# A review of the bio-tribology of medical devices

CorpusID: 256398614 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4a974128936499d2331e166af9c0c0d371834475](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4a974128936499d2331e166af9c0c0d371834475)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s4) Articulating interface
Number of References: 10

(p4.0) The articulating interface is designed to provide relative motion. The friction coefficient and wear resistance are important considerations from the perspective of long-term survivorship. However, common complications (such as excessive wear, and aseptic loosening caused by wear particles) due to improper tribological design are the most important factors affecting the performance and long-term effectiveness of artificial joints. Thus, investigation and improvement of the tribological performance of the articulating surface have been one of the main areas in the bio-tribology of artificial joints. Despite various material combinations are used, the articulating interface can be generally divided into two types, the soft-on-hard, and the hard-on-hard combinations. Due to the excellent tensile strength and impact resistance, ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) and its modifications are widely used as the "soft" component. While the "hard"   component of an articulating pair often includes  cobalt-chromium alloys, titanium alloys, stainless steel,  alumina, zirconia, and zirconia toughened alumina  composite ceramics (ZTA). Since UHMWPE is much softer, it is the major source of wear and wear particles. Figure 4 shows several typical wear features observed from a retrieved acetabular cup [11]. Various approaches have been proposed to improve the wear resistance of UHMWPE. Recent developments include highly cross-linked UHMWPE, which provide substantially improved wear resistance [12,13]. The wear rate of irradiated UHMWPE significantly decreased with an increase in the cross-linking gamma irradiation. Also, Vitamin E stabilization is found to protect against the oxidation of cross-linked materials [14].

(p4.1) It's worth noticing that the surface properties of the hard counter-face are also important since its asperities may scratch the soft surface. Various surface coatings of the metallic counter-face are introduced to maintain the low wear of the soft surface. However, the potential long-term durability of the coatings needs further examination [15]. Besides, the design parameters of the articulating surface also play important roles in determining its friction behavior. For example, a large femoral head diameter leads to a larger contact area and a longer sliding distance, which is a disadvantage in terms of wear [16]. However, a larger femoral head may also benefit from hydrodynamic lubrication. Thus, the actual wear performance is a negotiation of design parameters, lubrication, and surgical factors.

(p4.2) There are mainly two types of hard-on-hard combinations for artificial joints, the metal-on-metal, and ceramic-on-ceramic. In vitro experiments indicate that wear in a metal-on-metal articulation is very low due to the improved hydrodynamic lubrication. However, the wear of metal-on-metal is drastically increased under adverse operating conditions due to the breakdown of lubrication film. This is probably the main reason leading to the clinical failure of the device and the drastic reduction in clinical use. Ceramic-on-ceramic has been widely used for artificial knee joints. Compared with metal-on-metal joints, ceramic-on-ceramic joints have higher hardness and scratch resistance, thus it maintains a very low wear rate [17]. However, squeaking, as one of the potential complications, has been reported to happen range from 0.5% [18] to 10% [19]. Although various factors have been identified to contribute to squeaking, yet the squeaking mechanism is still unclear. Thus, the complete elimination of the squeaking in ceramic-onceramic joints remains a difficulty. Also, the risk of fracture was reported to be an important concern of  ceramic-on-ceramic joints. However, with the improved design and manufacturing, the fracture risk of the contemporary ceramic-on-ceramic joints is much lower (0.001% to 0.021%) [17].
## (s6) Modular interface
Number of References: 10

(p6.0) During daily activities, the articulating interfaces bear three-dimensional dynamic motion and loading. The frictional forces and moments of the articulating interface are transmitted to the modular interfaces, which leads to the fretting of the modular surfaces. In combination with the presence of body fluids, the modular interfaces undergo fretting wear and fretting corrosion. Figure 7 shows typical fretting corrosion damages of retrieved hip components. Similar phenomena also exist in knee joints [36,37], shoulder joints [38], and spinal fixation using assemblies. It is generally believed that fretting corrosion is widespread in various artificial joints.

(p6.1) Modular-neck hips are reported to have a higher revision rate compared to fixed stems [40,41]. Corrosion and fretting at the taper interface have been widely reported with metal-on-metal and metalon-polyethylene implants [42,43]. Although the taper corrosion mechanism is not fully understood, a combination of electrochemical and mechanical interactions is identified as important factors [44]. The micromotion between the contact surfaces disrupts the passivation layer, and the exposure of the bulk metal leads to corrosion [45]. Also, crevice corrosion may happen due to the spaces between modular components [46].
## (s9) Bio-tribological issues of fracture fixation devices
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) Bone fracture is a very common body injury. There are millions of fractures worldwide per year, with a global market of $5.5 billion [60]. When a bone is broken, a "reduction" orthopedic surgeon is performed to re-set the bone, where various constructs are used for fracture fixation, as shown in Fig. 8. A detailed summary of fracture fixation devices was conducted based on different fracture sites, as shown in Table 1 [61]. Stainless steel, titanium alloys, cobalt-chromium alloys, and NiTi shape-memory alloys are widely used in fracture fixation devices [61]. The interface between the screw and the screw hole of the bone plate produces micro-action, which promotes fretting wear [62]. Also, the screw hole is the weakest link of www.Springer.com/journal/40544 | Friction the bone plate. Fatigue fracture often occurs under cycling loading. The micro-motion accelerates the generation of fatigue cracks and causes fatigue damage to the bone plates. Due to the in vivo condition, the synthetic effect of corrosion and fretting may result in unstable and fracture of the constructs. Also, since bone plates are in direct contact with cortical bones, the tribological performance of the bone-fixation plates is of importance for the minimization of wear debris and ion release, which causes inflammation and potentially carcinogenic effects [63].
## (s19) Dental implants
Number of References: 3

(p19.0) Implants provide a strong foundation for fixed or removable replacement teeth that are made to match natural teeth. There are many advantages to dental implants, including improved appearance, durability, and convenience. However, there are still many failed clinical cases. The possible causes are interface fretting and corrosion [96,97]. Although they are difficult to detect, they directly affect the bone ingrowth at the initial stage of implantation and the long-term lifetime of the dental implant [98].
## (s23) Research advances on the bio-tribology of cardiovascular devices
Number of References: 3

(p23.0) Mechanical friction and wear have always been important research interests for various mechanical heart valves [118]. Wear and friction often occur in the hinge region of a bileaflet, between the occluder and the ring or struts in a titling-disc, between the ball and cage in a cage-ball valve [119]. Excessive wear may cause the leaflet to escape or strut fracture, and finally result in the failure of mechanical heart valves. A tribology-related leaflet escape was reported by Zhang et al. [120] in a low profile bileaflet mechanical prosthesis, where excessive wear of the leaflet outflow edge was identified.
