# Chronic Nonbacterial Osteomyelitis and Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Literature Review-Based Cohort

CorpusID: 257351826 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4f9ec240f5599f1bdfea1fe765c601b1fb97bc61](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4f9ec240f5599f1bdfea1fe765c601b1fb97bc61)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Inflammatory Bowel Diseases in Children: From Pathogenesis to Clinical Aspects
Number of References: 18

(p2.0) Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) are a group of diseases characterized by immune activation and inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract. IBDs include Crohn's disease (CD), ulcerative colitis (UC), and undifferentiated IBD (u-IBD) [33]. The pathogenesis of the disease is not yet clearly understood, but genetic factors, environmental insults, and dysbiosis seem to cooperate to determine the disease [34]. In spite of different phenotypes, approximately 30% of IBD-related genes are shared between CD and UC, suggesting common pathogenetic pathways; indeed, more than 50% of IBD susceptibility loci have also been related to other inflammatory/autoimmune diseases [34]. NOD2, C13orf31, and LRRK2 genes are associated both with susceptibility to CD and Mycobacterium leprae infection. Interestingly, NOD2 mutation has been shown to contribute to the dysfunction in the mucosal barrier integrity in CD. This has further led to an intense investigation into the impact of the gut microbiome dysbiosis in IBD.

(p2.1) In patients with a very early onset of IBD (before the age of 6), genetics acquires a priority role. In particular, IL-10 signaling pathway defects are associated with the development of early-onset IBD [35]. In contrast, IL23R allele variants have shown a protective role. In fact, T helper 17 lymphocytes from IBD patients (carriers of protective IL23R variant) show a decreased production in IL-17A in response to IL-23 stimulation [36,37]. In 20-30% of cases, IBDs are diagnosed in childhood or in young adulthood with male predominance [38]. The incidence of the disease is increasing in industrialized countries, suggesting that environmental and dietary factors play a key role [39,40]. In children, a positive family history of IBD remains an important risk factor for the development of IBD [41].

(p2.2) The most common symptoms and signs are diarrhea, weight loss, and abdominal pain. In UC, rectal bleeding is present in 83% of pediatric patients [42,43]. Fecal calprotectin, intestinal ultrasound, and magnetic resonance enterography may help with diagnosis, but esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy remain the gold standard for diagnosis and classification. Extra-intestinal manifestations (EIM) can affect musculoskeletal (arthri-tis, osteopenia), dermatologic (pyoderma granulosum, erythema nodosum), hepatobiliary (pancreatitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis), renal (uveitis, episcleritis, iritis), and hematologic (anemia, deep venous thromboembolism) systems. Some EIM go hand in hand with intestinal inflammation, while others are independent (i.e., pyoderma gangrenosum) [33]. Joint involvement represents the most common EIM in IBD; commonly, it occurs within the first year after the onset of IBD symptoms. However, arthritis might be the presenting symptom of IBD in up to 4% of pediatric IBD cases [44]. The pattern of joint involvement might be heterogeneous: asymmetrical polyarticular or oligoarticular arthritis, arthralgia, enthesitis, and sacroiliitis [44]. During the disease course of pediatric IBD, sacroiliitis might be underrecognized due to the subtle symptoms, and can progress despite the IBD treatments. MR enterography (MRE) is used to assess IBD intestinal disease activity and might help to detect the underlining inflammation of sacroiliac joints. Indeed, a reevaluation of MRE in a cohort of children with IBD showed that, using the ASAS (Assessment of Spondy-loArthritis international Society) criteria for signs of sacroiliitis, 15% of patients have mild sacroiliitis at MRE despite not complaining of any musculoskeletal symptoms [45]. The link between IBD and joint/bone inflammation might rely on the alteration of IL-23 and/or IL-17 axis, dysbiosis, and subclinical gut barrier dysfunction as well as genetic factors such as the HLA B27 positivity and NOD2 variants [46,47].
## (s3) Association between CNO/CRMO and IBD
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) Since the first descriptions, the association with other inflammatory disorders such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), psoriasis, and arthritis has been reported [26,48]. In particular, the relationship between bone and intestinal inflammation is still poorly understood. On the other hand, the prevalence of musculoskeletal involvement in IBD is not negligible (up to 46%) [49], but the impact of CNO is unknown. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in the role of the gut microbiome in CNO. Lukens et al. demonstrated that a high-fat diet reduced Prevotella levels and pro-IL-1-beta expression in distant neutrophils in osteomyelitis-prone cmo mice [50]. In another study, an alteration in oral microbiome in CNO/CRMO patients in response to NSAID treatment was described.

(p3.1) Another study described an alteration in the oral microbiome in CNO/CRMO patients responding to NSAID treatment [51]. A recent study has also highlighted compositional differences in fecal and oral microbiota between healthy controls and CRMO patients, drawing new attention to the potential role of dysbiosis in the pathology of CRMO [52].
