# A Survey on Event-based News Narrative Extraction

CorpusID: 256900869 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ff9e62181e9eb0817407ecd383b9a4d7263076b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ff9e62181e9eb0817407ecd383b9a4d7263076b)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s41) Recent Trends and Open Challenges
Number of References: 5

(p41.0) Timeline Summarization Variations Recent works have proposed some variations on the traditional timeline summarization task. In particular, Duan et al. [28] proposed the comparative TLS task and Yu et al. [130] proposed the Multi-TLS task. These two works highlight the fact that simple linear representations of narratives are naturally limiting unless applied to the most simple of narratives. Thus, the creation of similar tasks to address some of the shortcomings of these representations is a natural progression. However, it raises the question of whether these extensions would benefit from borrowing elements from the methods that use more complex representations discussed in this survey. A natural extension would be to consider a graph-based representation that allows for multiple storylines and comparisons without further modifications. This approach would address both the comparative TLS and MLTS tasks.

(p41.1) In this context, we note that most of the reviewed articles with a sentence-level event resolution used a linear structure (see Table 1). The only exceptions were the disaster storyline extraction systems [131,133,134] with their local tree representation. However, these methods are designed with a specific news topic in mind-disaster news-and are able to leverage specific characteristics of the topic (e.g., the disaster moves over time). Thus, it would not be possible to directly adapt it to other types of news without addressing this issue.
## (s42) Multi-resolution Methods
Number of References: 5

(p42.0) Currently, all the narrative extraction approaches that we reviewed work on a singular resolution level (sentences, documents, or clusters). Existing attempts at multiple resolution levels only change the scope of the data [100,101] (i.e., applying the method again on a new subset of the data), they do not seek to change the underlying event resolution. Another perspective corresponds to the multi-level presentations of disaster storylines by Zhou et al. and Yuan et al. [131,133,134], which use global and local levels to represent the narrative. However, the underlying event representation remains the same and no efforts have been made to make a model that handles multiple levels of event resolution. Developing models that provide a multi-resolution approach remains an open challenge.
