# Ovarian absence: a systematic literature review and case series report

CorpusID: 255847526 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5901f73037c90e6c66a9352a12381ca727cb45d7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5901f73037c90e6c66a9352a12381ca727cb45d7)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) Case #1
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) A 15-year-old postmenarchal girl presented to Yale New Haven Children's Hospital for a diagnostic laparoscopy due to chronic abdominal and pelvic pain. Menarche occurred at age 12. She reported regular menses with normal flow and acyclic pelvic and flank pain. She denied being sexually active. Past medical and surgical history were significant for ADHD, dyslexia, nephrolithiasis, constipation, tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. There was no documented family history of endometriosis, but there was a suspicion for endometriosis necessitating oophorectomy in the maternal grandmother. Physical exam was notable for tenderness with deep palpation in the left upper and lower abdominal quadrants. She had age-appropriate secondary sexual characteristics with Tanner stage 5 breasts and Tanner stage 4 pubic hair. The external inspection of the genitalia revealed normal labia, clitoris, prepuce, external urethra meatus, and annular hymen. Renal ultrasound demonstrated leftsided nonobstructing kidney stones. The transabdominal pelvic ultrasound was unremarkable. Three prior ultrasounds reported normal-appearing ovaries bilaterally. The patient was started on continuous combined ethinyl estradiol-progesterone oral formulation to suppress menses due to suspicion of endometriosis. After four months, she continued to experience pelvic pain and irregular vaginal bleeding. Following a shared decision-making process, the patient and guardian elected to proceed with diagnostic laparoscopy. Surgery revealed a normal appearing uterus with bilateral round ligaments and a normal appearing right fallopian tube leading to an enlarged right ovary. Lesions suspicious for endometriosis were observed and biopsied in the pouch of Douglas, on the sigmoid colon, and the right uterosacral ligament. The left ovary, distal fallopian tube, and utero-ovarian ligament were absent. The left cornua of the uterus had a 3 cm tubular structure which was presumed to be the left fallopian tube remnant. (Fig. 1). The left ureter was clearly observed passing over the external iliac vessels, but no other adnexal structures, including the infundibulopelvic (IP) ligament, were observed. Multiple peritoneal biopsies revealed endometriosis and stage 3 was assigned per American Society for Reproductive Medicine were excluded c encompasses manuscripts that did not mention imaging findings (not stated), or reported non-tuboovarian imaging studies (e.g. chest X-ray) classification [25]. A second gynecology attending physician was consulted intraoperatively and concurred with the incidental finding of the absent left ovary. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course. Endometriosis was managed by a 30 mcg-1.5 mg ethinyl estradiolnorethindrone pill in continuous regimen, resulting in amenorrhea and the resolution of both pelvic and flank pain. Postoperative MRI of the abdomen and pelvis did not identify ortho/heterotopic left ovary.

(p8.1) A 15-year-old postmenarchal girl presented to Yale New Haven Children's Hospital for a diagnostic laparoscopy due to chronic abdominal and pelvic pain. Menarche occurred at age 12. She reported regular menses with normal flow and acyclic pelvic and flank pain. She denied being sexually active. Past medical and surgical history were significant for ADHD, dyslexia, nephrolithiasis, constipation, tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. There was no documented family history of endometriosis, but there was a suspicion for endometriosis necessitating oophorectomy in the maternal grandmother. Physical exam was notable for tenderness with deep palpation in the left upper and lower abdominal quadrants. She had age-appropriate secondary sexual characteristics with Tanner stage 5 breasts and Tanner stage 4 pubic hair. The external inspection of the genitalia revealed normal labia, clitoris, prepuce, external urethra meatus, and annular hymen. Renal ultrasound demonstrated leftsided nonobstructing kidney stones. The transabdominal pelvic ultrasound was unremarkable. Three prior ultrasounds reported normal-appearing ovaries bilaterally. The patient was started on continuous combined ethinyl estradiol-progesterone oral formulation to suppress menses due to suspicion of endometriosis. After four months, she continued to experience pelvic pain and irregular vaginal bleeding. Following a shared decision-making process, the patient and guardian elected to proceed with diagnostic laparoscopy. Surgery revealed a normal appearing uterus with bilateral round ligaments and a normal appearing right fallopian tube leading to an enlarged right ovary. Lesions suspicious for endometriosis were observed and biopsied in the pouch of Douglas, on the sigmoid colon, and the right uterosacral ligament. The left ovary, distal fallopian tube, and utero-ovarian ligament were absent. The left cornua of the uterus had a 3 cm tubular structure which was presumed to be the left fallopian tube remnant. (Fig. 1). The left ureter was clearly observed passing over the external iliac vessels, but no other adnexal structures, including the infundibulopelvic (IP) ligament, were observed. Multiple peritoneal biopsies revealed endometriosis and stage 3 was assigned per American Society for Reproductive Medicine were excluded c encompasses manuscripts that did not mention imaging findings (not stated), or reported non-tuboovarian imaging studies (e.g. chest X-ray) classification [25]. A second gynecology attending physician was consulted intraoperatively and concurred with the incidental finding of the absent left ovary. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course. Endometriosis was managed by a 30 mcg-1.5 mg ethinyl estradiolnorethindrone pill in continuous regimen, resulting in amenorrhea and the resolution of both pelvic and flank pain. Postoperative MRI of the abdomen and pelvis did not identify ortho/heterotopic left ovary.
## (s15) Primary Amenorrhea
Number of References: 20

(p15.0) A small minority of cases reported bilateral ovarian absence, typically presenting as primary amenorrhea [26,27]. Mutchinik et al. described an 18-year-old female with primary amenorrhea, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, bilateral gonadal absence, rudimentary uterus and right fallopian tube with a normal vagina and kidneys [28]. Centromeric Y-chromosome DNA, SRY and ZFY genes were negative, ruling out the presence of genomic sequences associated with streak gonads or rare intersex conditions [28]. These cases represent a rare congenital anomaly of bilateral OA leading to early diagnosis and profound phenotypical characteristics such as absent pubertal development, delayed bone maturation, primary ovarian insufficiency, and the need for lifelong hormonal supplementation. One patient was noted to have a similar phenotype despite one intact ovary [29].

(p15.1) A small minority of cases reported bilateral ovarian absence, typically presenting as primary amenorrhea [26,27]. Mutchinik et al. described an 18-year-old female with primary amenorrhea, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, bilateral gonadal absence, rudimentary uterus and right fallopian tube with a normal vagina and kidneys [28]. Centromeric Y-chromosome DNA, SRY and ZFY genes were negative, ruling out the presence of genomic sequences associated with streak gonads or rare intersex conditions [28]. These cases represent a rare congenital anomaly of bilateral OA leading to early diagnosis and profound phenotypical characteristics such as absent pubertal development, delayed bone maturation, primary ovarian insufficiency, and the need for lifelong hormonal supplementation. One patient was noted to have a similar phenotype despite one intact ovary [29].
## (s18) Infertility
Number of References: 20

(p18.0) Infertility/subfertility was the second most common presenting symptom in the diagnosis of the OA, comprising 19% of all cases. Kriplani et al. reported a 36-year-old G0 female with secondary amenorrhea and a 14-year history of infertility [34]. Laparotomy revealed a normal uterus, bilateral partial tubes and an omental mass with pathology consistent with ovarian tissue and a dermoid cyst. Sivanesaratnam described a 23-year-old woman whose initial hysterosalpingography (HSG) showed a blocked right tube at the cornual end. Subsequent laparoscopy demonstrated absent right tube and ovary, with no other GU abnormalities on postoperative workup [1]. Peer et al. reported a 27-year-old nulligravid woman with regular menses and history of infertility [35]. Laparotomy revealed an ectopic unilateral ovary within the omentum, as well as contralateral OA. Other cases leading to the diagnosis of the UOA during infertility workup have been described [17,36].

(p18.1) Infertility/subfertility was the second most common presenting symptom in the diagnosis of the OA, comprising 19% of all cases. Kriplani et al. reported a 36-year-old G0 female with secondary amenorrhea and a 14-year history of infertility [34]. Laparotomy revealed a normal uterus, bilateral partial tubes and an omental mass with pathology consistent with ovarian tissue and a dermoid cyst. Sivanesaratnam described a 23-year-old woman whose initial hysterosalpingography (HSG) showed a blocked right tube at the cornual end. Subsequent laparoscopy demonstrated absent right tube and ovary, with no other GU abnormalities on postoperative workup [1]. Peer et al. reported a 27-year-old nulligravid woman with regular menses and history of infertility [35]. Laparotomy revealed an ectopic unilateral ovary within the omentum, as well as contralateral OA. Other cases leading to the diagnosis of the UOA during infertility workup have been described [17,36].
## (s19) Pelvic masses
Number of References: 44

(p19.0) Sunku et al. described a 16-year-old female with secondary amenorrhea, synchronous cervical rhabdomyosarcoma, and Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor of the ovary with unilateral tuboovarian absence [37]. A number of cases noted pelvic masses diagnosed concomitantly with UOA with pathologies such as a mucinous cystadenocarcinoma, dermoid cysts, a serous cystadenoma, and fibrous calcified masses consistent with autoamputated ovary [34,[38][39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46].

(p19.1) Sunku et al. described a 16-year-old female with secondary amenorrhea, synchronous cervical rhabdomyosarcoma, and Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor of the ovary with unilateral tuboovarian absence [37]. A number of cases noted pelvic masses diagnosed concomitantly with UOA with pathologies such as a mucinous cystadenocarcinoma, dermoid cysts, a serous cystadenoma, and fibrous calcified masses consistent with autoamputated ovary [34,[38][39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46].
## (s23) Embryological
Number of References: 4

(p23.0) Cases in our study with suspected embryological origins were all notable for comorbid GU abnormalities-most commonly complete ipsilateral renal agenesis. Uterine abnormalities such as Müllerian agenesis, unicornuate uterus, and hypoplastic/rudimentary uterus were also frequently observed in this group. Bousfiha et al. reports on a 19-year-old female with bilateral ovarian dysgenesis, concomitant uterine aplasia (MRKH), and normal karyotype [31]. Similarly, Kumar et al. reported an 18-year-old female with primary amenorrhea, absent uterus, vagina and right ovary as well as single ectopic grossly hydronephrotic kidney [65]. These cases of combined ovarian absence and Müllerian anomalies suggest an insult that occurs early in embryologic development. Such an insult accounts for both fallopian tube and OA. This supports existence of a congenital etiology of UOA, while acknowledging the implausibility of OA in the absence of ipsilateral renal findings.
## (s25) Fertility
Number of References: 32

(p25.0) Questions of how UOA may affect fertility are of great importance to patients with the condition. As approximately 20% of our cases presented with fertility concerns, it may be tempting to infer a causal relationship. While fertility was a major cause of presentation, approximately 35% of our cases with ages ≥ 18 years had a history of pregnancy prior to their UOA diagnosis. Perhaps the most extreme example was an incidental UOA finding in a G11P11 woman with a history of 11 uncomplicated deliveries [73]. Another incidental UOA finding occurred during a cesarean delivery [74]. Interestingly, fertility was the focus of a prior review of 60 cases [75]. The study found UOA was not associated with adverse reproductive outcomes in the subset of women without other conditions that could decrease fertility (e.g. endometriosis, leiomyoma, uterine malformation). That is, comorbidities were likely responsible for sub/infertility rather than UOA itself. UOA patients with contralateral tube obstruction have had successful pregnancies following salpingostomy [76], or mucous plug removal during HSG [77]. Two other instances of contralateral tube obstruction were also noted [78,79].

(p25.1) Another way to conceptualize fertility in UOA involves examining women with a surgically absent ovary. A metanalysis of 21 studies examining ovarian reserve statuspost unilateral oophorectomy found decreased ovarian pool quantity, but not quality [80]. Despite a decreased response to induction during in vitro fertilization, the likelihood of a clinical pregnancy in women with one ovary was statistically comparable to women with two ovaries. Taken together, these findings suggest that infertility should not be presumed in UOA patients. In UOA patients without additional conditions that affect fertility the great majority were able to conceive, though some required assistive reproductive techniques. This group of patients roughly corresponds to our cases with suspected non-embryological UOA etiologies -as structural uterine anomalies were much less common in this group.

(p25.2) Questions of how UOA may affect fertility are of great importance to patients with the condition. As approximately 20% of our cases presented with fertility concerns, it may be tempting to infer a causal relationship. While fertility was a major cause of presentation, approximately 35% of our cases with ages ≥ 18 years had a history of pregnancy prior to their UOA diagnosis. Perhaps the most extreme example was an incidental UOA finding in a G11P11 woman with a history of 11 uncomplicated deliveries [73]. Another incidental UOA finding occurred during a cesarean delivery [74]. Interestingly, fertility was the focus of a prior review of 60 cases [75]. The study found UOA was not associated with adverse reproductive outcomes in the subset of women without other conditions that could decrease fertility (e.g. endometriosis, leiomyoma, uterine malformation). That is, comorbidities were likely responsible for sub/infertility rather than UOA itself. UOA patients with contralateral tube obstruction have had successful pregnancies following salpingostomy [76], or mucous plug removal during HSG [77]. Two other instances of contralateral tube obstruction were also noted [78,79].

(p25.3) Another way to conceptualize fertility in UOA involves examining women with a surgically absent ovary. A metanalysis of 21 studies examining ovarian reserve statuspost unilateral oophorectomy found decreased ovarian pool quantity, but not quality [80]. Despite a decreased response to induction during in vitro fertilization, the likelihood of a clinical pregnancy in women with one ovary was statistically comparable to women with two ovaries. Taken together, these findings suggest that infertility should not be presumed in UOA patients. In UOA patients without additional conditions that affect fertility the great majority were able to conceive, though some required assistive reproductive techniques. This group of patients roughly corresponds to our cases with suspected non-embryological UOA etiologies -as structural uterine anomalies were much less common in this group.
## (s26) Clinical practice Recommendation
Number of References: 12

(p26.0) Upon suspicion for UOA, we suggest several practices to confirm the diagnosis. 1) Rule out ovarian ectopy. An ectopic ovary may be detected along the line of descent -the presence of bilaterally intact fallopian tubes may increase the suspicion for maldescent [81]. If a heterotopic location is confirmed, standard of care surveillance of the gonad is warranted [82]. 2) For suspected UOA with ipsilateral tubal abnormalities, providers may consider autoamputation. An autoamputated ovary may have implanted itself within the peritoneal cavity, and may be found within the omentum, intestinal serosa, or peritoneal wall [34,35,83]. Many prior reports of ovarian autoamputations have revealed free-floating masses in gravity-dependent areas, suggestive of calcified ovaries [64]. Documenting the presence and gross appearance of pelvic and abdominal organs in the operative findings of non-emergent laparoscopic procedure should be standard practice.
## (s45) Case #1
Number of References: 4

(p45.0) A 15-year-old postmenarchal girl presented to Yale New Haven Children's Hospital for a diagnostic laparoscopy due to chronic abdominal and pelvic pain. Menarche occurred at age 12. She reported regular menses with normal flow and acyclic pelvic and flank pain. She denied being sexually active. Past medical and surgical history were significant for ADHD, dyslexia, nephrolithiasis, constipation, tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. There was no documented family history of endometriosis, but there was a suspicion for endometriosis necessitating oophorectomy in the maternal grandmother. Physical exam was notable for tenderness with deep palpation in the left upper and lower abdominal quadrants. She had age-appropriate secondary sexual characteristics with Tanner stage 5 breasts and Tanner stage 4 pubic hair. The external inspection of the genitalia revealed normal labia, clitoris, prepuce, external urethra meatus, and annular hymen. Renal ultrasound demonstrated leftsided nonobstructing kidney stones. The transabdominal pelvic ultrasound was unremarkable. Three prior ultrasounds reported normal-appearing ovaries bilaterally. The patient was started on continuous combined ethinyl estradiol-progesterone oral formulation to suppress menses due to suspicion of endometriosis. After four months, she continued to experience pelvic pain and irregular vaginal bleeding. Following a shared decision-making process, the patient and guardian elected to proceed with diagnostic laparoscopy. Surgery revealed a normal appearing uterus with bilateral round ligaments and a normal appearing right fallopian tube leading to an enlarged right ovary. Lesions suspicious for endometriosis were observed and biopsied in the pouch of Douglas, on the sigmoid colon, and the right uterosacral ligament. The left ovary, distal fallopian tube, and utero-ovarian ligament were absent. The left cornua of the uterus had a 3 cm tubular structure which was presumed to be the left fallopian tube remnant. (Fig. 1). The left ureter was clearly observed passing over the external iliac vessels, but no other adnexal structures, including the infundibulopelvic (IP) ligament, were observed. Multiple peritoneal biopsies revealed endometriosis and stage 3 was assigned per American Society for Reproductive Medicine were excluded c encompasses manuscripts that did not mention imaging findings (not stated), or reported non-tuboovarian imaging studies (e.g. chest X-ray) classification [25]. A second gynecology attending physician was consulted intraoperatively and concurred with the incidental finding of the absent left ovary. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course. Endometriosis was managed by a 30 mcg-1.5 mg ethinyl estradiolnorethindrone pill in continuous regimen, resulting in amenorrhea and the resolution of both pelvic and flank pain. Postoperative MRI of the abdomen and pelvis did not identify ortho/heterotopic left ovary.

(p45.1) A 15-year-old postmenarchal girl presented to Yale New Haven Children's Hospital for a diagnostic laparoscopy due to chronic abdominal and pelvic pain. Menarche occurred at age 12. She reported regular menses with normal flow and acyclic pelvic and flank pain. She denied being sexually active. Past medical and surgical history were significant for ADHD, dyslexia, nephrolithiasis, constipation, tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. There was no documented family history of endometriosis, but there was a suspicion for endometriosis necessitating oophorectomy in the maternal grandmother. Physical exam was notable for tenderness with deep palpation in the left upper and lower abdominal quadrants. She had age-appropriate secondary sexual characteristics with Tanner stage 5 breasts and Tanner stage 4 pubic hair. The external inspection of the genitalia revealed normal labia, clitoris, prepuce, external urethra meatus, and annular hymen. Renal ultrasound demonstrated leftsided nonobstructing kidney stones. The transabdominal pelvic ultrasound was unremarkable. Three prior ultrasounds reported normal-appearing ovaries bilaterally. The patient was started on continuous combined ethinyl estradiol-progesterone oral formulation to suppress menses due to suspicion of endometriosis. After four months, she continued to experience pelvic pain and irregular vaginal bleeding. Following a shared decision-making process, the patient and guardian elected to proceed with diagnostic laparoscopy. Surgery revealed a normal appearing uterus with bilateral round ligaments and a normal appearing right fallopian tube leading to an enlarged right ovary. Lesions suspicious for endometriosis were observed and biopsied in the pouch of Douglas, on the sigmoid colon, and the right uterosacral ligament. The left ovary, distal fallopian tube, and utero-ovarian ligament were absent. The left cornua of the uterus had a 3 cm tubular structure which was presumed to be the left fallopian tube remnant. (Fig. 1). The left ureter was clearly observed passing over the external iliac vessels, but no other adnexal structures, including the infundibulopelvic (IP) ligament, were observed. Multiple peritoneal biopsies revealed endometriosis and stage 3 was assigned per American Society for Reproductive Medicine were excluded c encompasses manuscripts that did not mention imaging findings (not stated), or reported non-tuboovarian imaging studies (e.g. chest X-ray) classification [25]. A second gynecology attending physician was consulted intraoperatively and concurred with the incidental finding of the absent left ovary. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course. Endometriosis was managed by a 30 mcg-1.5 mg ethinyl estradiolnorethindrone pill in continuous regimen, resulting in amenorrhea and the resolution of both pelvic and flank pain. Postoperative MRI of the abdomen and pelvis did not identify ortho/heterotopic left ovary.
## (s52) Primary Amenorrhea
Number of References: 20

(p52.0) A small minority of cases reported bilateral ovarian absence, typically presenting as primary amenorrhea [26,27]. Mutchinik et al. described an 18-year-old female with primary amenorrhea, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, bilateral gonadal absence, rudimentary uterus and right fallopian tube with a normal vagina and kidneys [28]. Centromeric Y-chromosome DNA, SRY and ZFY genes were negative, ruling out the presence of genomic sequences associated with streak gonads or rare intersex conditions [28]. These cases represent a rare congenital anomaly of bilateral OA leading to early diagnosis and profound phenotypical characteristics such as absent pubertal development, delayed bone maturation, primary ovarian insufficiency, and the need for lifelong hormonal supplementation. One patient was noted to have a similar phenotype despite one intact ovary [29].

(p52.1) A small minority of cases reported bilateral ovarian absence, typically presenting as primary amenorrhea [26,27]. Mutchinik et al. described an 18-year-old female with primary amenorrhea, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, bilateral gonadal absence, rudimentary uterus and right fallopian tube with a normal vagina and kidneys [28]. Centromeric Y-chromosome DNA, SRY and ZFY genes were negative, ruling out the presence of genomic sequences associated with streak gonads or rare intersex conditions [28]. These cases represent a rare congenital anomaly of bilateral OA leading to early diagnosis and profound phenotypical characteristics such as absent pubertal development, delayed bone maturation, primary ovarian insufficiency, and the need for lifelong hormonal supplementation. One patient was noted to have a similar phenotype despite one intact ovary [29].
## (s55) Infertility
Number of References: 20

(p55.0) Infertility/subfertility was the second most common presenting symptom in the diagnosis of the OA, comprising 19% of all cases. Kriplani et al. reported a 36-year-old G0 female with secondary amenorrhea and a 14-year history of infertility [34]. Laparotomy revealed a normal uterus, bilateral partial tubes and an omental mass with pathology consistent with ovarian tissue and a dermoid cyst. Sivanesaratnam described a 23-year-old woman whose initial hysterosalpingography (HSG) showed a blocked right tube at the cornual end. Subsequent laparoscopy demonstrated absent right tube and ovary, with no other GU abnormalities on postoperative workup [1]. Peer et al. reported a 27-year-old nulligravid woman with regular menses and history of infertility [35]. Laparotomy revealed an ectopic unilateral ovary within the omentum, as well as contralateral OA. Other cases leading to the diagnosis of the UOA during infertility workup have been described [17,36].

(p55.1) Infertility/subfertility was the second most common presenting symptom in the diagnosis of the OA, comprising 19% of all cases. Kriplani et al. reported a 36-year-old G0 female with secondary amenorrhea and a 14-year history of infertility [34]. Laparotomy revealed a normal uterus, bilateral partial tubes and an omental mass with pathology consistent with ovarian tissue and a dermoid cyst. Sivanesaratnam described a 23-year-old woman whose initial hysterosalpingography (HSG) showed a blocked right tube at the cornual end. Subsequent laparoscopy demonstrated absent right tube and ovary, with no other GU abnormalities on postoperative workup [1]. Peer et al. reported a 27-year-old nulligravid woman with regular menses and history of infertility [35]. Laparotomy revealed an ectopic unilateral ovary within the omentum, as well as contralateral OA. Other cases leading to the diagnosis of the UOA during infertility workup have been described [17,36].
## (s56) Pelvic masses
Number of References: 44

(p56.0) Sunku et al. described a 16-year-old female with secondary amenorrhea, synchronous cervical rhabdomyosarcoma, and Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor of the ovary with unilateral tuboovarian absence [37]. A number of cases noted pelvic masses diagnosed concomitantly with UOA with pathologies such as a mucinous cystadenocarcinoma, dermoid cysts, a serous cystadenoma, and fibrous calcified masses consistent with autoamputated ovary [34,[38][39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46].

(p56.1) Sunku et al. described a 16-year-old female with secondary amenorrhea, synchronous cervical rhabdomyosarcoma, and Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor of the ovary with unilateral tuboovarian absence [37]. A number of cases noted pelvic masses diagnosed concomitantly with UOA with pathologies such as a mucinous cystadenocarcinoma, dermoid cysts, a serous cystadenoma, and fibrous calcified masses consistent with autoamputated ovary [34,[38][39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46].
## (s60) Embryological
Number of References: 4

(p60.0) Cases in our study with suspected embryological origins were all notable for comorbid GU abnormalities-most commonly complete ipsilateral renal agenesis. Uterine abnormalities such as Müllerian agenesis, unicornuate uterus, and hypoplastic/rudimentary uterus were also frequently observed in this group. Bousfiha et al. reports on a 19-year-old female with bilateral ovarian dysgenesis, concomitant uterine aplasia (MRKH), and normal karyotype [31]. Similarly, Kumar et al. reported an 18-year-old female with primary amenorrhea, absent uterus, vagina and right ovary as well as single ectopic grossly hydronephrotic kidney [65]. These cases of combined ovarian absence and Müllerian anomalies suggest an insult that occurs early in embryologic development. Such an insult accounts for both fallopian tube and OA. This supports existence of a congenital etiology of UOA, while acknowledging the implausibility of OA in the absence of ipsilateral renal findings.
## (s62) Fertility
Number of References: 32

(p62.0) Questions of how UOA may affect fertility are of great importance to patients with the condition. As approximately 20% of our cases presented with fertility concerns, it may be tempting to infer a causal relationship. While fertility was a major cause of presentation, approximately 35% of our cases with ages ≥ 18 years had a history of pregnancy prior to their UOA diagnosis. Perhaps the most extreme example was an incidental UOA finding in a G11P11 woman with a history of 11 uncomplicated deliveries [73]. Another incidental UOA finding occurred during a cesarean delivery [74]. Interestingly, fertility was the focus of a prior review of 60 cases [75]. The study found UOA was not associated with adverse reproductive outcomes in the subset of women without other conditions that could decrease fertility (e.g. endometriosis, leiomyoma, uterine malformation). That is, comorbidities were likely responsible for sub/infertility rather than UOA itself. UOA patients with contralateral tube obstruction have had successful pregnancies following salpingostomy [76], or mucous plug removal during HSG [77]. Two other instances of contralateral tube obstruction were also noted [78,79].

(p62.1) Another way to conceptualize fertility in UOA involves examining women with a surgically absent ovary. A metanalysis of 21 studies examining ovarian reserve statuspost unilateral oophorectomy found decreased ovarian pool quantity, but not quality [80]. Despite a decreased response to induction during in vitro fertilization, the likelihood of a clinical pregnancy in women with one ovary was statistically comparable to women with two ovaries. Taken together, these findings suggest that infertility should not be presumed in UOA patients. In UOA patients without additional conditions that affect fertility the great majority were able to conceive, though some required assistive reproductive techniques. This group of patients roughly corresponds to our cases with suspected non-embryological UOA etiologies -as structural uterine anomalies were much less common in this group.

(p62.2) Questions of how UOA may affect fertility are of great importance to patients with the condition. As approximately 20% of our cases presented with fertility concerns, it may be tempting to infer a causal relationship. While fertility was a major cause of presentation, approximately 35% of our cases with ages ≥ 18 years had a history of pregnancy prior to their UOA diagnosis. Perhaps the most extreme example was an incidental UOA finding in a G11P11 woman with a history of 11 uncomplicated deliveries [73]. Another incidental UOA finding occurred during a cesarean delivery [74]. Interestingly, fertility was the focus of a prior review of 60 cases [75]. The study found UOA was not associated with adverse reproductive outcomes in the subset of women without other conditions that could decrease fertility (e.g. endometriosis, leiomyoma, uterine malformation). That is, comorbidities were likely responsible for sub/infertility rather than UOA itself. UOA patients with contralateral tube obstruction have had successful pregnancies following salpingostomy [76], or mucous plug removal during HSG [77]. Two other instances of contralateral tube obstruction were also noted [78,79].

(p62.3) Another way to conceptualize fertility in UOA involves examining women with a surgically absent ovary. A metanalysis of 21 studies examining ovarian reserve statuspost unilateral oophorectomy found decreased ovarian pool quantity, but not quality [80]. Despite a decreased response to induction during in vitro fertilization, the likelihood of a clinical pregnancy in women with one ovary was statistically comparable to women with two ovaries. Taken together, these findings suggest that infertility should not be presumed in UOA patients. In UOA patients without additional conditions that affect fertility the great majority were able to conceive, though some required assistive reproductive techniques. This group of patients roughly corresponds to our cases with suspected non-embryological UOA etiologies -as structural uterine anomalies were much less common in this group.
## (s63) Clinical practice Recommendation
Number of References: 12

(p63.0) Upon suspicion for UOA, we suggest several practices to confirm the diagnosis. 1) Rule out ovarian ectopy. An ectopic ovary may be detected along the line of descent -the presence of bilaterally intact fallopian tubes may increase the suspicion for maldescent [81]. If a heterotopic location is confirmed, standard of care surveillance of the gonad is warranted [82]. 2) For suspected UOA with ipsilateral tubal abnormalities, providers may consider autoamputation. An autoamputated ovary may have implanted itself within the peritoneal cavity, and may be found within the omentum, intestinal serosa, or peritoneal wall [34,35,83]. Many prior reports of ovarian autoamputations have revealed free-floating masses in gravity-dependent areas, suggestive of calcified ovaries [64]. Documenting the presence and gross appearance of pelvic and abdominal organs in the operative findings of non-emergent laparoscopic procedure should be standard practice.
