# Pupil dilation as an index of effort in cognitive control tasks: A review

CorpusID: 256211362 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/875792aeabfbda0f73243601db777c5e2ecc18d8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/875792aeabfbda0f73243601db777c5e2ecc18d8)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s3) The n-back task
Number of References: 36

(p3.0) Another frequently used updating paradigm is the n-back task. The n-back task requires participants to indicate whether the currently presented letter or number is the same stimulus presented n trials back. Thus, task difficulty increases with increasing n (Kirchner, 1958). The n-back task is unique in its demands, because participants must constantly allocate attention to the task to perform well.

(p3.1) Multiple studies have shown that pupil dilation increases with increasing n (Belayachi et al., 2015;Brouwer, Hogervorst, Holewijn, & van Erp, 2014;Hopstaken, van der Linden, Bakker, & Kompier, 2015;Karatekin, Marcus, & Couperus, 2007;Niezgoda et al., 2015;Pehlivanoglu, Jain, Ariel, & Verhaeghen, 2014;Scharinger, Soutschek, Schubert, & Gerjets, 2015). Notably, a recent study using classification algorithms has shown that pupil dilation alone can be sufficient to distinguish high from low cognitive load up to an accuracy of 75 %. When compared to other measures such as electroencephalography, skin conductance, respiration, cardiac measures, and eye blinks, only the first exceeded this value with an classification accuracy of 80 % . This finding shows that pupil dilation might be used as an index of cognitive load, thus is even suitable for applied contexts.

(p3.2) Regarding the link between pupil dilation and performance, one recent study has shown that an increased pupil dilation to the target stimuli of a 2-back task predicted improved performance in terms of a lower error rate (Rondeel, van Steenbergen, Holland, & van Knippenberg, 2015). This correlation at the inter-individual level suggests that pupil dilation reflects effort supporting improved performance.

(p3.3) Another frequently used updating paradigm is the n-back task. The n-back task requires participants to indicate whether the currently presented letter or number is the same stimulus presented n trials back. Thus, task difficulty increases with increasing n (Kirchner, 1958). The n-back task is unique in its demands, because participants must constantly allocate attention to the task to perform well.

(p3.4) Multiple studies have shown that pupil dilation increases with increasing n (Belayachi et al., 2015;Brouwer, Hogervorst, Holewijn, & van Erp, 2014;Hopstaken, van der Linden, Bakker, & Kompier, 2015;Karatekin, Marcus, & Couperus, 2007;Niezgoda et al., 2015;Pehlivanoglu, Jain, Ariel, & Verhaeghen, 2014;Scharinger, Soutschek, Schubert, & Gerjets, 2015). Notably, a recent study using classification algorithms has shown that pupil dilation alone can be sufficient to distinguish high from low cognitive load up to an accuracy of 75 %. When compared to other measures such as electroencephalography, skin conductance, respiration, cardiac measures, and eye blinks, only the first exceeded this value with an classification accuracy of 80 % . This finding shows that pupil dilation might be used as an index of cognitive load, thus is even suitable for applied contexts.

(p3.5) Regarding the link between pupil dilation and performance, one recent study has shown that an increased pupil dilation to the target stimuli of a 2-back task predicted improved performance in terms of a lower error rate (Rondeel, van Steenbergen, Holland, & van Knippenberg, 2015). This correlation at the inter-individual level suggests that pupil dilation reflects effort supporting improved performance.
## (s5) The Sternberg task
Number of References: 24

(p5.0) The Sternberg task (Sternberg, 1966) consists of an encoding and a search phase. In the encoding phase a string of digits of varying length is presented. After a delay of a few seconds, the search phase starts: Participants search in a new string for the letters that they have seen in the previous string. Task difficulty increases with increasing length of the digit string.

(p5.1) One pupillometry study on the Sternberg task has revealed that for young people two dilation peaks were present that increased with increasing task difficulty: one during the encoding and one during the search phase (Van Gerven, Paas, Van Merriënboer, & Schmidt, 2004). In older people, pupil dilation did not increase with increasing workload during the search phase. Notably, together with the absence of pupil dilation during the search phase, older participants also showed longer reaction times, whereas young participants did display increased pupil dilation and were faster. The authors interpreted the pupil as a sensitive measure of cognitive load, that might become less sensitive and thus less reliable with increasing age.

(p5.2) The influence of cognitive load has also been shown in a visual search task where pupil diameter increased for a more difficult version of the task and for larger search sets (Porter, Troscianko, & Gilchrist, 2007). More recent work has confirmed that pupil dilation increases with set size (Kursawe & Zimmer, 2015). Moreover, pupil size plateaus when set size exceeds capacity limitations (Unsworth & Robison, 2015, 2017b.

(p5.3) The Sternberg task (Sternberg, 1966) consists of an encoding and a search phase. In the encoding phase a string of digits of varying length is presented. After a delay of a few seconds, the search phase starts: Participants search in a new string for the letters that they have seen in the previous string. Task difficulty increases with increasing length of the digit string.

(p5.4) One pupillometry study on the Sternberg task has revealed that for young people two dilation peaks were present that increased with increasing task difficulty: one during the encoding and one during the search phase (Van Gerven, Paas, Van Merriënboer, & Schmidt, 2004). In older people, pupil dilation did not increase with increasing workload during the search phase. Notably, together with the absence of pupil dilation during the search phase, older participants also showed longer reaction times, whereas young participants did display increased pupil dilation and were faster. The authors interpreted the pupil as a sensitive measure of cognitive load, that might become less sensitive and thus less reliable with increasing age.

(p5.5) The influence of cognitive load has also been shown in a visual search task where pupil diameter increased for a more difficult version of the task and for larger search sets (Porter, Troscianko, & Gilchrist, 2007). More recent work has confirmed that pupil dilation increases with set size (Kursawe & Zimmer, 2015). Moreover, pupil size plateaus when set size exceeds capacity limitations (Unsworth & Robison, 2015, 2017b.
## (s9) The antisaccade task
Number of References: 16

(p9.0) Studies using the antisaccade task have shown that antisaccade trials requiring an eye movement to the opposite side of the presented target are associated with larger pupil dilations than prosaccade trials that require an eye movement to the target (Karatekin, Bingham, & White, 2010;Wang, Brien, & Munoz, 2015;Wang, McInnis, Brien, Pari, & Munoz, 2016). Additionally, larger pupil dilations were observed during the preparatory interval of antisaccades, as compared to the preparatory interval of correct prosaccades or erroneous prosaccades made in the anti-saccade condition. Notably, analyses on intra-individual correlations for the anti-saccade condition have revealed that larger preparatory dilations are associated with faster saccades (Wang et al., 2015.

(p9.1) Studies using the antisaccade task have shown that antisaccade trials requiring an eye movement to the opposite side of the presented target are associated with larger pupil dilations than prosaccade trials that require an eye movement to the target (Karatekin, Bingham, & White, 2010;Wang, Brien, & Munoz, 2015;Wang, McInnis, Brien, Pari, & Munoz, 2016). Additionally, larger pupil dilations were observed during the preparatory interval of antisaccades, as compared to the preparatory interval of correct prosaccades or erroneous prosaccades made in the anti-saccade condition. Notably, analyses on intra-individual correlations for the anti-saccade condition have revealed that larger preparatory dilations are associated with faster saccades (Wang et al., 2015.
## (s18) The n-back task
Number of References: 36

(p18.0) Another frequently used updating paradigm is the n-back task. The n-back task requires participants to indicate whether the currently presented letter or number is the same stimulus presented n trials back. Thus, task difficulty increases with increasing n (Kirchner, 1958). The n-back task is unique in its demands, because participants must constantly allocate attention to the task to perform well.

(p18.1) Multiple studies have shown that pupil dilation increases with increasing n (Belayachi et al., 2015;Brouwer, Hogervorst, Holewijn, & van Erp, 2014;Hopstaken, van der Linden, Bakker, & Kompier, 2015;Karatekin, Marcus, & Couperus, 2007;Niezgoda et al., 2015;Pehlivanoglu, Jain, Ariel, & Verhaeghen, 2014;Scharinger, Soutschek, Schubert, & Gerjets, 2015). Notably, a recent study using classification algorithms has shown that pupil dilation alone can be sufficient to distinguish high from low cognitive load up to an accuracy of 75 %. When compared to other measures such as electroencephalography, skin conductance, respiration, cardiac measures, and eye blinks, only the first exceeded this value with an classification accuracy of 80 % . This finding shows that pupil dilation might be used as an index of cognitive load, thus is even suitable for applied contexts.

(p18.2) Regarding the link between pupil dilation and performance, one recent study has shown that an increased pupil dilation to the target stimuli of a 2-back task predicted improved performance in terms of a lower error rate (Rondeel, van Steenbergen, Holland, & van Knippenberg, 2015). This correlation at the inter-individual level suggests that pupil dilation reflects effort supporting improved performance.

(p18.3) Another frequently used updating paradigm is the n-back task. The n-back task requires participants to indicate whether the currently presented letter or number is the same stimulus presented n trials back. Thus, task difficulty increases with increasing n (Kirchner, 1958). The n-back task is unique in its demands, because participants must constantly allocate attention to the task to perform well.

(p18.4) Multiple studies have shown that pupil dilation increases with increasing n (Belayachi et al., 2015;Brouwer, Hogervorst, Holewijn, & van Erp, 2014;Hopstaken, van der Linden, Bakker, & Kompier, 2015;Karatekin, Marcus, & Couperus, 2007;Niezgoda et al., 2015;Pehlivanoglu, Jain, Ariel, & Verhaeghen, 2014;Scharinger, Soutschek, Schubert, & Gerjets, 2015). Notably, a recent study using classification algorithms has shown that pupil dilation alone can be sufficient to distinguish high from low cognitive load up to an accuracy of 75 %. When compared to other measures such as electroencephalography, skin conductance, respiration, cardiac measures, and eye blinks, only the first exceeded this value with an classification accuracy of 80 % . This finding shows that pupil dilation might be used as an index of cognitive load, thus is even suitable for applied contexts.

(p18.5) Regarding the link between pupil dilation and performance, one recent study has shown that an increased pupil dilation to the target stimuli of a 2-back task predicted improved performance in terms of a lower error rate (Rondeel, van Steenbergen, Holland, & van Knippenberg, 2015). This correlation at the inter-individual level suggests that pupil dilation reflects effort supporting improved performance.
## (s20) The Sternberg task
Number of References: 24

(p20.0) The Sternberg task (Sternberg, 1966) consists of an encoding and a search phase. In the encoding phase a string of digits of varying length is presented. After a delay of a few seconds, the search phase starts: Participants search in a new string for the letters that they have seen in the previous string. Task difficulty increases with increasing length of the digit string.

(p20.1) One pupillometry study on the Sternberg task has revealed that for young people two dilation peaks were present that increased with increasing task difficulty: one during the encoding and one during the search phase (Van Gerven, Paas, Van Merriënboer, & Schmidt, 2004). In older people, pupil dilation did not increase with increasing workload during the search phase. Notably, together with the absence of pupil dilation during the search phase, older participants also showed longer reaction times, whereas young participants did display increased pupil dilation and were faster. The authors interpreted the pupil as a sensitive measure of cognitive load, that might become less sensitive and thus less reliable with increasing age.

(p20.2) The influence of cognitive load has also been shown in a visual search task where pupil diameter increased for a more difficult version of the task and for larger search sets (Porter, Troscianko, & Gilchrist, 2007). More recent work has confirmed that pupil dilation increases with set size (Kursawe & Zimmer, 2015). Moreover, pupil size plateaus when set size exceeds capacity limitations (Unsworth & Robison, 2015, 2017b.

(p20.3) The Sternberg task (Sternberg, 1966) consists of an encoding and a search phase. In the encoding phase a string of digits of varying length is presented. After a delay of a few seconds, the search phase starts: Participants search in a new string for the letters that they have seen in the previous string. Task difficulty increases with increasing length of the digit string.

(p20.4) One pupillometry study on the Sternberg task has revealed that for young people two dilation peaks were present that increased with increasing task difficulty: one during the encoding and one during the search phase (Van Gerven, Paas, Van Merriënboer, & Schmidt, 2004). In older people, pupil dilation did not increase with increasing workload during the search phase. Notably, together with the absence of pupil dilation during the search phase, older participants also showed longer reaction times, whereas young participants did display increased pupil dilation and were faster. The authors interpreted the pupil as a sensitive measure of cognitive load, that might become less sensitive and thus less reliable with increasing age.

(p20.5) The influence of cognitive load has also been shown in a visual search task where pupil diameter increased for a more difficult version of the task and for larger search sets (Porter, Troscianko, & Gilchrist, 2007). More recent work has confirmed that pupil dilation increases with set size (Kursawe & Zimmer, 2015). Moreover, pupil size plateaus when set size exceeds capacity limitations (Unsworth & Robison, 2015, 2017b.
## (s24) The antisaccade task
Number of References: 16

(p24.0) Studies using the antisaccade task have shown that antisaccade trials requiring an eye movement to the opposite side of the presented target are associated with larger pupil dilations than prosaccade trials that require an eye movement to the target (Karatekin, Bingham, & White, 2010;Wang, Brien, & Munoz, 2015;Wang, McInnis, Brien, Pari, & Munoz, 2016). Additionally, larger pupil dilations were observed during the preparatory interval of antisaccades, as compared to the preparatory interval of correct prosaccades or erroneous prosaccades made in the anti-saccade condition. Notably, analyses on intra-individual correlations for the anti-saccade condition have revealed that larger preparatory dilations are associated with faster saccades (Wang et al., 2015.

(p24.1) Studies using the antisaccade task have shown that antisaccade trials requiring an eye movement to the opposite side of the presented target are associated with larger pupil dilations than prosaccade trials that require an eye movement to the target (Karatekin, Bingham, & White, 2010;Wang, Brien, & Munoz, 2015;Wang, McInnis, Brien, Pari, & Munoz, 2016). Additionally, larger pupil dilations were observed during the preparatory interval of antisaccades, as compared to the preparatory interval of correct prosaccades or erroneous prosaccades made in the anti-saccade condition. Notably, analyses on intra-individual correlations for the anti-saccade condition have revealed that larger preparatory dilations are associated with faster saccades (Wang et al., 2015.
