# Molecular Sciences The Fascinating Effects of Baicalein on Cancer: A Review

CorpusID: 250595 - [None](None)

Fields: 

## (s1) The Property and Antitumor Effect of Baicalein
Number of References: 9

(p1.0) Baicalein is one of the major, active constituents of Scutellariae radix (also known as Chinese Huang Qin) and is isolated from its root. The prominent, structural feature of baicalein is the diorthohydroxyl functional group, which is found on ring-A in its molecular structure [16]. The chemical structure and properties of baicalein are shown in Figure 1. Emerging evidence has demonstrated that baicalein exerts multiple pharmacological effects including anti-inflammatory [17], antioxidant [18], and antiviral [19] properties, as well as protection against cardiovascular illness [20]. In the past decade, there has been great progress in exploring the target mechanisms and signaling pathways of baicalein's anti-cancer potential. The main molecular mechanisms of the antitumor effects of baicalein include inhibiting several cyclins or cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) to regulate the cell cycle [9], scavenging oxidative radicals, attenuating MAPK, Akt or mTOR activities [15], inducing apoptosis through activating caspase-9/-3 [11] and inhibiting tumor invasion and metastasis by reducing the expression of MMP-2/-9 [14]. As shown in Figure 2, we summarized the relevant biological mechanisms of baicalein involved in inhibiting various types of cancer (e.g., bladder cancer, breast cancer, cervical cancer, colorectal cancer, gastric cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, osteosarcoma, multiple myeloma, melanoma/skin cancer, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, prostate cancer, and lung cancer). This review attempts to elucidate the various antitumor effects of baicalein.   
## (s7) Baicalein and Gastric Cancer
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) Gastric cancer (GC) is the fourth most common aggressive cancer in the world. There are approximately 990,000 newly-diagnosed cases and about 740,000 gastric cancer-related deaths every year [41]. The main treatment strategy for patients with gastric cancer remains a combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy. However, the prognosis of these patients is still poor due to the various side effects and multiple forms of drug resistance. A recent study reported that baicalein induced cell cycle arrest at the S phase of division and promoted apoptosis in SGC-7901 gastric cancer cell lines via downregulation and upregulation of Bcl-2 and Bax levels, respectively. An in vivo study also revealed that baicalein excellently inhibited tumor growth in subcutaneous xenograft models [42]. Baicalein treatment inhibited the migration and invasion of GC cells in Transwell and wound-healing assays. Baicalein also decreased the expression of metastasis-associated molecules, including N-cadherin, vimentin, ZEB1, and ZEB2. This study provided the basic mechanism for baicalein's inhibition of metastasis in gastric cancer cells by inactivation of the TGF-β/Smad4 pathway [43]. Similarly, another study revealed that baicalein inhibited the invasion of gastric cancer cells by inhibition of the p38 signaling pathway and subsequent MMP-2 and MMP-9 suppression [44]. Baicalein was reported to reverse hypoxia-induced 5-FU resistance in gastric cancer AGS cells. Baicalein enhanced the sensitivity of AGS cells to 5-FU and suppressed glycolytic flux. Furthermore, it suppressed the expression of glycolysis-associated enzymes such as HK2, LDH-A, and PDK1 under hypoxic conditions, possibly via activation of the PTEN/Akt/HIF-1α pathway [45]. In conclusion, these studies reveal that baicalein may be developed as an effective therapy for treating patients with gastric cancer.
## (s8) Baicalein and Hepatocelluar Carcinoma
Number of References: 10

(p8.0) Hepatocelluar carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer worldwide. It was also the third-leading cause of cancer-related deaths in 2015 [46]. Most cases of hepatocellular carcinoma occur in underdeveloped areas of the world (especially those found in Asia and Africa). China has the highest incidence of HCC of any country and, as such, is one of the main reasons for its high number of patients with chronic hepatitis B. In recent decades, the incidence of HCC has gradually risen in the developed world (e.g., North America and Europe) [13]. Hence, the treatment of HCC with baicalein has attracted additional attention in the field of cancer research. Cell viability assays have demonstrated that baicalein is significantly cytotoxic against HCC cells. Baicalein induced both apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phase of division in HCC cells, by modulating the transcription of cyclin D1 through a β-catenin-dependent mechanism [13]. Another study reported that baicalein inhibited tumor cell proliferation and induced G2/M arrest in HCC J5 cells. In addition, baicalein stimulated apoptosis via a mitochondrial-dependent caspase pathway, which included the promotion of the release of mitochondrial cytochrome c, apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) and Endo G, activating caspase-9 and -3, and increasing the ratio of Bax/Bcl-2 [47]. Chang et al. also confirmed that baicalein induced Hep G2 cell apoptosis by mitochondrial dysfunction. A recent study demonstrated that baicalein suppressed the expression of c-Myc, a key regulator of cell proliferation and apoptosis in HCC cells. Moreover, the expression of CD24 plays a role in the growth of HCC and was downregulated by baicalein. Therefore, this study implied that baicalein inhibited the growth and survival of HCC cells via downregulation of c-Myc and CD24 levels [48]. Furthermore, HQS-3, a new derivative of baicalein, distinctly inhibited the growth of transplantable Heps tumors in mice and xenograft tumors in nude mice. The treatment of HepG2 cells with HQS-3 induced mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis by generating ROS and downregulating the level of the anti-oxidative protein SOD2 [49]. Some researchers demonstrated that baiclalein inhibited cellular adhesion, migration, invasion, and growth of HCC cells both in vitro and in vivo. Their findings showed that baicalein inhibited cell-ECM interactions by suppressing the activities of MMP-2, MMP-9, and u-PA. In addition, the nuclear translocation of p50 and p65, and the phosphorylation of I-kappa-B (IKB)-β, were also downregulated by baicalein. This study provided a molecular mechanism for using baicalein as an anti-metastatic agent by inhibiting the expression of protein kinase C α (PKCα) and p38 MAPK [50]. The latest study found that baicalein triggered protective autophagy in HCC cells. The AKT/mTOR pathway is known as the key regulator of autophagy and was inhibited by baicalein in HepG2 cells [51]. Another study showed that baicalein induced autophagy via endoplasmic reticulum stress in human HCC cell lines SMMC-7721 and Bel-7402 [52]. These findings determined that the combination treatment of baicalein and autophagy inhibitors may be more effective as an anticancer therapy. In addition, the treatment of hepatoma HepG2 cells with a combination of baicalein and silymarin was obviously superior to baicalein or silymarin alone [53]. This combined treatment provided a novel insight for future clinical therapy of HCC. Together, this information suggests that baicalein is a promising candidate for the treatment of HCC.
## (s11) Baicalein and Osteosarcoma
Number of References: 6

(p11.0) Osteosarcoma is the most common malignant bone tumor worldwide, especially in adolescents and young adults. Osteosarcoma occurs principally in the metaphysis of long bones, including the distal femur, proximal tibia, and proximal humerus [68]. Currently, the primary treatment for osteosarcoma is wide surgical removal of the tumor and intensive adjuvant chemotherapy. However, there has been no significant improvement in the 5-year survival rate since the 1970s and the outcomes of available treatments remain unsatisfactory [69]. A recent study demonstrated that baicalein inhibited proliferation and promoted apoptosis of MG-63 osteosarcoma cells via intracellular ROS generation and activation of BNIP3 [70]. Another study showed that baicalein induced apoptosis of MG-63 cells by targeting the c-MYC gene and activating the Wnt signaling pathway [71]. In addition, Zhang et al. found that baicalein inhibited osteosarcoma cell growth by reducing the expression of cyclin D1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4), followed by subsequent blocking of cell cycle progression at the G1 phase of division. Baicalein treatment also induced apoptosis by activating caspase-3, downregualtingBcl-2 expression, and upregulating Bax expression. Furthermore, baicalein decreased both the migration and invasion of osteosarcoma cells by reducing the expression of MMP-9 and MMP-2 [72]. HSP70, which is essential for the survival and partial protection of tumor cells from apoptosis, was upregulated after baicalein treatment. This finding suggested that the anti-osteosarcoma property of baicalein can be strengthened in combination with some inhibitors of HSP70 [73]. Broadly speaking, baicalein could be a potential future treatment of patients with osteosarcoma.
## (s16) Potential Clinical Implication and Discussion
Number of References: 6

(p16.0) Multitudinous preclinical studies have proved that baicalein could be developed as a tremendous potential antitumor drug against cancer by targeting multiple molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways. In addition, accumulating evidence from animal studies demonstrates that baicalein significantly inhibited tumor volume and tumor weight, such as in hepatocellular cancer [98,99] and lung cancer [95]. Furthermore, it is worth noting that the development of appropriate delivery systems and chemical modification of baicalein can enhance its efficacy in preclinical studies. Unfortunately, very few clinical trials of baicalein were conducted to study its efficacy for the treatment of tumors in clinics. In order to promote the anti-tumor potential of baicalein to clinical use, in addition to some conventional animal experimental data, some issues, such as bioavailability and toxicological profiles of baicalein, have to be comprehensively investigated before clinical trials are initiated. In some tumors, such as breast cancer [34], colorectal cancer [37] and hepatocellular cancer [13], animal experiments suggested that baicalein significantly decreased tumor weights and volumes without toxicity. Therefore, it is of great significance to select some tumors such as breast cancer or coloreactal cancer to initiate the phase I and II trials.
