# SPECIAL ISSUE -21ST CENTURY CHALLENGES FOR SHIPPING Strategic alliances in container shipping: A review of the literature and future research agenda

CorpusID: 256508025 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3606141ffb315ec9f403ff52d9ce67dd6ae47ba8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3606141ffb315ec9f403ff52d9ce67dd6ae47ba8)

Fields: Business, Engineering

## (s5) Partner selection
Number of References: 15

(p5.0) An important characteristic of SAs is their instability (Fig. 4) involving frequent reshufflings, which have negatively affected both the performance of SAs and the quality of their services to shippers (Rau and Spinler 2017;Midoro and Pitto 2000). Selecting the right partner is therefore another important research question in the literature (Das 2011;Shi and Voss 2008;Song and Panayides 2002). Carriers need to assess the strategic and operational capabilities of competitors before entering into an SA agreement (e.g., Lee 2019; Song and Panayides 2002).  Table 4 summarizes the seven main criteria and 44 sub-criteria for the selection of the most appropriate strategic partners identified by Ding and Liang (2005).

(p5.1) Among these criteria, two are essential for partner selection. The first regards market complementarity, which means the potential to strengthen each other. This can offer various benefits, such as enhancing the geographical coverage of the SA members, improving service frequency, or sharing operational knowledge. Market complementarity depends on ship specifications, primarily ship size, the number of vessels available to each carrier, and available terminal capacity in the various ports of the network. Market complementarity has a direct impact on economies of scope and, in particular, potentially grants access to new markets (Agarwal and Ergun 2010;Kale and Singh 2009;Mitsuhashi and Greve 2009), which was one of the primary drivers of SAs in the 1990s. As illustrated in Fig. 4, SAs were initially composed of carriers of different nationalities, with their specific market knowledge and access.

(p5.2) Partner selection can also be based on the ability of the partners to bring new technical/operational competencies concerning, for example, energy reduction technologies, ship management, hinterland transportation, or cargo packaging and warehousing. For example, in July 2019, "THE Alliance" officially announced an expansion to include the Korean Shipping Company, Hyundai Merchant Marine (HMM). The main reason for this enlargement, as announced by the CEO of Hapag-Lloyd, was "HMM is a great fit for THE Alliance as they will provide a number of new and modern vessels, which will help us to deliver better quality and be more efficient and it will help us also to further reduce our emissions" (Rolf Habben Jansen as reported in Hapag-Lloyd 2019). The second criterion is compatibility, and it refers to the degree of similarity between potential partners such as working styles and cultures (Kale and Singh 2009;Haralambides 1996), trust and commitment, strategic fit, and stable financial position (Solesvik and Westhead 2010;Kale and Singh 2009). Das (2011) carried out an empirical investigation to identify and examine eight effective factors of carriers' strategic choice between partnerships and acquisitions. In this study, the authors conclude that the following four factors have a positive impact on choosing 'acquisition' as a strategy: redundant resources, the intensity of competition among carriers, the home region of a shipping company, and prior acquisition experience of the firm. However, prior partnership experience increases the probability of 'partnership', while the level of synergy and the degree of market uncertainty have a neutral impact on selecting partnership over acquisition and vice versa.
## (s6) The management of SAs
Number of References: 11

(p6.0) The second main research area for SAs is management. In practice, a large variety of management activities within SAs are performed by collaborative committees (Tan and Thai 2014). Each committee is responsible for decision-making and for carrying out a specific part of SA activities. Such a committee typically comprises one representative from each SA member. According to Tan and Thai (2014), the principal committees, consisting of the CEOs of the SA members, are responsible for making decisions such as the scope of geographical coverage and the volume of pooled assets by each member. The steering committees, including senior and middle managers as members, are responsible for executing decisions and directions made by the principal committees, such as service loop deployments and service timings and how vessels are allocated to each shared route. Finally, it is up to the support committees to plan for the daily operations of the alliance,, which involves several tasks like providing vessel berthing windows, vessel schedules, legal agreements, etc. In this section, we present the results of our review on research that has concentrated on the above managerial issues. Lu et al. (2006) interviewed experts who have participated in the definition of the Operating Cost Contribution (OCC) of the no longer-existing CKYH alliance, which had consisted of Cosco Container Lines, "K" Line, Yang Ming Line, Hanjin Shipping and later Evergreen, to identify and prioritize the factors that determine the success of a SA. In this study, the authors conclude with a list of SA success factors, specifically: "Mutual trust between all partners, the number & size of partners, partner compatibility, a reasonable and practicable cooperating rule for following up, continuous mutual commitment of facilities, mutual agreement on co-operation objectives, good understanding by all parties of competition and marketplace, compatible decision-making processes, open communication between the parties, good relations between the employees of the partner, and continuous CEO direction and involvement" (p. 208). Among all, the level of mutual trust between members is the most important success factor for a SA. Tan and Thai (2014) stress that the longer the collaboration among SA members, the higher the level of mutual trust that can be created among them (in line with Solesvik and Westhead 2010;Song and Panayides 2002).

(p6.1) Exchanging operational information among SA members is the next important management activity. Based on the SA agreements (Ocean alliance FMC agreement 2019, p. 5), carriers are entitled to obtain, maintain, and exchange among themselves operational knowledge and information such as statistics, studies, and consultancy reports related to their operations on different trade lanes. This information pertains to different operational aspects like forecasts of vessel utilization, length of port/terminal stays, productivity, schedule performance, and third-party costs like terminal and bunker costs. Sharing this information helps carriers to jointly make projections and plans associated with their vessel capacity and service structure and ensure the smooth running of operations (Zaheer and Venkatraman 1995). However, research on the aforementioned areas within SAs among carriers remains limited. Tan and Thai (2014) performed several face-to-face interviews with senior management executives of liner shipping operators and concluded that there are formal and informal knowledge-sharing mechanisms within SAs. Face-to-face meetings, video or teleconferencing, e-mails, and phone calls are the main formal knowledgesharing mechanisms, while dinners, drinks, and coffee sessions, among other casual exchanges, are introduced as the informal ways of information sharing among SA's members. This study also reveals that knowledge sharing among SA partners is limited to operational information, as sharing market-related information, such as freight rates and the list of customers, is strictly prohibited by antitrust laws. Moreover, the members are willing to share operational information to improve the benefit of their SA.

(p6.2) The stability of SAs among liner shipping companies is often defended as a consequence of successful management of these agreements. Stability is necessary for both alliance parties and shippers to establish long-term trading relationships (Brooks 2004) to ensure stability of freight rates and services (Fusillo 2006) and more reliable schedules (Graham 1998). The unstable structure of SA membership, as depicted in Fig. 4, is rooted instead in mergers and acquisitions between carriers inside and outside their SA, reshufflings of SA membership, to be able to compete with large carriers and other SAs. The main determinants of SA's instability are categorized in Table 5.
