# Survey of Anaplasma phagocytophilum and Anaplasma sp. 'Omatjenne' infection in cattle in Africa with special reference to Ethiopia

CorpusID: 255984517 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/faebe50dfbd23d74e0448ccc9f56cab2df2557be](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/faebe50dfbd23d74e0448ccc9f56cab2df2557be)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s2) International study
Number of References: 4

(p2.0) Samples used in this study were DNA samples extracted from bovine blood collected from selected African countries. The samples (238 in total), originating from Ivory Coast (n = 53), Morocco (n = 81), Rwanda (n = 50), Tanzania (n = 17) and Zambia (n = 37), were obtained from the Department of Biomedical Science, Institute of Tropical Medicine (Antwerp, Belgium) and were analysed using 16S rDNA PCR-RFLP as described by Teshale et al. [9].

(p2.1) Samples used in this study were DNA samples extracted from bovine blood collected from selected African countries. The samples (238 in total), originating from Ivory Coast (n = 53), Morocco (n = 81), Rwanda (n = 50), Tanzania (n = 17) and Zambia (n = 37), were obtained from the Department of Biomedical Science, Institute of Tropical Medicine (Antwerp, Belgium) and were analysed using 16S rDNA PCR-RFLP as described by Teshale et al. [9].
## (s5) Molecular analysis of the samples 16S rDNA polymerase chain reaction
Number of References: 20

(p5.0) A semi-nested PCR described by [9] was used to amplify a fragment of 16S rRNA gene. Primers designated EHR 16SD [24] and EBR3 [9] were used for the first round of PCR amplification. For the second round of amplification the same EHR 16SD was used as forward external primer while EBR2 [9] was used as internal primer. Details of the primers used are presented in Identification to species level of the detected Anaplasma was carried out by using restriction with MboII (5000 U/ ml, Biolabs, New England, USA), HhaI (20,000 U/ml, Biolabs) and MspI (20,000 U/ml, Biolabs) as described earlier by [9]. Restriction was carried out in a final volume of 15 μl mix consisting of 4 μl DNA (PCR product from positive samples) and 11 μl reaction mix. Incubation was done overnight following the manufacturer's instructions. The restricted fragments were separated on 2% high resolution agarose gel by electrophoresis in TAE buffer (0.04 M Tris, 0.4 mM EDTA, pH = 7.7-8.8) at 100 V for 40 min and visualised under UV illumination after staining with ethidium bromide (final concentration of 0.5 μg/ml).

(p5.1) A semi-nested PCR described by [9] was used to amplify a fragment of 16S rRNA gene. Primers designated EHR 16SD [24] and EBR3 [9] were used for the first round of PCR amplification. For the second round of amplification the same EHR 16SD was used as forward external primer while EBR2 [9] was used as internal primer. Details of the primers used are presented in Identification to species level of the detected Anaplasma was carried out by using restriction with MboII (5000 U/ ml, Biolabs, New England, USA), HhaI (20,000 U/ml, Biolabs) and MspI (20,000 U/ml, Biolabs) as described earlier by [9]. Restriction was carried out in a final volume of 15 μl mix consisting of 4 μl DNA (PCR product from positive samples) and 11 μl reaction mix. Incubation was done overnight following the manufacturer's instructions. The restricted fragments were separated on 2% high resolution agarose gel by electrophoresis in TAE buffer (0.04 M Tris, 0.4 mM EDTA, pH = 7.7-8.8) at 100 V for 40 min and visualised under UV illumination after staining with ethidium bromide (final concentration of 0.5 μg/ml).
## (s6) Identification of E. ruminantium using pCS20 PCR
Number of References: 20

(p6.0) A semi-nested pCS20 PCR assay was used to identify E. ruminantium DNA on randomly selected samples and samples collected from clinical cases of heartwater in Ethiopia. The assay was carried out as described by [25,26] using AB129 and ITM130 as external reverse and forward primers, and AB128 and AB129 as internal primers ( Table 2). After initial denaturation of DNA at 94°C for 3 min, the first round of amplification was carried out using 40 cycles of 30s denaturation at 94°C, 45 s annealing at 62°C, 1 min elongation at 72°C and a final extension of 10 min at 72°C. For the second round amplification, 0.5 μl of the PCR product of the first round amplification was used as template. The amplification process consisted of 25 cycles of the same PCR conditions as in the first round except that the annealing temperature was set at 58°C. The amplification process was carried out in the thermocycler described above. The presence of E. ruminantium DNA was analysed using a 2% agarose gel AB128 ACTAGTAGAAATTGCACAATCTAT pCS20 280 [21] AB129 TGATAACTTGGTGCGGGAAATCCTT [21] ITM130 TCAATTGCTTAATGAAGCACTAACTCAC [21] electrophoresis, giving a 280 bp DNA fragment for a positive sample. A PCR mix without DNA template was used as a negative control while DNA from E. ruminantium was used as a positive control.

(p6.1) A semi-nested pCS20 PCR assay was used to identify E. ruminantium DNA on randomly selected samples and samples collected from clinical cases of heartwater in Ethiopia. The assay was carried out as described by [25,26] using AB129 and ITM130 as external reverse and forward primers, and AB128 and AB129 as internal primers ( Table 2). After initial denaturation of DNA at 94°C for 3 min, the first round of amplification was carried out using 40 cycles of 30s denaturation at 94°C, 45 s annealing at 62°C, 1 min elongation at 72°C and a final extension of 10 min at 72°C. For the second round amplification, 0.5 μl of the PCR product of the first round amplification was used as template. The amplification process consisted of 25 cycles of the same PCR conditions as in the first round except that the annealing temperature was set at 58°C. The amplification process was carried out in the thermocycler described above. The presence of E. ruminantium DNA was analysed using a 2% agarose gel AB128 ACTAGTAGAAATTGCACAATCTAT pCS20 280 [21] AB129 TGATAACTTGGTGCGGGAAATCCTT [21] ITM130 TCAATTGCTTAATGAAGCACTAACTCAC [21] electrophoresis, giving a 280 bp DNA fragment for a positive sample. A PCR mix without DNA template was used as a negative control while DNA from E. ruminantium was used as a positive control.
## (s20) International study
Number of References: 4

(p20.0) Samples used in this study were DNA samples extracted from bovine blood collected from selected African countries. The samples (238 in total), originating from Ivory Coast (n = 53), Morocco (n = 81), Rwanda (n = 50), Tanzania (n = 17) and Zambia (n = 37), were obtained from the Department of Biomedical Science, Institute of Tropical Medicine (Antwerp, Belgium) and were analysed using 16S rDNA PCR-RFLP as described by Teshale et al. [9].

(p20.1) Samples used in this study were DNA samples extracted from bovine blood collected from selected African countries. The samples (238 in total), originating from Ivory Coast (n = 53), Morocco (n = 81), Rwanda (n = 50), Tanzania (n = 17) and Zambia (n = 37), were obtained from the Department of Biomedical Science, Institute of Tropical Medicine (Antwerp, Belgium) and were analysed using 16S rDNA PCR-RFLP as described by Teshale et al. [9].
## (s23) Molecular analysis of the samples 16S rDNA polymerase chain reaction
Number of References: 20

(p23.0) A semi-nested PCR described by [9] was used to amplify a fragment of 16S rRNA gene. Primers designated EHR 16SD [24] and EBR3 [9] were used for the first round of PCR amplification. For the second round of amplification the same EHR 16SD was used as forward external primer while EBR2 [9] was used as internal primer. Details of the primers used are presented in Identification to species level of the detected Anaplasma was carried out by using restriction with MboII (5000 U/ ml, Biolabs, New England, USA), HhaI (20,000 U/ml, Biolabs) and MspI (20,000 U/ml, Biolabs) as described earlier by [9]. Restriction was carried out in a final volume of 15 μl mix consisting of 4 μl DNA (PCR product from positive samples) and 11 μl reaction mix. Incubation was done overnight following the manufacturer's instructions. The restricted fragments were separated on 2% high resolution agarose gel by electrophoresis in TAE buffer (0.04 M Tris, 0.4 mM EDTA, pH = 7.7-8.8) at 100 V for 40 min and visualised under UV illumination after staining with ethidium bromide (final concentration of 0.5 μg/ml).

(p23.1) A semi-nested PCR described by [9] was used to amplify a fragment of 16S rRNA gene. Primers designated EHR 16SD [24] and EBR3 [9] were used for the first round of PCR amplification. For the second round of amplification the same EHR 16SD was used as forward external primer while EBR2 [9] was used as internal primer. Details of the primers used are presented in Identification to species level of the detected Anaplasma was carried out by using restriction with MboII (5000 U/ ml, Biolabs, New England, USA), HhaI (20,000 U/ml, Biolabs) and MspI (20,000 U/ml, Biolabs) as described earlier by [9]. Restriction was carried out in a final volume of 15 μl mix consisting of 4 μl DNA (PCR product from positive samples) and 11 μl reaction mix. Incubation was done overnight following the manufacturer's instructions. The restricted fragments were separated on 2% high resolution agarose gel by electrophoresis in TAE buffer (0.04 M Tris, 0.4 mM EDTA, pH = 7.7-8.8) at 100 V for 40 min and visualised under UV illumination after staining with ethidium bromide (final concentration of 0.5 μg/ml).
## (s24) Identification of E. ruminantium using pCS20 PCR
Number of References: 20

(p24.0) A semi-nested pCS20 PCR assay was used to identify E. ruminantium DNA on randomly selected samples and samples collected from clinical cases of heartwater in Ethiopia. The assay was carried out as described by [25,26] using AB129 and ITM130 as external reverse and forward primers, and AB128 and AB129 as internal primers ( Table 2). After initial denaturation of DNA at 94°C for 3 min, the first round of amplification was carried out using 40 cycles of 30s denaturation at 94°C, 45 s annealing at 62°C, 1 min elongation at 72°C and a final extension of 10 min at 72°C. For the second round amplification, 0.5 μl of the PCR product of the first round amplification was used as template. The amplification process consisted of 25 cycles of the same PCR conditions as in the first round except that the annealing temperature was set at 58°C. The amplification process was carried out in the thermocycler described above. The presence of E. ruminantium DNA was analysed using a 2% agarose gel AB128 ACTAGTAGAAATTGCACAATCTAT pCS20 280 [21] AB129 TGATAACTTGGTGCGGGAAATCCTT [21] ITM130 TCAATTGCTTAATGAAGCACTAACTCAC [21] electrophoresis, giving a 280 bp DNA fragment for a positive sample. A PCR mix without DNA template was used as a negative control while DNA from E. ruminantium was used as a positive control.

(p24.1) A semi-nested pCS20 PCR assay was used to identify E. ruminantium DNA on randomly selected samples and samples collected from clinical cases of heartwater in Ethiopia. The assay was carried out as described by [25,26] using AB129 and ITM130 as external reverse and forward primers, and AB128 and AB129 as internal primers ( Table 2). After initial denaturation of DNA at 94°C for 3 min, the first round of amplification was carried out using 40 cycles of 30s denaturation at 94°C, 45 s annealing at 62°C, 1 min elongation at 72°C and a final extension of 10 min at 72°C. For the second round amplification, 0.5 μl of the PCR product of the first round amplification was used as template. The amplification process consisted of 25 cycles of the same PCR conditions as in the first round except that the annealing temperature was set at 58°C. The amplification process was carried out in the thermocycler described above. The presence of E. ruminantium DNA was analysed using a 2% agarose gel AB128 ACTAGTAGAAATTGCACAATCTAT pCS20 280 [21] AB129 TGATAACTTGGTGCGGGAAATCCTT [21] ITM130 TCAATTGCTTAATGAAGCACTAACTCAC [21] electrophoresis, giving a 280 bp DNA fragment for a positive sample. A PCR mix without DNA template was used as a negative control while DNA from E. ruminantium was used as a positive control.
