# Contactless Palmprint Recognition System: A Survey

CorpusID: 251076876 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aad71ad8c94218ca82b3d6132f730027b58bb109](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aad71ad8c94218ca82b3d6132f730027b58bb109)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 6

(p0.0) A biometric authentication effectively recognizes a person's identification with high confidence [1]- [3]. Recent study interest has been required by palmprint recognition, an emerging technique in biometrics systems. Researchers have been looking at constructing such systems in a contactless approach to make the palmprint. Thus, there are two categories of palmprint capture techniques: contactbased and contactless-based. However, human users have expressed much justifiable opposition to contact-based acquisition strategies. However, this has had a detrimental effect on the advancement of palmprint recognition. As a result of these failures, contactless palmprint recognition has The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Jonathan Rodriguez . been developed to increase user-friendly and hygienic and safeguard user privacy [4]- [7]. Thus, this paper provides an overview and evaluation of the contactless palmprint recognition system, the state-of-the-art performance of existing works, different types of ''Region of Interest'' (ROI) extraction algorithms, feature extraction, and matching algorithms.

(p0.1) This work discusses the theoretical background of biometric recognition, contactless palmprint as a biometric, and the concept of on-device intelligence. Several related works are also discussed to highlight the state-of-the-art techniques related to these research areas. The following are some of the significant challenges in respect of palmprint biometrics in the literature: its pose and Illumination affect the layouts and visibility of palm lines; detecting the contactless palmprint region of interest (ROI) due to the different orientations of the presented palm is challenging; current palmprint processing is off the device; and due to costs, most of the devices are equipped with limited memory [8]- [11].
