# TRAVEL TIME RELIABILITY IN TRANSPORTATION NETWORKS: A REVIEW OF METHODOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTS

CorpusID: 250072530 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/192ce0b402708b8311cdd840c4a3023b81dcb93e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/192ce0b402708b8311cdd840c4a3023b81dcb93e)

Fields: Environmental Science, Economics, Engineering

## (s10) Capturing the heterogeneous TTDs based on different modeling rationales
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) As verified by Plötz et al. (2017) and Zang et al. (2018a), the performance of the same TTD model in fitting different travel time datasets may be different. Consequently, many different TTD models, based on different modeling rationales, have been developed to fit heterogeneous TTDs. As can be seen from Table 1, the TTD models based on single distribution and mixture modeling rationales have been widely studied for decades. In particular, the single distribution model is suitable for fitting a TTD with a typical right-skewed distribution and a long/fat tail,
## (s23) Directly developing reliability measures
Number of References: 4

(p23.0) Game theory is a representative methodology for directly developing reliability measures based on assumed sources of uncertainty. The source of uncertainty in game theory is the stochastic traffic supplies that are the result of link failures. In particular, compared to the route choice criterion used in traditional user equilibrium or stochastic user equilibrium, the route choice criterion in game theory assumes that the demons select links that will cause the maximum damage to travelers, while travelers accordingly seek the best routes to avoid link failures (e.g., Bell, 2000;Bell and Cassir, 2002;Szeto et al., 2006;Szeto, 2011). The resulting trip cost obtained by the game theory model is used as the measure to evaluate the network performance reliability. Please refer to Section 5.2.1 for the general formula of game theory model.
## (s37) Dimension 1: objective quantification of travel time reliability
Number of References: 11

(p37.0) To account for TTR in traffic assignment, various risk or utility measures are used to capture the role of travelers' attitudes toward TTR in route choice criterion. Table 6 summarizes the representative types and the corresponding measure. The first type is based on utility and mainly consists of expected utility-based and non-expected utility-based measures. Expected utility-based measures assume that decision-making under uncertainty aims to maximize the expected utility, e.g., mean-variance (Jackson and Jucker, 1982), late arrival penalty (Watling, 2006), quadratic utility function (Mirchandani and Soroush, 1987), and exponential utility function (Tatineni et al., 1997;Chen et al., 2002a). In the above utility measures, travelers' different risk attitudes toward TTR can be determined with different parameters. In contrast, the non-expected utility-based measures are based on the idea that decision-making under uncertainty may not be made according to the expected utility maximization, as demonstrated in the cumulative prospect theory (e.g., Avineri, 2006;Connors and Sumalee, 2009;Xu et al., 2011), regret theory (Chorus, 2012;Li and Huang, 2017), and fuzzy set theory (Miralinaghi et al., 2016). Cumulative prospect theory assumes that travelers compare a summary statistic of the perceived utility (instead of the expected utility) of each route before choosing one. Regret theory uses the modified utility function to calculate route utility and assumes that a traveler can anticipate the possibility that the chosen route may be slower or faster than a non-chosen route, causing regret or satisfaction, respectively. Finally, fuzzy set theory uses the membership value function to calculate route utility, where the mode of the random travel time of each link has the highest membership value and, accordingly, the highest route utility.
## (s48) Routebased algorithm
Number of References: 11

(p48.0) Alternating direction Shao et al. (2006b); Chen et al. (2010Chen et al. ( , 2011b Gradient projection Nie (2011) Waltling (2002); Shao et al. (2006aShao et al. ( , 2008 Gap function Lo et al. (2006); Szeto et al. (2006); Siu and Lo (2008) Link-based algorithm Frank-Wolfe algorithm Chen et al. (2002a); Cheu et al. (2007); Xu et al. (2017) 
## (s51) Uncertainty Propagation from Source to Link TTD
Number of References: 9

(p51.0) In early studies on TTR-based traffic assignment, TTD is assumed to be exogenous (i.e., provided explicitly) and flow-independent. Thus, these studies do not make any assumptions about the source and there is no propagation consideration of uncertainty (Mirchandani and Soroush, 1987;Uchida and Iida, 1993). Recent studies on TTR-based traffic assignment assume that TTDs are flow-dependent and that travel time variability originates from the uncertainty in certain sources, such as the supply side (Lo and Tung, 2003;Lo et al., 2006), the demand side (Shao et al., 2006a(Shao et al., , 2006b, or both . Figure 9 summarizes the three common paradigms for understanding the uncertainty propagation processes in TTRbased traffic assignment problems.

(p51.1) • In Paradigm 1, supply side uncertainty is the sole uncertainty source and includes two cases: link capacity variation (Lo and Tung 2003;Lo et al., 2006) and free-flow travel time variation (Chen et al., 2010). Under this paradigm, the uncertainty would directly propagate from the source to the link travel time through a link cost function.
