# Adaptive thermal comfort for energy saving office building design-A literature review

CorpusID: 259480052 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aff3e0a2f76c94c1f6eb76616287c8ce7199480d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aff3e0a2f76c94c1f6eb76616287c8ce7199480d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s8) Relation of comfort temperature to outdoor temperature
Number of References: 11

(p8.0) There is a powerful connection of outside temperature to inside comfort temperature [62]. It has been found that the comfortable condition indoors is dependent on the external temperature because people adjust well in their offices using adaptive mechanisms [2,5]. According to different thermal comfort research, the indoor comfort temperature is dependent on the outside temperature [62,67]. As a result, we can link the weather and season to the appropriate temperature for indoor comfort. Standards based on this type of connection would improve adaptive thermal comfort while simultaneously lower energy usage [68]. The link between comfort temperature and outdoor temperature will be useful in designing comfortable structures [10]. Figure 3 depicts a relationship that may be used to explain the difference in comfort temperatures between air-conditioned and naturally ventilated buildings. Individuals within naturally ventilated buildings acclimatize to the outside temperature via the building's envelope. The thermostat of a heated or cooled building, which is typically controlled by the building management, regulates the temperature, and the residents become used to of this predefined temperature. Figure 3 shows how peoples of naturally ventilated buildings have greater comfort temperatures and has better connection to outdoor temperatures than peoples of air-conditioned structures. We found the following equations using regression analysis [30]. The thermal design of buildings will improve from these equations. We estimated a regression coefficient of 0.43 for NV buildings, This has a greater gradient than the ASHRAE standard. Similarly, for HVAC building, we find 0.22 coefficient, which is also steeper than CIBSE guide. This could be due to the larger range of outside climatic fluctuation investigated by this study. In contrast, the regression coefficient of 0.31 obtained in MM building is more similar to that found in field studies by Manu et al. [41] and Trebilcock et al. [49]. Figure 3, and it may be used to determine if a building needs to be heated or cooled. In many situations, there ought to be a way of obtain the comfortable indoor temperature without using a heating system because the comfort indoor temperature in air-conditioned buildings is consistently higher than the mean temperature of outdoor. It is possible not to provide cooling facility in numerious situations through the careful design of building [30]. In some areas when the mean temperature of outdoor surpasses 25°C, the indoor comfortable temperature is consistently less than the mean temperature of outdoor.   Figures 4 and 5. Various studies has different adaptive thermal comfort model, and they are identical in terms of their tendency, the comfort temperature and exterior temperature are directly proportional to each other. That line's length shows the diversity of comfort temperature of a specific location. The line's length varies due to the wide range of outdoor temperatures. The comfort temperature rises as the exterior temperature rises. However, the coefficient varies across countries.
