# What's the Situation with Intelligent Mesh Generation: A Survey and Perspectives

CorpusID: 253499424 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/04d5891518052f83a7f240b821935ccef1ca051f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/04d5891518052f83a7f240b821935ccef1ca051f)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s9) Deformation-based Mesh Generation
Number of References: 6

(p9.0) A mesh consists of polygons and is essentially a discrete representation of a continuous surface. The combinatorial nature of the polygons prevents taking derivatives over the space of possible meshing of any given surface. Thus, it is difficult for mesh processing and optimization techniques to take advantage of modular gradient descent components of modern optimization frameworks. To circumvent this problem, deformation-based IMG has attracted more attention. As shown in Fig.4, a distinguishing feature of this technology is the need for an initial mesh such as spherical or ellipsoidal template mesh. Deformation-based IMG is applicable to different data types of inputs. A target mesh based on geometric information is usually generated from images [8]- [34], point clouds [35]- [39] or voxels [40], [41].
## (s12) Delaunay triangulation-based Mesh Generation
Number of References: 17

(p12.0) Delaunay triangulation [133] is a widely employed mesh reconstruction technology that can connect point clouds into triangular meshes. Delaunay triangulation has many excellent properties, such as maximizing the minimum angle characteristic. Regardless of which region the Delaunay triangulation is constructed from, the final generated triangular mesh is unique. Inspired by Delaunay triangulation, some researchers have tried to integrate it into IMG to generate high-quality and manifold meshes [43]- [46], [49], [98], [104], [106]. Among these methods, early works [43]- [45],  [49] predict the position of vertices using neural networks and then generate high-quality meshes using Delaunay triangulation [133]. These methods generate 2D planar meshes with given boundaries or coarse meshes. However, in applications, a three-dimensional surface often needs to be addressed. Alfonzetti [46] utilized the 3D Delaunay algorithm to generate a tetrahedral mesh from a 3D point cloud. Song et al. [93] combined the classification model and adaptive Delaunay algorithm to realize the mesh reconstruction of large indoor and outdoor scenes. Rakotosaona et al. [104] projected a 3D point into the 2D parameter space by a neural network, triangulated the 2D plane point using the Delaunay algorithm, and then pulled the point cloud back to the 3D surface by inverse mapping. The algorithm pipeline is shown in Fig. 9. Furthermore, to realize end-to-end differentiable triangulation, Rakotosaona et al. [98] proposed a differentiable weighted Delaunay triangulation. As [134] remark, parameterization is a correspondence between a surface mesh embedded in 3D and a simple 2D domain referred to as the parameter space. Generally, parameterization is expected to be bijective, which is a classic problem in computer graphics and geometry processing with multifarious applications, such as mesh generation, texture mapping, and shape correspondence. Considering the convenience of mesh generation in parameter space, some researchers have tried to combine parametrization with machine learning modules and then invented a series of IMG methods based on parameterization. According to the different participation modes of parameterization, we broadly divide them into two categories. The first category is geometry image-based IMG. The authors map the surface to the parameter plane by the traditional parametric method [135] to obtain a geometry image, process the geometry image using the deep learning model, and then convert the geometry image to a mesh. The second category is parameterization learning-based IMG, which learns the mapping from the parameter space to the target space. Then, meshes are generated in the parameter space by the traditional or machine learning method.
## (s18) Hybrid Polygon Mesh Generation
Number of References: 3

(p18.0) In practical applications, due to various nonideal conditions, it is often impossible to generate only a single basic facet. Therefore, some researchers have designed hybrid mesh generation algorithms out of active or passive intention. However, due to the limitation of their application, there are only a few types of IMG with hybrid meshes as the generation target. In the literature that we searched, only BP-ANN [114], AnalyticMesh [101] and PolyGen [70] belong to this category. BP-ANN generates anisotropic quadrilateral and isotropic triangular meshes by the advancing front method, which improves the level of automation and efficiency of hybrid mesh generation. AnalyticMesh marches among analytic cells to recover the exact mesh of the closed, piecewise planar surface captured by an implicit surface network. The algorithm is applicable to more advanced MLP architectures, including those with shortcut connections and max pooling operations, which support a richer set of architectural designs for learning and exactly meshing complex surface shapes. Polygen more compactly represents the surface of the object with different polygons.
## (s19) Tetrahedral Mesh Generation
Number of References: 5

(p19.0) Tetrahedral mesh generation is an important branch of mesh generation. Unlike the surface mesh, tetrahedral mesh generation simultaneously divides the surface and the interior of the object. Tetrahedral mesh plays an irreplaceable role in numerical simulation, so it has received the attention of many researchers. However, due to the complexity of the problem and the incompleteness of the basic theory, intelligent tetrahedral mesh generation is still lacking. In the literature that we selected, the tetrahedral mesh generation process has been partially [46] or fully [81] replaced by deep learning modules. In [46], Alfonzetti et al. proposed a neural network generator for tetrahedral meshes. Starting from an initial moderately coarse mesh, the generator grows the mesh up to the user-specified number of nodes by a node probability density function. DefTet [81] is optimized for both vertex placement and occupancy and is differentiable with respect to standard 3D reconstruction loss functions. DefTet offers several advantages over prior work and can Fig. 12: DefTet [81]: an IMG method for tetrahedral mesh.
