# An overview on current trends and future outlook of hydrogels in drug delivery

CorpusID: 259515885 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5aedafcac552b6c41f34f82d3bdd788f1c6d63fb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5aedafcac552b6c41f34f82d3bdd788f1c6d63fb)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) The terminology "Drug Delivery System" (DDS) refers to a method of introducing a drug into the body and increasing its efficiency by regulating the rate and time at which the medication is released into the targeted organ. To get over the disadvantages of traditional drug formulations, controlled drug delivery systems that provide drugs at predetermined rates have been developed [1]. There are many types of the DDS's that are in use nowadays. In this study, the hydrogels were investigated as drug carriers for a controlled drug release. Hydrogels are three-dimensional hydrophilic polymeric matrices that may absorb large amounts of water or biological fluids. Due to their high water content, porosity, and soft consistency, hydrogels are more similar to living tissues than other artificial biomaterials. [2]. As a result of their swelling capability, hydrogels, which have become extremely desirable materials nowadays, are commonly used in medicine and healthcare. Hydrogels can provide optimum conditions and environments for biological interactions to take place. One of the most significant materials of option is hydrogel, which is employed in bio generators, drug delivery systems, contact lenses, wound dressings, and biomedical applications.
## (s30) IONIC HYDROGELS
Number of References: 2

(p30.0) Cationic and anionic hydrogels are two types of ionic hydrogels. -Positively charged side groups such as amines and sulphonic acid are found in cationic hydrogels. At low pH, they show an increase in swelling. -Negatively charged side groups, like carboxylic acid and sulphonic acid, are present in anionic hydrogels. When the pH is too high, they swell more [55,60]. -
