# Warm needle acupuncture for osteoarthritis: An overview of systematic reviews and meta-analysis systematic review OPEN ACCESS EDITED BY

CorpusID: 257551757 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/142b1eae8321797631a7d4755f7c84200fdc3c86](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/142b1eae8321797631a7d4755f7c84200fdc3c86)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) Overlap calculation of the reviews
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) The degree of overlap of the original literature for SRs was assessed by creating citation metrics for SRs. We calculated the "corrected covered area" (CCA) index (19,20). The measure of overlap dividing the frequency of repeated occurrences of the index publication in other reviews by the product of index publications and reviews is reduced by the number of index publications. Calculation formulas were calculated as CCA = (N -r)/(rc -r), where N is the number of included publications in evidence synthesis (this is the sum of the ticked boxes in the citation matrix), r is the number of rows (number of index publications), and c is the number of columns (number of reviews) (supplement overlap). The calculation results lower than 5 can be considered a "slight overlap, " 6-10 can be considered a "moderate overlap, " 11-15 can be considered a "high overlap, " and greater than or equal to 15 can be considered a "very high overlap. " Frontiers in Medicine 03 frontiersin.org
## (s23) Report quality of included systematic reviews
Number of References: 2

(p23.0) To assess the reporting quality of the included SRs, we used the PRISMA 2020 checklist (22). Figure 3 shows the reporting quality assessment results of the included SRs. Item 1 (title), item 2 (abstract), item 4 (objects), item 8 (selection process), item 19 (results of individual studies), item 20 (results of syntheses), and item 21 (reporting biases) were reported adequately (100%). Item 15 (describe any methods used to assess certainty (or confidence) in the body of evidence for an outcome), item 22 (certainty of evidence), and item 24 (registration and protocol) of results reported insufficient description. Overall, two SRs (12,34) exhibited over 85% compliance. The results are shown in Supplementary 5. 
