# Input-output modelling for household activity-level environmental footprints: a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 257650379 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/938619365e813cbc55cc04390a99881fc35588fe](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/938619365e813cbc55cc04390a99881fc35588fe)

Fields: Environmental Science, Economics, Physics

## (s9) Activity classification
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) There are almost as many ways to distinguish activities as there are papers on the topic. Classifying activities is partly a question of terminology but designing relevant activity categories is essential for ensuring that the activities fulfil a uniform need of the consumers such that interventions have a uniform effect on an activity. Usually, it is relevant to distinguish between production and consumption activities. Often, the term leisure has been used to cover all consumption activities. The term 'committed time' is also used to refer to household production and is opposed to 'personal time' (including sleeping, and eating), 'contracted time' (employment and education), 'free time' , and 'mobility time' . Travel to paid work and self-education do not comply with the third-party criterion but do not seem to be consumption activities either (Ironmonger 1996). While Gershuny (1987b) defined education as consumption, Stahmer (2010) treated education as fixed capital formation, implying that more hours of education increase educational capital.  argued that education is consumed by the producer but indirectly influences society, making it relevant to distinguish education from consumption activities that only benefit the participating individuals. In practice, by-products of consumption activities might also benefit society.
