# Body fluid levels of neuroactive amino acids in autism spectrum disorders: a review of the literature

CorpusID: 254075338 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48c3c3554bc04181cde788d16a3c704ba2696b04](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48c3c3554bc04181cde788d16a3c704ba2696b04)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Psychology

## (s1) Neuroactive amino acids
Number of References: 48

(p1.0) Several lines of evidence have shown that changes (e.g., availability, metabolism, and/or receptor activity) in neuroactive amino acids associated with central brain functions may play a role in the pathogenesis and/or pharmacotherapy of several psychiatric disorders (e.g., schizophrenia and mood disorders) that have symptoms, such as cognitive impairment and problems with social interactions, in common with ASD (Coyle 2006;Grant et al. 2006;Lam et al. 2006;Labrie et al. 2008;Ongür et al. 2008;Yüksel and Öngür 2010;Durrant and Heresco-Levy 2014). Several preclinical and clinical studies have implicated neuroactive amino acids in the etiology of ASD, fragile X syndrome, and tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), but most of these studies have focused on glutamate, GABA, and/or glutamine (El-Ansary and Al-Ayadhi 2014; Rojas 2014; Santini et al. 2014;Rozas et al. 2015;Cochran et al. 2015;Lozano et al. 2015;Robertson et al. 2016). Other amino acids could also be involved and it may be important to conduct comprehensive studies in which a number of these amino acids are investigated simultaneously. Due to the potential role of neuroactive amino acids in the pathogenesis and treatment of ASD, monitoring changes in their concentrations in body fluids are also important in case they may be relevant to the early diagnosis and intervention in patients with ASD. This paper reviews the literature on such measurements of several of these important compounds in body fluids in ASD subjects.

(p1.1) Several lines of evidence have shown that changes (e.g., availability, metabolism, and/or receptor activity) in neuroactive amino acids associated with central brain functions may play a role in the pathogenesis and/or pharmacotherapy of several psychiatric disorders (e.g., schizophrenia and mood disorders) that have symptoms, such as cognitive impairment and problems with social interactions, in common with ASD (Coyle 2006;Grant et al. 2006;Lam et al. 2006;Labrie et al. 2008;Ongür et al. 2008;Yüksel and Öngür 2010;Durrant and Heresco-Levy 2014). Several preclinical and clinical studies have implicated neuroactive amino acids in the etiology of ASD, fragile X syndrome, and tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), but most of these studies have focused on glutamate, GABA, and/or glutamine (El-Ansary and Al-Ayadhi 2014; Rojas 2014; Santini et al. 2014;Rozas et al. 2015;Cochran et al. 2015;Lozano et al. 2015;Robertson et al. 2016). Other amino acids could also be involved and it may be important to conduct comprehensive studies in which a number of these amino acids are investigated simultaneously. Due to the potential role of neuroactive amino acids in the pathogenesis and treatment of ASD, monitoring changes in their concentrations in body fluids are also important in case they may be relevant to the early diagnosis and intervention in patients with ASD. This paper reviews the literature on such measurements of several of these important compounds in body fluids in ASD subjects.
## (s2) Glutamate (GLU)
Number of References: 18

(p2.0) GLU, which is highly concentrated in brain, is the primary excitatory neurotransmitter (Naaijen et al. 2015). GLU normally has a protective effect with regard to neural plasticity and cognitive function, but excessive GLU may be neurotoxic, leading to death of neurons and glia (Olney 1969;Manev et al. 1989) and may possibly play a role in the pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders, such as ASD (Sheldon and Robinson 2007). Ghanizadeh (2011) and El-Ansary and Al-Ayadhi (2014) showed that GLU is involved in neuroinflammation in ASD, and Ghanizadeh and Namazi (2010) proposed GLU and homocysteine as targets for therapy of ASD patients' irritability and aggression. A hyperglutamatergic hypothesis of ASD has been proposed (Fatemi 2008;Blaylock and Strunecka 2009). Fatemi et al. (2002) showed that the levels of GAD 65 kDa and GAD 67 kDa proteins, both of which are involved in converting GLU to gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), are reduced in the brains of patients with ASD, resulting in the increased levels of GLU in the brain.
## (s3) Glutamine (GLN)
Number of References: 52

(p3.0) GLU is stored in the form of GLN in astrocytes until it is transferred to presynaptic terminals and converted back to GLU (Magistretti and Pellerin 1999). Ghanizadeh (2010) reported that a glutamine (GLN) synthetase inhibitor may improve inflammation in ASD. Shimmura et al. (2011) suggested that the level of GLN in plasma could be a screening test for detecting ASD in children, especially those with a normal intelligence quotient (IQ). In studies of GLN levels in ASD patients compared to HCs, plasma (Moreno-Fuenmayor et al. 1996;Aldred et al. 2003;Shimmura et al. 2011;Tirouvanziam et al. 2011;Good 2011a;Tu et al. 2012; El-Ansary 2016) and platelet (Rolf et al. 1993) levels have been reported to be decreased, serum levels to be no different (Shinohe et al. 2006), and urine levels either increased (Noto et al. 2014) or decreased (Evans et al. 2008).

(p3.1) GLU is stored in the form of GLN in astrocytes until it is transferred to presynaptic terminals and converted back to GLU (Magistretti and Pellerin 1999). Ghanizadeh (2010) reported that a glutamine (GLN) synthetase inhibitor may improve inflammation in ASD. Shimmura et al. (2011) suggested that the level of GLN in plasma could be a screening test for detecting ASD in children, especially those with a normal intelligence quotient (IQ). In studies of GLN levels in ASD patients compared to HCs, plasma (Moreno-Fuenmayor et al. 1996;Aldred et al. 2003;Shimmura et al. 2011;Tirouvanziam et al. 2011;Good 2011a;Tu et al. 2012; El-Ansary 2016) and platelet (Rolf et al. 1993) levels have been reported to be decreased, serum levels to be no different (Shinohe et al. 2006), and urine levels either increased (Noto et al. 2014) or decreased (Evans et al. 2008).
## (s7) Tryptophan (TRP)
Number of References: 52

(p7.0) Serotonin (5-hydroxtryptamine, 5-HT) is an important neurotransmitter, and TRP is the precursor of serotonin (Zhang et al. 2015). Dysfunction of serotonin systems are implicated in some forms of ASD, and may contribute to social interaction impairments (Lam et al. 2006;Rubin et al. 2013;Yang et al. 2014). Whole blood serotonin has been reported to be elevated in at least 25 % of ASD children (Muller et al. 2016). However, reducing TRP in the diet can impair social behavior in patients (McDougle et al. 1996) and mice (Zhang et al. 2015) and increasing TRP in the diet has been reported to improve social behavior in mice (Zhang et al. 2015). Compared with HCs, TRP levels in plasma have been reported to be decreased in ASD (Tirouvanziam et al. 2011;Tu et al. 2012;Naushad et al. 2013), while Noto et al. (2014) reported levels to be increased in urine samples and Kałużna-Czaplińska et al. (2014) reported them to be decreased.

(p7.1) Serotonin (5-hydroxtryptamine, 5-HT) is an important neurotransmitter, and TRP is the precursor of serotonin (Zhang et al. 2015). Dysfunction of serotonin systems are implicated in some forms of ASD, and may contribute to social interaction impairments (Lam et al. 2006;Rubin et al. 2013;Yang et al. 2014). Whole blood serotonin has been reported to be elevated in at least 25 % of ASD children (Muller et al. 2016). However, reducing TRP in the diet can impair social behavior in patients (McDougle et al. 1996) and mice (Zhang et al. 2015) and increasing TRP in the diet has been reported to improve social behavior in mice (Zhang et al. 2015). Compared with HCs, TRP levels in plasma have been reported to be decreased in ASD (Tirouvanziam et al. 2011;Tu et al. 2012;Naushad et al. 2013), while Noto et al. (2014) reported levels to be increased in urine samples and Kałużna-Czaplińska et al. (2014) reported them to be decreased.
## (s8) d-Serine
Number of References: 108

(p8.0) In the recent years, d-serine in the brain has been the subject of extensive research (Fuchs et al. 2005(Fuchs et al. , 2011Nunes et al. 2012;Billard 2015;Sacchi et al. 2016). d-Serine is an important amino acid in glutamatergic transmission (Fuchs et al. 2005) and is a potent coagonist at NMDA receptors in some mammalian brain areas and possibly involved in the pathogenesis of several psychiatric and neurological disorders, such as schizophrenia (Labrie et al. 2008;Nunes et al. 2012;Balu and Coyle 2015;Ozeki et al. 2016), bipolar disorder (Yamada et al. 2004;Young and Barrett 2015), depression (Hashimoto et al. 2015(Hashimoto et al. , 2016Deutschenbaur et al. 2016), Alzheimer's disease (Paula-Lima et al. 2013;Madeira et al. 2015), and addiction (D'Ascenzo et al. 2014;Seif et al. 2015;Liu et al. 2016). GLY has high affinity for extrasynaptic NMDA receptors, while d-serine has high affinity for synaptic NMDA receptors (Vizi et al. 2013).

(p8.1) There is a paucity of studies on body fluid levels of d-serine in ASD. In 2006, Shinohe et al. (2006) showed that d-serine and l-serine levels in serum were no different between adult patients with ASD and HCs. Comparing with HCs, Tirouvanziam et al. (2011) showed that combined serine levels in plasma were decreased in ASD. In studies on urine samples, Kałużna-Czaplińska et al. (2014) reported that l-serine levels were decreased in ASD, and Noto et al. (2014) reported that l-serine levels were increased, while Evans et al. (2008) and Ming et al. (2012) showed that the combined serine levels were decreased. In the studies in which combined serine levels were reported, the d-serine and l-serine were not measured separately.

(p8.2) In the recent years, d-serine in the brain has been the subject of extensive research (Fuchs et al. 2005(Fuchs et al. , 2011Nunes et al. 2012;Billard 2015;Sacchi et al. 2016). d-Serine is an important amino acid in glutamatergic transmission (Fuchs et al. 2005) and is a potent coagonist at NMDA receptors in some mammalian brain areas and possibly involved in the pathogenesis of several psychiatric and neurological disorders, such as schizophrenia (Labrie et al. 2008;Nunes et al. 2012;Balu and Coyle 2015;Ozeki et al. 2016), bipolar disorder (Yamada et al. 2004;Young and Barrett 2015), depression (Hashimoto et al. 2015(Hashimoto et al. , 2016Deutschenbaur et al. 2016), Alzheimer's disease (Paula-Lima et al. 2013;Madeira et al. 2015), and addiction (D'Ascenzo et al. 2014;Seif et al. 2015;Liu et al. 2016). GLY has high affinity for extrasynaptic NMDA receptors, while d-serine has high affinity for synaptic NMDA receptors (Vizi et al. 2013).

(p8.3) There is a paucity of studies on body fluid levels of d-serine in ASD. In 2006, Shinohe et al. (2006) showed that d-serine and l-serine levels in serum were no different between adult patients with ASD and HCs. Comparing with HCs, Tirouvanziam et al. (2011) showed that combined serine levels in plasma were decreased in ASD. In studies on urine samples, Kałużna-Czaplińska et al. (2014) reported that l-serine levels were decreased in ASD, and Noto et al. (2014) reported that l-serine levels were increased, while Evans et al. (2008) and Ming et al. (2012) showed that the combined serine levels were decreased. In the studies in which combined serine levels were reported, the d-serine and l-serine were not measured separately.
## (s9) Other amino acids
Number of References: 68

(p9.0) The metabolism of homocysteine is associated closely with folic acid and Vitamin B12 (Ghanizadeh et al. 2012;Desai et al. 2016). Desai et al. (2016) showed that a lack of folic acid may be involved in the pathogenesis of ASD. Bala et al. (2016) reported low plasma levels of Vitamin B12 in ASD compared to values in HCs. James et al. (2004), and Bala et al. (2016) reported that the concentration of homocysteine in plasma with ASD patients is low. However, other studies showed that homocysteine levels were increased in ASD patients compared with HCs: Tu et al. (2012) reported levels in plasma, Ali et al. (2011) and Paşca et al. (2006) reported levels in serum, and Noto et al. (2014) and Puig-Alcaraz et al. (2015) reported levels in urine samples, and all were reported to be increased. Puig-Alcaraz et al. (2015) found that increased urinary levels of homocysteine correlated directly with the severity of deficit in communication skills in ASD.

(p9.1) Arginine is an essential precursor for the synthesis of proteins and nitric oxide, and it can spare GLN, detoxify ammonia, and increase brain blood flow (Good 2011a). Compared with HCs, arginine levels in plasma of ASD patients have been reported to be increased (Kuwabara et al. 2013) or no different (Tirouvanziam et al. 2011). Table 1 shows the reported levels of neuroactive amino acids in patients with ASD in comparison with HCs and includes some other amino acids not mentioned previously in this review (leucine, lysine, citrulline, alanine, valine, isoleucine, threonine, proline, methionine, aspartate, asparagine, phenylalanine, tyrosine, and histidine). Leucine, isoleucine, and valine are all termed branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) and share a transport system with large, neutral amino acids (LNAAs), such as tryptophan, tyrosine, and phenylalanine which are the precursors of the neurotransmitter amines 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin) and the catecholamines (Fernstrom 2005). Arnold et al. (2003) reported that the level of the essential amino acids valine, leucine, phenylalanine, and lysine in ASD was 58 % compared to HCs. Although there is a paucity of studies on the levels of BCCAs in ASD, most of the studies report a reduction of BCAA levels in autistic subjects (see Table 1 and the references mentioned therein), suggesting that future research in this area is warranted.

(p9.2) The metabolism of homocysteine is associated closely with folic acid and Vitamin B12 (Ghanizadeh et al. 2012;Desai et al. 2016). Desai et al. (2016) showed that a lack of folic acid may be involved in the pathogenesis of ASD. Bala et al. (2016) reported low plasma levels of Vitamin B12 in ASD compared to values in HCs. James et al. (2004), and Bala et al. (2016) reported that the concentration of homocysteine in plasma with ASD patients is low. However, other studies showed that homocysteine levels were increased in ASD patients compared with HCs: Tu et al. (2012) reported levels in plasma, Ali et al. (2011) and Paşca et al. (2006) reported levels in serum, and Noto et al. (2014) and Puig-Alcaraz et al. (2015) reported levels in urine samples, and all were reported to be increased. Puig-Alcaraz et al. (2015) found that increased urinary levels of homocysteine correlated directly with the severity of deficit in communication skills in ASD.

(p9.3) Arginine is an essential precursor for the synthesis of proteins and nitric oxide, and it can spare GLN, detoxify ammonia, and increase brain blood flow (Good 2011a). Compared with HCs, arginine levels in plasma of ASD patients have been reported to be increased (Kuwabara et al. 2013) or no different (Tirouvanziam et al. 2011). Table 1 shows the reported levels of neuroactive amino acids in patients with ASD in comparison with HCs and includes some other amino acids not mentioned previously in this review (leucine, lysine, citrulline, alanine, valine, isoleucine, threonine, proline, methionine, aspartate, asparagine, phenylalanine, tyrosine, and histidine). Leucine, isoleucine, and valine are all termed branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) and share a transport system with large, neutral amino acids (LNAAs), such as tryptophan, tyrosine, and phenylalanine which are the precursors of the neurotransmitter amines 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin) and the catecholamines (Fernstrom 2005). Arnold et al. (2003) reported that the level of the essential amino acids valine, leucine, phenylalanine, and lysine in ASD was 58 % compared to HCs. Although there is a paucity of studies on the levels of BCCAs in ASD, most of the studies report a reduction of BCAA levels in autistic subjects (see Table 1 and the references mentioned therein), suggesting that future research in this area is warranted.
## (s10) Discussion
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) Overall, the results on amino acid levels in ASD reported in the literature are, with the possible exception of the BCAAs, inconclusive, and contradictory. Table 1 is a summary of reported differences between ASD patients and HCs in the levels of amino acids. BCAAs are essential amino acids that make up about 1/3 of muscle protein, and these deficiencies may affect muscle and connective tissue integrity in ASD subjects (Evans et al. 2008). It has been suggested that BCAA deficiencies may be related to poor nutrition due to unusual food preferences in ASD children (Arnold et al. 2003).
## (s16) Neuroactive amino acids
Number of References: 48

(p16.0) Several lines of evidence have shown that changes (e.g., availability, metabolism, and/or receptor activity) in neuroactive amino acids associated with central brain functions may play a role in the pathogenesis and/or pharmacotherapy of several psychiatric disorders (e.g., schizophrenia and mood disorders) that have symptoms, such as cognitive impairment and problems with social interactions, in common with ASD (Coyle 2006;Grant et al. 2006;Lam et al. 2006;Labrie et al. 2008;Ongür et al. 2008;Yüksel and Öngür 2010;Durrant and Heresco-Levy 2014). Several preclinical and clinical studies have implicated neuroactive amino acids in the etiology of ASD, fragile X syndrome, and tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), but most of these studies have focused on glutamate, GABA, and/or glutamine (El-Ansary and Al-Ayadhi 2014; Rojas 2014; Santini et al. 2014;Rozas et al. 2015;Cochran et al. 2015;Lozano et al. 2015;Robertson et al. 2016). Other amino acids could also be involved and it may be important to conduct comprehensive studies in which a number of these amino acids are investigated simultaneously. Due to the potential role of neuroactive amino acids in the pathogenesis and treatment of ASD, monitoring changes in their concentrations in body fluids are also important in case they may be relevant to the early diagnosis and intervention in patients with ASD. This paper reviews the literature on such measurements of several of these important compounds in body fluids in ASD subjects.

(p16.1) Several lines of evidence have shown that changes (e.g., availability, metabolism, and/or receptor activity) in neuroactive amino acids associated with central brain functions may play a role in the pathogenesis and/or pharmacotherapy of several psychiatric disorders (e.g., schizophrenia and mood disorders) that have symptoms, such as cognitive impairment and problems with social interactions, in common with ASD (Coyle 2006;Grant et al. 2006;Lam et al. 2006;Labrie et al. 2008;Ongür et al. 2008;Yüksel and Öngür 2010;Durrant and Heresco-Levy 2014). Several preclinical and clinical studies have implicated neuroactive amino acids in the etiology of ASD, fragile X syndrome, and tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), but most of these studies have focused on glutamate, GABA, and/or glutamine (El-Ansary and Al-Ayadhi 2014; Rojas 2014; Santini et al. 2014;Rozas et al. 2015;Cochran et al. 2015;Lozano et al. 2015;Robertson et al. 2016). Other amino acids could also be involved and it may be important to conduct comprehensive studies in which a number of these amino acids are investigated simultaneously. Due to the potential role of neuroactive amino acids in the pathogenesis and treatment of ASD, monitoring changes in their concentrations in body fluids are also important in case they may be relevant to the early diagnosis and intervention in patients with ASD. This paper reviews the literature on such measurements of several of these important compounds in body fluids in ASD subjects.
## (s17) Glutamate (GLU)
Number of References: 18

(p17.0) GLU, which is highly concentrated in brain, is the primary excitatory neurotransmitter (Naaijen et al. 2015). GLU normally has a protective effect with regard to neural plasticity and cognitive function, but excessive GLU may be neurotoxic, leading to death of neurons and glia (Olney 1969;Manev et al. 1989) and may possibly play a role in the pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders, such as ASD (Sheldon and Robinson 2007). Ghanizadeh (2011) and El-Ansary and Al-Ayadhi (2014) showed that GLU is involved in neuroinflammation in ASD, and Ghanizadeh and Namazi (2010) proposed GLU and homocysteine as targets for therapy of ASD patients' irritability and aggression. A hyperglutamatergic hypothesis of ASD has been proposed (Fatemi 2008;Blaylock and Strunecka 2009). Fatemi et al. (2002) showed that the levels of GAD 65 kDa and GAD 67 kDa proteins, both of which are involved in converting GLU to gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), are reduced in the brains of patients with ASD, resulting in the increased levels of GLU in the brain.
## (s18) Glutamine (GLN)
Number of References: 52

(p18.0) GLU is stored in the form of GLN in astrocytes until it is transferred to presynaptic terminals and converted back to GLU (Magistretti and Pellerin 1999). Ghanizadeh (2010) reported that a glutamine (GLN) synthetase inhibitor may improve inflammation in ASD. Shimmura et al. (2011) suggested that the level of GLN in plasma could be a screening test for detecting ASD in children, especially those with a normal intelligence quotient (IQ). In studies of GLN levels in ASD patients compared to HCs, plasma (Moreno-Fuenmayor et al. 1996;Aldred et al. 2003;Shimmura et al. 2011;Tirouvanziam et al. 2011;Good 2011a;Tu et al. 2012; El-Ansary 2016) and platelet (Rolf et al. 1993) levels have been reported to be decreased, serum levels to be no different (Shinohe et al. 2006), and urine levels either increased (Noto et al. 2014) or decreased (Evans et al. 2008).

(p18.1) GLU is stored in the form of GLN in astrocytes until it is transferred to presynaptic terminals and converted back to GLU (Magistretti and Pellerin 1999). Ghanizadeh (2010) reported that a glutamine (GLN) synthetase inhibitor may improve inflammation in ASD. Shimmura et al. (2011) suggested that the level of GLN in plasma could be a screening test for detecting ASD in children, especially those with a normal intelligence quotient (IQ). In studies of GLN levels in ASD patients compared to HCs, plasma (Moreno-Fuenmayor et al. 1996;Aldred et al. 2003;Shimmura et al. 2011;Tirouvanziam et al. 2011;Good 2011a;Tu et al. 2012; El-Ansary 2016) and platelet (Rolf et al. 1993) levels have been reported to be decreased, serum levels to be no different (Shinohe et al. 2006), and urine levels either increased (Noto et al. 2014) or decreased (Evans et al. 2008).
## (s22) Tryptophan (TRP)
Number of References: 52

(p22.0) Serotonin (5-hydroxtryptamine, 5-HT) is an important neurotransmitter, and TRP is the precursor of serotonin (Zhang et al. 2015). Dysfunction of serotonin systems are implicated in some forms of ASD, and may contribute to social interaction impairments (Lam et al. 2006;Rubin et al. 2013;Yang et al. 2014). Whole blood serotonin has been reported to be elevated in at least 25 % of ASD children (Muller et al. 2016). However, reducing TRP in the diet can impair social behavior in patients (McDougle et al. 1996) and mice (Zhang et al. 2015) and increasing TRP in the diet has been reported to improve social behavior in mice (Zhang et al. 2015). Compared with HCs, TRP levels in plasma have been reported to be decreased in ASD (Tirouvanziam et al. 2011;Tu et al. 2012;Naushad et al. 2013), while Noto et al. (2014) reported levels to be increased in urine samples and Kałużna-Czaplińska et al. (2014) reported them to be decreased.

(p22.1) Serotonin (5-hydroxtryptamine, 5-HT) is an important neurotransmitter, and TRP is the precursor of serotonin (Zhang et al. 2015). Dysfunction of serotonin systems are implicated in some forms of ASD, and may contribute to social interaction impairments (Lam et al. 2006;Rubin et al. 2013;Yang et al. 2014). Whole blood serotonin has been reported to be elevated in at least 25 % of ASD children (Muller et al. 2016). However, reducing TRP in the diet can impair social behavior in patients (McDougle et al. 1996) and mice (Zhang et al. 2015) and increasing TRP in the diet has been reported to improve social behavior in mice (Zhang et al. 2015). Compared with HCs, TRP levels in plasma have been reported to be decreased in ASD (Tirouvanziam et al. 2011;Tu et al. 2012;Naushad et al. 2013), while Noto et al. (2014) reported levels to be increased in urine samples and Kałużna-Czaplińska et al. (2014) reported them to be decreased.
## (s23) d-Serine
Number of References: 108

(p23.0) In the recent years, d-serine in the brain has been the subject of extensive research (Fuchs et al. 2005(Fuchs et al. , 2011Nunes et al. 2012;Billard 2015;Sacchi et al. 2016). d-Serine is an important amino acid in glutamatergic transmission (Fuchs et al. 2005) and is a potent coagonist at NMDA receptors in some mammalian brain areas and possibly involved in the pathogenesis of several psychiatric and neurological disorders, such as schizophrenia (Labrie et al. 2008;Nunes et al. 2012;Balu and Coyle 2015;Ozeki et al. 2016), bipolar disorder (Yamada et al. 2004;Young and Barrett 2015), depression (Hashimoto et al. 2015(Hashimoto et al. , 2016Deutschenbaur et al. 2016), Alzheimer's disease (Paula-Lima et al. 2013;Madeira et al. 2015), and addiction (D'Ascenzo et al. 2014;Seif et al. 2015;Liu et al. 2016). GLY has high affinity for extrasynaptic NMDA receptors, while d-serine has high affinity for synaptic NMDA receptors (Vizi et al. 2013).

(p23.1) There is a paucity of studies on body fluid levels of d-serine in ASD. In 2006, Shinohe et al. (2006) showed that d-serine and l-serine levels in serum were no different between adult patients with ASD and HCs. Comparing with HCs, Tirouvanziam et al. (2011) showed that combined serine levels in plasma were decreased in ASD. In studies on urine samples, Kałużna-Czaplińska et al. (2014) reported that l-serine levels were decreased in ASD, and Noto et al. (2014) reported that l-serine levels were increased, while Evans et al. (2008) and Ming et al. (2012) showed that the combined serine levels were decreased. In the studies in which combined serine levels were reported, the d-serine and l-serine were not measured separately.

(p23.2) In the recent years, d-serine in the brain has been the subject of extensive research (Fuchs et al. 2005(Fuchs et al. , 2011Nunes et al. 2012;Billard 2015;Sacchi et al. 2016). d-Serine is an important amino acid in glutamatergic transmission (Fuchs et al. 2005) and is a potent coagonist at NMDA receptors in some mammalian brain areas and possibly involved in the pathogenesis of several psychiatric and neurological disorders, such as schizophrenia (Labrie et al. 2008;Nunes et al. 2012;Balu and Coyle 2015;Ozeki et al. 2016), bipolar disorder (Yamada et al. 2004;Young and Barrett 2015), depression (Hashimoto et al. 2015(Hashimoto et al. , 2016Deutschenbaur et al. 2016), Alzheimer's disease (Paula-Lima et al. 2013;Madeira et al. 2015), and addiction (D'Ascenzo et al. 2014;Seif et al. 2015;Liu et al. 2016). GLY has high affinity for extrasynaptic NMDA receptors, while d-serine has high affinity for synaptic NMDA receptors (Vizi et al. 2013).

(p23.3) There is a paucity of studies on body fluid levels of d-serine in ASD. In 2006, Shinohe et al. (2006) showed that d-serine and l-serine levels in serum were no different between adult patients with ASD and HCs. Comparing with HCs, Tirouvanziam et al. (2011) showed that combined serine levels in plasma were decreased in ASD. In studies on urine samples, Kałużna-Czaplińska et al. (2014) reported that l-serine levels were decreased in ASD, and Noto et al. (2014) reported that l-serine levels were increased, while Evans et al. (2008) and Ming et al. (2012) showed that the combined serine levels were decreased. In the studies in which combined serine levels were reported, the d-serine and l-serine were not measured separately.
## (s24) Other amino acids
Number of References: 68

(p24.0) The metabolism of homocysteine is associated closely with folic acid and Vitamin B12 (Ghanizadeh et al. 2012;Desai et al. 2016). Desai et al. (2016) showed that a lack of folic acid may be involved in the pathogenesis of ASD. Bala et al. (2016) reported low plasma levels of Vitamin B12 in ASD compared to values in HCs. James et al. (2004), and Bala et al. (2016) reported that the concentration of homocysteine in plasma with ASD patients is low. However, other studies showed that homocysteine levels were increased in ASD patients compared with HCs: Tu et al. (2012) reported levels in plasma, Ali et al. (2011) and Paşca et al. (2006) reported levels in serum, and Noto et al. (2014) and Puig-Alcaraz et al. (2015) reported levels in urine samples, and all were reported to be increased. Puig-Alcaraz et al. (2015) found that increased urinary levels of homocysteine correlated directly with the severity of deficit in communication skills in ASD.

(p24.1) Arginine is an essential precursor for the synthesis of proteins and nitric oxide, and it can spare GLN, detoxify ammonia, and increase brain blood flow (Good 2011a). Compared with HCs, arginine levels in plasma of ASD patients have been reported to be increased (Kuwabara et al. 2013) or no different (Tirouvanziam et al. 2011). Table 1 shows the reported levels of neuroactive amino acids in patients with ASD in comparison with HCs and includes some other amino acids not mentioned previously in this review (leucine, lysine, citrulline, alanine, valine, isoleucine, threonine, proline, methionine, aspartate, asparagine, phenylalanine, tyrosine, and histidine). Leucine, isoleucine, and valine are all termed branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) and share a transport system with large, neutral amino acids (LNAAs), such as tryptophan, tyrosine, and phenylalanine which are the precursors of the neurotransmitter amines 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin) and the catecholamines (Fernstrom 2005). Arnold et al. (2003) reported that the level of the essential amino acids valine, leucine, phenylalanine, and lysine in ASD was 58 % compared to HCs. Although there is a paucity of studies on the levels of BCCAs in ASD, most of the studies report a reduction of BCAA levels in autistic subjects (see Table 1 and the references mentioned therein), suggesting that future research in this area is warranted.

(p24.2) The metabolism of homocysteine is associated closely with folic acid and Vitamin B12 (Ghanizadeh et al. 2012;Desai et al. 2016). Desai et al. (2016) showed that a lack of folic acid may be involved in the pathogenesis of ASD. Bala et al. (2016) reported low plasma levels of Vitamin B12 in ASD compared to values in HCs. James et al. (2004), and Bala et al. (2016) reported that the concentration of homocysteine in plasma with ASD patients is low. However, other studies showed that homocysteine levels were increased in ASD patients compared with HCs: Tu et al. (2012) reported levels in plasma, Ali et al. (2011) and Paşca et al. (2006) reported levels in serum, and Noto et al. (2014) and Puig-Alcaraz et al. (2015) reported levels in urine samples, and all were reported to be increased. Puig-Alcaraz et al. (2015) found that increased urinary levels of homocysteine correlated directly with the severity of deficit in communication skills in ASD.

(p24.3) Arginine is an essential precursor for the synthesis of proteins and nitric oxide, and it can spare GLN, detoxify ammonia, and increase brain blood flow (Good 2011a). Compared with HCs, arginine levels in plasma of ASD patients have been reported to be increased (Kuwabara et al. 2013) or no different (Tirouvanziam et al. 2011). Table 1 shows the reported levels of neuroactive amino acids in patients with ASD in comparison with HCs and includes some other amino acids not mentioned previously in this review (leucine, lysine, citrulline, alanine, valine, isoleucine, threonine, proline, methionine, aspartate, asparagine, phenylalanine, tyrosine, and histidine). Leucine, isoleucine, and valine are all termed branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) and share a transport system with large, neutral amino acids (LNAAs), such as tryptophan, tyrosine, and phenylalanine which are the precursors of the neurotransmitter amines 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin) and the catecholamines (Fernstrom 2005). Arnold et al. (2003) reported that the level of the essential amino acids valine, leucine, phenylalanine, and lysine in ASD was 58 % compared to HCs. Although there is a paucity of studies on the levels of BCCAs in ASD, most of the studies report a reduction of BCAA levels in autistic subjects (see Table 1 and the references mentioned therein), suggesting that future research in this area is warranted.
## (s25) Discussion
Number of References: 4

(p25.0) Overall, the results on amino acid levels in ASD reported in the literature are, with the possible exception of the BCAAs, inconclusive, and contradictory. Table 1 is a summary of reported differences between ASD patients and HCs in the levels of amino acids. BCAAs are essential amino acids that make up about 1/3 of muscle protein, and these deficiencies may affect muscle and connective tissue integrity in ASD subjects (Evans et al. 2008). It has been suggested that BCAA deficiencies may be related to poor nutrition due to unusual food preferences in ASD children (Arnold et al. 2003).
