# Overview of the Penguin Visual System

CorpusID: 256127212 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cfefe4d5cf3559904bab3bb37125f476386705a5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cfefe4d5cf3559904bab3bb37125f476386705a5)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s2) Behavioural Repertoire and Light Intensity
Number of References: 4

(p2.0) Since penguins forage underwater, one must consider the attenuation of illumination in the underwater environment. In the clearest of natural waters, irradiance decreases 100× at 200 m [12]. Water also selectively absorbs short (ultraviolet, UV) and long wavelength light, with the greatest transmission around 420-430 nm [13], making it appear blue. However, most water also contains suspended matter, including living and dead organisms (notably plankton, which contain chlorophyll), coloured dissolved organic matter, suspended minerals and other detritus. This attenuates the light further and shifts the peak illumination to slightly longer wavelengths, between 420 nm and 500 nm. In the Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean, home to many penguins, light is primarily attenuated by chlorophyll and the water itself [14], although the amount of chlorophyll differs by depth, location, and season [15].
## (s3) Behavioural Repertoire and Light Intensity
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) Since penguins forage underwater, one must consider the attenuation of illumination in the underwater environment. In the clearest of natural waters, irradiance decreases 100× at 200 m [12]. Water also selectively absorbs short (ultraviolet, UV) and long wavelength light, with the greatest transmission around 420-430 nm [13], making it appear blue. However, most water also contains suspended matter, including living and dead organisms (notably plankton, which contain chlorophyll), coloured dissolved organic matter, suspended minerals and other detritus. This attenuates the light further and shifts the peak illumination to slightly longer wavelengths, between 420 nm and 500 nm. In the Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean, home to many penguins, light is primarily attenuated by chlorophyll and the water itself [14], although the amount of chlorophyll differs by depth, location, and season [15].
## (s13) Cornea
Number of References: 8

(p13.0) Birds generally have a much clearer cornea than do mammals. The range of refractive indices of the vertebrate cornea was summarised by Sivak and said to vary between 1.337 and 1.38 [50]. We feel that he may have misread an earlier paper by Gundlach et al. [51] who assumed a value of 1.334 for the cornea and vitreous together (as opposed to the cornea on its own, which they did not measure) in the pigeon (not stated, but presumably Columba livia). Were one to exclude this study, the range would have been 1.35 to 1.38. The little penguin cornea has a refractive index of 1.369 and the gentoo penguin has a refractive index of 1.371 [34], both within this range. In vivo corneal confocal microscopic images of avian (not penguin) corneas have been published [52]. In that study, it was found that 'the wing cells of the anterior epithelium exhibited much larger, irregularly shaped nuclei. Bowman's layer presented as an acellular layer with a homogenous reflectivity'. Furthermore, they noted that 'the keratocytes had radial nuclei and were located in a strictly parallel fashion. The endothelial cells were also of a uniform, hexagonal shape.' (Figure 6). Corneal accommodation, documented in some birds [51], has not been demonstrated in penguins. As with the globe, smaller penguins tend to have thinner and smaller corneas [34].

(p13.1) Vision 2023, 7, 6 9 of 24 it does not need to gather as much light, due to its diurnal nature and inability to dive as deeply as other penguins [16,49].
## (s14) Cornea
Number of References: 21

(p14.0) Birds generally have a much clearer cornea than do mammals. The range of refractive indices of the vertebrate cornea was summarised by Sivak and said to vary between 1.337 and 1.38 [50]. We feel that he may have misread an earlier paper by Gundlach et al. [51] who assumed a value of 1.334 for the cornea and vitreous together (as opposed to the cornea on its own, which they did not measure) in the pigeon (not stated, but presumably Columba livia). Were one to exclude this study, the range would have been 1.35 to 1.38. The little penguin cornea has a refractive index of 1.369 and the gentoo penguin has a refractive index of 1.371 [34], both within this range. In vivo corneal confocal microscopic images of avian (not penguin) corneas have been published [52]. In that study, it was found that 'the wing cells of the anterior epithelium exhibited much larger, irregularly shaped nuclei. Bowman's layer presented as an acellular layer with a homogenous reflectivity.' Furthermore, they noted that 'the keratocytes had radial nuclei and were located in a strictly parallel fashion. The endothelial cells were also of a uniform, hexagonal shape.' ( Figure 6). Corneal accommodation, documented in some birds [51], has not been demonstrated in penguins. As with the globe, smaller penguins tend to have thinner and smaller corneas [34]. The lowest corneal power in air yet reported was 10.2 D, which was observed in the king penguin [18], the largest penguin measured, although other studies have found higher powers in the same bird, namely 11.1 to 11.5 D [53] and 19.1 D [34]. Conversely, the highest power yet reported in a penguin, 41.3 D, was in the little penguin [34]-the smallest penguin. Mid-sized penguins tend to have corneal powers between these two. For instance, the anterior corneal power has been found to be 29.3 D in two Magellanic penguins [54], 33.19 D in the Humboldt penguin [47] and 21 to 22 D in the African penguin Spheniscus demersus [55].

(p14.1) There are some discrepancies between studies. Those in the king penguin have already been mentioned. Both 17.0 to 18.2 D [56] and 30.36 D [55] have been found for the The lowest corneal power in air yet reported was 10.2 D, which was observed in the king penguin [18], the largest penguin measured, although other studies have found higher powers in the same bird, namely 11.1 to 11.5 D [53] and 19.1 D [34]. Conversely, the highest power yet reported in a penguin, 41.3 D, was in the little penguin [34]-the smallest penguin. Mid-sized penguins tend to have corneal powers between these two. For instance, the anterior corneal power has been found to be 29.3 D in two Magellanic penguins [54], 33 recorded for the gentoo. We are unable to explain these discrepancies but would note that the methodology of each author was different. In a study in which these authors were involved [34], different methodologies also gave conflicting results. Furthermore, in all studies where more than one individual was examined there were differences between adults of the same species and greater differences if juveniles are included [34].
## (s16) Iris and Pupil
Number of References: 4

(p16.0) In birds, the pupil is almost always round both when constricted and when dilated. An exception is the king penguin pupil which, when constricted, becomes square rather than circular-with an up to 300-fold change in illumination between full miosis and full mydriasis [18]. As demonstrated in Figure 7, the little penguin iris also appears somewhat octagonal when mid-dilated [36]. The iris can also become irregular when diseased. mydriasis [18]. As demonstrated in Figure 7, the little penguin iris also appears somewhat octagonal when mid-dilated [36]. The iris can also become irregular when diseased.
## (s19) Retina
Number of References: 3

(p19.0) In many vertebrates, there is a defined central retinal area responsible for high spatial sensitivity. This can be a fovea, but it can also be a strip of highly sensitive retina. Some birds are bifoveate. A fovea was unable to be found in the Magellanic penguin [79] and was said to be absent in the African penguin [80]. However, histologically, a fovea was reported (although no photomicrograph was provided) in an Adélie penguin [70]. One of the authors (PWH) has been unable to find a fovea in an optical coherence tomogram of a gentoo penguin's central retina nor histologically in little, gentoo, or king penguin eyes (Figure 8).
## (s24) Intraocular Pressure
Number of References: 6

(p24.0) The intraocular pressure (IOP) of the African penguin was found to be 27-31 mmHg (dog setting, range 15-47 mmHg) and 25 mmHg (horse setting, range 12-40 mmHg), using rebound tonometry (Icare TonoVet, Jorgensen Laboratories, Loveland, Colorado) [98]. Using the same instrument, wild Humboldt penguins had an average intraocular pressure of 28 ± 9 mmHg (dog setting), higher than the 20.36 ± 4.1 mmHg found in captive Humboldt penguins. They speculated that this might be an adaptation to compressive forces at depth [99]. In macaroni penguins, the IOP was 21.9 ± 7.05 mmHg using the Tonopen XL applanation tonometry and 29.1 ± 7.16 mmHg (TonoVet, dog setting), thereby declining with age and cataract [48]. In the southern rockhopper penguin, the mean IOP was 20.0 ± 5.77 mmHg with the Tono-Pen XL (Reichert Inc., Buffalo, NY, USA) and 24.1 ± 5.09 mmHg with the TonoVet [48]. Neither correlated with age or cataract. In both macaroni and rockhopper penguins there was no sex or side difference, although the TonoVet read consistently higher [48]. Hadden et al. [34] found average intraocular pressures of 7 mmHg in the little penguin and 18 mmHg in the gentoo using the Tono-Pen Avia handheld tonometer, which was calibrated for humans (Reichert Inc., Buffalo, NY, USA).
## (s25) Tear Production
Number of References: 2

(p25.0) According to Bliss et al. [48], in macaroni penguins the mean modified phenol red thread test showed a tear production of 24.7 ± 6.37 mm/15 s and the mean Schirmer tear test showed 12.1 ± 5.43 mm/min. This did not change with age or lens status. In the same study, southern rockhopper penguins produced 25.1 ± 7.07 mm/15 s and 11.0 ± 3.96 mm/min tears with these same two tests. Neither changed with age or lens status. In the Humboldt penguin, mean tear production was 9 ± 4 mm/min with a Schirmer test [99].
