# molecules Emerging Strategies for Enhancing Propionate Conversion in Anaerobic Digestion: A Review

CorpusID: 258542025 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ef5de5a42559a391ea2de653bd4013ca18ab9c92](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ef5de5a42559a391ea2de653bd4013ca18ab9c92)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s2) Production of Propionate
Number of References: 5

(p2.0) Before the biomass is fermented to acids, the complicated components have to be hydrolyzed ( Figure 2). Hydrolysis is a series of biochemical reactions that decompose biomass polymers (such as polysaccharides, proteins, and lipids) into monomers or oligomers. These reactions are catalyzed by a series of distinct functional extracellular enzymes, including amylase, protease, lipase, cellulase, hemi-cellulase, and xylanases. The involved micro-organism can be mainly classified into two phyla: Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes [36]. Then hydrolyzed products are converted to VFAs, formate, H 2 , and CO 2 by a guild of fermentative bacteria. These fermentative organisms belong to Chloroflexi, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Synergist, and Actinobacteria [41]. Among them, the species Geobacter, Pelobacter, Streptomyces, Sorangium, Desulfatibacillim, Rhodopseudomonas, Mycobacterium, Acidovorax, Pseudomonas, and Ralstonia were reported to be engaged in propionate formation in anaerobic digesters [42].

(p2.1) Pyruvate plays a pivotal role in the network of various metabolic pathways of polysaccharides, proteins, and lipids. In fermentative bacteria, there are two main pathways to propionate formation from pyruvate, as shown in Figure 3. The first one is the acrylate pathway with lactate as an intermediate. The pyruvate is reduced by lactate dehydrogenase (LDHA) to lactate, which is then activated to lactoyl-CoA by propionyl-CoA transferase (PCT). Lactoyl-CoA is dehydrated and generates acryloyl-CoA. Then, acryloyl-CoA is further reduced by acrylyl-CoA reductase (ACR) to propionyl-CoA, which is the active form of propionate. This pathway can be carried out by some amino-acid utilizing Clostridia, such as Clostridium propionicum [43]. The other pathway is the methylmalonyl-CoA pathway, in which pyruvate is converted to oxaloacetate by pyruvate carboxylase (PC). Then, oxaloacetate undergoes a series of enzymatic catalytic reactions and generates propionyl-CoA. This process could be performed by many acidogenic bacteria, like Corynebacteria, Propionibacterium, and Bifidobacterium [44].
## (s4) Production of Propionate
Number of References: 5

(p4.0) Before the biomass is fermented to acids, the complicated components have to be hydrolyzed ( Figure 2). Hydrolysis is a series of biochemical reactions that decompose biomass polymers (such as polysaccharides, proteins, and lipids) into monomers or oligomers. These reactions are catalyzed by a series of distinct functional extracellular enzymes, including amylase, protease, lipase, cellulase, hemi-cellulase, and xylanases. The involved micro-organism can be mainly classified into two phyla: Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes [36]. Then hydrolyzed products are converted to VFAs, formate, H2, and CO2 by a guild of fermentative bacteria. These fermentative organisms belong to Chloroflexi, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Synergist, and Actinobacteria [41]. Among them, the species Geobacter, Pelobacter, Streptomyces, Sorangium, Desulfatibacillim, Rhodopseudomonas, Mycobacterium, Acidovorax, Pseudomonas, and Ralstonia were reported to be engaged in propionate formation in anaerobic digesters [42].

(p4.1) Pyruvate plays a pivotal role in the network of various metabolic pathways of polysaccharides, proteins, and lipids. In fermentative bacteria, there are two main pathways to propionate formation from pyruvate, as shown in Figure 3. The first one is the acrylate pathway with lactate as an intermediate. The pyruvate is reduced by lactate dehydrogenase (LDHA) to lactate, which is then activated to lactoyl-CoA by propionyl-CoA transferase (PCT). Lactoyl-CoA is dehydrated and generates acryloyl-CoA. Then, acryloyl-CoA is further reduced by acrylyl-CoA reductase (ACR) to propionyl-CoA, which is the active form of propionate. This pathway can be carried out by some aminoacid utilizing Clostridia, such as Clostridium propionicum [43]. The other pathway is the methylmalonyl-CoA pathway, in which pyruvate is converted to oxaloacetate by pyruvate carboxylase (PC). Then, oxaloacetate undergoes a series of enzymatic catalytic reactions and generates propionyl-CoA. This process could be performed by many acidogenic bacteria, like Corynebacteria, Propionibacterium, and Bifidobacterium [44].  
## (s5) Metabolism of Propionate
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) Propionate cannot be directly used by methanogenic bacteria, but it has to be converted to acetate and H 2 by acetogens at first. The metabolism route of propionate is as stated in the equations (i), (M), and (i + M) in Table 1. The Gibbs free energy of propionate oxidation is +76.1 kJ/mol, which is thermodynamically unfavorable [45]. Only when coupled with the oxidation reaction of H 2 does the overall reaction of propionate become exothermic (equation i + M), which means the H 2 generated should be consumed synchronously and be maintained at a very low partial pressure (lower than 10 −4 atm). This co-operative relationship between propionate-oxidizing bacteria and H 2 -consuming bacteria is called syntrophic association. The first syntrophic propionate-oxidizing bacteria were reported by Boone [46] based on the co-culture experiment of syntrophobacter wolinii with the H 2 -consuming bacteria Desulfovibrio sp. Since then, some other species have been identified, which mainly are assigned to Syntrophobacter, Pelotomaculum, and Smithella propionica, with two pathways of propionate metabolism, as shown in Figure 4. One is the methyl-malonyl-CoA pathway (MMC), which is similar to the reversion process of propionate formation and prevails in most propionate-oxidizing bacteria. In the MMC process, propionate is converted to the intermediates succinate, fumarate, malate, oxaloacetate, and pyruvate, which are further catalyzed by malate degydrogenase (MDH) and phosphotransacetylase-acetate kinase (PTA-ACK) into acetate. The Gibbs free energy of the oxidation of succinate to fumarate is +55.96 kJ/mol, which is thermodynamically unfavorable and is considered the limiting step. The other route of propionate decomposition is the dismutation pathway (Di-pathway), which was found in a syntroph Smithella propionica by Liu et al. [47] and was verified using 13 C-NMR spectroscopy by de Bok et al. [48]. This route includes the condensation of the C 2 of propionate to the carboxyl of another propionate molecule or its derivative, the rearrangement of the methyl group, the transfer of the oxygen to the C 3 of the intermediate, and the cleavage of 3-ketohexanoate, yielding butyrate and acetate [48]. 
## (s9) Critical Parameters Influencing the Biodegradation of Propionate
Number of References: 24

(p9.0) Temperature: Anaerobic digestion can be subdivided into three categories based on different operational temperatures and particular microbial communities: psychrophilic (10-20 • C), mesophilic (30-40 • C), and thermophilic (55-70 • C) [32,52]. In general, psychrophilic anaerobic digestion is rarely used in applications, and propionate metabolism has been reported to be significantly inhibited under psychrophilic conditions [53]. From 20-35 • C, an elevated temperature was beneficial to propionate conversion [53], indicating the optimum temperature of POBs involved. It is well acknowledged that thermophilic anaerobic digestion often has a higher organic hydrolysis rate and conversion rate, but the inhibition of propionate conversion in thermophilic digesters was reported in some studies. For instance, Jiang et al. [54] found that compared with mesophilic digesters, high levels of propionate were observed in thermophilic digesters, which was attributed to low affinities between propionate and the propionate-oxidizing bacteria of thermophilic species. At an organic load rate (OLR) of 10.0 kg·COD/(m 3 ·d), the methane production is 310 mL/g·COD. A similar result was observed by Yang et al. [55]. Li et al. [56] also observed the strong inhibition of propionate oxidation in thermophilic digesters with a lag phase of longer than 17 days. The maximum rates of methane production (R max ) fitted using the Gompertz model were 27-62% lower than those using mesophilic digesters. In contrast, Zhao et al. [57] investigated the effect of propionic acid on the activity of methanogenesis. When the concentration of propionic acid is higher than 5000 mg/L, the AD system is completely inhibited. When compared with mesophilic digesters, the propionic acid degradation rate of the thermophilic digestor is relatively higher, with a higher R max fitted using the Gompertz model and higher hydrolysis rates fitted using a first-order dynamic model. pH: pH plays a direct role in microbial growth and metabolism, as well as in propionate-oxidizing bacteria, since changing the pH causes a change in electric charge on the cell membrane, which thereafter influences the assimilation of nutrients and the activities of enzymes [58]. Li et al. [59] found that the propionate degradation rate was much higher at pH 7.0-8.5 than at pH 6.5 or below. Similarly, Zhang et al. [60] used 2000 mg/L propionic acid as the only carbon source in a UASB reactor. When the pH value was controlled at 6.8-7.5, the high propionate removal of the sludge blanket (81.5-90%) was observed, and the methane content and biogas productivity were maintained at 55.2-69.3% and 22.8-26.7 L/day; when pH was controlled at 6.0, 5.5, and 5.0, only 49.1%, 33.8%, and 16.7% of propionate was degraded, the methane content decreased by 5.1% and 33.7%, respectively, and the biogas productivity decreased to 15.3 L/day. When the pH value is below 4.5, propionate degradation almost does not occur, and biogas production almost stops. The decline in the oxidation performance of propionate was related to the significant reduction in propionate oxidation bacteria and acetoclastic methanogens, which were more sensitive to low pH [60].

(p9.1) Oxidation-reduction potential (ORP): ORP can significantly influence the fermentation type in the acidogenic phase in anaerobic digestion. It is a key factor affecting the production and consumption of VFAs. By altering ORP, the ratio of NAD/NADH is changed, cell metabolism is affected, as well as the distribution of fermentation end products is also altered [61]. The optimal ORP range for acid-producing fermentation is between −100 mV and −300 mV. The formation of propionate occurs under ORP conditions above −278 mV [62]. In an anaerobic reactor with iron added, the negative value of ORP is greater. If ORP is reduced to −300 mV, it will inhibit the formation of propionate and in-crease the production of CH 4 . Therefore, ensuring the reduction in atmosphere is critical to preventing the propionate fermentation route. Reducing additives, such as zero-valent iron, can be added to anaerobic digesters to prevent the formation of propionate and accelerate its degradation [63].

(p9.2) Acetate concentration and H 2 pressure: Propionate cannot be directly taken up by methanogens but can be decomposed to acetate, H 2 , and CO 2 at first by acetogenic bacteria. On the one hand, thermodynamically speaking, the conversion of propionate to acetate and H 2 is only possible when the H 2 partial pressure is below 10 −4 atm, and the acetate concentration is lower than 23 mM [64]. A high hydrogen partial pressure will also block the acetate oxidation. Many results manifested the severe inhibition of the digesters from high H 2 partial pressures [65,66]. In Cazier's research, the influence of H 2 and CO 2 pressure separation on solid-state AD was explored [66]. When the H 2 partial pressure was increased from 0 to 600 mbar, the CH 4 yield increased from 23 ± 4 mL CH 4 /g TS to 28 ± 6 mL CH 4 /g TS. When further increasing the H 2 partial pressure to 1555 mbars, the methane yield of CH 4 decreased from 28 ± 6 mL of CH 4 /g TS to 9 ± 1 mL of CH 4 /g TS. More specifically, when H 2 is higher than 800-900 mbar, methane production decreases very fast. On the other hand, H 2 cleavage is only possible when the H 2 partial pressure is above 10 −6 atm [67]. Thus, in order to ensure the metabolism of propionate, the H 2 partial pressure should be maintained between the narrow range of 10 −6 -10 −4 atm.

(p9.3) Propionate concentration: The organic loading rate (OLR) is a crucial operation parameter for an anaerobic digester. Propionate accumulation at a high OLR or short hydrolytic retention time (HRT) was frequently reported in the digestion of many substrates, such as food waste [63,68]. This could be attributed to the imbalance between propionate production and conversion rate, but the conversion rate of propionate at different propionate OLRs was rarely reported. When using digestate from a semi-continuous anaerobic digester with coffee powder as substrate, Zhao et al. [57] found that the hydrolysis content, k, modeled using a first-order dynamic model decreased from 0.82 to 0.13 when propionate loading increased from 0.5 to 8.0 g COD/L in mesophilic conditions, and a decrease from 0.89 to 0.31 in thermophilic conditions, indicating that elevated propionate concentration in digesters inhibits the activity of POBs. Rafika et al. [69] researched the performance of a semi-continuous anaerobic digestor under different OLRs. When the OLR increased from 3.44 g VS/L·d to 14.6 g VS/L·d, the methane productivity presented earlier increased and later decreased. Under an OLR of 4.25 gVS/L.d, one digestor showed a high energy potential of 530 L CH 4 /kg VS, while further increasing the OLR lead to propionate accumulation.
## (s11) Buffering Addition
Number of References: 10

(p11.0) Buffering addition is a direct way to increase the buffering capacity of an anaerobic digestion system and maintain a moderate pH value, which is important for propionatedegrading bacteria. Bicarbonate or phosphate is the most commonly used buffering material. In kitchen waste, it is easy to accumulate propionate via high organic loading digestion due to its corruptibility. In an anaerobic digestor containing solid residual kitchen waste, the addition of 1000 mg/L NaHCO 3 increased the conversion rate of propionate by 50% under high organic loading but low inoculum ratio (I/S = 1:3.5), and the anaerobic digestion capacity without acidification increased up to 33.3% [83]. The effectiveness of bicarbonate in enhancing propionate degradation might be considered due to the alternation of dominant methanogens and Gibbs free energy [84]. The addition of bicarbonate can favor hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis, which thermodynamically benefits the degradation of propionate [85]. Zhang et al. [86] directly proved that the Gibbs free energy of propionate degradation decreased from 0.12 kJ/mol (without bicarbonate addition) to −15.29 kJ/mol with 0.05 mol bicarbonate/L and to −18.73 kJ/mol with 0.20 mol bicarbonate/L addition, which made syntrophic propionate degradation more feasible. In accordance with the higher propionate degradation rates, synytophobacter sulfatireducens, a propionate-oxidizing bacterium, was enriched by moderate bicarbonate addition [86]. Zhang et al. [87] also observed that with alkali (lime mud) addition, the amount of methanobrevibacter, which was reported as an acid-tolerate and hydrogenotrophic methanogen, was enriched and became the dominant archeae. With the addition of lime mud, increased from 2.0 g/L to 10.0 g/L, the carbon conversion rate (carbon in the biogas generated from unit feedstock/carbon in the unit feedstock) increased by 64.3% (1.4% vs. 2.3%).

(p11.1) Although the high concentration of bicarbonate addition can serve as an alternative in a VFAs/propionate overloading digester, excessive Na + can be adverse to propionateutilizing micro-organisms due to toxicity [88]. Although bicarbonate supplementation favored the hydrogenotrophic methanogens, excessive bicarbonate supplementation also caused an increase in Gibbs free energy in the methanogenesis of formate and acetate, which inhibited propionate degradation in reverse [86]. The boundary concentration of Na + is about 3.5-8 g/L, as reviewed by Lin et al. [85]. In addition, in some cases of continuous operation, alkali addition cannot fundamentally solve the problem of propionate accumulation but only delays the failure of the process, with almost no improvement in the carbon conversion rate [63]. These results indicated that alkali addition was just a tempo-rary strategy or was more effective in batch conditions. In addition, the supplementation of NaHCO 3 or NaOH at the front end may lead to high Na solid residue and ash content, which is difficult to deal with.
## (s12) Bioaugmentation
Number of References: 15

(p12.0) In principle, the conversion and degradation of a certain substrate in an anaerobic digestion system is related to a very specific metabolic process implemented by a mixture of specialized micro-organisms. Thus, the extra addition of specialized micro-organisms with the desired functions is a feasible approach to improve performance, which was defined as bioaugmentation. The concept of bioaugmentation started much earlier, but it has begun to receive attention in recent years for relieving the start-up of anaerobic digestion suffering from high acetic acids loads [89], preventing or shortening the recovery time of anaerobic digesters stressed by overloading or toxicants [90,91], improving system stability [92], enhancing hydrolysis and methane production from lipids waste [93], food waste [94], ammonia-rich substrate [95][96][97], lignocellulosic residues [98,99], municipal sludge [100], and so on.

(p12.1) The introduction of propionate-degradation or hydrogen-utilizing micro-organisms into an anaerobic digestion system can accelerate the degradation metabolism of propionate. Tale et al. [101] obtained a rapid propionate-utilizing enrichment culture over 580 days of semi-continuous acclimation operation, fed with propionate. When it was added into transiently overloaded digesters, the results showed a stronger performance for the degradation of acetate, propionate, and butyrate in this bioaugmented overloaded digester, and the recovery time was shortened by 25 days compared to a non-bioaugmented overloaded digester. By monitoring the difference in sCOD removal and the methane generation rate, it was found that the influence of bioaugmentation could persist for more than 12 SRTs after organic shock overload. The presence of hydrogenotrophic methanogens closely related to Methanospirillum hungatei and Methanobacterium beijingense was thought to be associated with a high VFAs degradation rate and methane productivity. In another study by Tale et al. [102], it was demonstrated that a bioaugmentation trial using methanogenic propionate-enrichment cultures obtained using limited aeration (25 mg O 2 /L day) had a higher abundance of Methanospirillum hungatei. Comparatively, Methanolinea tarda dominates the organisms in common acclimation or no-bioaugmentation digesters. Due to Methanospirillum hungatei having the highest growth rate and substrate utilization rate among hydrogenotrophic methanogens, a bioaugmented digester showed more rapid hydrogen consuming and more complete propionate degradation when using it, and thus higher COD removal and faster recovery after shock overload. By inoculating a culture using a mixture of sludge and cow dung and using sole propionate as a feed source, Acharya et al. [92] obtained a propionate-degradation enriched culture and inoculated it in a mesophilic two-stage reactor for the treatment of simulation wastewater (Figure 2). It was found that Methanosarcinaceae dominated the enriched culture and the methanogenic stage in the digester when added. The specific methane activity (SMA) value of the bioaugmented digester was seven times higher than that of the control digester, with the hydrogentrophic methanogenic activity being four times higher. As a result, the hydrogen partial pressure in the bioaugmented digester remained lower when compared to the control digester, as well as the propionate concentration, while acetic acid dominated the VFAs, which is preferred for methanogens. Thus, a lower effluent sCOD content and a higher CH 4 content were observed in these bioaugmented digesters.
## (s13) Supplementary Trace Elements
Number of References: 11

(p13.0) Supplementary trace elements represent an effective approach to preventing anaerobic digestion from VFAs accumulation and maintaining system stability [76,[105][106][107]. The positive effect of trace elements in improving propionate degradation is mainly due to the acceleration of the growth rate of syntrophic hydrogenotrophic methanogens. Fe, Ni, and Co play key roles in propionate degradation. The supplementation of Fe + Co + Ni in a cow manure anaerobic digester led to a significant increase in the carbon conversion rate (from 1.3% to 2.3%) [76]. Fe is required for pyruvate-ferredoxin oxidoreductase, which catalyzes the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate and contains Fe-S clusters [108], and is also an essential element for formyl-MF-dehyogenase, which is an important enzyme in hydrogen-type methanognesis. Co is needed in vitamin B12, which is reported to bind to co-enzyme M [CoM] methylase that catalyzes a methytransferring reaction in both aceticlastic and hydrogenotrophic methanogens [109]; Mo is required for formate dehydrogenase (FDH, Figure 2) and is involved in syntrophic propionate metabolism [38]; Ni is incorporated into co-enzyme F430, which binds to the Methyl-co-enzyme M reductase and catalyzes Methyl-S-co-enzyme M to methane in almost all methanogenic pathways [105]. The assistance of biochar was proven to decrease the dosage of trace elements. Cai et al. [106] found that the addition of biochar resulted in Although bioaugmentation is a promising approach to enhance propionate degradation in anaerobic digestion and improve the performance of a digester, especially when preventing or recovering from shock overload in a digester, there is still an argument about whether there are differences between bioaugmentation using extra micro-organisms and acclimation, which can be established by micro-organisms in the system itself [104]. In addition, extending this to the existing pilot or large-scale digesters for application should also be addressed in the future.
## (s14) Supplementary Trace Elements
Number of References: 26

(p14.0) Supplementary trace elements represent an effective approach to preventing anaerobic digestion from VFAs accumulation and maintaining system stability [76,[105][106][107]. The positive effect of trace elements in improving propionate degradation is mainly due to the acceleration of the growth rate of syntrophic hydrogenotrophic methanogens. Fe, Ni, and Co play key roles in propionate degradation. The supplementation of Fe + Co + Ni in a cow manure anaerobic digester led to a significant increase in the carbon conversion rate (from 1.3% to 2.3%) [76]. Fe is required for pyruvate-ferredoxin oxidoreductase, which catalyzes the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate and contains Fe-S clusters [108], and is also an essential element for formyl-MF-dehyogenase, which is an important enzyme in hydrogentype methanognesis. Co is needed in vitamin B12, which is reported to bind to co-enzyme M [CoM] methylase that catalyzes a methy-transferring reaction in both aceticlastic and hydrogenotrophic methanogens [109]; Mo is required for formate dehydrogenase (FDH, Figure 2) and is involved in syntrophic propionate metabolism [38]; Ni is incorporated into co-enzyme F 430 , which binds to the Methyl-co-enzyme M reductase and catalyzes Methyl-S-co-enzyme M to methane in almost all methanogenic pathways [105]. The assistance of biochar was proven to decrease the dosage of trace elements. Cai et al. [106] found that the addition of biochar resulted in a 50% decrease in trace element demand when the OLR was 5 g TS/L day, with the carbon-carbon conversion rate slightly increasing from 26.2% to 29.5%.

(p14.1) In the mesophilic CSTR anaerobic digestion of wheat stillage, Schmidt et al. [110] found that a deficiency in Fe resulted in the accumulation of propionate, and the depletion of Ni could cause an increase in both acetate and propionate. When Osuna et al. [111] increased the OLR from 5 g COD/L day to 10 g COD/L day in UASB reactors with trace metal supplied (including Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, Cu, Zn, Mo, and Se) or not supplied, there were no discrepancies in acetate or butyrate degradation between the two reactors, but a sig-nificant difference was observed in propionate degradation. Propionate concentration in a trace metal-supplied trail showed fluctuations but regained a low level after 40 days of operation, which was contrary to continuous propionate accumulation in a trace metaldeprived reactor [111]. Daniel et al. [112] reported that the addition of either Fe, Ni, or Co or all three could increase the propionate utilization rates in mesophilic and thermophilic digesters by as much as 50%, with a more significant effect in the thermophilic systems. Ezebuiro et al. [113] confirmed that Co played an important role in propionate degradation. Supplementation using Co made the MMC pathway more energy-saving for microorganisms and was thermodynamically more beneficial when compared to no Co supplementation. Propionate accumulation occurred easily in the anaerobic digestion of food waste due to a deficiency in Fi, Co, Ni, and Mo. In the long-term anaerobic digestion of food waste, propionate inhibition was identified as the main reason for failure in the anaerobic digestion of food waste, but this could be eliminated by Fe, Co, Ni, and Mo supplementation [114]. The simultaneous addition of the cheating agent [S,S]-EDDS could improve the soluble fractions of the metals by 1.2-7 times when compared to non-[S,S]-EDDS addition trails, with higher bioavailability and easier uptake by micro-organisms [105,114]. By using high-throughput sequencing analysis, Zhang et al. [115] revealed that in the long-term continuous anaerobic digestion of food waste, the absence of Fe, Co, Ni, and Mo resulted in a change in methanogenic community. In the seed sludge, Methanosarcina, which are reported to use acetate, hydrogen, and methyl compounds, was the dominant methanogen (73.5%). After a period of charging and discharging, the proportion of Methanosarcina gradually declined, accompanied by increasing Methanosaeta, which is a unique acetotrophic methanogen that replaced the dominant position of Methanosarcina. As a result, the hydrogen could not be consumed in a timely manner, and this caused propionate accumulation. However, when Fe, Co, Ni, and Mo was added, this effectively prevented the shift in the methanogenic community and maintained the dominant position of Methanosarcina. As a result, the carbon conversion rate of food waste using anaerobic digestion increased from 3.5% to 3.9% (at OLR of 3.0 g VS/L day).

(p14.2) Mo, W, and Se are also important in propionate degradation. Formate dehydrogenase (FDH), which is an essential enzyme in propionate-oxidizing bacteria for producing formate, contains Fe, Se, Mo, and W. Worm et al. [116] found that the long-term absence of Mo, W, and Se in the feed of a UASB reactor caused a decrease in specific methane activity with propionate as the substrate, which was due to the decrease in activity of Syntrophobacter sp. and the accumulation of a competitor. Banks et al. [117] reported that the absence of Se and Co resulted in the inhibition of propionate-oxidizing bacteria and formate-reducing hydrogenotrophic methanogens, which further caused a loss of syntrophic interspecies electron transfer and non-reversible propionate accumulation. Conversely, supplementation with Se and Co could prevent accumulation. Jiang et al. [118] comprehensively investigated the effect of the trace elements Se, Mo, Co, and Ni on the anaerobic digestion of food waste using a fractional factorial experimental design. They proved that Se played a key role in improving the degradation rates of acetic and propionic acid; Mo and Co had a modest effect on promoting propionate degradation; Ni showed a slight inhibitory effect on all VFAs conversion. Significant synergistic interactions were observed between the VFAs degradation rate (including propionate) and supplementary of Se or Mo by Ezebuiro et al. [113].

(p14.3) Regarding trace element interactions, Ezebuiro et al. [113] reported significant synergistic interactions between Ni and Co and Ni and Se, as well as antagonistic interactions between Co and Mo on VFAs degradation. The antagonistic effect of a combination of W/Mo on propionate degradation was found by Jiang et al. [118]. The combination of trace metals with other stimulation factors may have a 1 + 1 > 2 performance. Capson-Tojo et al. [119] were the first to report that simultaneously providing trace elements and granular carbon further enhanced the propionate degradation rate (0.37 g propionate/L day) compared to providing only trace elements (0.28 g propionate/L day) or granular carbon (0.24 g propionate/L day). Additionally, the propionate degradation duration time was shortened. The positive synergistic effect could be attributed to a decrease in thermodynamic energy when introducing granular carbon and the enhanced growth of propionatedegrading micro-organisms when introducing trace elements.
## (s15) Addition of Sulfate
Number of References: 4

(p15.0) In anaerobic digestion systems, both mutualistic and competitive interactions between sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) and methanogenic-producing bacteria (MPB) exist [120]. SRB, such as Desulfobulbus propionicus, Desulfosporosinus, Desulfovibrio-related SRBs, compete with BMP for substrates, such as hydrogen, formate, acetate, propionate, butyrate, primarily propionate, and hydrogen [121]. Due to the faster growth rate and higher affinity with propionate, the degradation of propionate combined with sulfate reduction via SRB is more favorable than the syntrophic oxidation of propionate [122]. The importance of SRB in the conversion of propionate and hydrogen has been reported by many researchers and was reviewed by Chen et al. [88].
## (s18) Nano-Sized Additives
Number of References: 9

(p18.0) In general, trace metal supplementations in AD for enhancing propionate degradation are in the form of a dissolved state. Recently, more researchers have started to pay attention to adding nano-sized trace metals for enhancing VFAs conversion and methane generation since nano-sized particles have their unique small-object effects [157][158][159]. Tian et al. [160] found that although 400 mg/L of nano-sized MnO 2 could vastly inhibit the conversion of propionate, a proper concentration (50 mg/L) could stimulate the methanogenesis of propionate due to it triggering the stress response of anaerobic digester sludge and causing more enzymes to be secreted and participate in the digestion reactions. When using propionate as the sole substrate, Jing et al. [148] revealed that supplementation using 10 mg/L nano-magnetite could stimulate methane production by 44% in batch experiments. In the experiment of using acid-resistant inoculation sludge as the fermentation substrate to explore the influence of nano-magnetite on the anaerobic digestion system, the propionic acid degradation rate of the nano-magnetite group was 10.96-74.62% higher than that of the control group without nano-magnetite [161]. In waste cooking oil and aerobic sludge fermentation systems, when the added concentration of nano-Fe 3 O 4 was 5 g/L, the microbial community evolved in a direction conducive to the production of propionic acid [162]. Under this condition, the concentration of propionic acid reached 4990.92 ± 124.76 mg COD/L. Nano-magnetite-enriched culture was proven to have higher H 2 -utilizing activity and a higher abundance of Thauera, which was reported to be linked with direct interspecies electron transfer, indicating that both modes of propionate (HIT and DIET) were stimulated with nano-magnetite addition [148]. Due to its reductive characteristics and playing the role of a trace metal, nano-sized zero-valent iron (NZVI) could ensure a low OPR and prevent propionate generation [62].
