# A R T I C L E Creativity in SMEs: A overview and agenda for future research

CorpusID: 250931276 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b46691ad2c93dc2149ebd1c52ff9f4849b0c11f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b46691ad2c93dc2149ebd1c52ff9f4849b0c11f)

Fields: Business, Psychology

## (s7) indicAtors
Number of References: 6

(p7.0) In the present study, activity indicators are used, which measure the productivity of a researcher, institution, or journal measured in the number of publications, quality indicators that are focused on measuring the frequency with which a publication, an author, or a journal is cited for other publications (Cadavid-Higuita et al., 2012) and bibliometric methods, these are, the co-citation, which arises when two articles are independently cited by one or more articles and the bibliographic association, which takes place when two articles make reference to a third common article in their bibliographies; indicating that there is a probability that the two articles deal with a related topic (Ferreira, 2018).

(p7.1) Measures of centrality and density are used to represent bibliometric networks (Callon et al., 1991). The centrality of Callon (Callon et al., 1991) measures the degree of interaction of a network contrasted to other networks. It is identified as indicated in (1), where k represents a word belonging to the subject and h a keyword belonging to another subject.

(p7.2) The density of Callon (Callon et al., 1991) measures the internal strength of a network and can be defined as (2), where i and j are keywords belonging to the subject and w the number of keywords (nodes) that frame the subject. 19 435 (i) Upper-right quadrant with high density and strong centrality represent topics that are important for structuring the field and are also well developed. (ii) Upper-left quadrant with high density and low centrality, these themes are well developed but are less critical for the field. (iii) Lower-left quadrant with low density and low centrality, they represent topics that are less developed and are of lower importance; and (iv) Lower-right quadrant themes with high centrality but low density, these topics, although not developed enough, are crucial for a research field (Reverte & Badillo, 2019).
## (s15) An AgendA for future reseArch in creAtiVity in sme
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) The analysis carried out has shown that it is necessary to increase research on creativity in SMEs in a wide variety of topics. Future research should try to identify and test a series of factors so that creativity can generate economic development (Belitski & Desai, 2016). The opportunity arises to analyze what or how additional factors can influence the transformation of creativity in the company (Przychodzen et al., 2016). Moreover, background related to family businesses has been neglected in the general debate. So that we can classify in future lines of research that we have organized into five themes:
