# Ophthalmic imaging in diabetic retinopathy: A review

CorpusID: 252220547 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6426bc3bbb30385a72e671720f758720db71ef03](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6426bc3bbb30385a72e671720f758720db71ef03)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) | Fundus autofluorescence
Number of References: 7

(p2.0) Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) is another planar imaging technology which is commonly incorporated into fundus cameras or OCT machines. Short-wavelength FAF signal is mostly derived from lipofuscin in RPE while long-wavelength FAF (or near-infrared; NIR) signal primarily originates from melanin in the RPE and choroid. 9 Various patterns of DMO on FAF have been reported including single spot, multiple spots, cystoid or mosaic patterns ( Figure 7). 38,39 In a prior report, increased FAF was observed in most DMO eyes (76.8%) and the increased FAF region was associated with decreased macular sensitivity (11.5 ± 5.3 dB vs. 15.1 ± 3.9 dB in normal areas; p < 0.005). Moreover, the cystoid pattern seen on OCT and the leakage patterns seen on FA were correlated with the presence of increased FAF (p < 0.0001). 38 With NIR-FAF, relative fluorescence intensity in the central subfield (CSF) was negatively correlated with the CST (R = 0.492; p < 0.001) and VA (R = 0.377; p < 0.001). A mosaic pattern in the NIR-FAF was associated with worse logMAR VA (0.355 ± 0.239 vs. 0.212 ± 0.235; p = 0.001), a thicker CSF (530 ± 143 μm vs. 438 ± 105 μm; p < 0.001), and a disrupted ELM (p < 0.001) compared with eyes without this finding. In addition, eyes with a cystoid pattern on NIR-FAF had worse log-MAR VA (0.393 ± 0.233 vs. 0.221 ± 0.234; p < 0.001) and a thicker CSF (557 ± 155 μm vs. 443 ± 100 μm; p < 0.001) than those without this pattern. 39 Despite these apparent clinically important attributes of FAF in the setting of DR/DMO, there are several important limitations. First, the signal strength of FAF is not as strong as the fluorescent signal seen in FFA. Fluorescent properties of other structures (e.g., crystalline lens) and media opacities may influence and affect the fluorescent intensity originating from RPE and choroid, though the confocal attributes of the imaging devices confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscope (cSLO) instruments such as the Heidelberg Retina Angiograph (HRA), HRA 2 and HRA Spectralis (Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany), can partially mitigate this concern (Figure 7). 40 The confocal methods diminish extra light by focusing and detecting reflected light through a small confocal aperture (or pinhole) which is positioned at a focal plane F I G U R E 7 Short wavelength (blue) fundus autofluorescence (FAF) image of a left eye with diabetic macular oedema (DMO) in a cystoid pattern. Faint hyperfluorescence can be observed from the cystoid spaces relative to the hypofluoresence from the septae between the cystoid spaces. Image was obtained using a confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (cSLO) device, from the HRA (Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) conjugate to the retina in front of the image detector. 41 The aperture blocks non-image-forming light and minimises scatter and aberrations. The cSLO then enables imaging of selected individual layers of the retina with greater contrast and details. However, with variability in image acquisition settings (e.g., illumination intensity and detector sensitivity), patient factors (e.g., background AF which may vary with age or level of dilation), and difficulties in interpretating FAF images without significant training and experience, significant challenges remain for the routine use of FAF imaging in this setting.
## (s3) | Ultrasonography
Number of References: 23

(p3.0) By using inaudible sound waves (>20 kHz), piezoelectric crystals in ultrasonography instruments collect reflected sound waves from any echodense which can be displayed a 2D B-scan image. Ultrasonography has proven to be a useful tool for assessment of PDR with TRD, especially in the context of a vitreous haemorrhage precluding visualisation of the retina on ophthalmoscopy (Figure 8). In a study evaluating for the presence of a TRD in eyes with PDR and an obscuring vitreous haemorrhage, on 4-quadrant transverse and 1-quadrant longitudinal ultrasound scans reported a preoperative sensitivity of 72.4% and a specificity of 96.6% for detection of TRD. 42 In another study, ultrasonography was rated to have 100% sensitivity and 100% specificity for detection of vitreous haemorrhage, pre-retinal haemorrhage and posterior vitreous detachment in diabetes with a sensitivity of 87.5% and a specificity of 100% specificity for detecting TRD. 43 Cases in which the TRD was missed were suspected to be due to peripheral location, small size of the TRD, or a focal TRD with dense subhyaloid bleeding. 42,43 3 | DYNAMIC AND FUNCTIONAL RETINAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGIES 3.1 | Fundus fluorescein angiography and ultra-widefield imaging Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) has been used as a companion diagnostic procedure along with CFP for many decades. As FFA provides high contrast visualisation of retinal vessels, it has been the gold standard for evaluation of the retinal vasculature and can be used to image MAs, IRMA, NV and perhaps most importantly, the vascular perfusion and leakage in DR. 44 Normally, the retinal vascular endothelium acts as a blood-retinal barrier preventing escape of dye from within the vessels into the extravascular space. However, this barrier is compromised in MA and NV and results in dye leakage seen on FFA (Figures 9 and 10). The presence or severity of leakage may aid in the differentiation between IRMAs and NV, or tiny retinal haemorrhage and MAs which may be hard to distinguish on CFP or slit-lamp examination. 44 Moreover, FFA can help to differentiate the pattern of DMO as either diffuse (e.g., originating from telangiectatic capillaries) or focal leakage (e.g., originating from MAs), and also to localise MAs to guide focal laser treatment for DMO, when needed. 4 As a result of chronic endothelial cell damage and vascular injury, small vessel occlusion can occur in DR, and these areas of capillary nonperfusion (CNP) can be well-visualised on FFA ( Figure 10A). 45,46 CNP in the midperipheral region was reported to be the most common location for this abnormality in NPDR eyes and a positive correlation was observed between the initial site of CNP and its progression in eyes with NPDR. 47 DMI is identified by the presence of an enlarged and irregular foveal avascular zone (FAZ) and CNP within the paramacular area on FFA. [48][49][50] Prior study showed that DMO eyes (treated with intravitreal anti-VEGF injections) with DMI significantly more frequently progressed to PDR at 24 months compared with those without DMI at baseline (HR, 2.42; 95% CI, 1.30-4.49; p = 0.0052). 51 DMI progression itself, ranging from 5% to 10% of baseline FAZ area per year, was also reported as an independent predictive factor for VA loss (odds ratios, 4.60; 95% CI, 1.54-13.7, p = 0.03). 52 Similar to conventional CFP, conventional FFA images typically cover a 30-55 field of view in a single frame (Figure 9). Unlike static CFP images, where multiple images and a montage may be compiled without loss of information, because of the dynamic and changing nature of FFA, montage FFA images are invariably composed of images obtained at different time points. WF FFA ( Figure 10) and UWF FFA technologies overcome this significant problem, providing a wider field of view of up to 200 in a single frame (e.g., Optos 200Tx [Optos Plc]). Retinal CNP, NV and other lesions (e.g., photocoagulation scar) in the periphery were better revealed on UWF than conventional FFA. 53,54 In one study, UWF FFA demonstrated 3.2 times more total retinal surface area, 3.9 times more CNP (p < 0.001), 1.9 times more NV (p = 0.036), and 3.8 times more panretinal photocoagulation scars (p < 0.001) than within the ETDRS 7-standard fields. 54 Moreover, in 10% of eyes, UWF FFA demonstrated retinal pathology (including CNP and NV) not evident within the ETDRS 7-standard fields. 54 CNP area seen on UWF FFA and non-perfusion index are also correlated with the presence of PPLs, DR severity, and potentially DR progression. 55 Peripheral CNP was also reported to have a significant correlation with DMO (p < 0.001). 56 However, it remains unclear whether the extent of peripheral CNP is correlated with DMI (R = 0.49; p = 0.0001). 57 Despite the wealth of information provided by FFA, it is not without limitations. FFA is an invasive imaging technique which requires intravenous injection of fluorescein dye. FFA imaging may be contraindicated for patients with renal disease, pregnancy or dye allergies. Several risks and complications associated with fluorescein dye injections have been reported including, nausea, vomiting, itching, urticaria and rarely, anaphylaxis. 58 In addition, unlike OCT which may be acquired by operators with relatively limited training, FFA may require an experienced photographer or technician, and because of the dynamic nature of study, timing is critical and high- quality images need to be obtained from the outset. Another important limitation of standard FFA is its limited depth resolution (even with stereoscopic acquisition) which makes it difficult to distinguish superficial and deeper vascular plexi. 59 
## (s6) | Retinal oximetry and hyperspectral imaging
Number of References: 17

(p6.0) As a critical function of the retinal and choroidal vasculature is delivery of oxygen to the retina, non-invasive assessment of retinal oxygenation has been an area of considerable interest. The basic principle underlying current oximetry techniques is based on the distinct optical properties of oxygenated and deoxygenated haemoglobin, each of which absorbs different amounts of light at different wavelengths. By exciting the retina with two or more different wavelengths and measuring the reflected light from blood vessels and outside vessels, the optical density and its ratio can be computed. 80,81 An example of a currently available commercial device is the Oxymap T1 (Oxymap ehf, Reykjavik, Iceland) which generates a fundus photograph with a measurement of the oxygen saturation within each artery and vein displayed using a colour scale. 82 Using oximetry testing, the retinal vessel oxygen saturation in DR eyes was shown to be significantly higher than in healthy controls. [83][84][85] Possible explanations for this finding was arterio-venous shunting due to bypass of non-perfused capillaries. Thus, because of the loss of the capillary circulation, some regions of retinal tissue may be hypoxic, despite a high oxygen saturation in the larger blood vessels. 83 Retinal oximetry, however, is not without limitations as the fundus camera only provides 2D images and fundus pigmentation and vessel size may affect the accuracy of oxygen saturation measurements requiring an additional corrective algorithm. 80 Newer imaging techniques that are still under earlier stages of development such as photoacoustic ophthalmoscopy, visible light OCT, and hyperspectral imaging (HSI) may address some of these limiations. 80 For example, HSI is a spectral imaging technique which collects data from a contiguous spectrum of wavelengths of light reflected by the retina in every pixel of an image plane. 86 This technique provides a higher spectral resolution compared with multispectral imaging that captures only specific wavelengths such as red, green and blue in conventional CFP. 86 As the various structures and molecules in the retina have different reflective properties, HSI provides more-detailed information regarding these structures and is less influenced by vessel thickness. 80,86 One study reported the mean oxygen tensions in the artery and vein measured by HSI in diabetic patients were lower than normal subjects (p = 0.001). 29 For PDR eyes in particular, the arterial oxygen level was significantly lower (85 ± 4%) while the venous oxygen level was significantly higher (71 ± 4%) than the other groups (p = 0.04), which led to significant arteriovenous difference between PDR and healthy controls (14% vs. 26%; p = 0.003). 87 Another study of HSI in mild to moderate NPDR showed a contrary results where the mean retinal arterial and venular oxygen saturations were higher in NPDR eyes compared with healthy controls (94.7 ± 2.4% vs. 92.9 ± 1.6%, p = 0.02; 62.5 ± 5.7% vs. 56.3 ± 4.7%, p = 0.003; artery and vein, respectively), and the arteriovenous difference was significant between the NPDR group and controls (30.6 ± 6% vs. 36.7 ± 5.3%, p = 0.008). 88 Further larger and longitudinal studies are required to better clarify these relationships. Limitations of HSI include long acquisition and analysis times. 80 
