# Differential diagnosis of pulmonary sarcoidosis: a review

CorpusID: 258619536 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d642f999aee2c301c97b687e5ea6428b6afff1cc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d642f999aee2c301c97b687e5ea6428b6afff1cc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 7

(p0.0) Sarcoidosis is challenging to diagnose given the broad range of presentations, many of which mimic other conditions (1). No single criterion providing a definite diagnosis of sarcoidosis with 100% accuracy is available. Current guidelines indicate that the diagnosis of sarcoidosis should rely on three criteria, two positive (compatible presentation and evidence of noncaseating granulomas) and one negative (exclusion of all alternative diagnoses whose presentation and/or histopathology are similar) (1, 2). However, not all patients who meet these three criteria have sarcoidosis. The easiest criterion to assess is probably the presence of noncaseating granulomas, which can be sampled using highly efficient tools such as endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration, transbronchial lung and bronchial biopsy, and biopsy of peripheral lesions (e.g., involving the skin or peripheral lymph nodes) (3). In contrast, assessing compatibility of the presentation and ruling out alternative diagnoses can be laborious. These two criteria must be evaluated concomitantly, since the presentation governs the likelihood of each alternative diagnosis. Determining whether the presentation is compatible with sarcoidosis relies heavily on expertise in the field of sarcoidosis. However, the diverse and nonspecific initial manifestations of sarcoidosis often lead patients to visit general practitioners or emergency physicians, who have limited experience with the disease. This point probably explains the often long diagnostic delays, which may exceed 6 months, and the need for several physician visits before the diagnosis is established (4).

(p0.1) Several recent articles provide useful information for diagnosing sarcoidosis. Development of the American Thoracic Society (ATS) diagnostic guidelines involved using a Delphi methodology to classify several manifestations as indicating a highly probable or probable diagnosis of sarcoidosis, based on the World Association of Sarcoidosis and Other Granulomatosis (WASOG) Sarcoidosis Organ Assessment Instrument (1,5). Moreover, two Sarcoidosis Diagnostic Scores, with and without biopsy data, respectively, have been validated in confirmation cohorts, in the USA (6) and in a multicontinental study (7). The main strength of these studies is assessment of the scores under real-life conditions, with both sarcoidosis and a panel of alternative diseases mimicking sarcoidosis, to address both presentation compatibility and differential diagnoses.
## (s22) Pathological features in the alternative diseases
Number of References: 3

(p22.0) Epithelioid granulomas develop in many infectious and non-infectious diseases (62-66). For example, the granulomas in chronic beryllium disease closely resemble sarcoid granulomas ( Figure 5D). Inorganic agents (e.g., aluminum) can be identified by polarized light examination (Figures 5E,F) or special methods (67). The pathologist must consider all the lung diseases in which the organization of macrophages and macrophage-derived cells, with variable numbers of lymphocytes, resembles that seen in sarcoidosis. A granulomatous reaction per se is not specific of sarcoidosis, as shown in Table 2, and may be an immunological and inflammatory response to factors such as bacteria (e.g., Mycobacterium tuberculosis ( Figures 5G,J) (72). Exposure to organic airborne agents can cause hypersensitivity pneumonitis characterized by poorly formed granulomas that are often difficult to identify (65). In addition, granulomas develop in various systemic diseases including common variable immune deficiency, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, Sjögren's syndrome, and Crohn's disease. Figure 5O illustrates the various granuloma patterns, with the characteristics and extent of necrosis, and lists the methods for identifying causative agents (e.g., special stains and polarized light examination). These distinctive features are summarized in Table 2.
## (s37) When is the differential diagnosis most difficult?
Number of References: 5

(p37.0) The circumstances of the diagnosis vary widely. Chronic beryllium disease is readily diagnosed when the manifestations are detected during routine workplace monitoring of workers exposed to beryllium. However, individuals may be unaware of the exposure. Unless a systematic and detailed occupational history is obtained, sarcoidosis is often erroneously diagnosed at first, given the similarities in radiological, serum angiotensin-converting enzyme assay, BAL, and histopathology findings (120,121). Moreover, the tuberculin test is often negative in chronic beryllium disease. Interestingly, gene expression patterns in peripheral-blood mononuclear cells were not different between patients with chronic beryllium disease and sarcoidosis (122). The only reported differences are rare extrapulmonary manifestations and rare voluminous hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy in chronic beryllium disease (118). In one study, among 84 patients with potential beryllium exposure and suspected or diagnosed sarcoidosis, 34 were diagnosed as having chronic beryllium disease instead, based on a positive beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test (120). Of these 34 patients, 28 had first been diagnosed with sarcoidosis, the median time between the two diagnoses being 3 [0.  years.
## (s40) Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Number of References: 6

(p40.0) Hypersensitivity pneumonitis, notably in its nonfibrotic form, is caused by exposure to airborne environmental or occupational antigens and can share features with sarcoidosis. However, differentiation from sarcoidosis is generally easy, as shown by a study of the Sarcoidosis Diagnostic Scores (7). The onset may be acute, subacute, or insidious, and recurrent episodes may develop. Crackles are common and squawks may be heard. Although many patients have constitutional symptoms including weight loss, the disease is limited to the lungs, without extrapulmonary organ involvement. At least 40% of patients have either exposure to or serum IgG against an environmental or occupational inciting agent (e.g., avian antigens, bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, isocyanates). The imaging findings typically differ from those in sarcoidosis (section 3.1.3.) (76,126). Although BAL fluid lymphocytosis occurs in both hypersensitivity pneumonitis and sarcoidosis, a relative lymphocyte count above 50% has been reported in half the patients with the former versus almost none with the latter (80). In BAL fluid, the total cell count, percentages of neutrophils and eosinophils, and percentage of mast cells -this last having the greatest discriminating power -tend to be higher in hypersensitivity pneumonitis than in sarcoidosis, whereas the CD4/ CD8 T-cell ratio tends to be above normal in sarcoidosis and below normal in hypersensitivity pneumonitis (80,127). Combining the history with blood-test, imaging-study, and BAL findings usually suffices to differentiate hypersensitivity pneumonitis from sarcoidosis. The granulomas found in transbronchial lung-biopsy specimens in hypersensitivity pneumonitis are typically small and poorly formed and tend to predominate in the peribronchiolar interstitium (section 3.1.3.). This finding combined with those of the above-listed investigations is highly discriminating.
## (s53) Pulmonary manifestations in adults with chronic granulomatous disease
Number of References: 2

(p53.0) Chronic granulomatous disease is a rare inherited primary immunodeficiency caused by a mutation in the NADPH oxidase gene. The respiratory manifestations are major complications. The diagnosis is usually made in early childhood upon the evaluation of recurrent infections. The pulmonary infections are often chronic and may be asymptomatic, notably when caused by Aspergillus fumigatus. A biopsy of persistent pulmonary nodules or consolidations is often required and frequently shows noncaseating granulomas. Radiological presentations mimicking sarcoidosis are very rare (165,166). The repeated infections starting at a very young age combined with the radiological presentation usually make sarcoidosis very improbable.
## (s54) Genetic diseases
Number of References: 4

(p54.0) Blau syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder due to NOD2 mutations, of which over 15 have been identified (167,168). Familial cases are present in 40% of patients. The onset is usually at 3-4 years of age (15). Most patients have the typical triad of skin involvement, symmetrical polyarthritis, and uveitis. Lung involvement has been reported in a single patient, who had ground-glass opacities in the middle and lower lobes (169). The diagnosis is based on the presentation and results of genetic testing for NOD2 mutations. Thus, Blau syndrome is easily differentiated from sarcoidosis (170).
## (s58) Crohn's disease
Number of References: 2

(p58.0) Noninfectious pulmonary involvement has rarely been studied in patients with Crohn's disease. The first diagnosis to consider is an adverse drug reaction, for instance to mesalamine or a TNF-a antagonist (174). In practice, Crohn's disease is never per se the cause of pulmonary granulomatosis. At the trachea, in contrast, macroscopic abnormalities can be visible by endoscopy, a finding never observed in sarcoidosis (175). Crohn's disease and sarcoidosis may co-exist (176).
