# How Can Probabilistic Solar Power Forecasts Be Used to Lower Costs and Improve Reliability in Power Spot Markets? A Review and Application to Flexiramp Requirements

CorpusID: 252995976 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/58fea38aeba33dd26fcaafa903b9f1ff6fc7b7e7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/58fea38aeba33dd26fcaafa903b9f1ff6fc7b7e7)

Fields: Environmental Science, Economics, Engineering

## (s5) E. STOCHASTIC OPTIMIZATION TO PROCURE OPTIMAL AMOUNTS AND LOCATIONS OF RESERVES IN MARKET SOFTWARE
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) Stochastic multistage programming can be viewed as an extension of multi-scenario methods of Sections II.C,D in which probabilities are assigned to scenarios of, e.g., wind and solar output or net loads, and the objective is to minimize probability weighted costs across scenarios. Many researchers propose this approach as a rigorous method for endogenous determination of locations and amounts of reserves to manage uncertain net loads in unit commitment and dispatch problems (e.g., [47], [54], [56]). Indeed, it is undeniable that, in theory, probability-weighted costs would be minimized by optimizing immediate ''here-andnow'' decisions considering the many ways that uncertainties can unfold over the time horizon and how later ''wait-andsee'' decisions would optimally respond to forecast errors. Fig. 2(e) shows how these two types of decisions are related; after the initial decision, there are sets of scenarios issuing from a chance node, each with a probability and subsequent set of recourse decisions and associated costs. (We only show one chance node there; more generally, sequences of chance nodes could represent the random evolution of net load over the day.) But as has been pointed out [16], [48], this theoretical point does not imply that practical implementations by ISOs of stochastic programming in spot markets would actually improve schedules. This is because the sheer number of uncertain variables and decision stages cause an exponential explosion in problem size, and compromises have to be made to simplify the problem so it can be solved. Although computationally clever implementations of stochastic programming have greatly improved the efficiency of hydropower operations around the world (e.g., [40]), such practical success has been elusive for high dimensional unit commitment and dispatch problems of the size typically solved by ISOs. Another challenge is the need for scenario probabilities, including for extreme events whose probabilities are subject to high sample error and might be nonstationary due to, e.g., climate change. A lack of accepted and transparent methods for calculating such probabilities is a barrier to acceptance by stakeholders, many of whom already complain about the opaqueness of market processes.
