# Ethical issues and practical barriers in internet-based suicide prevention research: a review and investigator survey

CorpusID: 255832595 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/93b6c1e5211b014f70bd8836988ad83bc2c3a081](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/93b6c1e5211b014f70bd8836988ad83bc2c3a081)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s2) Study design
Number of References: 8

(p2.0) This was a mixed-methods study involving two phases. In Phase One, studies of internet-based interventions for suicide prevention were identified via a systematic literature search and their reported safety measures were examined. In Phase Two, lead and senior authors of all studies identified during Phase One were invited to participate in an online survey. Following Andriessen and colleagues [14,15], researchers who participated in the survey will be referred to hereafter as "respondents"; "participants" will refer to the participants of their studies.

(p2.1) This was a mixed-methods study involving two phases. In Phase One, studies of internet-based interventions for suicide prevention were identified via a systematic literature search and their reported safety measures were examined. In Phase Two, lead and senior authors of all studies identified during Phase One were invited to participate in an online survey. Following Andriessen and colleagues [14,15], researchers who participated in the survey will be referred to hereafter as "respondents"; "participants" will refer to the participants of their studies.
## (s25) Study design
Number of References: 8

(p25.0) This was a mixed-methods study involving two phases. In Phase One, studies of internet-based interventions for suicide prevention were identified via a systematic literature search and their reported safety measures were examined. In Phase Two, lead and senior authors of all studies identified during Phase One were invited to participate in an online survey. Following Andriessen and colleagues [14,15], researchers who participated in the survey will be referred to hereafter as "respondents"; "participants" will refer to the participants of their studies.

(p25.1) This was a mixed-methods study involving two phases. In Phase One, studies of internet-based interventions for suicide prevention were identified via a systematic literature search and their reported safety measures were examined. In Phase Two, lead and senior authors of all studies identified during Phase One were invited to participate in an online survey. Following Andriessen and colleagues [14,15], researchers who participated in the survey will be referred to hereafter as "respondents"; "participants" will refer to the participants of their studies.
