# International Journal of Molecular Sciences Review Confinement Effects in Well-Defined Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs) for Selective CO 2 Hydrogenation: A Review

CorpusID: 257118654 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54d8358f1a3f12f2b122bc77a75004e8e573ca68](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54d8358f1a3f12f2b122bc77a75004e8e573ca68)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s1) Confined Synthesis and Confinement Effects of MOFs as Host Materials
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) MOFs represent a frontier in advanced host materials for CO2 hydrogenation due to their tunable properties including: (1) semi-rigid and highly porous structures, (2) high physical and chemical host stability, (3) strong interaction for the stable dispersion of active species, and (4) solid Lewis or Brønsted acid characteristic. These properties provide an opportunity to synthesize stable and active catalysts using MOFs as host materials in CO2 hydrogenation. In this section, various synthetic strategies for MOF-confined molecular complexes, single atoms, NPs, or even micro-scale oxides were systematically summarized, including a one-pot synthetic approach (active sites confined in MOF cavities or channels), post-synthetic modification (active sites interacting with functional cavities or channels), and a two-step synthetic approach (active species surrounded by MOF membranes). For further details regarding the synthesis and characterization of various MOFs, the readers are referred to previous reviews and literature cited herein [62,63]. Moreover, the corresponding catalytic performance affected by confinement effects are detailed, indicating that rational designs of the structures of MOFs and active sites are essential in the valorization of CO2. 
## (s2) Confined Synthesis and Confinement Effects of MOFs as Host Materials
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) MOFs represent a frontier in advanced host materials for CO 2 hydrogenation due to their tunable properties including: (1) semi-rigid and highly porous structures, (2) high physical and chemical host stability, (3) strong interaction for the stable dispersion of active species, and (4) solid Lewis or Brønsted acid characteristic. These properties provide an opportunity to synthesize stable and active catalysts using MOFs as host materials in CO 2 hydrogenation. In this section, various synthetic strategies for MOF-confined molecular complexes, single atoms, NPs, or even micro-scale oxides were systematically summarized, including a one-pot synthetic approach (active sites confined in MOF cavities or channels), post-synthetic modification (active sites interacting with functional cavities or channels), and a two-step synthetic approach (active species surrounded by MOF membranes). For further details regarding the synthesis and characterization of various MOFs, the readers are referred to previous reviews and literature cited herein [62,63]. Moreover, the corresponding catalytic performance affected by confinement effects are detailed, indicating that rational designs of the structures of MOFs and active sites are essential in the valorization of CO 2 .
## (s9) Active Species Confined in MOF Membrane
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) The active species of CO2 hydrogenation are not only encapsulated in monocrystal MOFs, but also confined by the MOF membrane. The combination of guest species and different types of MOF active sites (e.g., metal nodes, functional organic linkers) makes MOFs promising multifunctional materials for synergistic catalysis [47]. For example, the ZnZrOx/SAPO-34 composite was able to selectively catalyze CO2 hydrogenation to paraffin. Jiang et al. shifted the product distributions from paraffins to olefins via the introduction of the UiO-66 membrane as a coating layer on the SAPO-34 surface. It was demonstrated that the stable UiO-n membrane passivated the excessive Brønsted acid sites of SAPO-34, suppressing the hydrogenation of olefins to paraffins. Meanwhile, the uniform UiO-66 membrane had no effect on the diffusion step during CO2 hydrogenation, where (c) Formation of unsaturated Zr sites that can accept CO 2 and hydrogen spillover from Cu surfaces. Reproduced with permission [145]. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.
## (s11) Confined Synthesis and Confinement Effects for MOF-Derived Materials
Number of References: 7

(p11.0) MOFs have been explored as potential templates or precursors to prepare highly dispersed NPs via thermal decomposition due to their unique structure and textural prop-erties [57,[155][156][157]. Carbon-encapsulated NPs derived from MOFs as emerging catalysts received tremendous research efforts [158][159][160]. The framework of MOFs could protect the active site aggregation to generate highly dispersed NPs during high-temperature pyrolysis. Moreover, the confinement effects induced by the encapsulation carbon layer provide robust microenvironments for CO 2 hydrogenation, which could tune the binding energy of key intermediates and affect the adsorption of CO 2 and transportation of products. In this section, we will simply highlight some important merits of the encapsulated metal nanoparticles for CO 2 hydrogenation, including modification of local reaction environment, electronic transfer, and interfacial catalysis to enhance catalytic performance.
