# SURVEY OF FEDERATED LEARNING MODELS FOR SPATIAL-TEMPORAL MOBILITY APPLICATIONS A PREPRINT

CorpusID: 258564828 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1bd8cb97f207dee598c54ea40fd65b3ab7c140d5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1bd8cb97f207dee598c54ea40fd65b3ab7c140d5)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s9) Federated Trajectory Predictive Approaches
Number of References: 6

(p9.0) The challenges of trajectory predictive approaches in decentralized learning are different. Firstly, the unique properties of people's mobility [20] lead to a non-iid distribution of the data amongst clients. Second and as a result of the first challenge, creating a global model for predicting the next location of users that works equally well for all the users becomes an extremely challenging task. That is one must decide to what extent should clients adopt the global model and when to opt-in for a purely personalized model. In this section we review the existing works in this domain, review how they account for the mentioned challenge, and compare their performances in Table 5 against centralized predictive approaches namely ST-RNN [60], MCARNN [59], DeepMove [26], and VANext [33]. Fan et al. [25] proposed a decentralized attention-based personalized human mobility prediction. They apply a few-shot learning human mobility predictor that makes personalized predictions based on a few records for each user using an attention-based model. Furthermore, they take advantage of pre-training strategies where the predictor is trained on another smaller mobility dataset to accelerate the FL training on devices. However, even with the pre-training and attention-based strategy, the model requires over 1000 rounds of data communication rounds and is not sufficiently robust for the irregular nature of the human movement.
