# World Journal of Gastroenterology Alcohol-related hepatitis: A review article Provenance and peer review: Peer-review model: Single blind Peer-review report's scientific quality classification Grade A (Excellent): 0 Grade B ( P-Reviewer

CorpusID: 258532551 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e62afe58061d3568fabc7f869b68cd458ec3ae9d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e62afe58061d3568fabc7f869b68cd458ec3ae9d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) Physical Examination
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Physical examination can range from benign to profoundly abnormal [45]. Patients may have signs of malnutrition/sarcopenia manifested as temporal or thenar muscle wasting. Jaundice and scleral icterus may be apparent in patients with more severe disease while subtle signs of jaundice can be noted sublingually or in the tympanic membranes in patients with less severe disease. The presence of spider angiomas, gynecomastia in men and caput medusa is uncommon in patients with ARH in the absence of cirrhosis. Right upper quadrant tenderness to palpation along the enlarged hepatic border is common, with the liver edge extending into the pelvis and crossing the midline in severe cases. Some studies have reported a bruit over the liver as a feature of severe ARH in > 50% of patients [46]. Splenomegaly can often be appreciated as well even in the absence of cirrhosis. Fluid wave, shifting dullness and frank abdominal distention signifying large-volume ascites can be seen in severe cases. Lower extremity swelling progressing to anasarca can also be seen in severe cases. Finally, asterixis can be seen in patients with significant hepatic dysfunction.
