# Coal waste management practices in the USA: an overview

CorpusID: 256430476 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e6c0aa9a479f9733f876d062f782a1cbb10efbe](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e6c0aa9a479f9733f876d062f782a1cbb10efbe)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s13) Current practices around underground coal mines in Illinois
Number of References: 4

(p13.0) Operations in Illinois use combinations of CCPW embankments, sediment ponds and surface drainage network to minimize adverse environmental effects of waste management, mining, processing, and reclamation activities. Current CCPW (refuse) structures are typically pyramid shaped, stepped structures. Majority of active mines dispose CCPW and FCPW in separate structures. Some operators have their CCPW structures built around FCPW structures at the center. Some operators co-dispose their FCPW and CCPW by mixing them together to take advantage of their geochemical properties. Some CCPW structures are constructed from CCPW mixed with clay or fly ash to improve their compaction and reduce their hydraulic conductivity. After the CCPW and FCPW structures are completed, they are capped by top-soil or sub-soil that have been removed and stored from within or outside the mine permits area. Alkaline amendments are added as appropriate in the upper portions of graded CCPW before putting the soil cover and vegetating it (Daniels et al. 1999).

(p13.1) Operations in Illinois use combinations of CCPW embankments, sediment ponds and surface drainage network to minimize adverse environmental effects of waste management, mining, processing, and reclamation activities. Current CCPW (refuse) structures are typically pyramid shaped, stepped structures. Majority of active mines dispose CCPW and FCPW in separate structures. Some operators have their CCPW structures built around FCPW structures at the center. Some operators co-dispose their FCPW and CCPW by mixing them together to take advantage of their geochemical properties. Some CCPW structures are constructed from CCPW mixed with clay or fly ash to improve their compaction and reduce their hydraulic conductivity. After the CCPW and FCPW structures are completed, they are capped by top-soil or sub-soil that have been removed and stored from within or outside the mine permits area. Alkaline amendments are added as appropriate in the upper portions of graded CCPW before putting the soil cover and vegetating it (Daniels et al. 1999).
## (s14) Current practices around surface coal mines in Illinois
Number of References: 4

(p14.0) Active surface coal mine operations in Illinois adopt approaches similar to underground mines with regard to the management of overburden spoils. The surface mines also use a combination of spoil pits, surface drainage network and sediment ponds to minimize potential of run-off water contamination. Coal processing waste is typically deposited at the bottom of the pit after removal of coal. This is done prior to dumping of overburden spoils. Overburden spoils are dumped into the pit using shovel or dragline, or hauled to the pit that is typically at the backend of the mining front and dumped. Then, spoils are usually graded with light compaction. Similar to underground coal mines, topsoil and subsoil removed and stored previously are used as cover material and vegetated. Sediment/dilution ponds in a surface mine also collect sediments and leachates, and help to minimize pollution potential. Finally, the ponds are also covered with topsoil and subsoil and vegetated (Rich and Hutchinson 1990).

(p14.1) Active surface coal mine operations in Illinois adopt approaches similar to underground mines with regard to the management of overburden spoils. The surface mines also use a combination of spoil pits, surface drainage network and sediment ponds to minimize potential of run-off water contamination. Coal processing waste is typically deposited at the bottom of the pit after removal of coal. This is done prior to dumping of overburden spoils. Overburden spoils are dumped into the pit using shovel or dragline, or hauled to the pit that is typically at the backend of the mining front and dumped. Then, spoils are usually graded with light compaction. Similar to underground coal mines, topsoil and subsoil removed and stored previously are used as cover material and vegetated. Sediment/dilution ponds in a surface mine also collect sediments and leachates, and help to minimize pollution potential. Finally, the ponds are also covered with topsoil and subsoil and vegetated (Rich and Hutchinson 1990).
## (s49) Current practices around underground coal mines in Illinois
Number of References: 4

(p49.0) Operations in Illinois use combinations of CCPW embankments, sediment ponds and surface drainage network to minimize adverse environmental effects of waste management, mining, processing, and reclamation activities. Current CCPW (refuse) structures are typically pyramid shaped, stepped structures. Majority of active mines dispose CCPW and FCPW in separate structures. Some operators have their CCPW structures built around FCPW structures at the center. Some operators co-dispose their FCPW and CCPW by mixing them together to take advantage of their geochemical properties. Some CCPW structures are constructed from CCPW mixed with clay or fly ash to improve their compaction and reduce their hydraulic conductivity. After the CCPW and FCPW structures are completed, they are capped by top-soil or sub-soil that have been removed and stored from within or outside the mine permits area. Alkaline amendments are added as appropriate in the upper portions of graded CCPW before putting the soil cover and vegetating it (Daniels et al. 1999).

(p49.1) Operations in Illinois use combinations of CCPW embankments, sediment ponds and surface drainage network to minimize adverse environmental effects of waste management, mining, processing, and reclamation activities. Current CCPW (refuse) structures are typically pyramid shaped, stepped structures. Majority of active mines dispose CCPW and FCPW in separate structures. Some operators have their CCPW structures built around FCPW structures at the center. Some operators co-dispose their FCPW and CCPW by mixing them together to take advantage of their geochemical properties. Some CCPW structures are constructed from CCPW mixed with clay or fly ash to improve their compaction and reduce their hydraulic conductivity. After the CCPW and FCPW structures are completed, they are capped by top-soil or sub-soil that have been removed and stored from within or outside the mine permits area. Alkaline amendments are added as appropriate in the upper portions of graded CCPW before putting the soil cover and vegetating it (Daniels et al. 1999).
## (s50) Current practices around surface coal mines in Illinois
Number of References: 4

(p50.0) Active surface coal mine operations in Illinois adopt approaches similar to underground mines with regard to the management of overburden spoils. The surface mines also use a combination of spoil pits, surface drainage network and sediment ponds to minimize potential of run-off water contamination. Coal processing waste is typically deposited at the bottom of the pit after removal of coal. This is done prior to dumping of overburden spoils. Overburden spoils are dumped into the pit using shovel or dragline, or hauled to the pit that is typically at the backend of the mining front and dumped. Then, spoils are usually graded with light compaction. Similar to underground coal mines, topsoil and subsoil removed and stored previously are used as cover material and vegetated. Sediment/dilution ponds in a surface mine also collect sediments and leachates, and help to minimize pollution potential. Finally, the ponds are also covered with topsoil and subsoil and vegetated (Rich and Hutchinson 1990).

(p50.1) Active surface coal mine operations in Illinois adopt approaches similar to underground mines with regard to the management of overburden spoils. The surface mines also use a combination of spoil pits, surface drainage network and sediment ponds to minimize potential of run-off water contamination. Coal processing waste is typically deposited at the bottom of the pit after removal of coal. This is done prior to dumping of overburden spoils. Overburden spoils are dumped into the pit using shovel or dragline, or hauled to the pit that is typically at the backend of the mining front and dumped. Then, spoils are usually graded with light compaction. Similar to underground coal mines, topsoil and subsoil removed and stored previously are used as cover material and vegetated. Sediment/dilution ponds in a surface mine also collect sediments and leachates, and help to minimize pollution potential. Finally, the ponds are also covered with topsoil and subsoil and vegetated (Rich and Hutchinson 1990).
