# A Review of Deep Learning-Based Visual Multi-Object Tracking Algorithms for

CorpusID: 253112363 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e8bc028b646d23f110198db9203633e3949b099b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e8bc028b646d23f110198db9203633e3949b099b)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) The primary area of intelligent and networked development in the vehicle and transportation industries is autonomous driving. AVs have the potential to fundamentally alter transportation systems by averting deadly crashes, providing critical mobility to the elderly and disabled, increasing road capacity, saving fuel, and lowering emissions [1,2]. The vehicle perception system's accurate perception of the environment is essential for safe autonomous driving. The perception of autonomous driving settings depends heavily on object tracking, a high-level vision job in the discipline of computer vision. As a result, the development of an object tracking algorithm ensures the development of an automatic driving system that is both safer and more effective.
## (s25) TBD Algorithm Based on Deep Learning Object Detection
Number of References: 3

(p25.0) Obtaining detection results is the first step in TBD, as already discussed. The results of the object detection have a significant impact on how well the TBD framework tracks objects. There are currently many object detection research findings that are rather advanced [35]. Traditional object detection techniques frequently rely on manually created feature operators to describe images. Examples include SIFT features [36], histogram of gradient directions HOG features [37], etc. However, the results of many related works of literature have demonstrated that compared to traditional algorithms for learning features, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have the strongest feature representation capability and contain the most feature information compared to traditional algorithms learning features.
## (s26) TBD Algorithm Based on Deep Learning Object Detection
Number of References: 3

(p26.0) Obtaining detection results is the first step in TBD, as already discussed. The results of the object detection have a significant impact on how well the TBD framework tracks objects. There are currently many object detection research findings that are rather advanced [35]. Traditional object detection techniques frequently rely on manually created feature operators to describe images. Examples include SIFT features [36], histogram of gradient directions HOG features [37], etc. However, the results of many related works of literature have demonstrated that compared to traditional algorithms for learning features, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have the strongest feature representation capability and contain the most feature information compared to traditional algorithms learning features.
