# Carry-Over of Aflatoxin B1 from Feed to Cow Milk-A Review

CorpusID: 257383922 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8292a4886457ffad59b952bcc34d9b737d930356](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8292a4886457ffad59b952bcc34d9b737d930356)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s8) Source of Intake
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) Some articles highlight that the source of intake matters regarding the carry-over value. Applebaum et al. (1982) [18] studied aflatoxin transfer using 10 Holstein cows; 6 cows received pure aflatoxin for 7 days, while 3 cows received a preparation containing AFB1 and other aflatoxins and metabolites produced by an Aspergillus culture. One cow received a higher dose of pure aflatoxin. The effects on feed consumption and milk production were also studied during the treatment and for 5 days before and 8 days after it. While differences in total feed intake were not significant, milk production was significantly reduced and, consequently, AFM1 level was increased in the milk of cows consuming preparations containing impure (13 mg/day) AFB1 toxin. The authors hypothesized that this could be due to the effect of other metabolites produced by the mold, since the amount of AFB1 administered was the same as the amounts of pure AFB1 administered [18].
## (s22) Carry-Over Studies Underpinning Calculations of Regulatory Limits
Number of References: 2

(p22.0) Knowledge of the carry-over formula may help to determine the maximum allowable contamination of the feed, which results in a given maximum milk contamination target value. In 1992, Veldman et al. [28] concluded that the average daily AFB1 intake for one cow in the herd should not reach a level of 40 µg/cow in order to keep the AFM1 level of the produced milk below the limit of 0.05 µg/kg. Therefore, a feed was considered safe in terms of AFB1 concentration if the concentration multiplied by the consumed amount gave a value below 40 µg AFB1 per day. Consequently, according to the authors, the legal limit of 5 µg/kg would not be a guarantee that the AFM1 content of the milk would be adequate [28].
## (s30) Appendix A. Carry-Over Studies with Adsorbents
Number of References: 2

(p30.0) Appendix A.1. Activated Carbons and HSCAS Galvano et al. (1996) [29] studied the effect of using two activated charcoals, CAC1 and CAC2, and hydrated sodium calcium aluminosilicate (HSCAS) on the aflatoxin carry-over values in 12 Friesian cows in late lactation. The applied adsorbents were effective. When adding CAC1, the AFM1 concentration in milk was reduced to a higher extent (45.3%) than with HSCAS (32.5%). On the other hand, CAC2 reduced AFM1 content in milk by only 22%. Pelleting was unsuccessful in the case of CAC2, which could explain the observed lower performance of CAC2.
## (s32) Appendix A.3. Addressing Potential Side Effects of Clay-Combined Addition of Clay and Yeast or Natural Compounds
Number of References: 14

(p32.0) Considering that clay products have not consistently prevented decreases in milk yield caused by AFB1 ingestion [42], later studies on the effects of adsorbents focus on combined applications, including clay and yeast. Saccharomyces cerevisiae fermentation products (SCFPs) were reported to have potential to improve animal performance parameters [42]. Jiang et al. (2018) [42] studied the effects of a bentonite clay added to the diet of cows, with or without a high level of Saccharomyces cerevisiae fermentation product, and found that both treatments reduced the AFM1 concentration in milk and the transfer of AFB1 into milk AFM1 (1.01% and 0.94% compared to 1.65%). Although the carry-over decreasing effect was comparable between the two treatments using clay with and without Saccharomyces cerevisiae fermentation product, the authors found that adding the yeast fermentation product along with clay was better at maintaining milk production during an aflatoxin challenge than using the clay alone [42].

(p32.1) On the other hand, Weatherly et al. (2018) [67] found no differences in AF transfer or excretion in milk, and the adsorbent neither hindered nor improved cow feed intake, milk production, or efficiency, when yeast cell wall and bentonite-based adsorbent were studied together. Xiong et al. (2015) [17], using Solis Mos, an adsorbent containing sodium montmorillonite with live yeast on cows in later stages of milk production, consuming low or high aflatoxin levels, found that in addition to improving the antioxidant status independently of aflatoxin intake, the addition of the adsorbent eliminated the AFM1 background contamination of milk in the case of animals consuming uncontaminated feed as well. AFM1 concentration in milk and carry-over were reduced by 16% and 17.9%, respectively, when the adsorbent was given to the animals consuming low amounts of aflatoxin. No change in AFM1 excretion caused by the adsorbent was observed in the case of animals consuming larger amounts of aflatoxins [17].

(p32.2) Testing the same adsorbent during a long-term aflatoxin challenge, Xiong et al. (2018) [44] observed a significant reduction in milk AFM1 concentrations and transfer rates. Rodrigues et al. (2019) [46] tested the efficacy of two additives composed of high adsorbent clay minerals and inactivated yeast, Toxy-Nil and Unike Plus, and found that both adsorbents reduced the AF transfer into milk significantly. Supplementation with these also reduced the time required for the AFM1 level in milk to drop below the FDA limit after AFB1 was withdrawn from the diet [46]. Cha et al. (2021) [24] experienced significantly lower milk AFM1 concentrations and AFB1-AFM1 transfer rates (0.57% and 0.63% compared to 1.16%) when a montmorillonitediatomite based patented adsorbent and a montmorillonite, diatomite, yeast cell wall and sodium-alginate-based adsorbent were fed to cows in addition to an aflatoxin challenge.
