# International Journal of Molecular Sciences Phototoxic or Photoprotective?-Advances and Limitations of Titanium (IV) Oxide in Dermal Formulations-A Review

CorpusID: 258500099 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0d2df96389e242c5ce906c51b77a1d5180100e36](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0d2df96389e242c5ce906c51b77a1d5180100e36)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s5) General Information
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Crystalline TiO2 may exist in three phases, namely rutile, anatase, and brookite (  Variations between these polymorphs involve octahedral units arranged in a threedimensional space. Importantly, each of the crystal structures exhibits different properties-they can differ in shape, structure, refractive index, and photocatalytic activity [30]. Furthermore, only rutile is stable, while anatase and brookite are metastable and convert Variations between these polymorphs involve octahedral units arranged in a threedimensional space. Importantly, each of the crystal structures exhibits different propertiesthey can differ in shape, structure, refractive index, and photocatalytic activity [30]. Furthermore, only rutile is stable, while anatase and brookite are metastable and convert to rutile upon heating. The differences between the polymorphs are particularly apparent when comparing their photocatalytic activity. The higher energy gap of anatase and brookite and their superior electron mobility make these polymorphs more reactive than rutile. Moreover, there is a significant difference in the refractive index of rutile and anatase (2.7 and 2.5, respectively). While there are many arguments in favor of the safety of TiO 2 , potential risk factors also need to be considered. On the one hand, excellent photoprotective properties are reported, and on the other hand, the risk of inducing photochemical reactions, as shown in the following sections.
## (s13) Might Modifications of TiO 2 -NPs Surface Decrease Phototoxicity?
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) The widespread potential use of TiO 2 in medicine and cosmetics has led researchers to try to reduce phototoxicity by modifying the particles surface. Most of the modifications involve the introduction of an inert shell on the surface of the NPs. Among the materials used for coating, the most common are silica (SiO 2 ), alumina (Al 2 O 3 ), zirconium dioxide (ZrO 2 ), or siloxanes [36]. However, the main challenge in synthesizing these types of particles with decreased phototoxicity is to suppress the photoactivity with preserved UV-shielding ability. Moreover, due to the potential application of these particles, the shell must be built of inert materials, the role of which is to inhibit the formation of ROS or to scavenge ROS. However, to date, there is no evidence that this method leads to a complete deactivation of the catalytic activity of TiO 2 -NPs [36,73].
## (s14) Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles as Photostabilizing Agents in Topical Drug Formulations
Number of References: 6

(p14.0) The use of TiO 2 as a photoprotector for photolabile active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) in dermal drug formulations is very limited, and to date, was tested only for retinoic acid and ketoprofen. However, all the papers confirm the increased photostability due to the use of this inorganic sunscreen, compared to formulations without TiO 2 [13,82,83]. Asfour et al., combined all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and TiO 2 for the alleviation of photoinduced sensitivity. The authors confirmed the positive impact of the prepared formulation on product safety in vitro and in vivo studies. They have proven that the addition of 6% (w/w) TiO 2 resulted in the enhanced photostability of ATRA by about 2 times, compared to its methanolic solution. Moreover, in vivo studies on mice exposed to direct sunlight for 4 days, confirmed that the prepared formulation alleviated the photosensitization in comparison to the marketed product [82]. The positive effect of TiO 2 on ketoprofen (KP) photostability has been proven for transdermal patches [13] and gels [83]. By incorporating TiO 2 into the fabric backing of the patch, the UV transmission through the product was effectively decreased in the UVA region, exhibiting the same increased photostability of KP. Moreover, in vivo studies demonstrated lower photosensitization of the patch with TiO 2 , compared to the KP patch without TiO 2 . In the latter study, the lowered decomposition of KP in the gel was confirmed. The three materials (crystalline TiO 2 , pharmaceutical grade TiO 2 , and TiO 2 coated with alumina and silica) were tested and the latter-one showed the best effect. The 2 h exposure of the gels with and without coated TiO 2 to ordinary sunlight caused a decrease in KP concentration from 2.5% to 0.05% (gel without TiO 2 ) and from 2.5% to 0.71% (gel with TiO 2 ).
