# OncoTargets and Therapy Dovepress Clinical response to sunitinib as a multitargeted tyrosine-kinase inhibitor (TKi) in solid cancers: a review of clinical trials

CorpusID: 264630056 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cede514596eaa484056e6799f029cd145d342ce2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cede514596eaa484056e6799f029cd145d342ce2)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 10

(p0.0) Sunitinib (Sutent ® ; Pfizer, New York, NY, USA) is a multitargeted tyrosine-kinase inhibitor (TKI) with activity against the stem cell-factor receptor (Kit) and plateletderived growth-factor receptor (PDGFR), vascular endothelial growth-factor receptor (VEGFR), glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor receptor (rearranged during transfection [RET]), colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF1R), and Fms-like tyrosine kinase-3 receptor (FLT3). 1,2 Several clinical trials have demonstrated that sunitinib has an objective response rate (ORR) as high as 40% in the treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC), and have recommended sunitinib as a first-line therapeutic option. 3 Another TKI, imatinib, is used in first-line therapy for unresectable and metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), but in patients who are intolerant to imatinib therapy, sunitinib is recommended as the second-line option in GIST. Results from a Phase I/II study showed that sunitinib had promising clinical activity in patients with imatinib-resistant GIST. 4 Furthermore, sunitinib has potential antitumor activity in various malignant tumors, such as lung cancer, pancreatic cancer, pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (PNET), esophageal cancer, bladder cancer, glioma, and sarcoma. [5][6][7][8][9][10] This review examines the antitumor efficacy of sunitinib in solid cancers, and summarizes both its preclinical activity and clinical development, including early and latest clinical trials. We discuss the mechanism of sunitinib's antiangiogenic activity and drug-resistance and toxicity studies. We conclude with an examination of the role of sunitinib as a single-agent therapy, combination with chemotherapy or radiotherapy, and its future directions.
## (s1) Mechanism of action
Number of References: 13

(p1.0) Sunitinib is a multitargeted TKI that acts on VEGFR, PDGFR, Kit, FLT3, RET, and CSF1R, and its antitumor activity has been demonstrated in various tumors. The antioncogenic mechanism of sunitinib is based upon a hypothesis derived from preclinical data of its transition of malignancy to alternative tumor-promoting pathways and its ability to upregulate alternative proangiogenic factors. 11 Sunitinib is characterized by an oral indolin-2-one structural analog, which inhibits multiple receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and exerts potent antiangiogenesis and antitumor effects. 12 The spectrum of kinases inhibited by sunitinib includes VEGFR1, -2, and -3, PDGFRα, PDGFRβ, Kit, FLT3, RET, and CSF1R. Sunitinib potently and specifically inhibits these targets in biochemical and cell-based assays. 13,14 Previous studies have shown that sunitinib has the best pharmacologic and binding potency profile for VEGFR and PDGFR at the biochemical and cellular levels. 15 The phosphorylated receptor acts as a docking domain for intracellular adaptors that lead to the activation of a cascade of intracellular signal-transduction mediators, eventually leading to deoxyribonucleic acid synthesis, cell division, growth, proliferation, and migration. 16 The Kit TKI sunitinib has shown a promising clinical profile for mastocytosis/mast cell leukemia, germ cell cancers, smallcell lung cancer, GISTs, acute myelogenous leukemia, neuroblastoma, melanoma, ovarian carcinoma, and breast carcinoma. [12][13][14][15][16][17] In GIST, sunitinib against wild-type and exon 9-mutant Kit was superior to that of imatinib in vitro, whereas both drugs exhibited similar potency against Kit exon-11 mutant kinases. 18 CSF1R is expressed on monocytic progenitors, binds with macrophage CSF to stimulate osteoclasts and enhances the osteolytic activity of osteoclasts. 19 CSF1R expression has been reported in breast, ovarian, and endometrial cancers, and associated with poor prognosis and invasive potential. Moreover, CSF1R appears to be an attractive target for the treatment of bone metastasis. FLT3 is another TKI that when mutated may lead to the development of a specific type of leukemia, known as acute myeloid leukemia. Furthermore, sunitinib targets mutant RET, which is involved in the multiple endocrine neoplasia types 2A and 2B autosomal-dominant syndromes, familial medullary thyroid carcinoma, and perhaps sporadic NETs. 20
## (s8) Resistance of sunitinib
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) The development of sunitinib resistance is accompanied by evasion of antiangiogenic effects and by increased expression of tumor-derived interleukin (IL)-8. 73 IL-8 expression was elevated in human RCC tumors with intrinsic resistance to sunitinib therapy, indicating that IL-8 levels may serve as a predictive biomarker for clinical response to sunitinib. 74 Obviously, IL-8 plays an important role in the resistance of RCC to sunitinib, and suggests that IL-8 may potentially serve as both a therapeutic target for the treatment of sunitinib-resistant RCC and as a clinical biomarker for both acquired and intrinsic sunitinib resistance. The best marker gene, AMFR, is highly downregulated in sunitinib-sensitive patients. The AMFR gene is associated with angiogenesis and tumor cell motility, and its identification may improve outcome prediction and improve our understanding of the mechanisms of submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
## (s12) Toxicity of sunitinib
Number of References: 5

(p12.0) A recent study suggested that grade 3-4 clinical TKI-related toxicities, namely digestive, cardiac, dermatologic, and asthenia, are associated with a significant improvement of OS. 77 Several studies reported that the occurrence of overall grade 3-4 toxicities was significantly associated with age, body surface, and sex. Another study reported that the most common toxicities experienced at both initial treatment and rechallenge were fatigue, diarrhea, and hand-foot syndrome. 78 A retrospective study showed that stomatitis (63.2%) and diarrhea (60.5%) were the most commonly reported dose-related adverse events. 79 In mRCC (n=132), the most common adverse events were stomatitis (66.7%), fatigue (52.3%), hand-foot syndrome (49.2%), and anorexia (48.5%). 80 Moreover, the most frequent laboratory abnormality was thrombocytopenia (75%), and 37.8% of patients experienced grade 3 or 4 thrombocytopenia. Other common laboratory abnormalities included increased serum creatinine (75.6%) and elevated alanine aminotransferase (53.5%). Chen et al reported that sunitinib-induced hypothyroidism was observed as a side effect in 12% of GIST patients. 17 The molecular mechanisms of sunitinib-induced hypothyroidism are currently unknown, but one possible mechanism may be via inhibition of VEGFR and/ or PDGFR in the thyroid tissue. 81
## (s13) Discussion
Number of References: 16

(p13.0) Since it is a multitargeted TKI, sunitinib's main mechanism of action is through inhibition of tumor angiogenesis, but it also has antiproliferative and apoptotic effects on diverse tumor types. 82 Sunitinib exerts its activity as a competitive inhibitor of the catalytic activity of a group of strictly related RTKs: VEGFR1, -2, and -3, PDGFR-α and -β, Kit, CSF1R, FLT3, and the RTK encoded by the RET proto-oncogene. 83 Sunitinib exerts potent and specific inhibition of these targets in biochemical and cell-based assays. 84 In vitro, sunitinib inhibited VEGF-dependent proliferation and migration of human umbilical endothelial cells and disrupted capillary tube formation, and in in vivo models of cancer angiogenesis, sunitinib decreased tumor-microvessel density, blocked vascularization in the vascular window tumor model, and decreased the metastatic potential of several cancers, such as Lewis lung cancer. 85,86 Sunitinib inhibited the proliferation of human cancer cells induced by VEGF, Kit, and PDGF, while inducing apoptosis in human umbilical endothelial cells in an in vitro study. 87 Preclinical studies suggest that plasma concentrations in the range of 50-100 ng/mL inhibited target activation. 88 In in vivo studies, sunitinib exerted significant antitumor activity in xenograft models from numerous tumor types, including renal, colon, breast, lung, melanoma, and epidermoid carcinoma, with once-daily dosing. 89 We summarized the clinical response of sunitinib, as shown in Tables 1-3. Sunitinib was generally established as a first-line therapy in advanced RCC and second-line therapy in GISTs after disease progression or intolerance to imatinib therapy. Recent clinical trials have reported that sunitinib has strong anticancer activity in PNET and has potential response in other cancers, since VEGF levels are highly correlated with the clinical output of well-vascularized tumors. Clinical trials have shown that sunitinib can be administrated as a single agent or in combination with chemotherapy or radiotherapy in different types of advanced cancers. Most clinical trials have suggested that sunitinib is efficacious, especially in mRCC and GIST, as a single agent. The benefits of sunitinib have also been shown in SCLC, NSCLC, and advanced esophageal cancer, and in combination therapy in urinary cancer. [83][84][85][86][87][88] Much of our experience with sunitinib has been with the maximum tolerated dose of 75 mg and the recommended dose of 50 mg/day, 4 weeks on, 2 weeks off schedule in solid cancers.

(p13.1) Our review has demonstrated that sunitinib has a significant, beneficial response in mRCC and GIST. A beneficial response has also been shown in SCLC, breast cancer, thyroid cancer, chondrosarcoma, and other cancers. There are different responses in different types of cancers (Figure 1), and previous studies have supported the belief that relative factors may be associated with the clinical response. These studies have suggested some predictive biomarkers, such as an increase in circulating endothelial cells and smoking, but body mass index, diabetes mellitus, and pretherapy hypertension were not found to be associated with outcome. 28 It is apparent that there needs to be a definition of the optimal biologic dose of antiangiogenic agents used as treatment for mRCC, GIST, and PNET. The combination of sunitinib and chemotherapy can improve OS in several solid cancers, such as SCLC and advanced esophageal cancer. However, sunitinib has failed as a treatment for NSCLC, metastatic breast cancer, and advanced pancreatic cancer. Although many trials have suggested that sunitinib represents a major therapeutic advancement in the treatment of mRCC, the best response to multikinase inhibitors is only temporary disease stabilization. For this purpose, a Phase II study was conducted to evaluate the efficacy of erlotinib (150 mg/day, orally) and sirolimus (6 mg orally on day 8, followed by 2 mg daily) in mRCC patients after failure with sunitinib or sorafenib (n=25). 90 The results showed that median PFS for these patients was 12 weeks (95% CI 5.9-18.1) and median OS 40 weeks (95% CI 0-85.7). SD of less than 6 months was noted in 21.8% (95% CI 4.9%-38.6%) of patients. No confirmed CR or PR was observed.
