# A Review on the Coalescence of Confined Drops with a Focus on Scaling Laws for the Growth of the Liquid Bridge

CorpusID: 264901429 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03aa8321824a42ce619c204aa471bc8df1143dad](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03aa8321824a42ce619c204aa471bc8df1143dad)

Fields: Medicine, Physics

## (s12) Computational Studies
Number of References: 14

(p12.0) Although in the current review we mainly focus on experimental studies on the coalescence of confined drops, we briefly summarize computational studies on the topic because experimental studies can be complemented by computational simulations that enable the easy modulation of fluid properties pertaining to the phenomenon [43][44][45][46][47].

(p12.1) Sui et al. simulated coalescence between two identical drops resting on a partially wetting surface, employing a diffuse-interface method and a volume-of-fluid method [43].For inertial coalescence (Oh = µ d / ρ d σR~10 −3 ) with a wide range of θ (θ < 90 • ), Sui et al. found h/Rsinθ~(t/t c ) 2/3 and r/Rsinθ~(t/t c ) 1/2 .Here, R is the radius of curvature of the initial drop, and t c = (ρ d R 3 sin 3 θ/σ) 1/2 .The scaling exponent of r (n = 1/2) agrees with the experimental result of Kapur and Gaskell [27].Also, Sui et al. found that the n value of h(t) changed from 2/3 to 1/2 at a certain critical time and that the critical time decreased to 0 as θ approached 90 • .This means that h~t 1/2 for θ = 90 • .This change in n for h agrees with Eddi et al. [28].For Oh = 0.1, where viscous effects are no longer negligible, Sui et al. found h~t 0.88 for θ = 70 • .This result agrees with the result of Lee et al. [18] of which the Oh range was 0.5-0.9.Ahmadlouydarab et al. simulated coalescence of sessile drops on a solid surface with a linear gradient of θ using a many-body dissipative particle dynamics method [44].For two identical drops that experienced θ changing from 82 • to 90 • , they found r~t 0.55 and h~t 0.54 (Oh ≈ 0.5).Also, Ahmadlouydarab et al. found that r grew faster than h on a wettable surface (θ < 90 • ) and h grew faster than r on a non-wettable surface (θ > 90 • ).In their simulation on coalescence between drops of different sizes, the smaller drop was merged into the bigger drop.That was because the greater capillary driving force of the smaller drop due to the larger curvature caused faster flow inside the smaller drop.For the coalescence between unequal-sized drops, they found that the n values of r(t) and h(t) were around 0.5 while varying depending on the drop sizes.

(p12.2) Pawar et al. employed the lattice Boltzmann method to simulate inertial coalescence between two sessile drops for three cases (Oh ≈ 0.04): equal-sized drops on a surface with homogeneous wettability (θ = 48 • , 62 • , 77 • , and 90 • ), unequal-sized drops on a surface with homogeneous wettability (θ = 48 • , 62 • , and 90 • ), and drops having different θ (θ = 90 • for one drop, and θ < 90 • for the other drop) [45].For the first case, they found that h grew faster with θ.For this result, Pawar et al. provided the following explanation.For a fixed volume of drops, as θ increases, the drop radius decreases, which increases the internal pressure of the drop, and the radius of curvature of the bridge simultaneously decreases, which results in higher capillary pressure difference.As a result, the drop liquid flows faster toward the bridge.Similar to Eddi et al. [28], Pawar et al. also found that for h(t), n = 2/3 for θ < 90 • and n = 1/2 for θ = 90 • .For the second case, they observed that the smaller drop was absorbed into the bigger drop, which agrees with the simulation result of Ahmadlouydarab et al. [44], because of faster liquid flow from the smaller drop toward the bridge compared to the bigger drop.It is noticeable that the scaling law for equal-sized drops is valid for unequal-sized drops.For the last case, Pawar et al. found that the growth dynamics of the bridge depended on the lower θ because they obtained n = 2/3 for all cases.This result of Pawar et al. does not agree with the finding of Hernández-Sánchez et al. [25], because the latter found n = 1 for asymmetric drops of θ L = 46 • and θ R = 13 • .The significant difference in θ needs to be considered when comparing the two studies.
