# Emotional intelligence, leadership, and work teams: A hybrid literature review

CorpusID: 262137717 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/57e748c25cdcd51516752517599eff42e4c7193f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/57e748c25cdcd51516752517599eff42e4c7193f)

Fields: Business, Medicine, Psychology

## (s18) Leadership types: transformational, emergence, virtual, effective, healthy, resonant, and dissonant
Number of References: 12

(p18.0) Dulewicz and Higgs [118] establish a positive relationship between emotional intelligence and leadership.Judge and Bono [119] conclude that relationships exist between traits of the Big Five personality model (neuroticism, extraversion, openness to experience, and agreeableness) and transformational leadership behavior.However, Shao and Webber [120] point out that the Big Five model does not appear to be as effective a predictor of transformational leadership behaviors in China as compared to samples from Judge and Bono's [119] previous studies conducted in the United States.Later, Mandell and Pherwani [116] studied managers in different industries and concluded that there is a significant relationship between EI and transformational leadership style.Scott-Halsell et al. [121] found that transformational leaders use their EI skills to employ effective leadership skills, such as good interpersonal communication and team collaboration.

(p18.1) Ahmed et al. [107], Polychroniou [122], Prochazka et al. [123], and Schlechter and Strauss [111] support the idea that transformational leadership mediates the relationship between EI, effectiveness, performance, and team commitment.In other results, Hur et al. [109] and Mandell and Pherwani [116] found no significant gender differences in this relationship.
## (s19) Leadership and emotion
Number of References: 4

(p19.0) In regard to the topic of leadership and emotions, Kelly and Barsade's [141] literature review shows that group emotion is the result of the combination of the affective composition of the individuals in a group and the affective context of the group itself.The authors proposed an organizational model to understand these affective influences and their impacts on group life.Pirola-Merlo et al. [142] analyzed how leaders influence the impact of affective events on team climate and performance.The findings show that potential obstacles within the organization have a negative impact on the team's work climate, although said effects can be neutralized by leaders adopting more facilitating and transforming styles.

(p19.1) That same year, Kellet et al. [143] established two behavioral pathways related to how an individual perceives leadership.One pathway is based on mental skills, such as task accomplishment, while the other pathway is based on emotional skills, such as empathy.Likewise, Rubin et al. [87] analyzed how leaders' ability to recognize emotions and personality characteristics influences transformational leadership behavior performance.
