# Transcriptome survey reveals increased complexity of the alternative splicing landscape in Arabidopsis

CorpusID: 26875402 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f2b10d22644d273020bbf8960a3b982af8fa632d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f2b10d22644d273020bbf8960a3b982af8fa632d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s2) Alternative splicing landscape in Arabidopsis
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) High level of detection of novel splice junctions in Arabidopsis For splice junction detection, we used TopHat ). To reduce the number of false positives, the minimum intron size was set to 60 nt, which is close to that established experimentally (Goodall and Filipowicz 1990) This is in contrast to other studies (Filichkin et al. 2010;Zhang et al. 2010) which used smaller intron sizes of 20 nt and 1 nt, respectively. We filtered the splice junctions originally detected (using alignment with two mismatches) (see Methods) by two criteria: quality of the alignment and coverage of the splice junction (Supplemental Fig. S1). Splice junctions that were obtained from the alignment with two mismatches (see Methods) were removed if the splice junction in question was within 10 nt of another splice junction with better support and if it was not supported by the alignment of perfectly aligned reads (alignment with no mismatches) (Supplemental Fig. S1; see Methods). For the remaining junctions, we have only included those supported by at least three reads (two mismatches). Our results showed that the majority of the splice junctions reside in annotated genes (131,523 of 149,925) (Table 1) and that, in protein-coding genes, they are located mainly in the coding sequence (CDS) ( Fig. 2A), highlighting the potential of splice junctions to affect the final protein sequence. From the total of predicted splice junctions, 46,955 (31%) were novel and not annotated in the TAIR9 Database (Table 1). This is most likely due to the use of a normalized library together with longer reads which have considerably improved splice junction detection (Supplemental Table S2).
