# Facial Nerve Tumors in Children: Two Clinical Cases and a Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 260377951 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03f36c6eff3dc47573e2b93f92bf27de7f63d26c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03f36c6eff3dc47573e2b93f92bf27de7f63d26c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Imaging
Number of References: 8

(p7.0) Most children underwent a combination of MRI and CT examinations (16/26, 61.5%).Four children (15.4%) underwent a CT examination only.Two children (7.7%) with parotid masses underwent MRI and ultrasound examinations.One child (3.8%) with a parotid mass had an ultrasound examination only.Computed tomography of some intratemporal FNTs revealed enlarged fallopian canal with some bone erosion (Table 2). 15,25,26Magnetic resonance imaging usually revealed enlarged FN, with intratemporal schwannomas enhancing with contrast and appearing hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyper-or isointense on T2-weighted images. 25Ultrasound revealed well-circumscribed homogenous intraparotid masses with hypoand isoechoic patterns. 21,23One meningioma enhanced with contrast and appeared isointense on T1-weighted MRI scans. 27However, due to its limited spread to the CPA, it could not be distinguished from a schwannoma by a dural tail.The FN was asymmetrically enlarged on CT, but there was no characteristic petrous bone hyperostosis.Moskowitz et al 28 reported an epithelioid hemangioendothelioma with irregular edges and adjacent bone erosion on CT.The largest proportion of FNTs (11/26, 42.3%) involved the GG, either alone or with adjacent regions.Two FNTs (7.7%) were limited to the IAC.Five schwannomas (19.2%) were found on the extratemporal parotid branches of the FN.Thirteen FNTs (50.0%), including 4 schwannomas reported by Grinblat et al 14 involved multiple segments.
## (s9) Tissue Pathology
Number of References: 16

(p9.0) Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) was performed preoperatively in 5 intraparotid schwannomas, 18,[20][21][22][23][24] providing a correct diagnosis only in one case reported by Coraglia et al. 22 Stromal characteristics of cells revealed by FNAC were suggestive of pleomorphic adenoma in 2 cases where a parotid mass was observed.Still, this diagnosis was changed to intraparotid schwannoma intra-operatively. 23,24ranscanal biopsy was performed in a child with a mass in the EAC  CHL, conductive hearing loss; Chole, cholesteatoma; CPA, cerebellopontine angle; EAC, external auditory canal; F, female; GG, geniculate ganglion; HB, House-Brackmann facial nerve grading system; HL, hearing loss; IAC, internal auditory canal; M, male; m, months; MFA, middle fossa approach; NA, not available; RSA, retrosigmoid approach; SC, suboccipital craniectomy; SNHL, sensorineural hearing loss; SP, superficial parotidectomy; STP, subtotal petrosectomy; TCA, transcervical approach; TLA, translabyrinthine approach; TMA, transmastoid approach; TM-SLA, transmastoid supralabyrinthine approach; TOA, transotic approach; TO-TPA, transotic-transparotid approach; VII-XII, nerve VII-XII anastomosis; y, years.

(p9.1) and revealed a schwannoma. 26Frozen-section biopsy was performed intra-operatively in at least 19 patients to determine tumor type and confirm the resection margin.Facial nerve schwannomas appeared as well-circumscribed encapsulated bundles of spindle cells with nuclear palisading and no mitosis.They stained positive for the S100 protein. 20,23,30Khilnani et al 24 reported brain tissue-like appearance of an intraparotid schwannoma.Two meningioma samples exhibited whorled patterns with psammoma bodies and some calcification. 19,27hey stained positive for the epithelial membrane antigen and negative for the S100 protein and CD34.Reticulin-stained epithelioid hemangioendothelioma contained many myofibroblasts and exhibited high vascularity. 28
## (s15) Outcomes
Number of References: 11

(p15.0) Facial nerve function improved or remained the same in 16/26 (61.5%) of the reviewed cases.The best functional outcomes were achieved with intraparotid schwannomas, which were easier to strip free of the nerve without damaging it. 20All children with an intraparotid schwannoma maintained normal FN function after surgery except one, although the follow-up period in his/her case was only 3 months, and he/she might have recovered later. 24Outcomes are mainly affected by the age of palsy onset, the duration of palsy before surgery, and the degree of FN function, although Van Den Abbeele et al 25 did not find such relationships in their case studies. 1,5,32,40There is less risk of immediate and complete facial paralysis with conservative treatment, whereas radical tumor resection almost inevitably results in HB grade III palsy. 32Grafting type does not seem to affect the outcome. 15Prognosis is usually better in children than in adults, although Ozkale et al noticed poorer outcomes in younger children than in older children. 29,43se Reports We also reported 2 recent observations that were initially classified as FNTs.In the first patient, the diagnosis of FN schwannoma was confirmed.The tumor and the associated segment of the FN were removed, resulting in postoperative HB grade VI palsy.In the second patient, the diagnosis was changed intra-operatively to FN edema.The affected segment of the FN was decompressed, resulting in postoperative HB grade V palsy.
