# Segmental arterial mediolysis: Literature review focused on radiologic findings and management

CorpusID: 261968595 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ecb028878d1dc5402918d877550b4354ac6e3096](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ecb028878d1dc5402918d877550b4354ac6e3096)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Pathologic Consideration
Number of References: 12

(p1.0) Although SAM was first reported in 1976 by Slavin and Gonzalez-Vitale, 13 the pathologic findings were then not well-recognized.According to current studies, lysis of the medial layer of the muscular arterial wall, caused by disruption of the smooth muscle cell membrane, is the primary pathologic finding. 9,11This seems to be a dynamic process with a temporal sequence of damage in the media, and thus injuring and stimulating a robust reparative response in the muscular arteries. 6,10Slavin 1,6 suggested both the initial injurious phase and the subsequent reparative phase.In the initial phase, vaculolar degeneration is seen in the medial layer, and in the reparative phase, proliferation of granulation tissue filling and expansion of arterial wall defects, which subsequently forms plaques, can be observed. 1,6,12hese pathologic findings are related to the pathogenesis of the disease.Repeated vasoconstrictive stimuli causing degeneration of smooth muscle cells in the media seems to be the key pathogenesis. 10Exposure to α-1 adrenergic receptor agonists or β-2 receptor agonists causing release of norepinephrine from the peripheral nervous system, is also thought to be the possible cause of SAM.The recent animal study by Slavin and Yaeger 14 supports this theory in which the exogenous ractopamine, the β-adrenergic receptor agonist, injected into dogs leads to Gastrointest Interv 2016;5:22-26 SAM. 6,10,14Considering this hypothesis, the use of norepinephrine antagonists for the treatment of SAM can be a possible option, although it is as yet untested. 6
## (s2) Clinical Features
Number of References: 9

(p2.0) SAM was originally reported to affect middle-aged and older adults; however, more recently, this disease has been seen in all age groups, and with a slight male predominance (male:female ratio of 1.5:1). 1,10,11,15Cerebral arterial involvement is reported to be more common in younger patients. 3he symptoms vary according to the involved organ as SAM can affect almost every part of the body.As the most commonly involved site is the celiac trunk, and which we will discuss later, the most common symptom of SAM is abdominal pain, accounting for approximately 66% of the reported symptoms. 11Hemoperitoneum and hypovolemic shock occur in less than 1/3 of the patients. 10nd-organ damage, including bowel ischemia, hematuria, and neurologic deficits, have also been reported. 10And according to the systematic review by Shenouda et al, 11 six of their 85 patients were incidentally found without specific symptoms.Asymptomatic patients are being more frequently diagnosed with SAM due to the increasing use of CT and MR for other abdominal symptoms.In symptomatic patients, varying symptoms and involved sites can be obscure and, therefore, make the early and exact diagnosis of the disease more difficult.
## (s3) Radiologic Findings
Number of References: 16

(p3.0) Because the pathologic diagnosis is not available in many patients with SAM, the radiologic findings have a critical role in the diagnosis of this disease.The most commonly involved sites are the celiac artery and its branches, including the splenic artery, which account for 70% to 80% of the cases. 10,11,16Renal arteries are the most commonly affected non-visceral arteries, and which account for seven to 24% of the cases. 10,11,16ix types of angiographic findings were suggested by Slavin. 1,6ey are arterial dilatation, single aneurysm, multiple aneurysms, dissecting hematomas, arterial stenosis, and arterial occlusions.

(p3.1) Lysis of media of the arterial wall can be seen as arterial dilatation or aneurysm on angiography (Fig. 1A, 2B). 1 It can involve multiple areas with an intervening, intact arterial segment, and causing the typical "string of beads" appearance (Fig. 3, 4). 11Dissecting aneurysms can be seen when transmedial mediolysis results in "arterial gaps". 11Unlike mycotic aneurysms, arterial dilatation and aneurysm formation rarely involve the branching sites.10There may be multiple aneurysms in one-third of the cases. 178][19] Arterial stenosis and occlusions result from luminal narrowing caused by reparative granulation tissue forming plaques. 1,20,21 dedicated CT or MR angiogram can reveal the characteristic arterial abnormalities of SAM, as previously described, as well as ancillary findings of intra-abdominal hematoma (Fig. 1B, 2A, 4A), active bleeding (Fig. 4A), bowel ischemia, and renal and splenic infarcts.CT and MR angiograms can be used for follow-up of patients with SAM.
## (s4) Diagnosis
Number of References: 6

(p4.0) Although the diagnosis of SAM requires pathologic confirmation, in many cases the diagnosis is based on the clinical and radiologic features. 9,15There is a lack of consensus regarding the noninvasive diagnostic criteria for the diagnosis of SAM. 18An institutional guideline for diagnosing SAM has been suggested by Kalva et al, 18 and which was based on the clinical features, laboratory values, and imaging findings as well as the exclusion of other vascular disorders.

(p4.1) As mentioned above, the radiologic diagnosis is confounded by a variety of vasculopathies that have similar imaging findings; however, it can be diagnosed after excluding other similar diseases.According to the institutional guidelines suggested by Kalva et al, 18 the absence of a congenital predisposition for dissections, e.g., Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Marfan syndrome, the absence of a more plausible diagnosis such as FMD or collagen vascular dis- order, the absence of associated contiguous aortic dissection or atherosclerosis, and the absence of inflammatory markers can be included in the diagnostic criteria. 18he differential diagnosis of SAM includes: 1) Systemic vasculitis, such as polyarteritis nodosa, Takayasu's arteritis, and Behcet's syndrome; 2) Mycotic aneurysms; 3) Collagen vascular diseases such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome; and 4) Degenerative vasculopathies such as cystic adventitial artery disease or cystic medial necrosis.The characteristic clinical features can help to distinguish systemic vasculitis, collagen vascular diseases, and degenerative vasculopathies.Increased acute-phase reactants and specific auto-antibodies present in many types of vasculitis are not seen in SAM.Mycotic aneurysms more commonly involve arterial bifurcation.
## (s5) A B C
Number of References: 10

(p5.0) One important disease, which was previously considered to be related to SAM, is FMD.Previously, SAM was thought to be a variant or a precursor of FMD. 1,3,17,22The morphologic appearance of FMD resembles that of the reparative phase of SAM. 1,6,8How- ever, a recent study shows that FMD is not solely caused by SAM but represents a group of arterial disorders with diverse etiologies. 6FMD typically occurs in young females and has a predisposition for the renal arteries. 7The clinical presentation also differs in the two diseases, i.e., SAM presents with profuse bleeding from abdominal intestinal arteries, while FMD presents with ischemic changes causing hypertension derived from renal artery alterations. 6
## (s6) Management
Number of References: 7

(p6.0) In the past, the mortality rate of SAM was known to approach nearly 50%. 11,19According to the recent study by Shenouda et al, 11 it is now estimated to be 26%, and which is attributed to the advanced techniques used for the early diagnosis of symptomatic and asymptomatic patients and as well as for their treatment.The management of SAM hinges on its clinical presentation, the vessels involved, and the presence of end-organ ischemia.

(p6.1) Although some studies have shown successful conservative management of SAM patients, the majority of these patients require an interventional procedure. 9,11,23Since the first successful management of SAM using coil embolization was reported in 2000, minimally invasive techniques, especially catheter-based endovascular techniques, are coming into the spotlight. 21With the proper selection of patients and the continuous advancement of endovascular devices, catheter-based endovascular treatment can be a successful option for the treatment of SAM (Fig. 1C, 2C, 2D), as well as open surgical procedures.
