# Text feature extraction based on deep learning: a review

CorpusID: 26131992 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18c287e1eec0598528372d23627447a938f4e5ba](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18c287e1eec0598528372d23627447a938f4e5ba)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s5) Fusion method
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) Fusion needs integration of specific classifiers, and the search needs to be conducted within an exponential increase interval. The time complexity is high [27,28]. So, it is inappropriate to be used for feature extraction of large-scale texts [27,28]. Weighting method is a special class of fusion. It gives each feature a weight within (0, 1) to train while making adjustments. Weighting method integrated by linear classifiers is highly efficient. K nearest neighbors (KNN) algorithm is a kind of learning method based on the instance [29].
## (s8) Mapping method
Number of References: 6

(p8.0) Mapping has been widely applied to text classification and achieved good results [33]. It is commonly used to LSI (latent semantic index) [17] and PCA.

(p8.1) 1. Latent semantic analysis LSA (latent semantic analysis) [17] (or LSI) was a new information retrieval algebraic model put forward by S.T. Dumais et al. in 1988. It is a computational theory or method that is used for knowledge acquisition and demonstration. It uses statistical computation method to analyze a mass of text sets, thereby extracts latent semantic structure between words, and employs this latent structure to represent words and texts so as to eliminate the correlation between words and reduce dimensionality by simplifying text vectors [17]. The basic concept of latent semantic analysis is that mapping texts represented in high-dimensional VSM to lower dimensional latent semantic space. This mapping is achieved through SVD (singular value decomposition) of item or document matrix [19,29]. Application of LSA: information filtering, document index, video retrieval, text classification and clustering, image retrieval, information extraction, and so on.
