# BMC Proceedings A review of COFRADIC techniques targeting protein N-terminal acetylation

CorpusID: 2805155 - [None](None)

Fields: 

## (s5) The general concept of isolating N-terminal peptides by COFRADIC
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) We here combine the major steps of the workflow for the N-terminal COFRADIC procedure ( Figure 1) and refer to [10,11] in which full experimental details are described.

(p5.1) Prior to trypsin digestion, proteins are denatured in high concentrations of chaotropes (e.g. 4 M guanidinium hydrochloride), protein disulfide bridges are reduced and free thiol groups are alkylated using iodoacetamide. Next, all free primary amines (α-and ε-amines) are blocked by acetylation. Thus, when trypsin is added, it is only able to cleave after arginines since acetylated lysines are not recognized. In other words, trypsin is now acting as endoproteinase Arg-C thus yielding peptides ending on arginine. Protein N-terminal peptides further differ from all other peptides since they carry an acetylated (either in vivo or acquired in vitro) α-amino group. In our original setup this chemical difference was exploited by targeting internal peptides (carrying a free α-amino group) by TNBS [10]. And, more recently, by further introducing an additional SCX step to enrich for blocked N-terminal peptides. Indeed, at pH 3, these peptides carry one positive charge less than internal peptides and thus interact significantly weaker with SCX resins [11].
## (s8) Enrichment of Met-containing N-terminal peptides
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Methionine is very susceptible to oxidation: its sulfur atom readily oxidizes to a sulfoxide derivative when exposed to air. We previously suggested oxidizing all methionyl peptides to methionine-sulfoxide peptides before starting the primary COFRADIC separation thereby creating uniform and oxidation-stable peptide mixtures [11]. However, this oxidation step can also be introduced between the primary and secondary RP-HPLC separation, thereby causing all methionine-containing N-terminal peptides to shift to earlier elution times ( Figure 2E). As a result, the N-terminal peptides of NatB (Met-Asn, Met-Asp and Met-Glu) and NatC (Met-Ile, Met-Leu and Met-Phe) substrates, as well as of substrates of yet unidentified NATs (e.g. Met-Lys) migrate out of the primary collection intervals and are in this way enriched. Clearly, N-terminal peptides containing an internal methionine will also elute earlier, but such N-termini typically only represent 20% of the total of NatA-type substrate N-termini identified. Moreover, the increased separation of peptides typically leads to increased overall proteome coverage (e.g. [19]).
