# Active Aging for Individuals with Parkinson's Disease: Definitions, Literature Review, and Models

CorpusID: 2925549 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c02ac0b14e4ec659e025b96f32ebe0a53616cadd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c02ac0b14e4ec659e025b96f32ebe0a53616cadd)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Social Communication.
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Recent efforts have emphasized that active aging is not only the ability to be physically active but also continuing participation in spiritual and civic affairs in which social communication plays an important role. Individuals with PD might have difficulties in social communication through different perspectives. The PD-related spectrum of communication barriers contains somatic problems such as masking face, speech disturbances, and movement problems to spiritual issues as disease stigma and depression. Some PD patients have difficulties in their facial expressions that could lead to a profound impact on social interactions especially among the individuals with atypical forms of the disease such as progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) [21]. On the other hand, the stigma attitudes and feelings of shame towards PD are other determinant factors to prohibit patients from socializing activities [22]. In addition to having an efficient management approach for the symptoms such as speech problems, masking face, and depression, it is of utmost importance to improve the attitudes of both patients and their surrounding persons towards PD. Educational meetings and programs for families, caregivers, and even the employers of the individuals with PD could help in avoiding stigmatizing behaviors and facilitating patients' involvement in social activities as an important part of active aging.
## (s9) Employment.
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) Evidences show higher rate of unemployment and earlier retirement in individuals with PD compared to healthy elderly in various societies [30,31]. In one study the median age of retirement in individuals with PD was shown to be 58 yr and 61 yr for males and females, respectively, which was 4 to 5.5 yr lower than the corresponding ages in other elderly [9]. Another study showed that less than 16% of the PD patients had worked for more than five years after diagnosis [32]. Sometimes, this loss of ability to work is in parallel with the loss of independency in living among the patients due to the progression of disease severity in the older age [33]. Nevertheless, in some other occasions, this early retirement could be a sign of the so-called "disablism" or disability discrimination in addition to the "agism" itself. In a vicious cycle, loss of employment could potentially induce social and economic burden for the individuals with PD, which distract them from their social networks, occupational skills, and spiritual involvements. It has been shown that severity of PD symptoms, lack of support in the workplace, and opportunities for early retirement were the factors affecting withdrawal from the labor market among the PD population.
## (s10) Quality of Life.
Number of References: 5

(p10.0) One ultimate purpose of the call for active aging is to improve the quality of life for the elderly. As a result, it seems necessary to pay attention to the factors affecting QoL in elderly suffering from chronic diseases like PD. Higher severity of motor disability; longer duration of disease [34]; nonmotor symptoms, such as depression, sleep disorders, and fatigue [35]; mood, gastrointestinal, and urinary disorders [36]; and nutritional status [37] were all demonstrated to associate with poorer QoL in individuals with PD. Knowing these determinant factors, comprehensive interventions are needed to improve the QoL in elderly with PD. Evidences have shown that multidisciplinary interventions could be beneficial to enhance QoL in PD patients such as adding cognitive-behavioral strategies and physiotherapeutic plans [38] to their routine medications.
## (s12) Self-Care.
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) Considering the visions of the active aging concept, it is clear that visiting patients with chronic diseases only every several months could not be helpful, especially when it comes to PD with a highly stochastic clinical presentation. As a result, there is an extreme need to develop a new model of caring approach for PD that copes with the concepts of active aging. Recently, the middle-range theory of self-care for chronic illnesses has been introduced, which contains three main domains: self-care maintenance, self-care monitoring, and self-care management [39]. In the context of PD, self-care maintenance reflects in patients' behaviors to maintain physical and emotional stability, which is promotable through patients' education and enhances their insight into the motor and nonmotor parts of PD. Self-care monitoring refers to the process of observing and preferably recording oneself for the fluctuations in signs and symptoms of PD. Nowadays, there is an increasing intention among the PD community towards self-measurement of the symptoms and tracking of the changes in the severity of motor problems such as tremor. A growing number of gadgets and tools are being developed to help PD patients in self-monitoring of their symptoms such as mobile apps, computer-based software, charts, and diaries [40]. After self-measurement, gathered information is used in self-care management with appropriate timely responses to the fluctuations in signs and symptoms. The ultimate vision of this self-care approach is to dynamically manage PD that has certain benefits for the elderly suffering from this disease. Nonetheless, it must be noted that such a pragmatic approach still needs to be supported by research-based evidences for the healthcare decision makers on one side and increased health literacy in the patients' side as well. Self-care can optimize opportunities for health in elderly with chronic illnesses, which is in line with the concept of active aging.
## (s15) Patient-Centered
Number of References: 3

(p15.0) Care. The modern definition of active aging has a prominent focus on the role of individuals to whom the concept is applying. Each elderly individual is encouraged to realize his/her potential for physical, social, and mental well-being throughout the life course [13]. Consequently, elderly patients should also have a central determining role in their caring approaches in order to have an active aging in parallel with their chronic condition. In other words, patient-centered care is a key concept to implement active aging for individuals with chronic illnesses including PD. Nonetheless, a transformative shift in the understanding of healthcare providers is required to believe what patients are capable of in order to implement the patient-centered approach and improve the quality of healthcare for PD patients [47]. For an efficient model, PD patients, their family, and caregivers should receive necessary education and information for being actively involved in their caring approach and not just passively put aside. Giving PD patients and their caregivers a central position as health coaches can play a considerable role in meeting their needs [47], which could ultimately improve their QoL through an active aging process.
