# Book Review Do science and common wisdom collide or coincide in their understanding of relational aggression? A Review of the empiRicAl liteRAtuRe on RelAtionAl AggRession whAt is RelAtionAl AggRession?

CorpusID: 3023708 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7795d3faea94f4f1cb16d8168036b02a2ef4665c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7795d3faea94f4f1cb16d8168036b02a2ef4665c)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine, Psychology

## (s5) the influence of the sociAl netwoRk
Number of References: 24

(p5.0) Peer groups play a significant role in the shaping of both positive and negative behavior among children. Relationships with others, according to social identity theory, play an important role in self-appraisal, which in turn motivates member of the peer group to create and maintain the norms of the group so as to achieve a positive group identity (Tarrant, 2002;Ellis and Zarbatany, 2007). This theory explains the conformity in children's and adolescents' peer groups and the development of antisocial behavior (Harris, 1995;Ellis and Zarbatany, 2007). A second factor which may explain the tendency of children and adolescents to conform to peer group norms involves group members passively falling victim to processes such as peer pressure, manipulation, and social reinforcement that are employed by others to ensure that group norms are maintained (Brown et al., 1986;Ellis and Zarbatany, 2007).

(p5.1) Peer groups play a significant role in the shaping of both positive and negative behavior among children. Relationships with others, according to social identity theory, play an important role in self-appraisal, which in turn motivates member of the peer group to create and maintain the norms of the group so as to achieve a positive group identity (Tarrant, 2002;Ellis and Zarbatany, 2007). This theory explains the conformity in children's and adolescents' peer groups and the development of antisocial behavior (Harris, 1995;Ellis and Zarbatany, 2007). A second factor which may explain the tendency of children and adolescents to conform to peer group norms involves group members passively falling victim to processes such as peer pressure, manipulation, and social reinforcement that are employed by others to ensure that group norms are maintained (Brown et al., 1986;Ellis and Zarbatany, 2007).
## (s8) peRceiveD populARity AnD sociometRic populARity
Number of References: 12

(p8.0) Investigations into the association between relational aggression and popularity have examined two moderately correlated but nonetheless distinct constructs: Sociometric popularity and perceived popularity (Parkhurst and Hopmeyer, 1998;LaFontana and Cillessen, 2002;Lease et al., 2002). Sociometric popularity describes how well-liked a person is by their peers; it typically is measured using nominations where peers name who is most-and least-liked (Cillessen and Mayeux, 2004). Perceived popularity is an indication of an individual's social reputation and influence and is measured by means of peer identification of who is "popular" (Cillessen and Mayeux, 2004). A child who is sociometrically popular is not necessarily part of the "popular crowd;" furthermore, a child who is part of the popular crowd is not necessarily sociometrically popular. Overall, perceived popularity has been found to be more stable than sociometric popularity or social preference due to the higher level of consensus regarding reputation compared to individual liking. Finally, perceived popularity was found by Cillessen and Mayeux (2004) to be more stable among girls, and social preference was a more stable construct among boys.
## (s30) the influence of the sociAl netwoRk
Number of References: 24

(p30.0) Peer groups play a significant role in the shaping of both positive and negative behavior among children. Relationships with others, according to social identity theory, play an important role in self-appraisal, which in turn motivates member of the peer group to create and maintain the norms of the group so as to achieve a positive group identity (Tarrant, 2002;Ellis and Zarbatany, 2007). This theory explains the conformity in children's and adolescents' peer groups and the development of antisocial behavior (Harris, 1995;Ellis and Zarbatany, 2007). A second factor which may explain the tendency of children and adolescents to conform to peer group norms involves group members passively falling victim to processes such as peer pressure, manipulation, and social reinforcement that are employed by others to ensure that group norms are maintained (Brown et al., 1986;Ellis and Zarbatany, 2007).

(p30.1) Peer groups play a significant role in the shaping of both positive and negative behavior among children. Relationships with others, according to social identity theory, play an important role in self-appraisal, which in turn motivates member of the peer group to create and maintain the norms of the group so as to achieve a positive group identity (Tarrant, 2002;Ellis and Zarbatany, 2007). This theory explains the conformity in children's and adolescents' peer groups and the development of antisocial behavior (Harris, 1995;Ellis and Zarbatany, 2007). A second factor which may explain the tendency of children and adolescents to conform to peer group norms involves group members passively falling victim to processes such as peer pressure, manipulation, and social reinforcement that are employed by others to ensure that group norms are maintained (Brown et al., 1986;Ellis and Zarbatany, 2007).
## (s33) peRceiveD populARity AnD sociometRic populARity
Number of References: 12

(p33.0) Investigations into the association between relational aggression and popularity have examined two moderately correlated but nonetheless distinct constructs: Sociometric popularity and perceived popularity (Parkhurst and Hopmeyer, 1998;LaFontana and Cillessen, 2002;Lease et al., 2002). Sociometric popularity describes how well-liked a person is by their peers; it typically is measured using nominations where peers name who is most-and least-liked (Cillessen and Mayeux, 2004). Perceived popularity is an indication of an individual's social reputation and influence and is measured by means of peer identification of who is "popular" (Cillessen and Mayeux, 2004). A child who is sociometrically popular is not necessarily part of the "popular crowd;" furthermore, a child who is part of the popular crowd is not necessarily sociometrically popular. Overall, perceived popularity has been found to be more stable than sociometric popularity or social preference due to the higher level of consensus regarding reputation compared to individual liking. Finally, perceived popularity was found by Cillessen and Mayeux (2004) to be more stable among girls, and social preference was a more stable construct among boys.
## (s49) finAl commentARy
Number of References: 16

(p49.0) A common thread in all the publications and media describing relational aggression, whether popular or research-based, is the significance of the event in the lives of women. While empirical and popular resources focus on relational aggression occurring at specific ages, the heart-rending stories from adults regarding incidents from their childhood and adolescence poignantly illustrate the importance of relationships in the lives of females and how much it hurts occurs when relationships are damaged. Those who are targets of relational aggression endure significant and sometimes devastating outcomes, including reduced rates of peer acceptance; stunted school achievement; and higher rates of peer rejection, internalizing symptoms, feelings of loneliness, and emotional distress (Crick and Bigbee, 1998;Ostrov and Keating, 2004;Woods and Wolke, 2004;Johnson and Foster, 2005). Further, for those who experience the adjustment Physical aggression is usually not specifically discussed, but it may be referred to as being an example of relationally aggressive or bullying behaviors

(p49.1) A common thread in all the publications and media describing relational aggression, whether popular or research-based, is the significance of the event in the lives of women. While empirical and popular resources focus on relational aggression occurring at specific ages, the heart-rending stories from adults regarding incidents from their childhood and adolescence poignantly illustrate the importance of relationships in the lives of females and how much it hurts occurs when relationships are damaged. Those who are targets of relational aggression endure significant and sometimes devastating outcomes, including reduced rates of peer acceptance; stunted school achievement; and higher rates of peer rejection, internalizing symptoms, feelings of loneliness, and emotional distress (Crick and Bigbee, 1998;Ostrov and Keating, 2004;Woods and Wolke, 2004;Johnson and Foster, 2005). Further, for those who experience the adjustment Physical aggression is usually not specifically discussed, but it may be referred to as being an example of relationally aggressive or bullying behaviors
