# Comprehensive Approach to Infections in Dermatology Chander Grover MD DNB MNAMS 2YHUVHDV 2I¿FHV Contributors CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS Chander Grover MD DNB MNAMS Keshavmurthy A Adya MD Comprehensive Approach to Infections in Dermatology Sunil Dogra MD DNB FRCP Vinay Gopalani MBBS DVD DNB Consultant Dermatologist DISHA Skin and Laser Institute Mumbai Minty Jambhore MD DDV Consultant Dermatologist DISHA Skin and Laser Institute Resident Physician Dermatology and Venereology National Skin Centre Singapore Hemanta K Kar MD MNAMS Contributors ix Sacchidanand A Sarvajana Murthy MD DVD Sidharth Sonthalia MD DNB MNAMS Consultant Dermatologist and Dermatosurgeon Skinnocence-The Skin Clinic Contents Section 1: Normal Flora 1. Normal Flora of Skin 3 Section 2: Bacterial Infections 2. Gram Positive Bacterial Infections 15 Section 3: Fungal Infections 4. Superficial Fungal Infections 85 5. Subcutaneous Mycoses 116 Vikram K Mahajan 6. Deep Fungal Infections 158 Section 4: Viral Infections 7. Overview of Dermatologic Viral Infections 187 10. Poxviruses, Rubella, Coxsackie, and Other Viruses 260 Section 5: Mycobacterial Infections 11. Leprosy 281 12. Cutaneos Tuberculosis 310 13. Nontuberculous Mycobacterial Infections 341 Section 6: Parasitic and Protozoal Diseases 14. Human Helminthic Infections (Nematodes, Cestodes, and Trematodes) 355 15. Protozoal Diseases 395 Section 7: Infestations, Bites, and Stings 16. Infestations 421 17. Bites and Stings 448 Section 8: Sexually Transmitted Infections 18. Sexually Transmitted Diseases 469

CorpusID: 31568002 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b3b8dccd026140fc6ec36294537ed3d4fbab145](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b3b8dccd026140fc6ec36294537ed3d4fbab145)

Fields: Medicine

## (s17) 13
Number of References: 4

(p17.0) Chapter J a y p e e B r o t h e r s patient-to-patient respiratory spread of NTM with the sole exception of an outbreak of respiratory M. abscessus disease in inpatient population with cystic fibrosis. 3 Second, exposure to the omnipresent NTM is likely extremely common. Third, NTM that colonize the respiratory tract can be isolated in respiratory samples in the absence of disease. Lastly, in most regions of the world, NTM disease is not reportable to public health authorities; therefore, epidemiological and surveillance data are not readily available. Despite obstacles in the study of the epidemiology of pulmonary NTM, available evidence suggests that the prevalence of pulmonary NTM disease has increased dramatically globally over the past three decades. 2 Infections with NTM are not limited to immunocompromised patients. Before AIDS-associated disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) disease, the most common presentation of atypical mycobacteria in the developed world was lung infection in relatively immunocompetent individuals with chronic lung diseases.

(p17.1) The distribution of NTM species worldwide varies by geographic region. 4 In a modern registry of 20,182 patients, from 30 countries across 6 continents, M. avium predominated in North and South America and Europe, while M. intracellulare was most frequently isolated in South Africa and Australia. M. kansasii is relatively more common in the middle USA, Brazil, England and Wales, Eastern Europe and the metropolitan centers of Paris, London and Tokyo, and the Johannesburg region of South Africa; M. xenopi is more common in the northern USA, Ontario-Canada, UK, and some European countries including Hungary, Croatia, and Northern Italy; M. malmoense is common in UK and northern Europe but is uncommon in the USA and M. simiae is more common in arid regions of the south-western USA, Cuba, and Israel. 4 Finally, RGM accounting for 10-20% of all NTM isolates worldwide in 2008, proved more prevalent in East Asia. 4 M. ulcerans is limited primarily to warmer climates in Africa, Central America, Southeast Asia, and Australia.
## (s22) ENVIRONMENTAL SOURCE OF NTM
Number of References: 2

(p22.0) Nontuberculous mycobacteria are ubiquitous in the environment and are frequently isolated from soil or water. Isolates have also been recovered from samples of animals, plant material, and birds. A few species that are known to cause disease, such as M. hemophilum and M. ulcerans, have rarely been recovered from the environment.  Although an association with an environmental source may be present, a direct link to the environment has not been proven except for healthcare-associated disease and pseudo-outbreak, and no evidence of person-to-person spread has been reported, presumably due to the lower virulence of environmental species. Tap water is considered the major reservoir for most common human NTM pathogens and as such is of increasing public health interest. Species from tap water include M. gordonae, M. kansasii, M. xenopi, M. simiae, MAC, and RGM, especially M. mucogenicus. 10 Biofilms, which are the filmy layers at the solid and liquid interface, are recognized as a source of growth and possibly a mode of transmission for mycobacteria. 11 Moreover, biofilms may serve to render mycobacteria less susceptible to disinfectants and antimicrobial therapy. Biofilms appear to be present in almost all collection and piping systems, so mycobacteria may often be recovered from these sites. The persistence of pathogenic NTM in water and biofilms has important implications in the epidemiology of infections related to water.
