# DIABETES AMONG ALASKA NATIVES:A REVIEW

CorpusID: 32373642 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d11749541847cb2a99c434e5f752e66bf239f2c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d11749541847cb2a99c434e5f752e66bf239f2c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s12) End Stage Renal Disease
Number of References: 3

(p12.0) The overall dialysis incidence for diabetic ESRD for 1986-1998 was 2.1/1000 (21) which was substantially lower than rates reported for other Native American diabetic populations (30,31). For the period 1986-93, the rates were reported for each major ethnic group and gender (17). Indians had the highest rate (2.6/1000) followed by Aleuts (1.9/1000) and Eskimos (1.0/1000). Indians of southeastern Alaska had the highest rate at 4.4/1000, significantly higher than other Alaska Indians. Overall, including all ethnic groups, women had a slightly higher rate (2.3/1000) than men (1.6/1000). However, the gender difference was not statistically significant. As for amputations, the incidence of renal replacement fell with time during the 1986-93, which may have been a result of improved care practices, including the use of renal-protective agents in blood pressure control. However, the overall lower rate compared to other Native Americans may also be due to a shorter duration of diabetes or other intrinsic factors.
## (s19) Obesity and Body Fat Distribution
Number of References: 3

(p19.0) In other populations, obesity and centripetal body fat distribution as measured by waist: hip ratios (WHR) are well-documented risk factors for type 2 diabetes. Several studies provide information on obesity in the Alaska Native population. The Yupik residents of villages studied in 1962, 1972, and 1987 documented a steady increase in the percentage of the population ≥ 40 years weighing ≥ 13.6 kg above the Caucasian average for the same age, height, and gender (2,4,23). The proportion increased from 3.0% to 16.3% among men and 6.1% to 27% among women. Controlling for age, the participants in Murphy's study who had IGT or diabetes were significantly more likely to be overweight by National Center for Health Statistics criteria at that time (BMI ≥ 27.8 for men and ≥27.3 for women, (42)) than those with normal glucose tolerance. By these criteria, 34% of Eskimo men and 56% of the women were overweight; among Athabascans, 29% of the men and 55% of the women were overweight.
## (s21) Other Associations
Number of References: 2

(p21.0) The 1992 pilot study among 65 Siberian Yupiks measured fasting insulin, glycated hemoglobin, percent body fat by bioelectric impedance, and blood pressure in addition to fasting lipids (16). Analysis showed that the participants had lower mean systolic and diastolic blood pressure, lower triglycerides, and higher HDL cholesterol compared to the US all races sample aged 45-74 years in the NHANES II survey. However, a significant positive linear correlation was noted for fasting insulin and BMI, and patients with diabetes had higher mean systolic blood pressure. The authors noted that fasting insulin levels were found to be lower than those of US Caucasians, implying greater insulin sensitivity among the Yupik participants, although several features of the insulin resistance syndrome were present. Fasting insulin was significantly and positively associated with diastolic blood pressure and fas-CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES AND DIABETES IN THE CIRCUMPOLAR NORTH ting triglycerides, even after adjustment for age, percent body fat, WHR, gender, and antihypertensive medication. However, it was emphasized that the small sample size was a limitation in the study (16).
## (s22) Genetics and Environment
Number of References: 4

(p22.0) Higher fasting insulin levels have been found to be predictive of type 2 diabetes (48). In the 1994 study among the three Eskimo populations in the Bering Straits region (18), the insulin levels were determined in the same laboratory using the same technique as those in the Strong Heart Study (49). The fasting insulin levels were compared after exclusion of all participants in either study who had either IGT or diabetes by WHO criteria, or who had inadequate data to determine glucose tolerance status. Fasting insulin did not differ significantly by age or by ethnicity among the three Eskimo populations (Siberian Yupik, Central Yupik, and Inupiat) but was significantly higher for women than for men and was higher with increasing BMI (50). In a regression model adjusting for age and BMI, Eskimo men and women had significantly lower insulin levels than American Indian men and women. The lower insulin levels in Eskimos could indicate a lesser degree or prevalence of insulin resistance as compared with other Native Americans and would be consistent with the observation that Alaskan Eskimos have a lower prevalence of diabetes compared with other Alaska Natives. However, it is also possible that dietary factors and physical activity are playing a protective role.
## (s24) Dietary Factors
Number of References: 2

(p24.0) Murphy's 1987 study in the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta region has contributed information on the possible relationships between dietary factors and glucose intolerance among Alaska Natives. In this study, participants were given a food frequency questionnaire asking them about the 10 most common indigenous and 15 most common nonindigenous foods consumed in the region. Participants were asked whether they ate each food daily, weekly, monthly, or never, and how many times in the stated time period they ate the food (43). Among participants ≥ 40 years of age, daily consumption of seal oil suggested a protective effect against glucose intolerance with an odds ratio of 0.2 (95% CI 0.1-0.7) (52). This association was not confounded by ethnicity, age, BMI, or gender. Daily salmon consumption was also associated with protection when limited to newly diagnosed cases of glucose intolerance. The authors speculated that the fatty acid content of these indigenous foods, which are high in polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and omega-3 fatty acids, may be protective (52).
