# Symptom management during and after treatment with concurrent chemoradiotherapy for oropharyngeal cancer: A review of the literature and areas for future research

CorpusID: 32221554 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7a1600770b438184eb301970eee4191ffe1ecfa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7a1600770b438184eb301970eee4191ffe1ecfa)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Mucositis
Number of References: 8

(p3.0) Mucositis is a major concern during chemoradiotherapy and can cause pain, poor nutrition and decreased quality of life. In patients receiving aggressive tumor treatment, incidence rates of mucositis as high as 80% have been reported [10] . Mucositis is known to be more severe and last longer in patients receiving chemoradiation compared to radiation alone. The risk of oral mucositis is higher for smokers, the elderly, those with a high alcohol intake and patients with a lower body mass index [11] . The standard of care continues to be good oral hygiene, dietary adjustments (such as avoiding spicy foods) and medication [12] . The pain of mucositis is often described as a burning sensation. Narcotics can help ease the pain, but does not completely eliminate the discomfort, especially during eating. This will often lead to difficulty maintain ing adequate caloric intake, leading to subsequent weight loss. Prophylatic placement of a feeding tube is controversial, secondary to the increased risk of esophageal stenosis during radiation if the patient does not continue to swallow or perform swallowing exercises during therapy. Guidelines from The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) only support prophylatic placement in patients with significant weight loss, dysphaqia, aspiration, dehydration or comorbiditles that impact the ability to eat or drink [12] . The placement of feeding tubes is not without risk. Complications include bleeding, bowel perforation, infection, potential seeding of tumors and swallowing resistance, all leading to a greater risk of fibrosis and long-term dependence. One randomized study conducted in a curative setting, however, demonstrated that patients who had a feeding tube placed prior to the start of treatment reported higher qualities of life (QoL) following treatment [13] . Another randomized clinical trial in a palliative setting using the prophylactic placement of feeding tubes demonstrated higher post-treatment quality of life in this patient population [14] . Even with high-dose narcotics, patients receiving concurrent chemoradiotherapy for head and neck cancer are still not able to achieve adequate pain control from oral mucositis [15] . Hence, the development of pharmacological treatments for oral mucositis is urgent [15] . Since narcotics are not as effective in controlling burning pain, further research in this area is crucial.
## (s4) Skin desquamation
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) Skin desquamation is also a major source of discomfort for this patient population. Radiation causes direct tissue injury and inflammation. This leads to an increased expression of epithelial growth factor receptors in keratinocytes, which assist in repopulation [22] . Grade 1 skin desquamation is mild erythema or dry desquamation. Grade 2 desquamation involves erythema and moist desquamation in the skin folds. Grade 3 desquamation demonstrates erythema and more wide-spread moist desquamation [23] . The skin should be dry and clean prior to the patient's radiation treatment. Patients should be counseled to avoid sunlight and skin irritants. Aquaphor, aloe vera, biafine or nonperfumed moisturizers are recommended for dry desquamation. Patients should avoid clothes that rub. Moreover, they should use mild soaps and detergents. Drying gels, zinc oxide past, silver sulfadizine or a chlorhexidine-based solution without alcohol are suggest for moist desquamation. It is important to watch for infections [24] .
## (s5) Depression and fatigue
Number of References: 17

(p5.0) Current literature supports that depression is a significant problem for patients receiving treatment for head and neck cancer [25][26][27][28][29] . Depression is experienced by 22%-57% of these patients [30] . The incidence of suicide is four times higher in head and neck cancer patients than in the general population [31] . This also contributes to greater difficulty with smoking cessation among smokers, which can indirectly compromise treatment outcomes. Although depression appears to be highest at diagnosis and during active treatment, it may continue for up to 6 mo following treatment, leading to frustration and further isolation since patients are unable to return to their normal activities of daily living [32][33][34][35] . One study found a direct correlation between overall symptom severity and the patient's radiation dosage and depression level [36] . The severity of symptoms and depression increased as radiation treatments progressed, peaking around 2 mo from the start of therapy.

(p5.1) Anti-depressants and anti-anxiety medications are often necessary during treatment. Since there are higher rates of mental health issues and elevated risks of suicide in this population, anti-depressants have a positive effect on patients. After assessing a patient's perception of the benefit of including a psychologist in their care, one trial found that integrated psychological care improves care for head and neck cancer patients [37] . Assessment for the presence of psychosocial distress has led to early intervention for patients and their loved ones. Use of The NCCN's Emotional Distress Thermometer assessment tool demonstrated patient distress -worry, fatigue, pain, nervousness and depression [38] . The use of the thermometer prompted the providers to refer their patients with high distress levels to an onsite social worker.

(p5.2) Fatigue is a common treatment-related side effect of chemoradiotherapy and can be more pronounced when patients experience pain. Fatigue tends to peak within the first 12 wk following the completion of radiation, and these symptoms can remain an issue for up to 2 years post radiation therapy [39] . It often leads to a sedentary lifestyle during the course of treatment, despite substantial evidence demonstrates that QoL can be enhanced with the use of moderate physical activity [40,41] .
