# Integration of evidence from multiple meta-analyses: a primer on umbrella reviews, treatment networks and multiple treatments meta-analyses

CorpusID: 34691181 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e630fbdc7f8963ea86e4d6453313b81909231044](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e630fbdc7f8963ea86e4d6453313b81909231044)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Simple umbrella reviews
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) Umbrella reviews ( Figure 1) are systematic reviews that consider many treatment comparisons for the management of the same disease or condition. Each comparison is considered sep ar ately, and meta-analyses are performed as deemed appropriate. Umbrella reviews are clusters that encompass many reviews. For example, an umbrella review presented data from 6 reviews that were considered to be of sufficiently high quality about nonpharmacological and nonsurgical interventions for hip osteoarthritis. 9 Ideally, both benefits and harms should be juxtaposed to determine trade-offs between the risks and benefits. 10 Few past reviews are explicitly called "umbrella reviews." However, in the Cochrane collaboration, there is interest to assemble already existing reviews on the same topic under umbrella reviews. Moreover, many reviews already have features of umbrella reviews, even if not called umbrella reviews, if they consider many interventions and comparisons.

(p0.1) Compared with a systematic review or meta-analysis lim-Analysis ited to 1 treatment comparison or even 1 outcome, an umbrella review can provide a wider picture on many treatments. This is probably more useful for health technology assessments that aim to inform guidelines and clinical practice where all the management options need to be considered and weighed. Conversely, some reviews may only address 1 drug, such as for narrow regulatory and licensing purposes, or even only 1 drug and 1 type of outcome for a highly focused question (e.g., whether rosiglitazone increases the risk of myocardial infarction). Much like reviews on 1 treatment comparison, umbrella reviews are limited by the amount, quality and comprehensiveness of available information in the primary studies. In particular, a lack of data on harms 11,12 and selective reporting of outcomes 13-15 may lead to biased, optimistic pictures of the evidence. Patching together pre-existing reviews is limited by different eligibility criteria, evaluation methods and thoroughness of updating information across the merged reviews. Moreover, pre-existing reviews may not cover all of the possible management options. Finally, qualitative juxtaposition of data from separate meta-analyses is subjective and suboptimal. Umbrella reviews may be better to perform prospectively, defining upfront the range of interventions and outcomes that are to be addressed. This is a demanding but efficient investment of effort. The cumulative effort may be greater to perform each of the constituent reviews separately in a fragmented, uncoordinated fashion.
## (s3) Incoherence
Number of References: 13

(p3.0) Whenever a closed loop exists in a network, one may examine incoherence in the treatment comparisons that form this loop. [20][21][22] Incoherence tells us whether the effect estimated from indirect comparisons differs from that estimated from direct comparisons. The simplest loop involves 3 compared treatments. For example, before varenicline became available, only bupropion, nicotine replacement and placebo or no treatment were used in trials of smoking cessation. To estimate the effect of bupropion versus that of nicotine replacement, we -+/-+ *Co-occurrence means that some treatments are compared far more frequently against each other than expected based on their overall use in clinical trials in the network or that they are compared far less frequently against each other than expected. For example, if treatment A was used in 30 of the 60 trials in the network (50%) and treatment B was used in 18 of the 60 trials (30%), one would expect that 50% × 30% = 15% (9/60) trials should include a comparison of A and B, if the pairing of the treatments to be compared across trials was random. If all 18 trials of treatment B used A as the comparator, this is positive co-occurrence; if A was never compared against B, this is negative co-occurrence. Co-occurrence testing is based on permutations that consider not only 1 pair of treatments but all available treatments in the network. The available test may be underpowered to detect co-occurrence if few studies are available. 16 †Preference may be justified (no active treatment shown to be effective so far), because of regulatory pressure (insistence on running placebo-controlled trials, even if effective treatments have been demonstrated previously) or unjustified (choosing a "straw man" comparator [placebo or inferior active treatment], avoidance of demonstrated effective comparators). can use either information from their direct (head-to-head) comparison or information from the comparison of each medication against placebo. When incoherence appears, one may ask why. Some reasons are listed in Box 1. Direct randomized comparisons of treatments are usually more trustworthy than indirect comparisons, 23,24 but not always. [25][26][27] Red flags that may suggest that the direct comparisons are not necessarily as trustworthy as they should be include poor study design and the potential for conflicts of interest and optimism bias in favour of new drugs. For example, if conflicts of interest favour drug A over B, the direct comparison estimate is distorted, while indirect estimates of the effects of A versus those of B through comparator C may be unbiased. An empirical evaluation of headto-head comparisons of antipsychotic drugs has shown that trials favour the drug of the sponsor 90% of the time. 27 Optimism bias in favour of new drugs may inflate their perceived effectiveness. 28 A biased research agenda may try to make a favoured drug "look nice." [29][30][31] For example, 1 trial showed bupropion to be far better than nicotine patch for smoking cessation (odds ratio [OR] of smoking at 12 months 0.48, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.28-0.82); 26 however, in trials of bupropion versus placebo and in trials of nicotine patch versus placebo, the indirect comparison of bupropion against nicotine patch suggested no major difference (OR 0.90, 95% CI 0.61-1.34). 26 The head-to-head comparison sponsored by the bupropion manufacturer might have overestimated its effectiveness.
