# Toward a relevant agenda for warehousing research: literature review and practitioners' input

CorpusID: 36084103 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca73eff22a9accabfac67297b9d06b0af7e2ce28](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca73eff22a9accabfac67297b9d06b0af7e2ce28)

Fields: Business, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s3) Operation strategy
Number of References: 5

(p3.0) By operation strategy, we mean both strategic planning and general operational policies. Detailed operational planning would fit to the scope of research related to each operation, namely receiving, storage, picking and shipping. Examples of operation strategies and policies are decision making on managerial philosophies [12], outsourcing [13], material flow pattern and FIFO versus LIFO [14].

(p3.1) In addition to the strategic decisions, appropriate operation policies should be devised. Different researchers have worked on the proper utilization of technologies to support the overall strategy: for example, employment of a WMS in cooperation with RFID technology [15] and decision support systems [16].
## (s4) Infrastructure design
Number of References: 12

(p4.0) Many papers cover different aspects of infrastructure design including estimations of required space [17], layout design and determination of departments' location relative to each other [18], department design [19] and equipment configuration [20]. Most of the papers reviewed in this category follow a mathematical modeling research method, and more specifically the majority of the solution techniques are meta-heuristic algorithms.

(p4.1) The other group of papers in this field is focusing on determining location and size of warehouse departments. Most of the published papers in this field try to capture other aspects in their models as well, such as designing the operation [21] and product allocation to different departments [22]. Multiple-level layout design is one of the most complicated problems in the literature [23]. The more detailed studies are those concentrating on design of the warehouse area, e.g., configuration of lanes in picking/ storage areas [24]. Apart from the layout of the departments, configuration of warehouse equipment is another area of the literature [20]. Finally, very few papers investigate warehouse construction and design from energy efficiency perspective [25][26][27]. Infrastructure design is one of the richest categories in the literature. Several aspects including sizing, dimensioning, department design and configuration of equipment are covered. Research on warehouses with special needs, such as temperature-controlled departments and high seasonality, is relatively scarce. The majority of the literature approach warehouse design problem from economic efficiency perspective, while research with special consideration to environmental performance is scarce. Most of the design papers focus on the storage departments, while research on the layout of receiving and shipping is rare; these departments are more important for a cross-dock warehouse, another field of research which seems to be overlooked in the literature.
## (s5) Human resource management
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) Human resource management can be investigated from different angles. Scheduling of the staff [28], psychological considerations [29], and ergonomics issues and safety [30] are the main areas explored in the literature. Chakravorty [31] posits that academic research in warehousing and material handling is mainly focused on technical factors to improve performance, but usually neglects human factors.

(p5.1) Ergonomics of warehousing jobs is the most investigated topic in human resource management. Such research can be useful when designing material handling equipment. Even the way that male and female operators [32] and expert and non-expert workers [33] are performing can be different. Awareness regarding such differences would be helpful not only in design of the equipment but also in job assignment in the warehouses.
## (s8) Receiving and shipping
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) The warehouse operations initiate in goods receiving and finish in the shipping area. Products are received into the warehouse, assigned to different locations, and after picking, they are packed and shipped out to the customers. The planning of receiving and shipping operations is among the least investigated topics in the literature. Some examples of potential problems to investigate are preparation of goods to be stored [53] and resource allocations, e.g., truck-dock assignment for receiving and delivery and order-truck assignment if orders of different customers are aggregated into one truck [54]. Receiving and shipping are the least investigated categories in the warehousing literature, with preparation operation and resource assignment as the main aspects explored.
## (s14) Operation strategy
Number of References: 5

(p14.0) Global competition is continuously increasing for most companies. Having cheap labor gives them an important competitive advantage. ''If we cannot keep our overhead down, we cannot compete with them. Doing less with more is what we should do'' (interviewee 9). Having customers who expect more (interviewees 5, 9) calls for customized services that require proper planning and strategy development. The business trend toward more customized demands, order consolidation and big fluctuation in  (4,8,9,12,15) raise the concern of slow movers, calling them one of the main cost drivers. Having said that, warehouse managers need an up-dated assortment of goods; ''It is probably the easiest one to say but one of the most difficult ones to handle'' (interviewee 4). As another aspect of modern business, e-commerce has been growing significantly during the past decade, and this trend will continue in the future. It is important to explore how this change can influence warehouses and their operations. In the words of interviewee 2, ''instead of having major flows going to the bigger distributers, you actually need to start sending smaller parcels to customers. So, more and more, warehouses find that this is a different way of doing work; … and there will still be a flow to normal stores.'' He continues, ''Many warehouse managers may have thought about it but only a few have really adapted to this new way of distributing things''; the nature of material flow has changed and warehouses need to take the responsibility of sending goods to end customers in addition to shops and distribution centers.
## (s18) Storage
Number of References: 2

(p18.0) Warehouse operations are not so frequently mentioned in the interviews, although several practitioners voice their concern about operations strategy and planning. Two interviewees (3,12) considered storage allocation and reallocation as their concern in the warehouse. Interviewee 12 mentions the warehouse problem during the recession: ''almost all the warehouse slots were occupied and picking productivity was lower than before. Taking a walk around the warehouse, I realized we had products that I was not even aware of.'' In connection to this problem, he finds the solution in reviewing the inventory to recognize the dead items (obsolete SKUs), fast movers and re-allocation of storage places. According to interviewees 3 and 12, appropriate classification of the goods and storage location assignment play critical roles in warehouse operation cost.
