# New developments in the pathology of malignant lymphoma: a review of the literature published from January to April 2008

CorpusID: 3677709 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/13e5dada55840e398dd74317474d8a8d355fbc41](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/13e5dada55840e398dd74317474d8a8d355fbc41)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s11) Prognostic factors in lymphoma
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Understanding lymphoma biology and using this knowledge in clinical practice has for many years brought the diagnosis of lymphomas at the forefront of diagnostic pathology, using new technologies early on. This seems not the case anymore since in contrast to solid tumors, predictive factors are not rapidly replacing prognostic factors in the lymphoma field (Her2/neu, KRAS, CD117), with only CD20 as predicting rituximab response. Many papers still appear that describe prognostic factors, but until now, very few have come into clinical practice. Van Galen et al. described that expression of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 2 correlates with poor prognosis in a group of 20 activated B cell-like-type diffuse large B cell lymphoma but not in the 13 tested germinal center type [39]. LMO2 protein expression predicts survival in 263 patients with diffuse large B cell lymphoma treated with anthracycline-based chemotherapy including those 80 that had in addition rituximab [40].
## (s13) Ancillary techniques
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) Less invasive approaches for diagnosing and classifying lymphomas are potentially very important. The proteomic spectra of crude sera from 132 patients with diffuse large B cell lymphoma and 75 controls obtained by surfaceenhanced laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (SELDI-TOF-MS) achieved a sensitivity of 94% and a specificity of 94% for detecting diffuse large B cell lymphoma samples in the test set of 85 samples and achieved a sensitivity of 94% and a specificity of 92% for detecting poor prognosis patients in the test set of 66 samples [52]. Using a similar SELDI-TOF-MS approach on small biopsies/fine-needle aspirations from lymphoma patients, Jansen et al. were able to create protein profiles that separate reactive lymph nodes and low-grade B cell lymphomas from cases of diffuse large B cell lymphoma [53]. Using liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry, Roy et al. analyzed the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from patients with central nervous lymphoma and confirmed the results with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Approximately 80 CSF proteins were identified and found to be present at significantly different concentrations, both higher and lower, in training and test studies, which were highly concordant. The findings demonstrate that proteomic analysis of CSF yields individual biomarkers with greater sensitivity in the identification of cancer than does CSF cytology [54].
