# Peripheral Nerve Blocks in Non-Operative Settings: A Review of the Evidence and Technical Commentary

CorpusID: 36711533 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cff74dd710ab6b0628387fd1daf7ff4aa37d7122](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cff74dd710ab6b0628387fd1daf7ff4aa37d7122)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 41

(p0.0) Increasingly, peripheral nerve blocks are being carried out in nonoperative settings [1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13]. For instance, Emergency department (ED) physicians and orthopedic surgeons often perform blocks to facilitate fracture manipulation and to provide analgesia for fracture-related pain [7][8]. Expectedly this has fostered heated debates between and within professional societies. In the near future, important questions will demand answers: should peripheral nerve blocks be performed by anesthesiologists only or could they be carried out by other physicians as well? What is the minimum training required to ensure proficiency and safety? Which governing body will legislate technical competency and implement quality insurance? If blocks were the sole domain of Anesthesiology departments, how best to reorganize Acute Pain Services to efficiently meet the growing needs of EDs and Intensive Care units?

(p0.1) Answers to these complex questions require first and foremost proof that nerve blocks improve patient care in non-operative settings. Previous review articles have attempted to succinctly summarize the available information [1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13]. Unfortunately, because of the various backgrounds and experience levels of the operators, the techniques and equipment employed varied substantially. Although it is paramount to ensure that the methods used do not deviate significantly from accepted technical standards, this potential shortcoming has been overlooked by all review articles so far [1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13]. Thus we undertook a systematic review of the literature: our goal was to analyze all level 1 evidence (randomized controlled trials) pertaining to the efficacy of peripheral nerve blocks in non-operative settings. Moreover we sought to compare the block techniques used with those advocated by the best evidence available.
## (s4) Upper extremity injury
Number of References: 6

(p4.0) Despite the widespread use of peripheral nerve blocks to provide analgesia for upper extremity injury in the ED, to date, only 2 RCTs (combined n = 83) have compared nerve blocks to conventional treatment [14][15]. In the first trial, Kriwanek et al. [14] randomized 41 pediatric patients (8 years or older) with forearm fractures to deep sedation or axillary brachial plexus block (AXB) for fracture reduction. In the deep sedation group, the authors administered midazolam (0.1 mg/kg, up to a maximum of 2 mg) and ketamine (initial bolus: 1 mg/kg, followed by additional doses titrated to patient comfort). For AXB, the authors employed a transarterial technique and injected 0.7 mg/kg (up to 40 mL) of adrenalized lidocaine 1%. During fracture manipulation, a pediatric nurse evaluated the patient's pain and distress according to the Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Pain Scale (CHEOPS). Kriwanek et al. [14] found no differences in CHEOPS scores. Furthermore, orthopedic and patient satisfaction was also similar between the 2 groups. Interestingly, in the AXB group, 2 patients displayed residual motor function with presence of pain during sensory testing and 2 subjects required supplemental analgesia during fracture manipulation. In 2011, Blaivas et al. [15] randomized 42 adult patients with shoulder dislocation to procedural sedation (etomidate) or interscalene brachial plexus block (ISB). For ISB, the authors employed an ultrasound (US)guided technique and deposited 20-30 mL of adrenalized lidocaine (concentration unspecified) around the roots of the brachial plexus. Blaivas et al. [15] observed a shorter stay in the ED with ISB (100.3 ± 28.2 vs. 177.3 ± 37.9 minutes; P < 0.0001). However post reduction pain levels and patient satisfaction were similar between the 2 groups. Despite the high local anesthetic (LA) volume, the authors observed a 0%-incidence of Horner's syndrome with ISB.
## (s5) Technical commentary
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) Axillary rachial plexus block: An enviable track record for safety explains the historical popularity of AXB. Traditional techniques such as fascial clicks, transarterial injection and elicitation of paresthesia (EP) usually result in low success rates (70-80%) [16]. Prior to the advent of US, peripheral nerve stimulation (PNS) constituted the most reliable adjunct. With PNS, the musculocutaneous, median, radial and ulnar nerves can be independently located and selectively targeted with LA. Extensive work by Sia et al. [17][18][19] suggests that, for PNS-guided AXB, a triple-stimulation technique offers the best combination of efficacy and efficiency.   [14], 2 patients displayed residual motor function and 2 subjects required supplemental analgesia during fracture manipulation. Thus one can speculate that the AXB would have been more efficacious had these authors selected PNS or US. Finally, AXB requires the patient to abduct the shoulder and flex the elbow. This may result in considerable discomfort in distal humerus/elbow trauma. In these subjects, supraclavicular (SCB) and infraclavicular (ICB) brachial plexus blocks constitute valuable alternatives [24]. However the efficacy/efficiency of SCB and ICB needs to be formally compared to conventional treatment in a non-operative context.
## (s6) Interscalene brachial plexus block:
Number of References: 16

(p6.0) The ISB is commonly used to anesthetize the shoulder and proximal humerus. Identification of the brachial plexus in the interscalene groove has been traditionally achieved with EP or PNS [16]. Recently, US have contributed to the surge in popularity of ISB. Compared to PNS, Kapral et al. [25] found that US improved the rate of surgical anesthesia (98.8 vs 91.3%; P<0.01) as well as the onset (10 vs 22 minutes; p<0.05) and offset times (899 vs 679 minutes; P<0.05). Using ropivacaine 0.5%, McNaught et al. [26] reported that, compared to PNS, US decreased the minimal effective volume for analgesia in 50% of patients (MEV 50 ) from 5.4 to 0.9 mL (P=0.034). In contrast, after randomizing 219 patients to PNS or US, Liu et al. [27] observed no differences in performance time, surgical anesthesia and patient satisfaction. However patients in the US group required fewer needle passes (1 vs 3; P<0.001). Thus, according to the available evidence, it is not clear if US increases the success rate for ISB compared to PNS. However, US seem to provide better efficiency (fewer needle passes, decreased onset time); moreover it allows a decrease in LA volume.

(p6.1) In 2008, Riazi et al. [28] set out to investigate the optimal LA volume for ISB. Using a combination of PNS and US, these authors compared injectates of 5 and 20 mL of ropivacaine 0.5%. There were no differences in pain scores, sleep quality and postoperative morphine requirements up to 24 hours after surgery. However, patients receiving 5 mL presented a lower rate of diaphragmatic paralysis (45 vs 100%), fewer side effects (Horner's syndrome, hoarseness, respiratory distress) as well as smaller reductions in forced expiratory volume, forced vital    [28]. In contrast, Sinha et al. [29] compared volumes of 10 and 20 mL of adrenalized 0.5% ropivacaine and found no differences in the incidence of diaphragmatic paralysis (93%) [29].

(p6.2) In summary, ISB constitutes a valuable tool to provide analgesia for patients with shoulder injury. In light of the improved efficiency, preference should be given to US techniques. If an US machine is unavailable, the operator should consider employing a PNS method. Thus, in their 2011 RCT, Blaivas et al. [15] selected an appropriate technique for their ISB group. However the non-blinded assessment and patient follow-up represents a confounding variable. For instance, the authors noted a 0% incidence of Horner's syndrome despite using 20-30 mL of lidocaine. In the literature, complete absence of Horner's syndrome has been only been reported with very low volumes (5 mL) [28]. The authors' potential bias favoring ISB could have led them to under record the occurrence of adverse events and to discharge their patients more promptly from the ED. In fact, Blaivas et al. [15] opined that "it might be helpful to explore safe alternatives such as regional anesthesia to decrease the length of stay in the ED" and that "complications such as respiratory depression and aspiration can potentially be avoided with US-guided regional anesthesia". However one should not forget that, with high LA volumes (34-52 mL), ipsilateral phrenic paralysis is inevitable [30]. Moreover, as demonstrated by Riazi et al. [28], even LA volumes as low as 5 mL can block the phrenic nerve in 45% of subjects. Thus ISB should be viewed as an additional analgesic tool to efficiently manage patients with shoulder trauma and not a modality to expedite discharge by circumventing post-procedural patient monitoring. Moreover, due to its inherent risk of phrenic paralysis, ISB should be used with caution in patients with preexisting pulmonary compromise. In these subjects, combined infraclavicularsuprascapular [31] or axillary-suprascapular [32,33] blocks could be employed to anesthetize the shoulder. However their efficacy and efficiency require further validation in non-operative settings.
## (s8) Lumbar plexus block (LPB):
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) In 1999, Chudinov et al. [34] randomized 40 patients with femoral neck fractures to intermittent LA boluses administered through a LPB catheter (1-2 mg/kg of adrenalized bupivacaine 0.25% every 8 hours) or intramuscular meperidine (1 mg/ kg every 5 hours) combined with diclofenac (1 mg/kg for breakthrough pain). In the experimental group, the psoas compartment was identified with loss of resistance. Chudinov et al. [34] reported that patients randomized to LPB achieved lower pain scores at 8 and 16 hours during the 48-hour preoperative period (both P<0.05).
## (s9) 3-in-1 Block:
Number of References: 9

(p9.0) Three RCTs have investigated the role of 3-in-1 blocks in the setting of hip and femoral fractures [35][36][37]. In 2 trials (combined n=83) comparing single-injection 3-in-1 blocks to intravenous morphine, patients randomized to the former experienced a quicker onset of analgesia [35] and lower pain scores at 30 minutes [36]. While one study observed decreased hourly consumptions of morphine (0.49 mg/h vs. 1.17 mg/h) with 3-in-1 blocks [35], the other found no differences in 24 hour-cumulative morphine consumption or pain levels after 30 minutes [36]. In 2013, Luger et al. [37] randomized 20 very elderly patients (> 80 years) with hip fractures to an US-guided continuous 3-in-1 block or intravenous piritramide (0.05 mg/kg). The perineural catheters were bolused with 30 mL of bupivacaine 0.25% and infused with 6 mL/h of bupivacaine 0.125%. In the preoperative period, Luger et al. [37] found lower dynamic pain scores (all P<0.05) and daily paracetamol consumption (0.1 ± 0.32 vs. 1.7 ± 1.4 mg/d; P<0.05) with 3-in-1 blocks. However there were no intergroup differences in pain scores at rest or daily piritramide requirements (0.75-3.4 mg/d). Thus, compared to conventional treatment, 3-in-1 blocks seem to provide better initial pain management (especially with movement) as well as a shorter onset of analgesia. However cumulative opioid consumption may not be decreased.
## (s11) Femoral Block (FB):
Number of References: 9

(p11.0) To date, 4 RCTs (combined n = 218) have investigated the role of FB in the management of lower limb trauma [42][43][44][45]. Haddad and Williams [42] and Mutty et al. [43] compared FB (bupivacaine 0.25-0.5%) to systemic analgesia (opioids/NSAIDs) in patients with extracapsular femoral neck fractures and diaphyseal/ distal femoral fractures, respectively. In both trials, FB resulted in lower pain scores during the first 1.5-2 hours. In a subsequent study, Schiferer et al. [44] randomized 62 patients with lower extremity injury (hip dislocation/fracture, femoral fracture, patellar tendon rupture) to FB (20 mL of levobupivacaine 0.5%) performed at the accident site or intravenous metamizole (1 g). Schiferer et al. [44] found that, unlike the control group, there was a significant decrease in pain and anxiety between the on-site and transport values for patients who received a FB (both P<0.001). Subsequently, the same authors proceeded to compare FB and metimazole for the ambulance transfer of patients with knee trauma [45]. Again, pain and anxiety were only decreased in patients receiving FB. Thus the available evidence suggests that, compared to conventional management, FB provides better pain control for patients suffering from hip and knee trauma.
## (s14) Fascia iliaca block:
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) In an effort to improve the obturator block seen with the 3-in-1 technique, Dalens et al. [60] introduced the FIB, a method whereby LA is injected immediately dorsal to the fascia iliaca while firm compression is applied distal to the puncture site. In 120 children randomized to a 3-in-1 block or a FIB, Dalens et al. [60] reported similar rates of complete sensory block for the femoral nerve (100%); unfortunately, the clinical test for motor blockade of the obturator nerve (elicitation of adduction at the end of surgery) did not allow for definitive conclusions. Subsequently, the same comparison was carried out in 100 adults by Capdevila et al. [61]. Again, the rates of femoral block were comparable (88-90%). However, motor blockade of the obturator nerve showed no difference (20-32%). Thus, obturator block remains elusive even with FIB.
