# A review of operational methods of variational and ensemble-variational data assimilation Article Published Version Creative Commons: Attribution 4.0 (CC-BY) Review Article A review of operational methods of variational and ensemble-variational data assimilation

CorpusID: 38352630 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d74ac895dcc3a35ad996b39d4d602e01c47f4527](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d74ac895dcc3a35ad996b39d4d602e01c47f4527)

Fields: Mathematics, Environmental Science, Physics

## (s2) Variational data assimilation
Number of References: 7

(p2.0) Variational DA (Talagrand and Courtier, 1987;Schlatter, 2000) is a tool used to estimate a single initial state and a single trajectory of an NWP model. * These are found by minimizing a cost function to optimize the fit of (i) the initial conditions to the background and (ii) the model's version of the observations to the actual observations over a time window. Variational methods have been used in NWP for many years (Courtier et al., 1994;Park and Zupanski, 2003;Rawlins et al., 2007) as they allow assimilation of a wide range of observations, including those remotely sensed (e.g. from satellite and radar). Variational methods are restricted in their ability to quantify adequately the flow-dependent background and model error statistics, which are prescribed in Var by a parametrized scheme (Trémolet, 2007;Bannister, 2008). Such schemes will almost inevitably be incapable of representing properly the true space and time structure of error statistics. The Var equations are derived in section 2. In 4D-Var the background-error covariance statistics do evolve with the flow within each window, and weak constraint formulations can account for model errors. Normally only the first moment (the mode) of the analysis is found and 4D-Var relies on linearized and adjoint versions of the numerical model.
## (s14) Control variable transforms in Var
Number of References: 6

(p14.0) The cost function (10), with definitions (11) and (12), requires the matrices B 0 , R t , and Q t to be known explicitly, but even modern computers are incapable of dealing with such large matrices. The method of control variable transforms (CVTs) is a 'trick' to represent B 0 and Q t without needing to know them explicitly. ‡ Instead of dealing with (10) -a function of (δx, δη) -an alternative cost function is formulated in terms of new variables ('control variables'). There are number of key studies that describe the choice of control variables used for meteorological DA (e.g. Parrish and Derber, 1992;Derber and Bouttier, 1999;Berre, 2000), for ocean DA (Weaver et al., 2005), and in general (Bannister, 2008;Ménétrier and Auligné, 2015).
## (s54) Model error in 4DEnVar
Number of References: 2

(p54.0) Accounting for model error in methods that do not use the linearized model, like hybrid 4DEnVar, is more in line with the requirements of many operational centres, but is arguably harder to do and there are few examples in the literature. The key is to build flexibility into a scheme to relax the need for the solution to be synthesized from model trajectories over the window. One possibility, based around the B05 localization is to allow a different linear combination of members at each time (Amezcua et al., 2017;Goodliff et al., 2017). Instead of one control vector associated with the ensemble, χ ens in (79), there would be T +1 such vectors. The versions of (78) and (79) become (87) and (88) respectively, J H4DEnVar δχ var , χ ens (0), . . . , χ ens (T)
