# Ocular Applications of Dipyridamole: A Review of Indications and Routes of Administration

CorpusID: 42807868 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/598c5647c1fb0cafd22385b2741850bbf40cb5d4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/598c5647c1fb0cafd22385b2741850bbf40cb5d4)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Topical applications
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) Topical ophthalmic medications are often the preferred mode of quick and efficient delivery of medication to the eye. The specific features of an eye drop's pharmacologic design help to ensure its acceptability to the patient, its bioavailability, and its respective efficacy at the intended site of action. Characteristics such as pH, osmolality, particle size, and PKa balance influence how effectively a topically applied drug will penetrate through the ocular surface and into the eye. The pH of a topical ophthalmic formulation is preferably between 5.0 and 8.0, although some with a pH as low as 3.0 are acceptable because the pH will rapidly approximate to that of lacrimal fluid upon instillation. Topical ocular indications of dipyridamole have not been sufficiently studied in humans, but the experimental data from animal models suggest minimal associated side effects and/or complications, which have been limited to transient minimal irritation at higher concentrations (0.5% in rabbits) and no observed effect on heart rate, blood pressure, or respiratory system. The early work from Podos found that topical application of dipyridamole (2 drops of 5% suspension) in rabbits had no effect on the artificially induced (by prostaglandin E2) ocular hypertension. 26 Miyazaki and Tanaka examined a method for treatment of ocular hypertension and glaucoma based on the use of dipyridamole eye drops. 29 The ocular hypotensive effect was investigated in rabbits treated with eye drops containing 6 concentrations of dipyridamole that ranged from 0.00005% to 0.5% (equivalent to maximal concentration of 5 g/L, or *0.01 mol/L). Maximal reduction of intraocular pressure was achieved in 1-2 h, and results were concentration dependent. The hypotensive effect lasted for 6 h after administration, and for concentrations ranging from 0.001% to 0.5%, the effect remained unchanged for 6 h after instillation. The effect was similar or superior to commercially used timolol maleate 0.5% eye drops. Eye irritation tests revealed that at the highest used concentration (0.5%), slight congestion in the iris was observed at 0.5 h after instillation. The congestion disappeared after 6 h. The effect was not clinically significant since the increased amount of intraocular blood flow is desirable in the treatment of glaucoma. There were no noticeable changes in other eye irritation measures. The pH range of eye drop preparations varied from 3.0 to 8.0 (preferred range 5.0-8.0). The typical single dosage was 1-3 drops, 25 mg to 6 mg, and was administered 1-4 times daily. The authors recommend that the dosage and administration can vary depending on patients' conditions and age. The drug is considered to be free of hypotensive, brachycardiac, and respiratory side effects associated with beta-blockers used in eye drops.
