# Survey of Game Theory and Future Trends for Applications in Emerging Wireless Data Communication Networks

CorpusID: 43996751 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c994c9da3f0cd4101a00317fe2d4cd2819480085](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c994c9da3f0cd4101a00317fe2d4cd2819480085)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s7) Discussion on Nash Equilibrium
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) The NE can be evaluated in both game types: non-cooperative and cooperative [49]. The authors of [30] have studied the probability to find the NE in each game. Initially, in non-cooperative games with incomplete information about the strategies of the opponents, the probability to find the NE decreases as that available information shrinks. This occurs because the lack of available information means less data about the strategy space of the game opponents. Consequently, the moves of the other players are considered in a random way and it is more difficult to obtain probabilistically the game's NE. In contrast, when a cooperative game is played, the probability of finding the more convenient set of NE increases. In fact, considering a cooperative model, each player has more complete information about the strategy space of others. In this way, a specific player can select the more suitable strategy almost without any conflict, which results in achieving the more convenient NE points with higher probability than in the initial case [49].
## (s10) Behavioral Facets of Game Theory
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) The design of wireless networking is challenging due to the highly dynamic environmental condition that makes model parameter optimization a complex task. Due to the dynamic, and often unknown, network status, modern wireless networking proposals increasingly rely on artificial intelligence algorithms. Genetic algorithms (GAs) are well known for their remarkable generality and flexibility and have been applied in a wide diversity of scenarios in wireless networks. A comprehensive survey of the applications of GAs in wireless networks is available in [55]. A GA models how a population of entities with similar characteristics (i.e. species), after several generations, through a process of genetic inheritance constrained by mutation, crossover and natural selection, can evolve to a future generation of that species, which is formed by a majority of entities fully-specialized in solving a specific problem. Applying now the GA methodology to the area of wireless networks, one can conclude that discovering the best solution for a wireless network problem could have a huge impact on the system´s performance; this is related to the necessary time to find out the optimum solution of that problem, as well as the amount of energy depleted on each mobile device's battery to discover the optimum solution in the typical distributed architecture of a wireless networking infrastructure. As a more concrete example, a GA to optimize either routing or localization function in a WSN could not be an efficient proposal to real-time applications due to both high delay and resource consumption (e.g. battery) induced by GA's operation. In this context, other alternative learning techniques, such as Reinforcement Learning (RL) performs better than GA, thus increasing WSN lifespan. RL is an unsupervised learning technique where each entity does not inherit any knowledge from the previous generation and learns only by itself through direct experience and interaction with the environment. In spite of the GA issues that we have just discussed, a GA strong advantage is about its easy deployment in digital signal processors (DSPs) or field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) [55]. Aligned with this, a recent contribution uses GA to enhance the WSN lifespan by employing a new rotated crossover combined with diverse mutation operators [56].
## (s22) Repeated Games
Number of References: 20

(p22.0) A repeated game (RG) is an effective tool to avoid potential conflicts among wireless nodes. The occurrence of these conflicts leads to selfish behaviors, resulting in poor network performances and detrimental individual payoffs. Contrary to static one-shot games that model interactions among players during a single time interval, in RGs, interactions of players repeat along multiple time intervals. Thus, the players become aware of other players' past behaviors and their future benefits, and they can adapt their strategies accordingly, resulting in better long-term system performance. In addition, the use of RGs with the aid of a convenient incentive mechanism can encourage wireless nodes to adopt more cooperative strategies, thereby improving network performance and increasing players' benefits. Aligned with these goals, the authors of [33] survey a considerable number of RGs in different wireless networks. A very important advantage of using a RG is to enforce learning at cognitive nodes in a NC game with incomplete and imperfect information [149]. With this learning, the game evolves to a state where the interference is tamed and QoS requirements are fulfilled. In addition, [7] revises RGs but within a more specific scope related to security. From the literature in the scope of RGs, we surveyed and divided it in two parts, namely non-cooperative and cooperative, as discussed below.

(p22.1) Discussion about recent work using non-cooperative repeated games From the literature in the scope of NC RGs, we have selected some recent contributions with the following main goals: radio spectrum sharing [150][29]; multimedia distribution [151][152]; D2D communication [153] [154]; and UAVs airborne communications [130].

(p22.2) The NC RGs we have selected are discussed more comprehensively as follows. The radio spectrum sharing among primary and secondary users is studied in two distinct perspectives: cognitive radio access channel among nodes with imperfect information [150], spectrum oligopoly market where each primary user individually defines a channel-price based on its quality [29]. In [150] they study how autonomous cognitive nodes (CNs) can use in an opportunistic way the unused capacity of a channel normally assigned to Primary Users (PUs). The main goal is to find an efficient and fair opportunistic channel access policy among CNs without disrupting the connection quality offered to PUs. They also consider CNs have two limitations when the channel status is monitored: i) imperfect observation due to both sensing and channel errors; ii) computational constraints. In this context, they propose a repeated game implemented by two-state machine (automaton) to fulfil the following requisites: i) maximizing the total network payoff; ii) ensuring fairness among CNs; ii) reducing the likelihood of collisions among CNs; and iii) requiring a small number of sensing attempts to find a channel free of any PU activity. They discuss and compare their results against the ones obtained from a complete centralized model. The authors of [29] investigate a spectrum oligopoly market where each primary user seeks to sell its channel to a secondary user. On one hand, each primary has a strategy to choose a price depending on the transmission rate of its channel. On the other hand, a secondary player aims to select a channel depending on the price and the transmission rate of the channel. It is assumed that the transmission rate evolves randomly (e.g. due to fading). Using their NC game, they have obtained results that illustrate a primary user prices its channel to render the channel that provides high transmission rate. They also show the primaries suffer a decrease on their profit due to a non-cooperative behaviour among them. Additionally, they studied a repeated version of their game. From this last analysis, they have concluded that a primary user can attain a payoff arbitrarily close to the payoff it would obtain when primaries cooperate.

(p22.3) We have also found some work related with multimedia dissemination through either a content distribution network [151] or a mobile multi-flow multicast approach [152]. The article [151] considers two aspects regarding the problem of distributed caching with limited capacity in a content distribution network. Firstly, a nonparametric learning algorithm is proposed to estimate the request probability of videos from past user choices. Secondly, using these estimated request probabilities, the adaptive caching issue is elaborated as a NC RG in which servers autonomously select which videos to cache. The utility function makes a trade-off between the placement cost for caching videos locally and the latency cost associated with delivering the video to the users from a neighbouring server. The game is nonstationary as the preferences of users in each region evolve over time. The authors then propose an adaptive popularity-based video caching algorithm that has two timescales: i) slow timescale corresponds to learning user preferences; ii) whereas fast timescale is a regretmatching algorithm that provides individual servers with caching prescriptions. It is shown that, if all servers follow simple regret minimization for caching, then the network achieves a correlated equilibrium. This means servers can coordinate their caching strategies in a distributed fashion similarly to a centralized coordinating device that all they trust to follow. The authors of [152] address the resource allocation problem in the multi-flow multicast scenario in a cellular networking environment. To configure the multicast and achieve optimal resource allocation, the BS requires the feedback of the channel-quality information (CQI) from the users. There is an incentive mechanism to users truthfully report the channel quality. This mechanism is based on both pricing and water-filling algorithm. A water-filling algorithm tries to maximize the network capacity, allocating network resources to traffic types in a differentiated way, according to their priority. In this way, the priority of a traffic type could depend on its own demand. As an example, a traffic type with a low demand has a high priority allocation for the network resources that traffic type will be using. A very recent mobile scenario is the mobile D2D communication [153] [154]. In [153] the authors have investigated a cellular network consisting of a BS, multiple cellular users and a D2D pair of users that communicate using licensed spectrum resources. They have introduced a new spectrum trading scheme based on supply and demand curves for service providers (SPs) and D2D user. The game model has been formulated and it has been shown that the game has a unique NE point under a specific condition. Furthermore, a gradient-based learning method has been proposed for decision making of the SPs and the D2D user in incomplete information case, when they only have the historical information about the price. The gradient-based characteristic of the learning method ensures that in spite of small learning rates being selected, the learning game converges to the NE point as well. Their results also show that increasing the channel quality results in more profit for SPs. This is a suitable incentive for SPs to offer bandwidth in high quality channels to improve their economic performance and satisfy their users. It is also shown that the higher learning rates may lead to faster game convergence. Nevertheless, increasing the learning rate from a specified threshold will result in the instability of the game. Article [154] proposes a game-theoretic resource allocation scheme to address inter-cell interference with multiple cell settings in a mobile networking environment, including the coexistence of D2D and cellular transmissions that can mutually interfere when D2D reuses the available cellular spectrum. They characterize Base Stations (BSs) as players competing for resources allocation quota of D2D demand, and define as a novelty the utility of each player as the payoff gained from both cellular and D2D.
## (s25) Small cell networks
Number of References: 8

(p25.0) We start our discussion with small cell networks. A possible solution to satisfy the problem imposed by high demands of multimedia data over an already deployed mobile cell is to use a deployment choice commonly proposed in 3G and beyond systems, essentially in areas with a huge concentration of users. This choice is based on the usage of femtocells sharing the same spectrum of the macrocells, which raises new challenges, such as the interference mitigation [97][160], spectrum management [159], uplink user association [158], traffic offloading [97], and optimization of the network throughput considering not only network status but also the social-ties among users, essentially as D2D communications are available [161]. Considering the hierarchical system formed by macro and small cells, the interference mitigation becomes more complex to manage because it has two components [97]: cross-tier and co-tier interference. The cross-tier interference is from the macrocell BS to the small cell BSs. The co-tier interference is among small cell BSs. The authors of [97] propose a CG for the mitigation of both co-tier and cross-tier interferences as well as the resource allocation in dense heterogeneous networks that allows in case of congestion the traffic offload from macrocell base station to small cell base stations. Alternatively, [160] is focused specifically in the co-tier interference reduce.
## (s30) Evolutionary Games
Number of References: 12

(p30.0) Applying evolutionary algorithms to theoretical games allow players with limited-rationality to learn from the environment and take individual decisions for attaining each game's equilibrium with minimum control message exchange. We have found in the literature games that use evolutionary algorithms in very diverse networking scenarios. From these, we have selected a few with the following main goals: developing strategies for wired [185] or wireless [186][64] cases to efficiently use the available resources, distributed management of networking environments with small cells for optimizing the usage of radio capabilities [96] [187], distributed learning to mitigate interference in wireless topologies with Femtocells [94] [188], and enhancing cooperation in VANETs [189]. The evolutionary games we have selected are now discussed as follows.

(p30.1) Developing more efficient strategies for wired/wireless networks Evolutionary algorithms have been proposed for either wired [185] or wireless [186] [190][64] use cases to use the available networking resources in a more efficient way. In [185] they use evolutionary theoretical games to study the necessary network conditions to concurrent transport protocols might either coevolve or not for dealing with the congestion problem. In the latter case, a dominant protocol would be operating at the network. In addition, the authors propose some directions in upgrading the protocols to enable the network operation at an optimum stable state. An evolution on this could be how to deploy in a non-disruptive way the protocol upgrades in a real networking system. In [186] they discuss an evolutionary Game for vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) caching. In the V2V caching, only users who actively participate in this caching can obtain cached contents from others, and users who participate in V2V caching must keep the contents in storage after watching/using/consuming them. In this work, an evolutionary stable strategy is a mixed strategy for the whole population (i.e. the winner strategy), such that the turbulence of a small proportion of other strategies will gradually disappear in the long-term trend. Examples of these minority strategies are related with a reduce number of users leaving or joining the system. The authors of [190] consider NC mobiles, each faced with the problem of which subset of WLANs access points (APs) to connect (and multi-homing) to, and how to split its traffic among them. Considering the many users' regime, they obtain a potential game model and study its equilibrium. The authors analysed the user performance of UDP/TCP throughput with varying frame lengths over WLAN. They also obtain pricing for which the total throughput is maximized at equilibrium and study the convergence to equilibrium under various evolutionary dynamics. They also study the case where the Internet Service Provider (ISP) could charge prices greater than that of the cost price mechanism and show that even in this case multihoming is desirable. They assume only a single ISP offering multihoming connectivity.
## (s44) Vehicular networks
Number of References: 2

(p44.0) The interest of intelligent transportation systems and vehicular ad hoc networks has increased in recent years. As a fundamental building block for the development of applications for vehicular networks, the resource management and sharing problem for bandwidth and computing resources should be revisited to support mobile applications in cloudenabled vehicular networks [225]. The challenges to solve are namely: find in an intelligent and efficient ways the more suitable communication link (i.e. with adequate data rate, low jitter and errors), support multi-hop communications, ensure data privacy, give incentives to vehicles cooperate and either relay traffic from others or cache data that can be used by others, support distinct patterns of mobility, use the parked cars as Serving nodes (i.e. like BSs or APs) for the cars circulating on the road, and increase the comfort of the passengers of self-driving vehicles by giving them all the Internet contents they need (e.g. streaming movie, live concert). Finally, new techniques and solutions are needed to handle data appropriately in vehicular networks [226].
## (s45) Micro-grid
Number of References: 9

(p45.0) Recently, electric vehicles (EVs) and plug-in hybrid EVs have been considered as natural components of future electricity power systems, due to their efficient integration, cost savings, and significant environmental advantages. This will lead to new significant challenges in the design of power systems. These challenges include proposing energy charging scheduling plans for connected EVs, guaranteeing energy demands of EVs during peak hours, and managing information exchange between EVs and the grid (or aggregators). Other interesting area to investigate is the security of these systems. In fact, intrusion detection/prevention and mitigation of DDoS attacks need to be addressed in micro-grids.  [147]. Considering the widespread penetration of plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs), the overall demand on micro-grids may increase manifold in the near future. In this way, [227] proposes a charging-discharging scheme to manage the micro-grid's load using electrical vehicles. In addition, [229] revises comprehensively the diverse on-air technologies to charge battery-operated devices. Driven by the need of sustainable "green communications" the management of the available energy within a network domain is a challenging and very active research topic [228][230] [231]. From these contributions, [228] investigates a decentralized algorithm that allocates energy for wireless networks with renewable energy powered Base Stations. The authors of [230] study dynamic energy trading through a stochastic game. Their solution assists devices to trade the harvested energy with one another based on the service requirement. Reference [231] proposes a double-action-based relay selection scheme to stimulate the relay nodes to forward packets for others, empowering the network connectivity. For the in-home charging of electrical vehicles, consumer electricity consumption can be controlled through electricity prices, namely using a method designated by demand response. Under demand response, retailers determine their electricity prices, and customers respond accordingly with their electricity consumption levels. In particular, the demands of customers who own electric vehicles are elastic with respect to price. In this context, the interaction between retailers and customers can be seen as a game because both attempt to maximize their own payoffs. Considering this fact, the authors of [147] propose a Stackelberg game based on the demand response to control the electricity consumption. Their results evidence that this game reaches an equilibrium point (NE) at which the electrical vehicle charging requirements are satisfied and retailer profits are maximized, when customers use their own utility function. In addition, they conclude that the NE of this game can vary according to the weighting factor for the utility function of each customer, resulting in various strategic choices. Their numerical results confirm that the NE of the proposed game lies somewhere between the minimum generation-cost solution and the result of the equal-charging scheme.
## (s46) Tactile Internet
Number of References: 4

(p46.0) The Tactile Internet (TI) involves human-to-machine (H2M) communications for remotely supervise tactile/haptic devices. These devices have local sensors and actuators and are required to be controlled via the Internet in a completely reliable and deterministic ways [232]. The TI seems to converge towards a well-defined list of design goals [233]: very low latency on the order of 1 ms; ultra-high reliability; H2H/M2M coexistence; security. Other important challenges for the TI are, as follows [233][234]: resource management; task allocation and orchestration; mobility of robots; remote robot steering and control applications. In addition, the authors of [72] report on the first initiative in designing LANs to facilitate the converged delivery of latency-sensitive TI traffic and bandwidth-intensive applications.
