# A Review on Aptamer-Conjugated Quantum Dot Nanosystems for Cancer Imaging and Theranostic

CorpusID: 43995000 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/227286746d568614be1b1c2ba563a2b3a432ebc8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/227286746d568614be1b1c2ba563a2b3a432ebc8)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 8

(p0.0) Cancer diagnosis and therapy remains a major obstacle worldwide. An increasing rate of cancer mortality is expected to growth to about 13 million deaths per year by 2030 [1]. Currently, six powerful diagnostic modalities including computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET-scan), single-photon emission CT, ultrasound and optical imaging are available for cancer imaging and staging [2]. However, classifying the cancers and delivering proper dosages with maximum therapeutic effects and minimum toxicity of therapeutics are the main hurdles that seems clinicians have to overcome in the field of cancer treatment. In addition, immune-editing process supporting cancer cells in escaping from the human immune system help tumor cells survive and metastasize other organs [3].

(p0.1) In recent two decades, nanotechnology as an emerging scientific discipline has received significant attention in all areas of science encompassing chemistry, physics and biology [4]. Indeed, nanotechnology is ever more firming a foothold in medicine, especially in oncology [5]. Nanoparticles such as quantum dots and superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO) are useful contrast agents for medical imaging with CT or MRI in animal studies [6]. Among quantum dots, fluorescent inorganic quantum dots (QDs) with diameter of 2 to 10 nm display superior fluorescent properties without photo-bleaching in comparing with organic fluorophores [7]. Significant evidences suggest that QDs can be used in imaging [8]. It seems that one potential area of application would be in the development of advanced materials for early diagnosis or convergence of imaging and therapy (theranostic) of cancer.
## (s9) QDs as contrast agents for optical imaging
Number of References: 17

(p9.0) Inorganic QDs are commonly classified into major two types depending on their chemical composition. In the first classification, QDs are composed of elements from groups III to V of the periodic table [30]; for example, Indium (In) from group III, phosphorus (P) from group V. In the second classification, QDs are composed of elements from groups II-VI of the periodic table; for example, cadmium (Cd) from group II, Selenium (Se) from group VI. The second category especially CdSe [31] and CdTe [32] are generally utilized in favor owing to their higher quantum yield compared to QDs from the first group. However, QDs from group 2 are potentially toxic because of the release of heavy metals, then, must be protected by engineering a physical shell between the main core and the environment. thioglycolic acid [9], polyethylene glycol (PEG) [21], carboxyl-functionalized groups, as well as amine-functionalized groups [33] are conventional barriers used in reducing QDs toxicities.

(p9.1) These QDs also are used for real-time in vitro [34] and in vivo [35] optical imaging of cancer cells. Cancer biomarkers such as prostate-specific antigen [36], HER2 [37], CD44 [38], and folic acid [39] specifically present in the tumor microenvironment or on the cancer cells surface, can be recognized by the appropriate monoclonal antibody [40], peptide [41], or immunoglobulin [18,42] that are conjugated onto the QDs surface ( Figure 4). In some circumstances, it has been shown that QDs encapsulated in magnetic liposomes covered by Arginyl-Glycyl-Aspartic acid (RGD) ligands have been utilized for the MRI imaging of tumor angiogenesis [43].
## (s13) SELEX process
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) To make the SELEX technology more efficient and less time consuming, the selection process has frequently been modified for different applications and for different target molecules [60]. The initiation step of a common SELEX process is an artificially synthesized random DNA oligonucleotide library containing about 1013-1015 diverse sequences [45]. In the first round of SELEX process, the DNA or RNA pool is incubated with a specific target. Washing process separates weakly bound and unbound strands from target-oligonucleotide complexes. In the second step, the oligonucleotide sequences bound to target are amplified by reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) for RNA SELEX or by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) experiments for DNA SELEX. The resultant pool of enriched oligonucleotides would be used in the next round of SELEX procedure. Enrichment up to a saturation condition determines the end of SELEX process. The selected aptamer is cloned and sequenced for subsequent analysis and binding assays including the specificities and affinities. 
## (s15) Cancer cell imaging by aptamer-conjugated QDs
Number of References: 6

(p15.0) Tenascin-C is a dominant extracellular matrix protein that distributes on the surface of glioma cells. Chen et al. [57] constructed a new bioprobe by conjugating GBI-10 aptamer to the QD surface, and used this fluorescent QD-labeled aptamer (QD-Apt) nanoprobe convenient and sensitive in vitro diagnostic assays to recognize the Tenascin-C molecules [52]. Likewise, Shieh et al. [56] conjugated prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) aptamers with QDs surface to label and image prostate carcinoma cells.

(p15.1) One of the major challenges of bioanalytical chemists is multiplex sensing of analytes specifically tumor markers [4]. Tried to image tenascin-C and nucleolin simultaneously using two types of aptamer-conjugated QDs. they showed that this imaging was reliable and cell line-specific; however, current requirements for cancer imaging technologies include the need for simple preparation methods and the ability to detect multiple cancer biomarkers and evaluate their intracellular localizations [65,66].
