# To Teach Modal Logic: An Opinionated Survey *

CorpusID: 43162780 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c019799ce75fc50a1cee70e7d90dc72b5bcf7aa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c019799ce75fc50a1cee70e7d90dc72b5bcf7aa)

Fields: Mathematics, Philosophy, Computer Science, Education

## (s5) The Nature of Modality
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) It will be worthwhile to return here to some reflections about modal logic recently introduced by John P. Burgess that we just referred to [3]. According to Burgess' approach, it is convenient to look backward to the origins of modal logic. Originally logic used to "name an enterprise aiming to prescribe the norms of deductive argumentation in philosophy and elsewhere". However, "the pursuit of what were the original aims of logic is now for many inseparable from philosophy generally, and philosophy of language especially. [3] Thus, logic progressively has gone far away from its original motivations. In fact, logic is no more restricted to the study of correct or valid reasoning. Formal systems are studied in its own right. Burgess' observation also enables to see that the original logic's aim is now shared by many disciplines other than logic. In consequence, in order to fulfil this original aim one must cross some disciplinary borders, since it is no longer in the domains of logic alone. Burgess also considers the case of modal logic in particular and thinks that we must go back to the work of Aristotle to appreciate the initial sense of modality that was getting lost as time went by. Moreover, a neglected question at this point is what is meant by "modal" here. And if there is a sense which is particular relevant to philosophy. What is characteristic of modality is the expression of irreality of one kind or another, as it is expressed by means of grammar. It is widely accepted the distinction between deontic, epistemic and dynamic modalities. In the beginnings of modal logic, H. von Wright also made an almost similar distinction. In fact, all of them were of interest in philosophy, but specially the third, which more or less corresponds to what is called "metaphysical" modality. This is the conclusion of Burgess, which is worth to consider in the setting of teaching modal logic in philosophy. The notions associated with this type of modality are the necessary, in the sense, of what is and would have been (could not failed to be) no matter what, and the possible in the sense of what is or isn't but potentially might (or could) have been. The idea of a true modal logic endorsed by Burgess and other philosophers must be interpreted as an effort to put modal logic again in the right way. In the words of Burgess [3]:
