# Neuromodulatory Treatments for Alcohol Use Disorder: A Review

CorpusID: 44158705 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b5f18f333e2f57bfd1cda338c50a87f3dc3ddb25](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b5f18f333e2f57bfd1cda338c50a87f3dc3ddb25)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s3) Drinking in the Dark (DID)
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) To induce pharmacologically significant ethanol drinking in mice, Rhodes et al. [37] tested multiple paradigms involving intermittent access to ethanol in various time points in the sleep-wake cycle. Using C57BL6 male and female mice, on a 12:12 light:dark cycle (22:00 lights off, 10:00 lights on), mice drank approximately 90% more ethanol in a 2-h period when ethanol was substituted for water starting 3 h after lights off (active phase of circadian cycle) in comparison to starting 1 h after lights off. Similarly, mice drank 50% more when starting 3 h after lights off in comparison to 2 h after lights off [37]. This procedure yielded the animal model referred to as "drinking in the dark" (DID), through the promotion of high levels of ethanol drinking-mimicking that of binging, without the need of extensive training or the inclusion of sucrose. By replacing the water bottle with 20% ethanol for 2 or 4 h in the mouse's home cage, starting 3 h after lights off, and repeating across four consecutive days, mice reliably drank ethanol to levels that produce a BEC of 1.0 mg/mL by day 4.

(p3.1) There are several unique advantages to the DID system in modeling binge-like ethanol consumption. First, it reliably achieves pharmacologically meaningful BECs in a well-defined, limited access time frame [30]. This allows for ease of experimental design for high throughput testing of the effects of pharmacological compounds or other more invasive interventions on binge-like ethanol intake, because the ethanol access occurs over a relatively truncated period of time [37]. Indeed, repeated episodes of DID procedures leads to relatively consistent binge-like ethanol drinking, even up to 10 repeated 4-day DID procedures [38]. Exhibition of binge-like drinking behavior with short-term ethanol access more precisely mirrors human binge drinking behavior. In other ethanol binge models where ethanol is directly administered by the experimenter, these passive, forced, or potentially painful methods of ethanol administration can confound the true motivation to binge ethanol [21]. The DID paradigm allows for preclinical modeling of binge drinking, a hallmark of AUD, in the context of potential therapeutics, such as DBS.
## (s4) Intermittent Access (IA)
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) A series of experiments conducted by Simms et al. were designed to further characterize intermittent access to 20% ethanol using 2-bottle choice drinking paradigms. The experiments were adaptations from Wise [39], in an effort to induce ethanol consumption without adulteration. Animals were given access to 20% ethanol for three 24 h sessions per week. Ethanol access was intermittent in the sense that access was reinstated every other day. Using a two-bottle choice, animals had continuous access to at least one bottle of water at all times. However, the second bottle alternated between 20% ethanol and water. In experiment one, animals were given access to 20 ethanol-drinking sessions (across 45 days), water only and ethanol + water consumption was recorded. This resulted in a steady escalation in ethanol intake until the fifth drinking session, thereafter, there was no difference in ethanol consumption in subsequent sessions. Experiment two involved a 40-day period of abstinence following the 20th ethanol drinking session using the rats from experiment one. Following the abstinence period reinstatement of ethanol using IA was conducted across ten drinking sessions. There was no significant difference in mean ethanol consumption (g/kg/24 h) between the ten drinking sessions before and after the abstinence period [40]. Preclinical models utilizing both IA and DID allow for unadulterated consumption of ethanol that better represent the pathophysiology of AUD.
## (s9) Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS)
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) In 2013, Da Silva et al. [53] conducted a sham-controlled study that targeted unilateral treatment of the frontal lobe dysfunction with the intent of reducing cravings and relapse through the use of repetitive unilateral anodal stimulation of the left-dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (L-dlPFC) in 13 heavy drinkers (200 g ethanol a day). Initially, participants who received the L-dlPFC treatments were found to have significant decrease in craving and depressive symptoms, as well as increased executive function in comparison to the sham group. However, these results were short lived because 4 of the 6 in the treatment group relapsed during the trial, compared to 1 relapse in the sham group [53]. Later, in 2014, Klauss et al. [54] conducted a trial of bilateral tDCS stimulation of the dlPFC in 35 severe alcoholics that were randomized into sham and treatment groups in the study. Two of the 16 in the sham group, and 8 in the treatment group remained alcohol abstinent by the end of the six months of follow-up. No differences were reported with regards to cravings, frontal function, and depressive/anxiety symptoms [54]. Modest effects seen with tDCS on cravings are tempered by high relapse rates and long-term efficacy for this therapy remains to be established.
## (s10) Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS)
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) In 2010, Mishra et al. conducted a trial involving rTMS of the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (R-dlPFC) in 45 patients diagnosed with alcohol dependence syndrome. 30 participants received active rTMS treatment, and 15 received sham treatment. Within the first 4 weeks following rTMS treatment-cravings significantly decreased in active treatment group, however, beyond 4 weeks there was no significant difference between the treatment and sham groups with regards to cravings. Similarly, there was no significant difference between relapse rates between the two groups [55]. In a follow-up study in 2011, Hoppner et al. [56] conducted a trial involving rTMS of the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (L-dlPFC) in 19 detoxified females. The intent was to investigate the effect of rTMS on mood and cravings in alcohol-dependent women. There were no significant differences between the treatment and sham groups with regards to mood or cravings [56]. Again, while at best a temporary decrease in cravings was seen with rTMS therapy, this was not durable in the long term and had no effect on relapse rates.
## (s11) Disulfiram Intervention
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Ethanol is converted to acetaldehyde by alcohol dehydrogenase, and acetaldehyde is then converted to acetate by aldehyde dehydrogenase. Disulfiram blocks enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase and is a common pharmacological intervention in the treatment of alcohol dependence. In the presence of alcohol, acetaldehyde accumulates to cause symptoms including tachycardia, flushing, diaphoresis, dyspnea, nausea, and vomiting creating a deterrent to alcohol ingestion in a controlled environment. However, efficacy of disulfiram drops tremendously in an unsupervised environment as compliance with the regimen and succumbing to relapse becomes a decision at the discretion of the patient [57]. A longitudinal trial involved 120 alcoholic volunteers who were assigned at random to receive subcutaneous disulfiram implants and were followed for a subsequent 2-year period. Post-implantation all groups demonstrated an increase in sobriety, however, there was no significant dose response relationship nor was there a significant difference between groups in the incidence of disulfiram ethanol reaction [58].
## (s13) 2008-2016 DBS Pilot Trial
Number of References: 5

(p13.0) A study conducted in Germany consisted of 5 patients with treatment-resistant alcohol dependency (based on DSM4 and ICD-10 criteria) that underwent DBS treatment and longitudinal follow-up care beginning in 2008. The inclusion criteria for this study included males, ages 25-60, with 10 years or more of alcohol dependence, who completed detoxification and subsequent period(s) of abstinence for at least 2 weeks. To be eligible for this study, participants had to have demonstrated treatment failures of at least two inpatient programs (6 months or longer for each program), failure of anti-craving pharmaceutical interventions such as ACAMP and NTX, as well as failure of community and self-help intervention programs. Participants had to have had at least 10 years of schooling in addition to a "finished apprenticeship or higher education" to ensure they had the mental capacity to perform psychological tests before and after implantation and understood the procedures and associated risks. Patients included in this study were considered severely addicted to alcohol and, on average, consumed at least 200 g of ethanol a day [6,61,62].

(p13.1) Participants were excluded if they had any of the following: seizures during detoxification, mental retardation, clinically significant impairments on neuropsychological battery, alcohol related personality change, use of additional addictive substances, or marked atrophy signifying brain damage detected via MRI. Additionally, high scores on the neuroticism scale and/or antisocial personality disorder were exclusionary [61]. It is important to note that all patients were offered continuous care for their DBS device as well as psychiatric outpatient care covered by their compulsory health care insurance, making all treatment free of charge [62].
