# Applying precision feeding to improve the nitrogen efficiency of swine production: a review of possible practices... Applying precision feeding to improve the nitrogen efficiency of swine production: a review of possible practices and obstacles Aplicação da alimentação de precisão para melhorar a eficiência do nitrogênio na produção de suínos: revisão de possíveis práticas e obstáculos

CorpusID: 46556301 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/56c68632e962f8a760b207aa54b6b57ef1dc5cf2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/56c68632e962f8a760b207aa54b6b57ef1dc5cf2)

Fields: Mathematics, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s4) New feeding practices toward nitrogen efficiency in pigs
Number of References: 7

(p4.0) Usually, the nutrient density progressively decreases with an increase in the pig's body weight. Therefore, the optimal concentration of nutrients in the diet also decreases over time. One way to adjust the dietary concentration of nutrients to match the animal's requirements is to increase the number of feeding phases (Figure 1). These schemes are commonly used to accommodate continuous changes in the amino acid requirements of growing pigs, and the environmental benefits of this strategy have been demonstrated (POMAR et al., 2009;POMAR et al., 2014). However, the use of several diets increases the cost of feed management and facilities. Based on this premise, FEDDES et al. (2000) developed a system with the automatic blending and distribution of two diets combined in variable proportions, which can meet the requirements of pigs throughout their growing period (POMAR et al., 2014). The diets are formulated to meet the pig's nutritional requirements at the beginning and at the end of growth period. POMAR et al. (2014) formulated two diets, one of them meeting the pig's nutritional requirements at the beginning of the growing period (high nutrient concentration) and the other meeting the requirements at the end of this period (low concentration). They commingled diets in different proportions, according to the three-phase (3P) or daily feeding program, in order to meet the nutritional requirements at the beginning of each feeding stage. The group of pigs receiving the daily feeding program consumed 7.3% less protein than the group fed the 3P, as a result of the progressive decrease in the amount of protein released during the course of the experiment (Figure 2). Replacing the traditional 3P method with the daily feeding program reduced the intake and excretion of nitrogen by 7.3% and 12%, respectively.

(p4.1) However, current group phase-feeding programs do not account for the variation among individuals, and the diets are usually formulated to optimize the population performance, with most of the pigs receiving more nutrients than they actually need (HAUSCHILD et al., 2010). While promoting better nutrient use, they fail to provide exactly what each animal requires. In this context, precision feeding is a modern approach in which pigs are fed individually using diets adjusted in real time according to their patterns of feed intake and growth (HAUSCHILD et al., 2012).
