# The evolution of nucleoside analogue antivirals: A review for chemists and non-chemists. Part 1: Early structural modifications to the nucleoside scaffold

CorpusID: 4976297 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/862110c1ddf0008f7297bf01bc35b44796ff90e3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/862110c1ddf0008f7297bf01bc35b44796ff90e3)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry, Engineering

## (s3) 3′-OH modifications
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) Due to the initial success with the 2′-modified nucleoside analogues, scientists also explored modifications at the 3′ carbon. Some of the first 3′ modified nucleosides include 3′-methyl analogues such as 3′-C-methyluridine and 3′-C-methylcytidine (Fig. 6). (Mikhailov et al., 1983) From these initial SAR studies, it was found that 3′-C-methyladenosine served as a potent anticancer agent against numerous human leukemia and carcinoma cell lines, with IC 50 values of ∼18 μM (Franchetti et al., 2005;Cappellacci et al., 2006). Further analysis found that shifting the methyl from the 3′ position of 3′-C-methyladenosine to another position on the sugar ring was associated with a decrease in activity, thus highlighting the importance of this moiety (Cappellacci et al., 2006). Similarly, this study found that the adenosine nucleobase was the most active analogue against human myelogenous leukemia K562 cells and human colon carcinoma HT-29 and CaCo-2 cell lines, with no antiproliferative activity found with the other nucleobases (Cappellacci et al., 2006). To further test the ability of these 3′-C-methyl analogues as potential therapeutics, the Osolodkin group studied 3′-C-methyluridine and cytidine against Tickborne encephalitis virus, however, none of these analogues demonstrated potent antiviral activity (Orlov et al., 2017). Due to the lack of antiviral activity, as well as the development of more potent anticancer agents, these analogues have not been extensively pursued any further.
## (s5) Carbocyclic nucleosides
Number of References: 13

(p5.0) The use of an atom replacement in the sugar moiety as exemplified by Lamivudine and Emtricitabine were not the first examples of this type of modification. In 1966 an unusual nucleoside was synthesized by Shealy and Clayton that featured a cyclopentyl ring in place of the furanose sugar moiety (Fig. 9). (Shealy and Clayton, 1966) This analogue, later named Aristeromycin (Ari), was subsequently isolated from Streptomyces citrocolour and found to have potent antiviral properties against viruses such as measles, parainfluenza, vaccinia virus, and vesicular stomatitis (De Clercq, 1985;De Clercq et al., 1989;Rawal et al., 2016). Similarly, a closely related structural analogue was first isolated from Ampullariella regularis in 1981 (Hayashi et al., 1981), and later synthesized and named Neplanocin A (NpcA). Similar to Ari, NpcA also featured a cyclopentyl ring in place of the furanose sugar, however, in NcpA the cyclopentyl ring possesses a double bond between the C4′ and C6′ carbons ( Fig. 9). (Rawal et al., 2016;Hayashi et al., 1980Hayashi et al., , 1981 Both NpcA and Ari were highly active, however, they were also quite toxic, as their triphosphate forms closely mimicked ATP, thus leading to misincorporation and disruption of many important biological systems (De Clercq, 1985;De Clercq et al., 1989;Rawal et al., 2016;Hayashi et al., 1980;Wolfe and Borchardt, 1991).
## (s6) Second generation carbocyclic nucleosides
Number of References: 19

(p6.0) As Neplanocin A and Aristeromycin were unable to be used as drugs due to the toxicity of their triphosphate forms, focus turned to the design of carbocyclic analogues that could not be phosphorylated at the 5′ position. One pivotal example was 5′-deoxy-Ari, where replacement of the CH 2 OH group with a simple methyl group led to a dramatic increase in activity against both vaccinia virus as well as vesicular stomatitis virus ( Fig. 10). (Marquez, 1996;Siddiqi et al., 1992) Another approach that proved advantageous was the development of the 5′-nor analogues by Schneller et al., where the 5′-methylene group was removed resulting in the direct connection of the 5′-OH to the cyclopentyl ring (Patil et al., 1992;Das and Schneller, 2014;Seley et al., 1997aSeley et al., , 1997bSeley et al., , 1997cSeley et al., , 1997dSeley et al., , 1998Hegde et al., 1999Hegde et al., , 2000Barnard et al., 2001). Surprisingly, despite the presence of a hydroxyl group, phosphorylation did not occur since the shortened bond did not position the hydroxyl group correctly such that it was recognized by cellular and viral kinases (Patil et al., 1992). Taking it one step further, Borchardt, Schneller, Seley-Radtke and others completely removed the 5′-hydroxymethylene group leading to the truncated Ari and NpcA analogues (Hasobe et al., 1987;Zimmermann et al., 2014;Seley et al., 1997e). These truncations Fig. 9. Early carbocyclic nucleosides that feature a C-C-N glycosidic bond that is more stable compared to the corresponding hemiacetal bond found in the natural sugar nucleosides.

(p6.1) proved extremely fruitful in that they retained similar activity to the Ari and NpcA analogues, however, the associated toxicity was not observed (Zimmermann et al., 2013(Zimmermann et al., , 2014Seley et al., 1997e).
## (s8) Replacement of oxygen in the furanose ring by heteroatoms
Number of References: 15

(p8.0) Given the potent activity exhibited by the carbocyclic nucleosides, researchers next turned to replacing the furanose oxygen with other atoms to see the potential impact on biological activity. One such replacement included that of the isosteric sulfur atom to yield thionucleosides, which have a similar benefit to carbocyclic nucleosides in that they are also unaffected by glycoside hydrolases (Fig. 17). (Messini et al., 1999;Elzagheid et al., 1999;Crnugelj et al., 2002) Sulfur is related to oxygen in several ways, including a similar electronic configuration and the same number of valence electrons, however, sulfur is less electronegative and larger in size than oxygen. In contrast, sulfur does not participate in hydrogen bonding like oxygen, thus this substitution results in the loss of important interactions in enzyme binding pockets (Paulsen, 1966). While numerous analogues were synthesized by Secrist et al. (Messini et al., 1999;Elzagheid et al., 1999) and others (Paulsen, 1966;Inoue et al., 2005;Crnugelj et al., 2002) none led to a marketable drug.

(p8.1) Many years later, Jeong et al. developed the analogous selenonucleosides, however, none showed meaningful anticancer or antiviral activity, most likely due to lack of recognition by cellular kinases, as they were not phosphorylated (Fig. 17). (Sahu et al., 2014;Yu et al., 2013) Extension of the methylene group at the 5′ position of these compounds however, resulted in potent anti-HSV-1 activity with EC 50 values as low as 2.3 μM since these analogues were able to be phosphorylated by cellular kinases (Sahu et al., 2014;Yu et al., 2013).

(p8.2) Another modification that proved to be highly successful is the use of the nitrogen-containing imino sugar found in the immucillins (Fig. 18) developed by Schramm et al. (Kicska et al., 2001;Schramm and Tyler, 2003), however those will be discussed below in the C-nucleoside section of this review.
