# Systematic literature review of IL-6 as a biomarker or treatment target in patients with gastric, bile duct, pancreatic and colorectal cancer

CorpusID: 49905119 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/958ba4864d3f85176d6ea47c971bc37a576cf247](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/958ba4864d3f85176d6ea47c971bc37a576cf247)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Gastric cancer
Number of References: 6

(p6.0) Six out of the 10 studies investigating gastric cancer and IL-6 ( Table 1), assessed the correlation between clinical characteristics in patients with gastric cancer and IL-6, all showing a significant correlation. Ashizawa et al. [70] found significantly elevated IL-6 levels in gastric cancer patients compared to the healthy controls, and significantly elevated IL-6 was found in the presence of liver metastases, suggesting an association with tumor metastases. Ikeguchi et al. [67] found that high serum IL-6 correlated with the depth of tumor invasion, but not with lymph node metastases, and Kim et al. [79] found significant correlation between increased IL-6 and tumor size, tumor depth, lymph node metastases and stage. In a study by De Vita et al. [44] assessing both gastric and colorectal cancer patients as one cohort, IL-6 levels were shown to be significantly increased in patients with distant metastases and disseminated disease.

(p6.1) Sanchez-Zauco et al. [21] assessed the diagnostic use of IL-6 in gastric cancer and found a high specificity (97%), but a low sensitivity (39%). In contrast to this, Kim et al. [79] found a high sensitivity (85.7%) and a low specificity (50.1%).
## (s7) Bile duct cancer
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) Only two studies focused on the correlation between clinical characteristics in patients with bile duct cancer and IL-6 ( Table 2), and both included few patients. Both authors argue that high serum IL-6 levels may be useful in distinguishing between different neoplasms and between benignity and malignancy. Goydos et al. [72] performed a 3-year study assessing serum IL-6 in patients with bile duct cancer, and found that serum IL-6 was significantly higher in cholangiocarcinoma compared to patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, metastatic colorectal cancer and benign bile disease. A cut-off serum-IL-6 level above 100 pg/ml identified 80% of the bile duct cancer patients and excluded healthy adults, all patients with benign bile disease and 92% of the hepatocellular carcinoma patients. Cheon et al. [80] assessed the usefulness of serum IL-6 in bile duct cancer patients receiving photodynamic therapy (14 of the 26 patients), matching pre-therapy and post-therapy IL-6 levels to the tumor size. Serum IL-6 correlated with bile duct cancer tumor mass, which they used to define tumor burden, indicating that IL-6 has potential as a prognostic biomarker and could be useful in assessing the efficiency of treatment. However, Mott and Gores [81] commented that tumor mass is not identical to tumor burden in bile duct cancer.
## (s8) Pancreatic cancer
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Three studies assessed the use of IL-6 as a diagnostic biomarker in patients with pancreatic cancer, all finding IL-6 useful ( Table 3). Schultz et al. [26] studied a cohort of 559 patients and compared the use of serum IL-6 to CA 19.9 and found that IL-6 was no better than CA 19.9. More pancreatic cancer patients had elevated CA 19.9 than elevated IL-6. The area under the curve (AUC) for the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer was higher for CA 19.9 (AUC 0.94) compared to IL-6 (AUC 0.87). Both serum IL-6 and serum CA 19.9 were associated with tumor stage. Mroczko et al. [82] studied the diagnostic applicability of IL-6 in differentiating between pancreatic cancer and chronic pancreatitis and found that the AUC was higher for serum IL-6 (AUC 0.94) than serum CA 19.9 (AUC 0.86), CEA (AUC 0.89) and CRP (AUC 0.84).
## (s11) Gastric cancer
Number of References: 4

(p11.0) Although the number of studies of patients with gastric cancer was small, all studies found a significant association between high serum IL-6 and short OS, suggesting a prognostic value in gastric cancer ( Table 1). The most recent study performed by Necula et al. [100] showed an association between increased plasma IL-6 and tumor progression and between high tissue and plasma IL-6 levels and OS. Using a cut-off value of 1.97 pg/ml, Ashizawa et al. [70] found that OS was significantly longer in the low IL-6 level group than in the high IL-6 level group for both advanced gastric cancer and patients with lymphatic invasion. After 1 year, 69% of the gastric cancer patients with high IL-6 levels were alive compared to 94% of the gastric cancer patients with low serum IL-6, and after 3 years, the survival rates were 43% and 87%, respectively. Using multivariate analysis, Liao et al.

(p11.1) [69] found a significant relation between high IL-6 and shorter OS (HR 1.77, 95% CI 1.07-2.92). The gastric cancer patients with stage II/III and high IL-6 levels had a median survival of 618 days in contrast to 1418 days in patients with stage II/III and low IL-6 levels. Kai et al. [66] investigated IL-6 as a prognostic biomarker in patients with gastric cancer measuring IL-1β and IL-6, and found no significant difference in survival between patients with high tissue levels of IL-6 (cut-off level 50 pg/mg-protein) or IL-1β and low serum levels. Kim et al. [79] studied serum IL-6 and CRP in 115 gastric cancer patients undergoing gastrectomy, and found that high IL-6 was associated to short PFS and OS. In multivariate analysis, IL-6 was not related to TTP and OS. As expected, serum CRP correlated to IL-6, but CRP was not correlated to TTP and OS in univariate analyses.
## (s16) Predictive use of circulating IL-6
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) A predictive biomarker is a biomarker which estimates the relative likelihood that a cancer will respond to a specific treatment prior to treatment [22]. In investigating a biomarker, a study should include a homogenous group of patients randomized to receive either standard treatment or the specific treatment assessed in the study. The pre-treatment biomarker should foresee which patients respond to the treatment by comparing OS, PFS or response rate. In this review, a study was considered to investigate the predictive use of circulating IL-6, if the study assessed how the circulating IL-6 levels could identify the group benefitting from treatment in two homogenous groups of GI cancer patients receiving different treatments. No studies were performed in patients with gastric cancer, biliary duct cancer or pancreatic cancer. Only one study by Hara et al. [109] assessed the predictive use of serum IL-6 in colorectal cancer (Table 4), showing IL-6 to be useful as a predictive biomarker.
## (s17) DISCUSSION
Number of References: 6

(p17.0) Hayes [22] highlights that a tumor biomarker test should be used in clinical care only when there is analytic validity, clinical validity and clinical utility, meaning that the measurement should be accurate and reliable and identify a defined disorder or separate a population into groups with distinct clinical outcomes. In addition, the use of the test results should improve measurable clinical outcomes [110]. It has, however, been difficult to achieve a satisfying level of evidence due to a lack of adequate funding, inappropriately designed studies, nonpublication bias and lack of guidelines when approving new biomarkers [111]. Many initiatives have been taken to overcome these difficulties. The REMARK (reporting recommendation for tumor biomarker prognostic studies) guidelines attempt to increase the transparency in information provided by studies investigating possible tumor biomarkers [111]. The REMARK criteria consist of 20 items to report, including research goals, hypotheses, patient characteristics, assay and measurement methods, statistical design and study results [112]. Furthermore, it has been suggested that due to the low level of evidence most tumor biomarker studies achieve, multiple studies must be done to validate the usefulness of a tumor biomarker [111].
