# a section of the journal Frontiers in Microbiology Overview of Virus Metagenomic Classification Methods and Their Biological Applications

CorpusID: 5034390 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38b6634cd639fcb94166d9492b84bc9fef380f7e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38b6634cd639fcb94166d9492b84bc9fef380f7e)

Fields: Medicine, Biology, Computer Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 9

(p0.0) Unbiased sequencing of nucleic acids from environmental samples has great potential for the discovery and identification of diverse microorganisms (Tang and Chiu, 2010;Chiu, 2013;Culligan et al., 2014;Pallen, 2014). We know this technique as metagenomics, or random, agnostic or shotgun high-throughput sequencing. In theory, metagenomics techniques enable the identification and genomic characterisation of all microorganisms present in a sample with a generic lab procedure (Wooley and Ye, 2009). The approach has gained popularity with the introduction of next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods that provide more data in less time at a lower cost than previous sequencing techniques. While initially mainly applied to the analysis of the bacterial diversity, modifications in sample preparation protocols allowed characterisation of viral genomes as well. The fields of virus discovery and biodiversity characterisation have seized the opportunity to expand their knowledge (Cardenas and Tiedje, 2008;Tang and Chiu, 2010;Chiu, 2013;Pallen, 2014).
## (s7) Database Searching
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) In the search step, sequences (either reads or contigs) are matched to a reference database. Twenty-six of the workflows we found search with the well-known BLAST algorithms BLASTn or BLASTx (Altschul et al., 1990; Table 2). Other oftenused programs are Bowtie (Langmead, 2010;Langmead and Salzberg, 2012), BWA (Li and Durbin, 2009), and Diamond (Buchfink et al., 2015). These programs rely on alignments to a reference database and report matched sequences with alignment scores. Bowtie and BWA, which are also popular programs for the filtering step, align nucleotide sequences exclusively.
