# materials Ga-Based Alloys in Microelectronic Interconnects: A Review

CorpusID: 51956672 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b8591c9726ef4031ce5d4e093fdb2ab7eb13b824](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b8591c9726ef4031ce5d4e093fdb2ab7eb13b824)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s19) Wetting Characteristics of Liquid Ga and Ga-Based Alloys
Number of References: 6

(p19.0) The surface tension of pure Ga and its temperature dependence have been measured by the sessile drop technique [80,115] and the pendant-drop method [116].

(p19.1) For Galinstan and eutectic Ga-In, several measurements have been recorded at room temperature in different atmospheres. Liu et al. [82] obtained the contact angle of Galinstan on several materials commonly used in micro-electromechanical systems devices (including tungsten, silicon nitride, glass, parylene, Teflon, phlogopite, and muscovite) using the sessile drop method. The surface tension of Galinstan on these substrates was measured using the pendant-drop method under a nitrogen atmosphere. There were no chemical reactions between any of the substrates tested and Galinstan, and the surface tension of Galinstan was measured to be around 534.6 mN/m. The authors found that the oxidation state had an obvious effect on the Galinstan drop morphology and fluidity. During the wettability tests, only when the oxygen level was precisely controlled to be below 1 ppm, would Galinstan droplets behave like a normal liquid. The results confirmed the effect of the oxide skin on the Galinstan wettability on solid substrates. Xu et al. [117] measured the wettability including viscosity, surface tension, and contact angles of pure Ga and eutectic Ga-In alloy, while controlling the oxidation level by immersing the liquid metal drops in a hydrochloric acid bath with different HCl concentrations. The dynamic and static contact angles of eutectic Ga-In alloy on cellulose paper and double-sided adhesive were also obtained by Han et al. [85]. All these measurements were taken on substrates that do not chemically react with or are penetrated by these liquid Ga-based alloys.
