# A Review of Planar PIV Systems and Image Processing Tools for Lab-On-Chip Microfluidics

CorpusID: 52278595 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4f647afd5a6538a01b715b6a99119add16147f3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4f647afd5a6538a01b715b6a99119add16147f3)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s4) Three-Component Measurements
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) A 2D3CµPIV system [35] uses two cameras ( Figure 3) to achieve the stereoscopic viewing principle and therefore is often called Stereo-µPIV system in the literature. The schematic of a 2D3CµPIV measurement system in a fluorescence back-scatter illumination mode is shown in Figure 3a. In this illumination mode, the high light intensity of a laser is often required. The laser light reflects from a 45 • mirror, and is focused in the microchannel by the microscope objective (Figure 3a). The flow is seeded with fluorescent particles that are typically coated with a Rhodamine dye that absorbs green wavelengths produced by the second harmonics of the Nd:YAG (λ = 532 nm) or Nd:YLF lasers (λ = 527 nm) and produce a broadband emission in the orange-red spectrum. The fluorescence emission and the Mie scattering are collected by the same objective, and relayed to the two cameras positioned off-center above the microscope objective. Band-pass optical filters are installed in each beam path to block the green Mie scattering from the particles and surfaces, which improves the signal quality. The off-center positioning of the cameras produce a translational stereoscopic imaging configuration [49], where the measurement plane, objective plane and the image plane are parallel. The 3C velocity field for a translational stereoscopic imaging system can be estimated using [49]:
## (s5) Three-Component Measurements
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) A 2D3CµPIV system [35] uses two cameras ( Figure 3) to achieve the stereoscopic viewing principle and therefore is often called Stereo-µPIV system in the literature. The schematic of a 2D3CµPIV measurement system in a fluorescence back-scatter illumination mode is shown in Figure  3a. In this illumination mode, the high light intensity of a laser is often required. The laser light reflects from a 45° mirror, and is focused in the microchannel by the microscope objective ( Figure 3a). The flow is seeded with fluorescent particles that are typically coated with a Rhodamine dye that absorbs green wavelengths produced by the second harmonics of the Nd:YAG (λ = 532 nm) or Nd:YLF lasers (λ = 527 nm) and produce a broadband emission in the orange-red spectrum. The fluorescence emission and the Mie scattering are collected by the same objective, and relayed to the two cameras positioned off-center above the microscope objective. Band-pass optical filters are installed in each beam path to block the green Mie scattering from the particles and surfaces, which improves the signal quality. The off-center positioning of the cameras produce a translational stereoscopic imaging configuration [49], where the measurement plane, objective plane and the image plane are parallel. The 3C velocity field for a translational stereoscopic imaging system can be estimated using [49]:
