# Natural Phytotherapeutic Antioxidants in the Treatment of Mercury Intoxication-A Review

CorpusID: 52890219 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7e9a0f02716398be83008a9ad2c5c20c01f8f47](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7e9a0f02716398be83008a9ad2c5c20c01f8f47)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s1) ROS (Reactive Oxygen species)
Number of References: 10

(p1.0) Free radicals are highly active atoms or molecules that can be produced in many physiological and pathological processes, carrying one or more unpaired electrons in their orbit. These highly unstable atoms or molecules tend to react with molecules in their environment and to share these electrons. 57,58 Free radicals can be positively charged, negatively charged, or neutral and are most often formed by electron transfer in biological systems. The most important free radicals in biological systems are the oxygen radicals. In addition, another source of free radicals is the nitrogen molecule. There is no toxic effect of O2, but it becomes free oxygen radicals during aerobic cell metabolism. By partial reduction of O2, OH and O2are formed. [58][59][60] Superoxide Radical (O2 •-) Superoxide is the first radical to appear in living organisms. In almost all aerobic cells, reduction of oxygen by an electron takes place. 61 The superoxide radical plays an important role in the formation of other reactive oxygen species, such as H2O2, HO2or 1 O2. 58,62 The superoxide radical is produced either directly in mitochondria during oxidation or enzymatically by xanthine oxidase (XO), cytochrome p450 and other oxidases. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) enzyme or in H2O2 is spontaneously inactivated. 63,64 Combined with superoxide (O2 •-) and the free radical NO -, comes the reactive nitrogen derivative ONOO . (Peroxynitrite). ONOO-has harmful effects on direct proteins. 65
## (s9) Discussion
Number of References: 10

(p9.0) Plants are an exogenous source of antioxidants taken in the diet. It is believed that two thirds of the plant species in the world have medical prescription, and almost all of them have excellent antioxidant potential. 125 Increased exogenous antioxidant supplementation or endogenous antioxidant defense has been found to be effective in combating undesirable effects of oxidative stress. 126 The main natural antioxidants present in vitamins and protecting the human body from harmful free radicals are mainly vitamins (C, E and A vitamins), flavonoids, carotenoids and polyphenols. 127 Phenolic compounds exhibit physiological properties such as anti-allergic, anti-atherogenic, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, anticancer, antithrombotic, cardiovascular and vasodilatory effects. [128][129][130] In addition, Fruits, spices and many medicinal herbs are rich sources of pharmacological properties. These agents have antioxidants, free radical scavengers and anti-toxic properties. 16,23,[131][132] As shown in Table 2, many natural antioxidants against mercury poisoning have been tested for detoxification. 
