# Chitosan-based nanomaterials on controlled bioactive agents delivery: a review Volume 7 Issue 4 -2018 Chitosan-based nanomaterials on controlled bioactive agents delivery: a review 485

CorpusID: 52206985 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ab07b909fa375c9edeff397980a9e2cd149fd9e2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ab07b909fa375c9edeff397980a9e2cd149fd9e2)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s1) Chitosan
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) Chitosan is actually a polysaccharide rather know. It can be considered a lineal copolymer of glucosamine and N-acetyl-glucosamine and it is generally named as poly (β-1,4-glucosamine-co-N-acetyl-β-1,4glucosamine). Although it is naturally present in some fungi, especially of the Mucor species, its main source of production is the chemical deacetylation of chitin or poly (N-acetyl-1,4-glucosamine), a reaction that usually leads to a random distribution of acetylated (GlcNAc; β-(1,4)-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-4-glucopyranose) and deacetylated (GlcN; β-(1,4)-2-amino-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranose) units along the chain, in proportions defined by a parameter known as degree of deacetylation (DD). DD represents the fraction of deacetylated units in the biopolymer chains and it usually ranges between 0.50-0.95. Figure 1 allows clarifying this definition. The presence of the amine groups along the chain gives to this biopolymer its distinctive feature of other known polysaccharides (pectin, dextran, agarose, carrageenan, etc.), which exhibit acidic properties in aqueous solutions, while chitosan has a basic character due to the protonation of the amine group present in each of the glucosamine units. Similarly, it has been widely proposed that the chitosan biological activity derives, to a large extent, from the cationic character associated with said protonation 12, 16 although it has been proven that hydrophobic interactions also play their role. 17 Commercial chitosan generally appears in the form of flakes or as a powder of color between white and beige, whose glass transition temperature depends on the molecular weight, DD and the moisture content in the sample analyzed. On the other hand, the material is soluble in short-chain organic acids such as formic, lactic, acetic, tartaric, citric, etc., being an acetic acid 1% aqueous solution the solvent most commonly employed. Obtaining values of pH <6 is fundamental for its dissolution in these systems. It is also soluble in 1% aqueous solutions of mineral acids such as hydrochloric acid and nitric acid but it is insoluble in sulfuric and phosphoric acids.
## (s8) Some system of chitosan-based NMs for controlled bioactive agents release
Number of References: 6

(p8.0) Chitosan has strongly attracted attention in recent years for the preparation of drug carrier nanomaterials with applicability in the "smart" drug delivery because of their good bioadhesibilidad, biocompatibility and biodegradability properties. Additionally, this biopolymer can undergo a wide range of chemical modification reactions becoming more versatile yet. In this regard, numerous studies have been reported on the preparation of specific transport systems and effective delivery of different types of therapeutic agents, i.e., genes, proteins, hormones, etc. Also, the routes of administration that are being tested are diverse: oral, nasal, intravenous, ocular, etc. Table 1 presents a brief list of studies that have recently been reported on this subject. Subsequently, a short discussion of some release systems that have been tested is presented. [39][40][41][42][43][44] 
## (s10) Hormone release
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) Estradiol is a potent sex hormone which has been used in the prevention and treatment of Alzheimer disease. It is of fundamental importance to achieve a sufficient tissue concentration of estradiol in the brain to observe its effect. When estradiol is administered alone, orally, their cerebrospinal levels result very low; however, these levels were found to be high compared to plasma levels when estradiol was administered intranasally as chitosan NPs, suggesting that estradiol is transported to the brain directly when it is transported through the nasal route as chitosan NPs. 47 Another promissory system based in polymeric-metallic hybrid nanoparticles coated with glycol chitosan has been proposed recently for progesterone controlled release. Kinetic studies carried out with it shown that release differ significantly with pH changes, where nanoparticles exhibited swelling at pH 6.5 and shrinkage at pH 7.4. On the other hand, metabolic activity assay of C3H10T1/2 cell line resulted in a promising biocompatibility of these magnetic nanoparticles. 48 Regarding this topic, a special commentary should be made on the chitosan/tripolyphosphate-based nanosystems developed by Rather et al., 49 for the sustained nanorelease of the hormone gonadotropin (obtained from salmon) in test fish (common carp), obtaining a fertilization 13% higher than the injection of the hormone alone. In addition to the greater effectiveness of the system these results can also be considered a clear evidence of the protection that chitosan provides to the hormone, which is known to have a short half-life in the bloodstream.
## (s11) Protein release
Number of References: 6

(p11.0) Medical and pharmaceutical studies related to protein release are very numerous due to the diversity of roles played by them. Table 2 shows some recent studies on protein delivery/release using chitosanbased NMs. As it can be seen proteins can act in some cases as an active therapeutic agent and in others their role can be that of signaling agent to direct the carrier to a specific target and/or enhancer of the cellular uptake of the bioactive agent-loaded Nps. Finally, it is important to stand out that most studies conducted with chitosan suggest that it ensures greater stability and protection of proteins from degradation during their transit through aggressive areas, as well as promote better contact with biomembranes, ensuring a greater bioavailability of these. [51][52][53][54][55][56]  In vitro anticancer activity of CR loaded Nps was studied by Sulforhodamine B assay using a Human Breast Carcinoma cell line.
