# Towards the Internet of Flying Robots: A Survey

CorpusID: 53749112 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b1ef47025063aadf4cecab3a974a96611152e59](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b1ef47025063aadf4cecab3a974a96611152e59)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s5) Camera Coverage
Number of References: 7

(p5.0) In the application of target tracking, FRs are usually equipped with cameras facing the ground [13,22,23]. In general, the cameras have a fixed angle of vision θ, see Figure 2. Then, when a FR is at altitude h, the corresponding coverage area is a circular area with the radius:

(p5.1) If a target is within the range of r max to the projection of a FR, this target is covered by the FR [7,22,24,25]. It is clear that the coverage radius relates to the altitude of the FR, and increasing the altitude enlarges the coverage area. An implied assumption is that the target has the Line-of-Sight (LoS) with the FR. If there is any obstacle between the two parts, the former cannot be observed by the latter, although the above condition holds. 
## (s7) Communication Coverage I
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) In the applications of providing wireless communication service to cellular users, the coverage of a user by a FR can be determined by the signal pathloss (PL). Beyond the LoS assumption, references [29,30] consider that the links between FRs and ground users can have two cases: LoS and Non-LoS (NLoS). The authors of [30] propose a model for the probability of having LoS link between the two parts (P LoS ), which depends on the elevation angle, and some environmental parameters:

(p7.1) where ϕ is the elevation angle (see Figure 2), and a and b are environment dependent parameters. As pointed out by [30], a and b depend on environmental parameters including the ratio of built-up land area to the total land area, the mean number of buildings per unit area and a scale parameter that describes the buildings' heights distribution according to Rayleigh probability density function. The probability of NLoS link is P NLoS = 1 − P LoS . Furthermore, the pathloss is modelled with two parts: free space pathloss and excessive pathloss η ξ , where ξ ∈ {LoS, NLoS}. Free space pathloss depends on the distance between the FR and the ground user, while excessive pathloss depends on the type of link between the two parts. Thus, the average pathloss from the FR to the ground user is the sum of the LoS pathloss and NLoS pathloss [30]:
## (s8) Communication Coverage II
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) One implied assumption of the communication coverage model I is that only one FR is used to serve ground users, or multiple FRs use different wireless channels. Regarding this, a more practical communication coverage model should take interference into account. In the communication coverage model I, the coverage of a user or the association of it with an FR is determined by the maximum allowed pathloss or signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). When interference is accounted, the coverage or association should be determined by signal-to-interference-and-noise ratio (SINR). Following the average pathloss model [30], it can be seen that the received signal from the nearest FR is always the largest. Thus, by assuming that the association of a user and a FR is determined by SINR, a user is always associated with the nearest FR [31]. Obviously, the area of interest can be separated into several Voronoi cells given the positions of FRs, see Figure 3. To briefly sum up, although the first three coverage models may be suitable to varying scenarios, the common feature of them is that the coverage area is a disk, which is independent of the position of the FR. Conversly, the coverage area of the last model depends on the relative positions of nearby FRs.
## (s10) Energy Consumption
Number of References: 9

(p10.0) It is clear that many current commercial FRs are powered by onboard batteries, which means that their working time is limited. Some publications focus on flight control to improve energy efficiency and increase working time [35,36]. One model describing energy consumption of a FR is as follows [7,26]:

(p10.1) where E is the energy consumption during the period of t, β is the minimum power needed to hover just over the ground, α is a motor speed multiplier, s is the lifting speed, and P max (h/s) is the energy spent for lifting the robot to altitude h with the speed s. A similar model has been discussed in [23]. Superior to [7,26], the model for recharging FRs is also presented in [23], but the idea is similar. Another model characterizing the energy consumption for flying is given in [37] and such a model simply assumes that the energy consumption for flying is proportional to the flying distance.
## (s13) Minimizing Robot-User Distance
Number of References: 5

(p13.0) Another commonly considered optimization problem is to minimize the average robot-target distance [31]. To formulate this problem, the communication coverage model II is often used. Let D min (p) denote the distance from point p ∈ S to the nearest FR, which can be computed by [31]:

(p13.1) Different from the communication coverage model I used in [32], the association of a target with an FR in [31] is based on distance. Then, the objective to minimize the average robot-target distance can be formulated as follows: min P 1 ,...,P n p∈S ρ(p)D 2 min (p)dp. (9) where ρ(p) is the target density at position p ∈ S as mentioned above.
## (s14) Minimizing the Number of Flying Robots
Number of References: 17

(p14.0) The above approaches are about the deployment of a given number of FRs. A different objective is to figure out the minimum number of required FRs to provide a high quality of communication service or target coverage, which relates to the system investment. In [25], the authors deploy the FRs at the same altitude to cover a set of targets, given their locations. Based on the disk coverage model, they formulate a Geometric Disk Cover problem with the objective of using the minimum number of robots to cover all the targets. To address the problem, a centralized heuristic algorithm is proposed. Beyond the 2D situation considered in [25], the authors of [50] consider the case of deploying FRs in 3D space with the same objective and a PSO-based heuristic algorithm is proposed. Reference [51] studies the similar problem and an elitist non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm is used to find the optimal positions for FRs from a given set of candidates.

(p14.1) Besides the application of supporting wireless communication using FRs, the minimization of FR number has also been considered in other applications such as wireless charging sensor nodes [26] and target tracking [7,24,37]. Publications [7,24] study the continuous camera coverage problem. The objectives are to minimize the number of FRs and energy consumption. Reference [7] formulates a mixed-integer non-linear optimization model and presents a mixed-integer programming-based heuristic algorithm. Paper [24] considers the similar case as [7] and the authors further propose a localized heuristic algorithm beyond the centralized one in [7]. It is worth mentioning that the advantages of [7,24] include the consideration of the energy limitation of FRs. Paper [37] integrates the recharging requirements into the continuous coverage problem and examines the minimum number of FRs for covering multiple subareas. The authors partition the coverage graph into cycles that start from the charging depot and the number of FRs required depends on the charging time, the traveling time, and the number of subareas to be covered by the cycle.
## (s24) Localization of Flying Robots
Number of References: 2

(p24.0) A typical example is that FRs are used to monitor key plants in the indoor factory environment, such as nuclear power stations, which is safer, more efficient, and more economical than human patrol. There are several challenges to be addressed about the navigation of FRs. In indoor environments, GPS may not work, which makes localizing FRs a challenge, as well as navigation. Although a camera can to be equipped on the FRs, it will lead to a heavy computing load because of image processing, which may be impossible for micro FRs with low computing performance [97]. To this end, WSNs can be used to localize FRs in indoor environments using the extended Kalman filter and time difference of arrival (TDOA) measurements of radio signal [98].
## (s25) Navigation of Flying Robots
Number of References: 3

(p25.0) In WSNs, replacing a failed sensor node is a typical operation. To achieve this by FRs, the capability to navigate a FR towards a sensor node is required. One approach is based on received signal strength indication (RSSI) [99,100]. Specifically, in reference [99], the target sensor node periodically sends out beacons, and the FR can measure RSSI to determine the moving direction. Under the similar setting, reference [100] presents a reduced particle filtering method, which is well suited for devices with limited computational power and energy resources.
## (s29) Connectivity Consideration
Number of References: 12

(p29.0) As mentioned above, when multiple robots are used, each robot needs to have a valid wireless backhaul link at any time, to guarantee the delay of response, or form a connected backbone to transmit the collected sensory data to SBSs. References [31][32][33] have addressed this issue by requiring each robot to be connected to an SBS either directly or via another for relay, but the issues related to the data flow have not been covered in them. Under this model, the system will work as long as the connectivity is set up. However, the data rates at the one-hop robots are different from those with two hops when serving users [13]. Therefore, such connectivity is not guaranteed to provide satisfactory service. One possible solution is inspired by the uneven clustering problem in WSNs [103,104], i.e., setting different serving numbers for the FRs with different hops, i.e., an unequal association between users and robots. In this way, the one-hop robots can serve a smaller number of users than the robots with two or more hops. Then, the one-hop robots can have more resources to relay the requests from the robots which are connected to it.

(p29.1) Another drawback of [31,32] is that they all fix the topology at first and then find optimal positions for FRs satisfying this topology. It is clear that the topology of robots can also be optimized to achieve no worse performance of coverage. References [13,33] consider finding a subset of positions for the FRs from a set of candidates. It is easy to understand that this method can generate different topologies of connected graphs, which is superior to [31,32].
## (s30) Optimal Deployment in 3D Space
Number of References: 6

(p30.0) Among the discussed approaches, some are based on grids [7,24]. Although discretization simplifies the problem, the performance of the solution depends highly on the resolution of grids. The higher resolution makes the solution closer to the optimal one, but it increases the computing load, while the lower resolution makes the searching computational efficient, but the solution may be far from the optimal. Furthermore, there are some approaches based on the formulation of mixed-integer programming, such as [13,22,33,105]. One common feature of them is the assumption that the possible positions of FRs are given by a set of candidates. These candidates can be regarded as a special set of grids.
## (s32) Navigation with Collision Avoidance
Number of References: 20

(p32.0) In the application of search and rescue, navigation with collision avoidance is important for both ground and FRs. Approaches such as [81,83,84,106] and some others such as [107][108][109][110] have proposed various path planning and reactive navigation algorithms. Although some of them are designed for FRs, such as [107][108][109], a fixed altitude is assumed; while few papers studied the much more difficult case of collision-free 3D navigation [111][112][113][114][115]. With this regard, there is a necessity to extend the available 2D methods to the 3D scenario. Furthermore, 3D risk-aware navigation is more preferred to avoid no-flight areas, such as populated areas and those with chemical plants [107][108][109]. Risk-aware navigation especially suits urban environments, where a relatively larger number of obstacles and no-flight areas exist. Another important direction for future research is to obtain some 3D versions of barrier and sweep coverage problems [116] for monitoring and surveillance applications.
