# Survey Paper on Fractal Image Compression using Block Truncation Coding Technique Anshu Agrawal

CorpusID: 53985870 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6ec1e87a5dff44707c7dc17bbb0c52b4d7542829](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6ec1e87a5dff44707c7dc17bbb0c52b4d7542829)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s1) LITERATURE SURVEY
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) Sunwoong Kim et al. [1], Frame memory compression is a widely used image compression technique that aims to reduce the size of the frame memory in display panels such as those containing LCD and OLED technologies. Late LCD boards utilize the RGBW shading area to supplant the customary RGB space keeping in mind the end goal to improve the shine of LCD boards with the expansion of a white segment. The extra part expands the extent of the casing memory yet requires a forceful pressure calculation. This paper proposes a novel pressure calculation for RGBW parts that enhances the proficiency of piece truncation coding (BTC), which is generally utilized for LCD overdrive. Jing-Ming Guo et al. [3], Block truncation committal to writing (BTC) has been thought of extremely economical compression technique for many years. In addition, this strategy can give phenomenal preparing proficiency by abusing the nature parallelism preferred standpoint of the spot dispersion, and great picture quality can likewise be offered through co-upgrading the class grid and diffused network of the dab dissemination. As per the test comes about, the proposed DDBTC is better than the previous mistake diffused BTC as far as different target picture quality appraisal strategies and in addition preparing productivity.
## (s3) BLOCK TRUNCATION CODE
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) The encoding method of VQ is time consuming, whereas its decoding method uses table look-up method and is very fast. This method results in higher compression ratio, though quality of the reconstructed image is usually not as good as BTC. BTC is a simple and fast method, which enables high quality reconstruction but bit-rate is also high. Comparatively, the encoder of BTC is faster than that of VQ, while its decoder is little slower. A compromise between these two methods gives a fast decoder, maintains good quality for reconstructed image with moderate bit-rate. Again, this hybrid method can also be used in image feature extraction. That means the compressed data due to this method can directly be used to compute image features like, edge [5][6], and so on.
