# Pregnancy-associated Breast Cancer: A Review of Imaging Modalities

CorpusID: 53335658 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dcc74a63000b94f3bb6004cb615c2ae883ed1b46](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dcc74a63000b94f3bb6004cb615c2ae883ed1b46)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Ultrasound
Number of References: 6

(p6.0) Ultrasonography in the diagnosis of PABC has a high sensitivity and specificity (17). The first step in dealing with pregnant and breastfeeding patients with a sense of mass is ultrasound. Since in this phase the nodularity of the breast tissue increases, any sustainability nodularity that lasts at least more than 2 to 4 weeks requires a Target ultrasound. In similar studies, the sensitivity of ultrasound to detect PABC has been reported to be up to 100% with a negative predictive value of about 100%. In another study, sonography was abnormal in 100% of symptomatic patients (11). Any suspicious mass found in ultrasound should subsequently be subjected to an ultrasound-guided biopsy. If the pathology is malignant, it is necessary to carefully examine the contralateral breast, as well as the multifocal or multicentric lesion in the same breast. It should be noted that PABC is more likely to be locally advanced. Another application of ultrasound in the PABC management setting is serial mass size measurement after neo-adjuvant chemotherapy. Sonographic criteria of PABC do not significantly differ from non-PABC ( Figure 1). The most common finding in ultrasound is mass. Most of these masses tend to have large cystic parts that can be induced due to their invasive nature and central necrosis (17,18). So, it is important to note that cystic-solid (complex) masses, which is discovered during pregnancy and lactation, should be biopsied and should not be abandoned to the abscess or galactocele unless clinically apparent. Sonographic criteria are helpful in the determination of malignant and benign masses ( Figure 1). According to the system of BI-RADS (breast imaging and data reporting system), ultrasound specimens including spiculated margin, irregular shape, and non-parallel orientation are potent malignant suggestions, while the elliptical shape and well-defined margins are in favor of benign tumors. In pregnancy and lactation, due to physiological changes in breast tissue, we may not have typical ultrasonographic views of malignancy. In a study, 58% of masses with malignant pathology demonstrated parallel orientation, as we know this is a sign of benign masses (19). Posterior enhancement, which is commonly seen in benign lesions, has been reported in 63% of PABC cases in a study (19). In various papers, biopsy was recommend for every solid mass, which was discovered in ultrasound during pregnancy. One of the other ultrasound application for PABC, according to NCCN guidelines (2017), is the evaluation of liver metastasis in patients with PABC, who are diagnosed with axillary lymph node involvement or have tumors in the T3 and higher (above 5 cm).
## (s9) Staging of PABC
Number of References: 6

(p9.0) In the process of staging, modalities with radiation are reasonable if they are effective in the management of the disease, otherwise it is best to avoid them. Ionizing radiation can damage the fetus's DNA directly or through free radicals. Radiation complications include mental retardation and organ malformation that are more common in conventional radiology and occur at higher doses of 0.2 Gy (23). The most frequent encountered organs involved in metastasis are the liver, lung, and skeletal system, routinely staging with chest x-ray, liver ultrasound, bone scan, or bone MRI without contrast. A chest x-ray with fetus shielding can be done safely in pregnancy. The preferred method of diagnosis of metastatic according to NCCN 2016 is non-contrast MRI. A bone scan is applicable only in cases, where the patient has undetectable MRI findings. In the evaluation of diagnostic methods, sentinel lymph node biopsy is not recommended for less than 30 weeks pregnancy and it is contraindicated to perform with iso-sulfanblue and methylene blue. There are few case studies that explain the association between the use of tracer radioactive materials and fetus anomalies. PET scan is not indicated in staging (8). The risk of metastasis is approximately 0.9% when cancer diagnosed with 1 month delay and this risk is 2.6% and 5.1% in the delay of 3 months and 6 months, respectively, if considering the doubling time of the mass 130 days (24). On the other hand, if the doubling time of the mass is 65 days, the estimated metastatic risk of these numbers increases by 1.8%, 5.2%, and 10.2% for 1, 3, and 5 months, respectively (29). Finally, in young patients with PABC in pregnancy, 48% of cases have positive familial history, 2% to 29% are with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations; therefore, in PABC cases, genetic counseling is recommended (30,31).
