# Biogenic Hydrocarbons in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer: A Review

CorpusID: 53965765 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b7c8c23589a9a48fea379b39943bab64ae7644c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b7c8c23589a9a48fea379b39943bab64ae7644c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry

## (s3) 1) ISOPRENE
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) The biosynthetic pathways of the common biogenic hydrocarbons, isoprene, and monoterpenes share a common precursor compound, dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAPP, Fig. 1). This precursor and its isomer isopentenyl pyrophosphate are also precursors for important biological molecules such as carotenoids and cholesterol ). This last step in isoprene synthesis is catalyzed by the enzyme isoprene synthase (Fig. 1). Progress has been made recently in understanding the controls acting on isoprene synthase. It appears to be a membrane-bound, lightactivated enzyme that catalyzes the elimination of pyrophosphate from DMAPP (Silver and Fall 1991;Wildermuth and Fall 1996). Changes in activity of isoprene synthase are correlated with changes in isoprene emission (Kuzma and Fall 1993).
## (s5) 4) OXYGENATED HYDROCARBONS
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) In addition to isoprene and monoterpenes, several oxygenated volatile organic compounds are emitted by plants. All plants studied to date emit methanol when their leaves are expanding (Nemecek-Marshall et al. 1995). The mechanism for this emission is not known, but MacDonald and Fall (1993a) suggest that methanol is produced when cell walls expand (Fig. 2), a process during which pectin is demethylated. Many conifers emit large amounts of acetone from their buds (MacDonald and Fall 1993b).
## (s14) 3) LANDSCAPE-LEVEL FLUXES
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) The main goal of deriving hydrocarbon fluxes is to provide emissions for regions. Thus, hydrocarbon concentration measurements at several altitudes using tethered balloon systems provide contextual information to derive hydrocarbon fluxes canvasing spatial scales extending from the canopy top to well into the convective boundary layer. The mass balance approach provides the basis to derive hydrocarbon fluxes at the landscape level. As noted in (8), if the mean horizontal flow (u) is aligned with the west-to-east axis (x) this method requires knowledge of spatial (∂χ/∂x) and vertical (∂χ/∂z) changes in hydrocarbon concentrations, and flux changes (∂F χ /∂z) within the atmospheric mixed layer to obtain hydrocarbon fluxes (Guenther et al. 1996;Zimmerman et al. 1988
