# A survey on dynamic and stochastic vehicle routing problems

CorpusID: 53761338 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5e08e1cf9ca7c04103b56a579447e753ec766ff1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5e08e1cf9ca7c04103b56a579447e753ec766ff1)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s6) Preprocessed decision support
Number of References: 7

(p6.0) In order to handle uncertainty and real-time information about travel times efficiently, travel times are analysed and modelled appropriately and incorporated into the algorithms. Usually, this is modelled as a MDP and it is popular to model the stochastic information about travel times via probabilities of congestion on links. The aim is to calculate an optimal routing policy in advance which can then be applied to the vehicle en route. Note that all the possible decisions are calculated and evaluated before the vehicle starts its route. One shortcoming is the dimension of the problems. So for every possible state regarding time, location and traffic information an optimal routing policy must be determined and stored. The computational effort can be demonstrated by the rather small test networks used in the literature. Interesting work which considers stochastic time-dependent travel times and which performs (optimal) routing decisions in advance is presented in Fu (2001), Miller-Hooks (2001, Kim, Lewis, and White (2005), Gao and Chabini (2006), Gao and Huang (2012) and Güner, Murat, and Chinnam (2012). Recently, Toriello, Haskell, and Poremba (2014) propose an approximated linear programming (ALP) approach for the dynamic TSP with stochastic arc costs. The authors also investigate a rollout policy, where the expected costs at any state biased by the optimal value of the LP relaxation of a shortest Hamiltonian path are considered.
## (s7) Online decision-making
Number of References: 6

(p7.0) Here, the focus is on DVRPs with stochastic and time-dependent travel times where the decisions for adapting the route are not preprocessed but calculated online. In Taniguchi and Shimamoto (2004) and Potvin, Xu, and Benyahia (2006), the routes are updated according to estimated travel times whenever a vehicle arrives a customer location. In the former work, the travel times are obtained by a dynamic traffic simulation based on a macroscopic approach and the results show the benefit of using the reactive algorithm compared to the static counterpart for test scenarios where a link is blocked for an hour at different times. In the latter case, travel times are obtained by a short-term forecast and dynamic perturbation model and a tolerance level, which is an allowed waiting time in the case of lateness, before a reassignment action, is initiated. Results show that a good strategy is to accept lateness in the case of small deviations in travel times, but react on events of a large magnitude. Yan, Lin, and Lai (2013) deal with the planning of courier routes and introduce a time-space network including several arcs associated with travel times and a probability. A stochastic planning model, incorporating unanticipated lateness penalty costs and a stochastic real-time adjustment model, which handles dynamic requests and aims for little route adjustment, are introduced. The results show that the model with route adjustment yields better results. Another essential work is presented by Schilde, Doerner, and Hartl (2014), using stochastic deviations from time-dependent travel speeds which are deduced from historical accident data. The positive effect of using such data instead of average time-dependent travel speeds is tested on different stochastic metaheuristic concepts: dynamic stochastic variable neighbourhood search (DSVNS) which is based on Gutjahr, Katzensteiner, and Reiter (2007) and multiple scenario approach (MSA) introduced in Bent and Van Hentenryck (2004). The results are compared to the corresponding myopic approaches: a dynamic VNS (DVNS) and a multiple plan approach (MPA). In contrast to the work above, the true travel speed is revealed in each iteration of the algorithm. In general, the DSVNS performs best, but the solution quality highly depends on the DOD in so far as for highly and non-dynamic instances, the DVNS works better. However, the MSA turns out to be unsuitable for this problem setting and, on average, obtains no improvements.
## (s10) Preprocessed decision support
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) A popular method for solving a DVRPSD is to consider all states (e.g. all possible demand realisations) in advance and the value of each state according to its performance. Such an approach performs the evaluation of the states before the vehicle starts the tour and enables an accurate decision-making based on these values during the plan execution phase. From the point of computational effort, it might be very expensive to determine all the predefined values, but it comes with the advantage that dynamic decisions can be provided quite fast. This is usually formulated as a multi-stage stochastic dynamic programming model and with the assumption that states and decisions are discrete and the value evaluation can be done by Bellman's equation. To overcome the curse of dimensionality, the exact value function can be replaced by an approximation. This formulation can either be implemented as an ALP as in Toriello, Haskell, and Poremba (2014) or as an approximated dynamic programming (ADP) discussed in Powell (2007).
## (s19) Production and routing interface
Number of References: 3

(p19.0) A recent trend in this research field is the combination of production and transportation problems and their simultaneously optimisation. The inventory routing problem (IRP) is a combination of vehicle routing and inventory management problems, where a supplier has to delivery products to a set of customers. Solutions for the IRP are obtained by simultaneously optimising vehicle routing, inventory management and delivery scheduling. Coelho, Cordeau, and Laporte (2014) provide a comprehensive literature review on IRPs and classify the problems with respect to their structural variants and the availability of customer demand information. Another problem class is the production routing problem (PRP) which combines the vehicle routing and lot-sizing problem. It is solved by optimising inventory, distribution, routing and production decisions simultaneously and is thus a generalisation of the IRP. An excellent survey on PRPs is given in Adulyasak, Cordeau, and Jans (2015), where different formulations and algorithmic issues and performance for PRPs are discussed. The review from Chen (2010) addresses the problem that for time-sensitive or make-to-order product distribution, the production process and the distribution of the products must be linked and scheduled jointly.
