# 06+ MILLION TOP 1% MOST CITED SCIENTIST 12.2% AUTHORS AND EDITORS FROM TOP 500 UNIVERSITIES Cyanobacterial Toxins Emerging Contaminants in Soils: A Review of Sources, Fate and Impacts on Ecosystems, Plants and Animal and Human Health Provisional chapter Cyanobacterial Toxins Emerging Contaminants in Soils: A Review of Sources, Fate and Impacts on Ecosystems, Plants and Animal and Human Health

CorpusID: 53410839 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73bf80cf738aa9ec00cc46af41ca01e683e5a82a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73bf80cf738aa9ec00cc46af41ca01e683e5a82a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s7) Microorganisms
Number of References: 14

(p7.0) Secondary, metabolites produced by cyanobacteria seem to have several activities as antiviral, antifungal and antibacterial [71]. In aquatic environments, several studies revealed an inhibition of bacterial growth after 8 days of exposure to cyanobacterial extract containing microcystins or pure microcystin standards [105]. In the same way, Giaramida et al. [106] reported that the exposure to cyanobacterial extract containing microcystins induced changes in structure and physiology of bacterial communities. The measure of arylsulfatase, phosphatase, urease and β-D-glucosidase activities in the soil, after irrigation with cyanobacterial extract of M. aeruginosa (PCC7820) diluted between 5 and 100 µg equivalent MC-LR L −1 during 14 or 90 days, revealed an absence of the alteration of the activity of these enzymes linked to sulphur, phosphorus and nitrogen mineralization and cellulose degradation, respectively [107,108]. In contrast, these studies revealed a stimulation of the potential of nitrification that was positively correlated to an increase in the abundance of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria, whereas the ammonia-oxidizing archaea were not impacted. In a recently study, El Khalloufi et al. [109] highlighted the effects of cyanobacterial extract containing microcystins on soil microorganisms from the rhizosphere of Medicago sativa. The authors exposed M. sativa to 100 µg equivalent MC-LR L −1 during 30 days at three times a week and a pyrosequencing analysis was further established to characterize the bacterial community of the rhizosphre. The results revealed fluctuations with an increase in Betaproteobacteria and a decrease in Gammaproteobacteria proportion. Furthermore, cyanobacterial extract containing microcystins used for irrigation seemed to be toxic towards Actinobacteria, Gemmatimonas, Deltaproteobacteria and Gammaproteobacteria, however other groups as Clostridia, Opitutae and bacteria related with Betaproteobacteria, were stimulated [109]. However, Lahrouni et al. [110,111] reported that rhizobia-Vicia faba symbiosis was not impacted by microcystins. Nevertheless, several studies revealed the presence of heterotrophic bacteria in the soil containing a microcystin-gene cluster, mlrA, B, C and D essential for degradation of microcystins [89,94,95,112]. For example, some species of the proteobacteria belonging to the genera Sphingomonas, Methylobacillus and Paucibacter are known to degrade microcystins [10, 76]. Additionally, Jia et al. [113] showed that a fungus, Trichaptum abietinum, was able to degrade microcystins. However, no studies have yet examined the effects of cylindrospermopsin and neurotoxins in soil microorganisms.
## (s8) Invertebrates
Number of References: 8

(p8.0) The impact of cyanotoxins on aquatic invertebrates was well documented (for review, see Ref. [114]). However, the effects of these toxins on soil invertebrates are scarce. The effects of microcystins on soil nematods Ceanorhabditis elegans were studied by Li et al. [115,116] and Holajjer et al. [117]. After exposure to 1 µg MC-LR L −1 , a reduction in lifespan, a delay of development, an increase in generation time, a decrease in brood size, a suppression of locomotion behaviour and a decrease in hsp-16-2-gfp expression were observed [115]. In addition, the neurotoxicity of MC-LR was demonstrated in C. elegans with significant severe defects of chemotaxis to NaCl and diacetyl, and thermotaxis [116]. Therefore, the application of toxic cyanobacteria in soil may reduce nematode infestation and finally increase plant yield (see review in Ref. [117]). Concerning the macrofauna, and to the best of our knowledge, only one study was reported in the literature on the survival and reproduction of the springtail Folmiosa candida after application to the soil of a cyanobacterial biomass containing different concentrations of microcystins from 21 to 3662 µg g −1 DW [118]. The results showed no adverse effects on survival and reproduction when the ratio cyanobacterial biomass/soil attained 4 g kg −1 DW soil.
