# Protein Molecular Structures, Protein SubFractions, and Protein Availability Affected by Heat Processing: A Review

CorpusID: 54660459 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/30ccfde46a5316ed8f3ec1dcbcb9892f6bf6c804](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/30ccfde46a5316ed8f3ec1dcbcb9892f6bf6c804)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Biology

## (s15) Effect of Roasting on Protein Subfractions of Brown and Yellow Flaxseed and Relation to Biodegradation Behavior:
Number of References: 8

(p15.0) In the recent studies [10,12] , the S-FTIRM was used as a novel approach to reveal molecular chemistry of protein in the seed tissues affected by roasting and variety (brown and yellow) and relatively estimate protein structures, in relation to rumen protein digestive behaviors and nutritive value, estimated using the CNCPS system [16] . The study [10,12] showed that the S-FTIRM revealed that the secondary structure of protein differed between the raw and roasted golden flaxseeds in terms of the proportions and ratios of αhelix and β-sheet within cellular dimensions. The roasting reduced percentage of model-fitted α-helix, increased percentage of model-fitted β-sheet and reduced α-helix to β-sheet ratio in the golden flaxseeds, which indicated that a negative effect of the roasting on protein values, utilization and availability. These results were proved by the CNCPS system which also revealed that the roasting increased protein bound to lignin, and Maillard reaction protein, which are poorly used by the ruminants and increased indigestible and undegradable protein.

(p15.1) Comparing the raw and the roasted, the raw was higher in PA (43 vs. 21 g/kg DM) and PB1 (255 vs. 64 g/kg DM), but lower in PB2 (41 vs. 243 g/kg DM), PB3 (41 vs. 243g/kg DM) and PC (12 vs. 16 g/kg DM), indicating large and potential differences in rumen protein degradation characteristics between the raw and the roasted golden flaxseed. Higher PA and PB1 content in the raw indicated that roasting processing reduced soluble protein (PA+PB1) which are fast degraded in the rumen. Lower PB2 and PB3 fractions associated with the cell wall in the raw indicated that the roasting processing increased slowly degradable and intermediately degradable proportions. Fraction PC consists of protein bound to lignin and Maillard reaction protein. From the nutritive point of view, this fraction appears to be essentially indigestible and the amount apparently digested is poorly used by animals [16,70,71] . In this study, the roasted flaxseed had a higher PC fraction than the raw flaxseed, which indicated that the roasting increased undegradable and undigestive protein fractions, which may be an indication of overprocessing and reduction of protein nutritive value.
## (s29) Comparison of Predictions of Nutrient Supply to Dairy Cows between the Two Models:
Number of References: 2

(p29.0) The studies [82] did comparison of the DVE/OEB system and the NRC-2001 model in the prediction of potential protein supply to dairy cows from concentrates, which showed that the predicted values from the DVE/OEB system and the NRC-2001 model had significant correlations. Using the DVE/OEB system, the mean supply of microbial protein based on available energy and total absorbed protein in the small intestine were lower by 9.4 and 12.9 g/kg DM, respectively. However, the mean supply of microbial protein based on ruminally degraded protein and the degraded protein balance value were higher by 21.6 and 17.4 g/kg DM, respectively, in comparison to that predicted by the NRC-2001 model for the concentrate feedstuffs. In this study [82], using the DVE/OEB system, the overall average microbial protein supply based on available energy from rumen fermented OM was 10% lower, microbial protein supply based on ruminally degraded feed protein was 10% higher, and the truly absorbed protein in the small intestine was 8% lower than that predicted by the NRC-2001 model. However, the correlation of the predicted values from the two models were high (R>0.90) except of potential microbial protein supply based on energy.
