# Survey on Access Control Mechanisms in Cloud Computing

CorpusID: 55363340 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca03d25c9d518b383a7792e6121dc402898ad675](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca03d25c9d518b383a7792e6121dc402898ad675)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) Access control systems have various attributes in order to perform access control principles. The largest advantage of these systems is having user features, which are functions that are appropriate for the procedures performed, methods, and administration characteristics rather than individually performing the procedures in different fields. Thus, the priorities of the systems can be easily determined [1,2]. In addition, the procedures of performing or denying the determined priorities according to a set of rules can be performed. These rules are set in access control policies. These policies also need to be in accord with the priorities. When evaluating prioritization of access control, five different entities must be considered [3,4].
## (s7) Attribute Based Access Control
Number of References: 8

(p7.0) Unlike RBAC, the user controls (access permissions) are ensured with attributes and not roles. Thus, in the usage of Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC), the user attributes play an important role. These attributes can access the general characteristics of the user such as age, height, personal characteristics, and can be altered again according to this information [37][38][39][40]. The determination of the attributes is performed according to the topics. As the attributes are related to the information entered, they can be grouped into the following three categories: subject attributes (such as personal information), Resource attributes (information about the outcomes), and environment attributes (information about the environment) [41]. In this manner, the complexities that are rising in the growing and complicated systems are solved. Similar to RBAC, ABAC calls the permissions and limitations to action when they are needed. Additionally, logical comparisons, and controls are important features [37,42,43]. The set of user attributes will be preserved separately as shown in Figure 2.
## (s9) Mandatory Access Control
Number of References: 11

(p9.0) Mandatory Access Control (MAC) surfaced when the experts decided that DAC is not efficient in terms of security since it is not being able to control every piece of information, which the Working model of the MAC scheme is shown in Figure 4. The decisions in MAC are not made by an owner but a central system [11,12]. In this way, more powerful processes are performed in security models [57,64,65]. The wholeness and privacy of the system are the most important features after security. Thus, it can increase the security to the highest level in a whole system. Its flexibility is really low [63]. The reason for that is the system security, however, even this does not ensure the absolute privacy. It is used in government and military system improvements as a result of these features [66][67][68][69]. Also SElinux has a MAC mechanism that enables the security protocol to reduce the level of control over objects [70].
