# A Review on Data Analytics for Supply Chain Management: A Case study

CorpusID: 55422957 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a90c6d013efa5ac714f85d69b0af5794effef49c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a90c6d013efa5ac714f85d69b0af5794effef49c)

Fields: Business, Computer Science

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 3

(p0.0) After the 1990s great changes in the operating rules of world economy and market competition patterns, enterprises have identified the need for globalization of economic development. Companies need to rely on the integration of their own and external resources available in the market. This integration enables the working pattern of a system that gives quick response to the needs of the market. Also the ad-hoc situations that arise in the market. Such a system is referred to as Supply Chain Management (SCM) [1]. SCM is defined as managing the flow of information, material and resources across and within the network of upstream and downstream organizations [2]. Supply chain can be defined as network of flow of products, financial deliverables, customer services and network of information, material and resources. Management of multiple relationships in supply chain is referred to as supply chain management. Some of the factors like product success, customer satisfaction, growth of an organization depends on the successful execution of SCM [5].
## (s3) Variety:
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) It refers to the different forms of data like structured, unstructured or semi structured [35]. Also it includes different types of data from XML to video to SMS. The variety of data in the field of SCM includes data from diverse sources like retailers, distributors, suppliers, inventory, sales, consumer [9] etc. Big Data collection process in SCM includes 2 variety of sources: Upstream and downstream sources. The data from upstream source includes supplier's side, through intermediate stream or warehouse side. Data from downstream includes logistics, distribution or retailer side [20].
## (s15) C. Prescriptive Analytics:
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) DA and PA are focused on what and when it will happen, whereas Prescriptive Analytics anticipates on "why it has happened". It collects the data continuously to re-predict the events which enable the decision makers to increase the prediction accuracy for taking better decisions. Prescriptive analytics explains the reasons behind certain events. It is mainly associated with simulation and optimization [2]. The aim of Prescriptive analytics is to improve the business performance [17]. Three classes of algorithms used under this analytics method are  Decision trees  Fuzzy Rule-Based System  Switching Neural Networks (Logic Learning Machine)
## (s19) IV. CHALLENGES OF SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
Number of References: 4

(p19.0) According to Robak et al [2014], the open research problem in supply chain management along with logistics can be analyzed from the view of stake holders and executive business components, where key business functions are forecasting, inventory management, transport management and also human resources. Big data can address the issues of Supply chain like timely response, time delivery, real time planning, supplier and customer relationship management etc. [15]. Operating an effective supply chain involves continuous flow of information, which in turn helps to create better material flow [8]. The main focus in supply chain is the customer. So achieving a good customer focused system is one of the aim of SCM [8]. The key supply chain processes/ challenges are listed and shown in the  Supply chain need to be aware of the benefits given by the big data for their operations.
## (s22) B. Green Logistics
Number of References: 3

(p22.0) It implies efficiency in using transportation equipment's. Some of the key features in Green logistics are Minimization of carbon emission, Cost reduction from resource saving and environmental externalities [13]. better utilization of resources, social and environment responsibility etc. Introducing or adopting green logistics is a complex process which requires cross disciplinary coordination and also changes in the current operation process [19]. This can be also being achieved by introducing new practices in the area of supply and distribution that links them to other participants like suppliers and customers in the value chain. This link must be supported by management staff's, their characteristics and also by human resources [19].
## (s33) E. Intelligent cargo
Number of References: 2

(p33.0) Capabilities under Intelligent Cargo are selfidentification, context detection, access to services, status monitoring and registering. Self-organized logistic company's functions without intervention by managers, engineers or by the software control. Of the above approaches, the Intelligent traffic management systems attracted the greatest interest during recent years. Uckelmann described Smart Logistics as technical components to gain data on the level of material flow and to process these data for monitoring and further purposes [23]. Smart Logistics are a key approach in the information logistics cross company and international transportation networks to meet the need for robustness, flexibility, resilience and agility [23]. Technical components in smart logistics are as follows:
