# Visible and Near-Infrared Reflectance Spectroscopy for Investigating Soil Mineralogy: A Review

CorpusID: 55519533 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/741c9af1568d87d2faa7142e0a547b3b9e985dd3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/741c9af1568d87d2faa7142e0a547b3b9e985dd3)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 9

(p0.0) Soils are open, complex, and dynamic systems as well as fundamental natural environments for animals, plants, microorganisms, and human interaction [1]. Mineral composition is the most fundamental property of a soil, and soil minerals account generally for half the soil volume [2]. According to Churchman [3], clay minerals in the soil context are "secondary inorganic compounds of <2 μm size" including Fe, Al, and Mn oxides (hydroxides and oxyhydroxides), as well as noncrystalline phases. Importantly, they are the most reactive and important inorganic components in soils, and they occur commonly in close association with the most reactive organic matter [4,5]. Clays influence soil function through both their bulk properties and their associations with their huge outer/inner surfaces (e.g., cation exchange capacity [6]). e effort involved in comprehensive understanding of the nature of soil minerals is of particular importance as they may help us explain and predict how different soil types function [7].

(p0.1) However, soil mineralogy (mainly clay mineralogy) is still a minor topic in soil sciences. is may be due partly to the unjustified assumption that a given soil mineral will have the same properties as those of its better-crystallized counterpart that formed in a more "geologic" context (e.g., sedimentary kaolinite will have the same properties as pedogenic kaolinite) [4]. Revisiting soil mineralogy has been gradually important, for instance, in terms of the manner by which soil minerals are de ned and investigated [8].
## (s7) Continuum Removal
Number of References: 7

(p7.0) Approaches. e continuum removal approach aims to remove background noise and isolate particular absorption features for identi cation and analysis [34]. e continuum is usually determined using local maxima to generate a hull of boundary points (Figure 2(a)) [22]. All the boundary points are tted by straight-line segments, and then, the continuum removal is calculated by removing the original re ectance intensities from corresponding intensities of the continuum (Figure 2(b)) [23]. Continuum removal analysis is a particularly robust tool for detecting and predicting iron oxides and phyllosilicate minerals. us, it is feasible to substitute a statistical method to apply to soil mineralogy studies [10,20,22,24].
## (s12) Clay Minerals.
Number of References: 13

(p12.0) Clay minerals are frequently used as climatic indicators since their nature is directly in uenced by the temperature and amount of precipitation at the site during pedogenesis [9,48]. As climate conditions shift from cool/dry to warm/moist, the dominant clay minerals go from chlorite/illite → vermiculite → montmorillonite → kaolinite [24,49]. e dominant clays in soils show diagnostic absorptions in the SWIR domain [39]. ese absorption bands are caused by vibrational transitions and commonly display sharp and narrow features ( Figure 4). e diagnostic bands are mainly focused on ∼1400 nm (overtones caused by OH), ∼1900 nm (overtones caused by molecular water), and ∼2200 nm (combination tones caused by Al-OH [50,51]).

(p12.1) Additionally, some weak absorption bands in the 2300-2500 nm region are related to the presence of Fe-OH and/or Mg-OH in the clay minerals [24].   e spectral characteristics of some clay minerals are showed in Figure 4 and Table 1. Chlorites are a group of clay minerals containing specific octahedral cations such as Fe, Mg, and Al [52]. eir reflectance spectra exhibit a weak absorption band at approximately 1400 nm and triple absorption features near 2300 nm. e bands at 2250 and 2350 nm are related to Fe-OH and Mg-OH, respectively [53]. Illite is characterized by three prominent absorptions at ∼1400, ∼1900, and ∼2200 nm. Two secondary diagnostic Al-OH absorption peaks close to 2344 and 2445 nm are modified by Fe and Mg tschermak cation exchange [24,31]. Vermiculite has two broad absorptions at 1400 and 1900 nm and two weak absorptions near 2200 and 2300 nm [39]. Montmorillonite has three strong and sharp absorption bands at ∼1400, ∼1900, and ∼2200 nm, which are similar to but generally stronger than illite.
## (s14) Prediction from the Continuum Removal Spectra.
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) As discussed in Section 3.1.1, several geometrical features of the absorption bands can be extracted through the continuum removal method. ose parameters (e.g., P, D, and AS) from the continuum removal spectra are key to characterizing and predicting mineral compositions in soils. Viscarra Rossel et al. [23] quantitatively estimated the mineral composition by using the continuum removal method. Compositions of soil minerals such as kaolinite, illite, Al-smectite, goethite, and hematite are considered in this study, and the parameter  D is selected for prediction. e spectroscopic predictions are generally in consistence with those interpreted by XRD analysis. According to Dufrechou et al. [20], the parameter D at ∼1400, ∼1900, and ∼2200 nm was strongly affected by the amounts of kaolinite, illite, and montmorillonite in soil mixtures. Additionally, the estimation of montmorillonite abundance shows reliability when compared with XRD results. Five parameters (P, D, W, F, and AS) were used in the work by Zhao et al. [24] for assessing the utility of the continuum removal method. We compared these parameters with the results from both XRD and DRS analyses and found that some of the parameters are good at mineral content prediction. Furthermore, some parameters (e.g., AS at ∼2200 nm) are confirmed as reliable proxies for soil weathering and paleoclimate reconstruction.
## (s24) Focused Spectral Bands.
Number of References: 3

(p24.0) Spectral analyses focus on specific absorption bands representative of the corresponding soil minerals, while the multivariable regression algorithms commonly use the signals from the whole 350-2500 nm region. In some cases, the 350-400 nm and 2450-2500 nm ranges with low instrumental signal-to-noise ratios are removed [59,79]. erefore, a multivariable regression model deals with over 1000 spectral bands-many more than the number of focused bands in a continuum removal study. Moreover, several geometric parameters can be extracted from each band in a spectral measurement, including P, W, D, F, and AS, whereas only the information of depth for each band can be gleaned from a chemometric study. Note that some algorithms intrinsically provide a feature selection method (e.g., SMLR and PLSR), and it has been shown that the most important features selected by a regression model are the ones that we should pay the most attention to in a spectral measurement study [22].
