# An overview of integrative analysis in cancer studies

CorpusID: 55984211 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bee70b69438245272b31ae29c65e6be5261f49ff](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bee70b69438245272b31ae29c65e6be5261f49ff)

Fields: Computer Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s0) Integration of molecular datasets
Number of References: 6

(p0.0) Different types of molecular datasets can be obtained from the same cancer patient. Many studies proved that cancer analysis using integrative datasets performs better than analysis that just uses individual datasets. For examples, Lu et al. [3] and Peng et al. [4] distinguished eleven cancer types using miRNA and mRNA datasets. Lu et al. [3] presented that the classification (or prediction) accuracy based on mRNA is 5.9% while the accuracy of the model based on miRNA was 70.58%. However, Peng et al. [4] demonstrated that the performance of the analysis using only mRNA is better than that of only using miRNA. Even though the dataset was same, applying different tools produced completely opposite results. Regarding this, Kim et al. [5] presented the result of comparing three different types of datasets; miRNA alone, mRNA alone, and integrative datasets of miRNA and mRNA. For the research, two different cancer types, ovarian cancer (OV) and glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) were analyzed (Kim et al. [5]). The accuracies of OV are 84.04%, 75%, 63.64% using integrative miRNA-mRNA profiles, miRNA profiles, and mRNA profile, respectively. The accuracies of GBM are 87.76%, 79.59%, 77.55% using integrative miRNA-mRNA profiles, miRNA profiles, and mRNA profiles, respectively.
## (s1) Integration of molecular dataset with biological information
Number of References: 11

(p1.0) Fu et al. [6] proposed an integrative method using miRNA and mRNA expression datasets, and miRNA and its target mRNA information from both TargetScan [1] and miRanda [2]. The method identified the robust target mRNA of miRNAs. Integrating pathway information and microarray gene expression datasets also provided more accurate results than just using mRNA expression profiles.

(p1.1) The classification based on pathway presented comparable or even better performance than the gene-based classification method. For example, Guo et al. [7] suggested a method to infer module activity using mean or median gene expression values in gene ontology [8]. Su et al. [9] presented a method for classification based on the probabilistic inference of pathway activity. In addition, Lee et al. [10,11] proposed a classification method for cancer phenotypes using the core genes in pathways as the differentiators of the disease phenotypes. Kim et al. [12] proposed an integrative method using KEGG pathway [13] information extracted from gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) [14] and mRNA expression datasets. In the study, features based on core genes from enrichment pathway performed better than the methods using only the pathway features or mRNA itself (Figure 1). Integr Cancer Sci Therap, 2016 doi: 10.15761/ICST.1000193 results of using integrative datasets are more accurate than just using single profiles.
