# Clinical Medicine A Literature Review of Proton Beam Therapy for Prostate Cancer in Japan

CorpusID: 58539316 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f80badcadff95e865e771a8fdcc53d874399844](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f80badcadff95e865e771a8fdcc53d874399844)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s9) Target Positioning and Organs at Risk
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) Target positioning is a very important factor to deliver adequate amount of dosage to the target with minimal radiation to the organ at risk. In 2018, Maeda et al. compared bone and prostate matching in terms of the dose constraint in the rectum and dose coverage in the prostate which resulted to more favourable outcomes in the latter. Maeda et al. measured movements of the prostate, seminal vesicles, as well as the rectum at the time of CT image guiding proton therapy for prostate cancer while studying the range difference in lateral opposed proton beams. A total of 375 CT images of 10 patients were taken to assess the movements of the prostate, seminal vesicle, and rectum with the use of bone, prostate center (PC), and prostate-rectum boundary (PRB) matching strategies. Extensive movement of the seminal vesicle towards the superior-inferior direction and anterior region of the rectum was observed. Comparison of the three matching strategies showed that PRB matching exhibited the least positional disparity on all directions specifically in the posterior part of the prostate however, there was no significant difference on the anterior part positioning. The use of PRB matching along with CT guidance image can be more beneficial in decreasing rectal toxicities. It was observed that errors are increased in the anteroposterior (AP) and superoinferior (SI) parts of both the prostate and seminal vesicle, yet a larger deviation was found in the latter alongside its lateral portion. The prostate had shown a higher daily disparity on the AP side than the SI direction indicating that prostate movements are inclined toward the anterior side. In CT image guided proton therapy, keeping the dose constraint of the rectum and the dose coverage of the prostate can be achieved by proper repositioning of AP and SI direction in conventional bone matching. PRB matching showed the least average positional deviation along the AP and SI direction compared to the other two techniques. Bone matching and prostate center matching increased the positional deviations and errors of the rectal wall in the inferior to superior side, but less can be observed in PC. In the case of PRB matching, errors and average positional deviation were minimal around the center of the prostate due to the decreased movement of the seminal vesicle (SV) in this matching strategy. Thus, positional disparity due to SV movements can be better balanced out by PRB matching in comparison to PC and bone matching [34,35].

(p9.1) Fuji et al. conducted a clinical research on the effect of rectal emptying tube (RET) to the rectal volume and prostate localization. Pronounced internal motion of the prostate was observed in the AP direction, agreeing with previous reports [34,35]. The relationship between the reduction of rectal volume and disparity in prostate motion was also confirmed in this study. Internal motion can be influenced by various factors such as rectal filling, bladder filling, leg position, respiratory position, and most importantly, rectal volume. Twenty-one patients had given their consent to use a RET which releases gas from the rectum to mechanically control the its volume. This device is also useful for immobilization of the organ and also hampers rectum shape change after emplacement. Results showed that RET can decrease the rectal volume and prostate displacements in the anteroposterior and superoinferior direction. In comparison with the use of an endorectal balloon, RET placement exhibited to be more favorable as it was able to reduce prostate motion in all directions of about 0-4 mm. Aside from this, the use of an endorectal balloon can cause a distended rectum, which may lead to alteration in the prostate shape and anterior position. Thus, the use of RET can significantly decrease prostate motion following reduced rectal volume changes and it can be more beneficial for patient use than the endorectal balloon [33].
