# Intelligent Packaging in the Food Sector: A Brief Overview

CorpusID: 58615938 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c7373d47f5c196efb579f9727395c042a393bd4e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c7373d47f5c196efb579f9727395c042a393bd4e)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s10) Data Carriers
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) Data carriers help to make the information flow within the supply chain more efficient. The function of data carriers is not to monitor the quality of the products, but to guarantee traceability, automatization, theft protection, or counterfeit protection [24]. To ensure this, data carriers store and transmit information about storage, distribution, and other parameters. Therefore, they are often placed on tertiary packaging. The most frequently used data carriers are barcode labels and RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) tags [10]. 
## (s11) Barcodes
Number of References: 10

(p11.0) Barcodes are cheap, easy to use, and are widely used to facilitate inventory control, stock recording, and checkout [25]. In general, barcodes can be divided into one-dimensional and two-dimensional ones. Depending on the type, they have different storage capacities [10].

(p11.1) A one-dimensional barcode is a pattern of parallel spaces and bars (see Figure 3). The different arrangement of the bars and gaps results in the coding of data. A barcode scanner and an associated system can translate the coded information [10]. A one-dimensional barcode is a pattern of parallel spaces and bars (see Figure 3). The different arrangement of the bars and gaps results in the coding of data. A barcode scanner and an associated system can translate the coded information [10]. Two-dimensional barcodes offer more memory capacity (e.g., for packaging date, batch number, packaging weight, nutritional information, or preparation instructions) because of the combination of dots and spaces arranged in an array or a matrix. This provides great convenience for retailers and consumers. An example of 2D barcodes are QR (quick response) Codes (see Figure 4) [14]. Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) Technology RFID tags are advanced data carrier with a data storage up to 1 MB, as well as non-contact and non-line-of-sight ability to collect real time data. These collect, store and transmit real-time information to a user's information system. In comparison to barcodes, RFID tags are more expensive and need a more powerful electronic information network [14]. On the other side, the information can be loaded electronically on these tags and can be changed again [26]. Furthermore, RFID offers further advantages for the entire food supply chain. These include traceability, inventory management and promotion of quality and safety [27].

(p11.2) A RFID system consists of three compounds: a tag formed by a microchip connected to a tiny antenna, a reader that emits radio signals and receives answers from the tag in return and a middleware that bridges the RFID hardware and enterprise applications (see Figure 5) [27,28]. 
## (s12) Time Temperature Indicator (TTI) Integrated Barcodes and RFID Tags
Number of References: 24

(p12.0) Barcodes and QR Codes are the first so-called intelligent packaging technologies. Meanwhile they have been further developed and integrated into TTIs. The principle is based on the fact that a label is scanned and information about the product as well as the temperature progression is given. Compared to traditional data carriers, these systems can not only be used to track the distribution chain, but can also help reduce food waste [29]. Two-dimensional barcodes offer more memory capacity (e.g., for packaging date, batch number, packaging weight, nutritional information, or preparation instructions) because of the combination of dots and spaces arranged in an array or a matrix. This provides great convenience for retailers and consumers. An example of 2D barcodes are QR (quick response) Codes (see Figure 4) [14]. A one-dimensional barcode is a pattern of parallel spaces and bars (see Figure 3). The different arrangement of the bars and gaps results in the coding of data. A barcode scanner and an associated system can translate the coded information [10]. Two-dimensional barcodes offer more memory capacity (e.g., for packaging date, batch number, packaging weight, nutritional information, or preparation instructions) because of the combination of dots and spaces arranged in an array or a matrix. This provides great convenience for retailers and consumers. An example of 2D barcodes are QR (quick response) Codes (see Figure 4) [14]. Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) Technology RFID tags are advanced data carrier with a data storage up to 1 MB, as well as non-contact and non-line-of-sight ability to collect real time data. These collect, store and transmit real-time information to a user's information system. In comparison to barcodes, RFID tags are more expensive and need a more powerful electronic information network [14]. On the other side, the information can be loaded electronically on these tags and can be changed again [26]. Furthermore, RFID offers further advantages for the entire food supply chain. These include traceability, inventory management and promotion of quality and safety [27].

(p12.1) A RFID system consists of three compounds: a tag formed by a microchip connected to a tiny antenna, a reader that emits radio signals and receives answers from the tag in return and a middleware that bridges the RFID hardware and enterprise applications (see Figure 5) [27,28]. Barcodes and QR Codes are the first so-called intelligent packaging technologies. Meanwhile they have been further developed and integrated into TTIs. The principle is based on the fact that a label is scanned and information about the product as well as the temperature progression is given. Compared to traditional data carriers, these systems can not only be used to track the distribution chain, but can also help reduce food waste [29]. Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) Technology RFID tags are advanced data carrier with a data storage up to 1 MB, as well as non-contact and non-line-of-sight ability to collect real time data. These collect, store and transmit real-time information to a user's information system. In comparison to barcodes, RFID tags are more expensive and need a more powerful electronic information network [14]. On the other side, the information can be loaded electronically on these tags and can be changed again [26]. Furthermore, RFID offers further advantages for the entire food supply chain. These include traceability, inventory management and promotion of quality and safety [27].

(p12.2) A RFID system consists of three compounds: a tag formed by a microchip connected to a tiny antenna, a reader that emits radio signals and receives answers from the tag in return and a middleware that bridges the RFID hardware and enterprise applications (see Figure 5) [27,28]. A one-dimensional barcode is a pattern of parallel spaces and bars (see Figure 3). The different arrangement of the bars and gaps results in the coding of data. A barcode scanner and an associated system can translate the coded information [10]. Two-dimensional barcodes offer more memory capacity (e.g., for packaging date, batch number, packaging weight, nutritional information, or preparation instructions) because of the combination of dots and spaces arranged in an array or a matrix. This provides great convenience for retailers and consumers. An example of 2D barcodes are QR (quick response) Codes (see Figure 4) [14]. Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) Technology RFID tags are advanced data carrier with a data storage up to 1 MB, as well as non-contact and non-line-of-sight ability to collect real time data. These collect, store and transmit real-time information to a user's information system. In comparison to barcodes, RFID tags are more expensive and need a more powerful electronic information network [14]. On the other side, the information can be loaded electronically on these tags and can be changed again [26]. Furthermore, RFID offers further advantages for the entire food supply chain. These include traceability, inventory management and promotion of quality and safety [27].

(p12.3) A RFID system consists of three compounds: a tag formed by a microchip connected to a tiny antenna, a reader that emits radio signals and receives answers from the tag in return and a middleware that bridges the RFID hardware and enterprise applications (see Figure 5) [27,28]. Barcodes and QR Codes are the first so-called intelligent packaging technologies. Meanwhile they have been further developed and integrated into TTIs. The principle is based on the fact that a label is scanned and information about the product as well as the temperature progression is given. Compared to traditional data carriers, these systems can not only be used to track the distribution chain, but can also help reduce food waste [29].  label is scanned and information about the product as well as the temperature progression is given. Compared to traditional data carriers, these systems can not only be used to track the distribution chain, but can also help reduce food waste [29].
## (s19) Gas Indicators
Number of References: 7

(p19.0) Gas indicators indicate the quality condition of the food depending on the indoor atmosphere. A sensor detects and reacts to changes in the atmosphere inside the packaging, while the actual indicator displays the quality status. The modifications of the atmosphere are based on the one hand of the food activity, such as enzymatic or chemical reactions, and on the other hand of the package nature and environmental conditions, such as gas generation by microorganisms metabolism or gas transmission through the packaging. Most of them monitor the oxygen and carbon dioxide concentrations [42]. But also water vapor, ethanol, hydrogen sulfide, and other gases are checked [14]. The concentrations of these gases often correlate closely with the advance of spoilage [42]. The functionality of most devices is based on redox dyes, a reducing compound and an alkaline component [10]. In order to be able to monitor the gases, indicators must be placed inside the packaging. But many of these indicators have a loss of color due to the moisture in the packaging. However, companies are already researching UV-activated colorimetric indicators [44] that show less dye leaching because of encapsulation or coating technologies [10,45].
