# The Assessment Process of Pupils' Learning in Saudi Education System: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 59399951 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12824c5963cbb352587ddb56ab94a9e135adcf6a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12824c5963cbb352587ddb56ab94a9e135adcf6a)

Fields: Education

## (s9) The Assessment Process in Saudi Education System
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) There is a close interlinking of teaching materials, classroom management skills, educational aims and educational assessment processes. Assessments are essential components of teaching and learning programmes and play a role in shaping individual learning. Assessment is used in Saudi Arabia to measure student attainment [8] using an examination system and is the only system of assessment used [7]. An internal exam is sat by students at the end of every term with the school year having two terms in all, and the results are used to assess progression to the next grade by combining 50% of each term's grades. This is done in all years of education from primary, intermediate to secondary school [8] Internal exams make up the remaining assessments and are set by teachers, who design their own assessments, within the constraints of resources available to them within their school. The grading system for all assessments in Saudi Education System as ( Table 1) below: 
## (s11) The Assessment Process in Intermediate School
Number of References: 5

(p11.0) The Saudi Arabian curriculum is rigid and prescriptive with no opportunity for teachers to develop or amend it. It is centrally controlled and oriented on academic subjects [8] with the national curriculum, education facilities, assessment, teachers, additional funding and administration controlled by the Ministry of Education. Reference [8] suggesting that it is characterised by insufficient professionalism in administration of assessments, curricula and data gathering, and he purports that the curriculum lacks performance standards, content and rigor, and is hampered by poor decision making because there is insufficient data to inform decision making. These factors severely affect the national assessment strategy of the Kingdom [7]. However there are those such as [8] who also accuses the Saudi curriculum for being wanting and not providing pupils with the necessary content to inform decision making, with little opportunity for teachers, parents and students to influence curriculum development. The lack of teacher involvement in curriculum development has resulted in this rigid and over prescriptive curriculum, and has reduced teachers to merely delivering prescribed content. Reference [8] suggests that this means the educational system itself can only be substandard.
