# Occupational Exposures and Neurodegenerative Diseases-A Systematic Literature Review and Meta-Analyses

CorpusID: 59342107 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b4d3dbb4cf9ea89a513e113c16cc57121229fd53](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b4d3dbb4cf9ea89a513e113c16cc57121229fd53)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s5) Exposure to Pesticides
Number of References: 11

(p5.0) Thirty-one studies fulfilling good scientific standards (Armon class II-III) contributed data to meta-analyses of risk rates for pesticide exposure: five studies on ALS [33,[44][45][46][47], four on Alzheimer's disease [33,[48][49][50] and 24 on Parkinson's disease [23,33,. Figure 5 shows an increased overall risk of 50% for contracting these neurodegenerative diseases following exposure to pesticides.  Figure 4. Cumulative meta-analyses for studies ordered by precision of the confidence interval for RR, from low precision with wide confidence intervals for RR to studies with high precision and narrow confidence intervals. The association between ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) and Alzheimer's disease together and occupational exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMFs) is described. The pooled estimate (Cum RR) is updated for every new study. Column P gives a measure of the precision for the confidence interval for RR, where large P stands for a wide confidence interval and small P stands for a narrow and more precise confidence interval. RR is the Relative Risk for the study included in the Cum RR.
## (s15) Strengths and Limitations
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) All previously published meta-analyses on the neurodegenerative diseases ALS, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease are based on all publications on the topic that were identified, irrespective of the scientific quality of the study design. One strength of our study is that our meta-analyses were based on a systematic literature review that included only studies of a high scientific standard. Based on the detailed checklist proposed by Armon [25] we used an elaborate protocol for scrutinizing publications [20]. Another strength of our meta-analyses is that we focused heavily on finding all possible sources of bias, using stratification of data with regard to possible confounders. For evaluation of possible publication bias, we used several methods including funnel plots, specific tests and stratification by publication year as well as precision of risk estimates.
