# Evidence Based Library and Information Practice Embedded Academic Librarianship: A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 60624579 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b3c260d2e6ef703b5cf743a33e211a23e0e7daa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b3c260d2e6ef703b5cf743a33e211a23e0e7daa)

Fields: Medicine, Education

## (s4) History and Definitions
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) Historically, embedded librarianship can be traced back to departmental libraries, where librarians provided services and collections within the confines of the department itself. Some of these libraries still exist today, but many have been assimilated into main campus libraries. This has primarily been due to the expansion of digital content, competition for space for non-library uses, and economic factors associated with the costs of maintaining collections (Drewes & Hoffman, 2010). However, these same factors have served to isolate the librarian from his customer, causing librarians to explore ways to interact and integrate with those they serve. More recently, the expression "embedded librarian" takes root in the phrase embedded journalist, a concept connected to wartime media coverage in the last several years. In this situation, journalists become a part of their military unit, providing a perspective, "a slice of the war" ("Pros and Cons of Embedded Journalism," 2003) from their vantage point. Drewes and Hoffman (2010) provide a good discussion of the branch library concept and its connection to modern day embedded librarianship. Brower (2011) also provides a concise recent history of the concept that offers an overview and characteristics of such programs.
## (s11) Permanent office with customers
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) Bartnik (2007) Brown and Leith (2007) Clyde and Lee (2011) Covone and Lamm (2010) Freiburger and Kramer (2009) Martin (2010) Matava et al. (2010) Matos et al. (2010) Searing and Greenlee (2011) Embedded via social media Filgo (2011) Freiburger and Kramer (2009) discuss several librarians at the Arizona Health Sciences Library who spend at least half their time within their liaison colleges and whose activities span more traditional liaison work to newer roles such as providing literature searches to support grant applications and serving as co-principal investigators on grant applications. Martin (2010) adds spending 80% of her time in the pharmacy school at the same institution. They refer to their model as "liaison librarian in context" (p. 140). Librarians at Arizona Health Sciences Library have the flexibility to customize embedded services based on customer needs. Fitzgerald et al. (2010) describe an innovative embedded librarian program where librarians provide onsite market intelligence service to the non-profit MaRS Discovery District, which assists entrepreneurs in Canada. These librarians are partially funded by the MaRS group and spend the majority of their time with the group, but retain all their University of Toronto connections, privileges, and responsibilities. The types of services provided range from the licensing of appropriate resources to in depth market analysis. This program is worth closer inspection for other reasons aside from the embedded aspect, including how they value their worth and how university librarians can work within a growing trend of universities partnering with non-profits to commercialize research. Brown and Leith (2007) describe a somewhat similar situation where they are embedded in an Australian newsroom environment and support editorial functions of the media groups. Both of these embedded librarian programs demonstrate the use of information expertise in partnership with customer expertise to market a product. In many ways, these programs illustrate non-traditional librarian roles while still maintaining the identity and duties of a traditional librarian.
## (s16) Analysis of Reference Transactions
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) Two studies evaluated reference transaction data related to embedded librarian interventions. Bennett and Simning (2010) conducted correlation and linear regression calculations to show a positive relationship between the number of librarian interactions in an online course (discussion board comments) and the number of reference transactions in an online-only university setting. Sullo et al. (2012) evaluated 82 reference questions encountered from 16 nursing and health sciences online courses with an embedded librarian component gathered in an approximate 16 month period. More than a third of questions were general research guidance questions, while another 22% were related to citation management, followed by 20% related to identifying, locating or using a library resource. As a result of these findings, librarians planned to embed resources within the course management system so students did not have to find them on the library's web page.
