# A Survey of Text Mining in Social Media: Facebook and Twitter Perspectives Establish algorithm for to determine an authorized PW error View project Further Investigations on Developing an Arabic Sentiment Lexicon View project Said Salloum British University in Dubai 3 PUBLICATIONS 2 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE

CorpusID: 65219850 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/94d255e0b2a729e918a320ab99e503cfc04e1fc8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/94d255e0b2a729e918a320ab99e503cfc04e1fc8)

Fields: Linguistics, Computer Science

## (s1) Background
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) Businesses have identified data-driven approaches as the ideal blueprint for their growth. It is easier to understand this theory. After all, wouldn't it benefit a company to get an idea about the perception of its products in the market without having to consult individual reviews from everyone? Wouldn't it be better if they could gauge which political candidate is ideal for their public image without having to analyze them all individually? This is why market study and research are some of the most highly invested fields in the world right now. Social networking sites like Twitter and Facebook are ideal for this purpose. Posts or messages shared by people on these platforms with their friends remain freely accessible or are kept confidential. They give businesses the chance to scoop up public sentiments [20], [21] about topics that they are interested to share by a large group of people.

(p1.1) The processing of surveys and public impressions using specially designed computational systems is a shared objective of inter-connected fields like subjectivity analysis, opinion mining [22], and sentiment analysis. Creating problem-solving techniques or methods to define the structure and precedence or for summarizing opinionated messages for particular topics [23], occasions or products is another target of the survey. For example, these methods could be used for gauging support for particular occasions or items, or determining thumbs down or thumbs up votes for specific movies based on their reviews.
## (s7) Text mining in Twitter
Number of References: 4

(p7.0) A significant size of research has been occupied by the Twitter data analysis over the last couple of years [54]. Large spectrums of domains are using this data, some of which are using it for academic research and others for applications [55]. New improvements regarding twitter data are presented by this section. The document collection from various resources triggers the "Text Mining" process. A particular document would be retrieved by Text mining tool and this document is pre-processed by checking the character sets and format [56]. Subsequently, a text analysis phase would monitor the document. Semantic analysis is used to derive high-quality information from text; this is referred to "Text analysis". The market has a lot of text analysis techniques. Professionals can use combinations of techniques subject to the goal of the organization. Researchers tend to repeat the text analysis techniques till the time information is acquired. A management information system is capable of incorporating the resulting information, and as a result, significant knowledge is produced for the user of that information system [57]. A key issue in text mining is intricacy of natural language. The ambiguity problem is much dense in the natural language. There are multiple meanings of a single word and multiple words can possess same meaning. Ambiguity is referred to as the understanding of a word which has more than one possible meaning. Noise has emerged in extracted information as a result of this ambiguity. Since usability and flexibility are the main parts of ambiguity, it cannot be removed from the natural language. One phrase or sentence can have multiple understandings, so there is a chance we can obtain a number of meanings. The work is still undeveloped and a particular domain is correlated with the suggested approach while the experts have attempted to resolve the ambiguity problem by performing a number of research studies. As there is uncertainty/vagueness in the semantic meanings of many discovered words, so it is very difficult to answer the requirements of the user.
