# INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 67458118 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0c4f7642b60c8192e60440393b2cdcc6a1407e49](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0c4f7642b60c8192e60440393b2cdcc6a1407e49)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s5) ATTAKS AND ITS TAXONOMY
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) An attack is a set of operations that puts a system under security risk. Attacks can be classified into eight main categories [20]. Physical attacks: These attacks involve damaging the computers and network hardware. Infection: Some unwanted programmes are installed on the target system that may corrupt the system or utilize the system resources. Eg. Viruses, Worms and Malwares. Exploding: This category of attacks seeks to explode or overflow the target system with bugs. Eg. Buffer Overflow Probe: This type of attacks collect the information about the target system. Port Scanning, Sniffing. Cheat: Fake identities are used to get into the system. Eg. Session Hijacking, XSS, IP/MAC Spoofing Traverse: This category of attacks uses all possible ways to match the system credentials to get into the system. Eg. Brute Force, Dictionary Attacks. Concurrency: This system of attacks compromise the system availability by sending mass requests that the system cannot handle. E.g. Flooding, DoS, DDoS, Others: These are attacks which uses the known vulnerability/weakness to compromise the system. This does not require any professional skills. The target is the systems which are not configured properly Further attacks can be classified into passive and active. Passive attacks are launched to gather information and monitor network traffic. By using this information active attacks can be initiated. Port Scans, Sniffing are examples of passive attacks. Active attacks are classified into four categories by Defence Advanced Projects Agency (DARPA) namely DOS: Denial of Service Attacks are designed to disturb the host and availability of host or service is compromised. Probe: These attacks scan the computer or network to gather useful information about the hosts, valid IP address, active ports and OS etc. [21]. The information gathered are used to launch attacks. R2L: In this type of attacks the user who does not have account in the system gains local access. U2R: In this type of attacks the user who has local account gains privileges of super user account.
## (s43) ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEMS
Number of References: 2

(p43.0) In this section different anomaly detection systems are discussed based on the core functionality. Application Layer Anomaly Detector (ALAD): ALAD [39] is designed to detect the attacks at application layer. A model on normal behaviour is built and this is used to detect anomalies. Anomalies are detected in inbound TCP connection to known ports. This falls under the category of Statistical based anomaly detector [40]. It uses a time-bound model. ALAD was trained and tested using DARPA dataset. 70 known attacks were detected out of 180 and the false alarm was 100.
## (s48) Fuzzy Intrusion Recognition Engine (FIRE):
Number of References: 2

(p48.0) This is an anomaly based IDS that uses fuzzy logic. It generates fuzzy sets for every observed feature which are in turn used to define fuzzy rules to detect individual attacks [15]. NETAD: NETAD like PHAD detects anomalies in network packets. PHAD takes into account only the first 48 bytes of each packet whereas NETAD use those 48 byte as one of the attributes. NETAD worked well with DARPA data on 18nattacks which are poorly detected by other IDS [48].
