# A Review of the Status of Brain Structure Research in Transsexualism

CorpusID: 6793632 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/597e639e32a039f24bf65f162b65388e6197311b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/597e639e32a039f24bf65f162b65388e6197311b)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s15) Comment on the Brain of Nonhomosexual Transsexuals
Number of References: 5

(p15.0) As noted above, there is only one morphological study on untreated nonhomosexual transsexuals in the literature (Savic & Arver, 2011). This study and our proposed phenotypes for homosexual MtFs and FtMs could help us take the first steps in discerning between homosexual and nonhomosexual transsexuals. Homosexual MtFs are female-like in a series of sexually dimorphic behaviors, while nonhomosexualMtFs are not (Blanchard, 1989a(Blanchard, , 1989b. It has also been hypothesized that the brain of homosexual and nonhomosexual MtFs would differ from that of males in different ways. In homosexual MtFs, the differences would involve sexually dimorphic structures and the nature of the differences would be a shift toward the female-typical patterns, while in nonhomosexual MtFs the differences themselves would not involve sexually dimorphic structures (Blanchard, 2008). Moreover, it was also suggested that''if there is any neuroanatomic intersexuality, it is in the homosexual group'' (Blanchard, 2008).
## (s19) Possible Mechanisms That Control Brain Alterations After Cross-Sex Hormone Treatment
Number of References: 5

(p19.0) With respect to the mechanisms, it should be remembered that the human brain contains receptors for androgen and estrogen (see above), as well as glucocorticoids (Kicman, 2008) and, what is more, it also possesses most of the enzymes involved in the biosynthesis and metabolism of sex steroids and glucocorticoids (Ö sterlund, Keller, & Hurd, 2000).

(p19.1) In relation to FtMs, it was suggested that the reported morphological increments might be due to the anabolic effects of testosterone . Testosterone has virilizing and anabolic effects that are inseparable. FtMs under hormonal treatment are natal females with supraphysiological levels of testosterone that might affect the normal metabolic mechanisms of androgens. There are several nonexclusive mechanisms involving the AR and ER that could account for the morphological increments observed in FtMs. Testosterone, and its reduced metabolite dihydrotestosterone,canactdirectlyviatheAR.Moreover,somereduced metabolites from dihydrotestosterone (3a diol and 3b diol) can also bind ER. In addition, testosterone is converted to estradiol in the brain via the p450 enzyme aromatase and then binds to ER. Human brain is known to express aromatase and reductase activities (Lephart, 1996;Ö sterlund et al., 2000;Pelletier, 2010).
## (s20) Clinical Consequences
Number of References: 4

(p20.0) Do cross-sex hormone treatment induced brain changes have clinical consequences? The few existing studies on transsexuals report on short-to medium-term treatment durations and during this period cross-sex hormone treatment seems to be reasonably safe for clinical variables associated with the vascular system, metabolism, and skeleton (Gooren, 2011;Wierckx et al., 2012). However, nothing is known about older transsexuals; long-term clinicalstudiesareyettobe published,andrisksmaybecomemore apparent as the duration of hormone exposure increases (Gooren, 2011). Up until now, neuropsychological research on cross-sex hormone treatment in transsexuals has been mainly focused on the effects of gonadal hormones on sexually dimorphic emotional and cognitive behaviors (van Goozen, Cohen-Kettenis, Gooren, Frijda, & van de Poll, 1995). From a clinical viewpoint, neuropsychological tests that are sensitive to subtle brain changes and tests that are sensitive to the cognitive functions subserved by the structures that experience the most significant changes after treatment are needed and have yet to be carried out.
