# bioengineering Microbial Enzyme Production Using Lignocellulosic Food Industry Wastes as Feedstock: A Review

CorpusID: 6942921 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6696a4e9a92cb0942b6b7d0a6dfeca0bc91fec90](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6696a4e9a92cb0942b6b7d0a6dfeca0bc91fec90)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Materials Science, Medicine, Environmental Science, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 5

(p0.0) Enzymes are biological catalysts found in all living systems. Enzymes are proteinaceous in nature and catalyse a variety of reactions. For centuries enzymes have involuntarily been used in the form of bacterial or plant extracts for making wine, cheese, bread, beer and vinegar, and for manufacturing commodities such as leather and linen. However, it has only been a few decades since purified enzymes have found extensive application in manufacturing processes [1]. A major issue with the application of enzymes in industrial processes is the cost associated with it. Large-scale enzyme production is a capital-intensive process and the application of enzymes in different manufacturing processes indirectly influences the cost of the finished product. Much of the annual operating cost of an enzyme production facility is attributed to plant equipment and installation ( Figure 1). However, 28% of the operating cost is contributed by raw materials [2].

(p0.1) Lignocellulose is a great source of cheap carbohydrates and thus has been used over the past decades as a raw material for the production of a range of high value products, such as bioethanol, organic acids, enzymes and biodegradable plastics [3]. Lignocellulose is made up of lignin and carbohydrate polymers, like cellulose and hemicellulose, along with pectin and traces of salts, minerals and ash [4]. Using food material for valorization has sparked a worldwide debate, encouraging scientists to look for other feasible alternatives [3]. Most of the processing waste generated by the 
## (s6) Food Industry Waste (Global Status)
Number of References: 4

(p6.0) Food waste is generated from the non-products flow of raw materials, whose collection and processing for reuse cost more than their economic value, and are thus discarded as waste. An estimated 89 million tonnes of food waste is produced every year in the European Union (EU)-27, with the manufacturing sector contributing to over 38% [18]. Waste produced by the agriculture and manufacturing sector is in a concentrated manner, which is easier to collect, distribute and valorise to form value-added products. Steps taken by the industry for higher sustainability, processing efficiency and improving green credentials have led to the development of innovative strategies for the valorization of food waste [19]. Considerable efforts are being made by the European Union, with the implementation of strict laws and high cost associated with the disposal of food waste as landfill, which encourages its application for the production of value-added products [3,18].
## (s8) Lignocellulose as a Raw Material
Number of References: 10

(p8.0) Lignocellulose is essentially a complex polymer which is made up of polysaccharides and phenolic polymers (lignin). All plant matter is composed of lignocellulose, and lignin is the most recalcitrant substance found in them. It imparts physical strength to the plant cell wall. It is a complex polymer made up of coniferyl alcohol, synapyl alcohol and p-hydroxyphenyl alcohol [23]. The presence of lignin in lignocellulose prevents its effective enzymatic degradation and subsequent utilization of fermentable sugars by microbes [24]. This calls for effective measures for lignin removal through various pretreatment techniques [25,26]. The crystalline nature of lignocellulose is another major hurdle in its efficient utilization. Crystallinity of the biomass material is imparted by the presence of crystalline cellulose, which, if not converted into its amorphous form, is not susceptible to enzymatic hydrolysis [27,28].

(p8.1) Cellulose and hemicellulose are two components in the plant cell wall, which, when hydrolyzed, result in the release of fermentable sugars (glucose, xylose, galactose, etc.) [29]. Enzyme-producing microbes depend on glucose as their main carbon source. High cellulose content is therefore desired in a potential lignocellulosic substrate. In such cases, the presence of hemicellulose can interfere with cellulose breakdown, glucose formation and uptake [30]. However, the production of different enzymes is susceptible to the presence of specific substrates in the media composition. For example, the presence of xylans and arabinoxylans in substrates has been reported to boost xylanase production [31]. Also, uncommon sugars, such as fructooligosaccharides and inulin based fructans, facilitate better inulin production by several microbial species [32]. The availability of the lignocellulosic substrate and its cost are also important aspects in the choice of substrate.
## (s16) Submerged Fermentation
Number of References: 6

(p16.0) The submerged fermentation strategy is the most sought-out method for large-scale production of enzymes. Figure 3 represents a stirred tank reactor, which is one of the modes of submerged fermentations used for enzyme production using lignocellulose as substrate. It involves water-based medium within the reactor, which helps in maintaining the pH and temperature and provides provisions for aeration and agitation within the vessel. A sterile environment can be maintained within the reactor with lesser chance of contamination. Submerged fermentation maintains a homogenous environment, with the reactor facilitating better control over process parameters. While this helps optimization studies and the even distribution of nutrients and oxygen to the growing microbe, the presence of negative factors such as butylated hydroxytoluene, hydrogen peroxide and metal ions, which induce oxidative stress, can undermine the whole operation [55]. Several filamentous fungal species are employed for the production of various enzymes and bioactive compounds. Although submerged fermentation is employed for the cultivation of these microbes in the industry, several studies prove that it is not the best method available [56]. Submerged fermentation is not as economical as solid state fermentation due to the requirement of large and sophisticated equipment. A comparative study involving the production of biodiesel revealed that the capital investment required for submerged fermentation was 78% more than that of the solid state mode [57].

(p16.1) Bioengineering 2016, 3, 30 7 of 23 microbe, the presence of negative factors such as butylated hydroxytoluene, hydrogen peroxide and metal ions, which induce oxidative stress, can undermine the whole operation [55]. Several filamentous fungal species are employed for the production of various enzymes and bioactive compounds. Although submerged fermentation is employed for the cultivation of these microbes in the industry, several studies prove that it is not the best method available [56]. Submerged fermentation is not as economical as solid state fermentation due to the requirement of large and sophisticated equipment. A comparative study involving the production of biodiesel revealed that the capital investment required for submerged fermentation was 78% more than that of the solid state mode [57]. 
