# Paracetamol: a review with specific focus on the haemodynamic effects of intravenous administration

CorpusID: 723440 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/685811bf5b94d01a9e75c8a7a13525a2e29f9ffd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/685811bf5b94d01a9e75c8a7a13525a2e29f9ffd)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) IV Propacetamol
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) In its raw form, paracetamol has negligible solubility in water and, in aqueous mediums; it is highly sensitive to oxygen and light. As a result, the first formulation of IV paracetamol contained the active ingredient propacetamol hydrochloride. Intravenous propacetamol was produced by Bristol-Myers Squibb, France, in 1985 under the trade name Pro-dafalgan. Propacetamol is rapidly hydrolysed in a 1:1 ratio to produce paracetamol and N,N-diethylglycine by non-specific plasma esterases. Every 2 g of propacetamol yields a total of 1g paracetamol. Pro-dafalgan vials consist of a white, odourless crystalline propacetamol powder that requires reconstitution in a solvent such as glucose, water or sodium citrate. In solution, propacetamol is unstable and requires immediate infusion after reconstitution to avoid degradation. It was found to be an efficacious antipyretic and analgesic, able to produce a faster response compared to oral and rectal formulations (21). However, in the 1990s, several reports of contact dermatitis, due to the skin-sensitizing effects of the phenyl ester N,N-diethylglycine, and complaints of pain on infusion, prompted reconsideration of Pro-dafalgan (22). Its use has since been discontinued in medical practice.
## (s8) Paracetamol-induced hypertension
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) In a study comparing effervescent para-cetamol to normal oral paracetamol tablets, clinicians were warned of the potential for effervescent paracetamol to cause a rise blood pressure (42). The sodium content of effervescent paracetamol was implicated in this effect. Forman et al. conducted two studies that have established a relationship between the frequency of paracetamol use (oral tablets) and the incidence of hypertension in both male and female healthcare workers (43,44). A myriad of possible reasons for this effect were discussed, such as inhibition of vasodilatory prostaglandins and effects on endothelial function. However, the study failed to acknowledge the type of paracetamol tablet taken. This may be of considerable importance, because sodium content varies greatly. In fact, if participants in the study were taking Panadol Actifast (346 mg sodium per 2 tablets) at the manufacturer's recommended daily dosage, they would have ingested 1.38 g of sodium per day. It is therefore important to assess the effects of any additional compounds in all the formulations of paracetamol. This may be especially true for the IV formulations, considering its potential to cause hypotension.
