# Application of Sensory Descriptive Analysis and Consumer Studies to Investigate Traditional and Authentic Foods: A Review

CorpusID: 73415577 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5777416e3ab3ce6a0f0f1fd740182e764964e266](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5777416e3ab3ce6a0f0f1fd740182e764964e266)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Business, Medicine

## (s3) Beverages
Number of References: 11

(p3.0) In the beverage category, descriptive analyses of rooibos and green tea were included. Although the tea market is growing, we considered that rooibos and green tea are still classified as ethnic foods compared to black tea. A sensory wheel for rooibos was developed by Koch et al. [19]. Those authors used a total of 69 samples evaluated by nine panelists with extensive experience on descriptive analysis. They first developed 121 descriptors during the training sessions and then 27 terms were selected for inclusion in the sensory wheel based on their relevance. After testing, 17 attributes were eventually selected for efficient sensory profiling by grouping and eliminating descriptors. The suggested application of the sensory wheel was for use for the quality control of rooibos tea. For full profiling of rooibos tea, more descriptors might be needed [18]. Jolley et al. [56] also evaluated rooibos tea; samples were compared to determine differences based on production area and harvest year. Approximately nine to 10 trained female panelists, most of whom had previous experience on rooibos evaluation, participated and a total of 208 tea samples were assessed using the 17 characteristics developed by Koch et al. [19]. Understanding the results of the study was suggested as helping to understand product segments, opening up the opportunity for marketing niche products especially at the global level.

(p3.1) In the case of green tea, a greater number of studies have been conducted, likely reflecting increased awareness and consumption by global consumers worldwide. Lee and Chambers [17] examined differences among green teas from different countries and the correlation with consumer data using six panelists performing a sensory descriptive analysis on six samples using 18 attributes. These findings have the potential to explain the differences among samples from different production areas, processing methods, or with different flavor characteristics. Lee and Chambers [18] developed the lexicon of green tea from nine countries (China, India, Japan, Kenya, Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Tanzania, and Vietnam) and established definitions and references. They used a total of 138 green tea samples to generate descriptors that could distinguish all kinds of green tea samples. Specifically, 31 attributes were generated by six highly trained panelists who had more than 120 h of general descriptive training and averaged more than 1200 h of sensory descriptive testing. They used the flavor profile method, which usually involves a smaller number of panelists compared to other sensory descriptive methods. The consensus procedure was used however the original flavor profile method was modified by using a 0-15 scale. Subsequently, those authors further analyzed the data to cluster green teas based on their flavor profiles and found that the origin influenced flavors through a combination of varietal differences, growing conditions, and processing variations [57]. They noted that their study could be used as a marketing tool for consumer segments for green tea so that consumers would be able to select teas that met their specific sensory preferences. Those authors also identified flavor change during storage using two green tea samples with five different storage durations [58], suggesting that the tea retailer must consider the type of packaging of green tea in order to maintain its quality during the distribution period. In addition, other research groups also worked on green tea. Lee et al. [59] developed a method to establish sample preparation and presentation procedures using six green tea samples (three green teas × two grades) and evaluating 16 characteristics. They were attempting to create a method that would minimize possible bias caused by the changes in brewing temperature that could result in differences in volatile compounds of the tea. Those authors then analyzed differences in sensory attributes such as "turbidity" or "bitter taste" between green teas that were processed under different methods and the correlation of those sensory attributes with consumer acceptability [60]. They further evaluated decaffeinated green teas as samples to ascertain the product market of decaffeinated beverages potential [61].
## (s9) Miscellaneous Products
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) The category of other foods included some cheese products, tofu, meat products, and additional foods as shown in Table 2. Although cheese comprises a well-known food product worldwide, some traditional types, which are authentic to specific regions, still constitute special and unfamiliar foods to many consumers. Ojeda et al. [42] used Idiazabal cheese with three different quality levels to compare the liking of local consumers in Spain with the sensory quality as assessed by trained panelists. In that study, the preferences of a large group of consumers was mainly driven by certain characteristics such as "sweet" and "toasty" attributes described by the trained panel. Scamorza cheese with different milk and starter type was studied by Braghieri et al. [43] in Italy who identified the driver of liking in terms of specific sensory input. They mentioned that the liking of specific sensory attributes such as appearance, taste/flavor, and texture were highly related to overall liking. They concluded that further studies were needed to promote product differentiation and to meet the sensory requirements of particular consumer segments. Swiss cheeses including different kinds of retail products were evaluated in the U.S. by Liggett et al. [45], who investigated the relationship between consumer liking and the specific flavor characteristics. For establishing the characteristics of unique food products and understanding consumer acceptance, descriptive analysis may be combined with consumer testing to better understand specific foods.
