# molecules Transformation Products of Organic Contaminants and Residues-Overview of Current Simulation Methods

CorpusID: 73467354 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c188d4b591988312d499f39697003350ae05262](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c188d4b591988312d499f39697003350ae05262)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 42

(p0.0) Transformation products (TPs) of organic compounds are structurally diverse intermediates. They are formed by different conversion ways and occur in several matrices worldwide. The knowledge of transformation pathways and identification of TPs is important for health, food, and environmental matters. Metabolism research and investigating effects of TPs is the basis, e.g., drug development or strategies to avoid or reduce harmful TPs in food and environment [1,2]. Figure 1 gives an overview of the occurring transformation processes. TPs are referred as metabolites or degradation products, depending on the origin. Metabolites are formed by biotransformation processes in living organism whereas degradation products are formed by various microbial, biotic, and abiotic processes in the environment. All these processes cause the formation of TPs from organic compounds. Natural detoxification processes aim to generate easily degradable and harmless TPs. Nevertheless, TPs can occur, which are even more (bio)active or harmful to toxic and as well persistent [2][3][4][5][6]. Consequently, TPs need to be investigated in relation to their formation way and structure. The first investigations on identification of TPs of organic compounds were the scouting of relevant matrices like feces, urine, water, soil, and atmosphere. The identification of TPs in real samples is often challenging due to dilution effects. Moreover, TP identification and studies on their formation processes could be hampered by high matrix complexity especially for TP trace levels. The application of different methods to simulate TPs allow the above mentioned issues and moreover these methods are faster and cheaper [7]. Another benefit is the production of TPs in higher amounts with high purity [2]. This offers the possibility for risk assessment purposes, like toxicity tests or the conceivable use of the isolated TPs as reference material. All transformation processes are based on simple chemical reactions like oxidation, reduction, hydroxylation, hydrolysis, cleavage, and dealkylation [2,8]. These reactions correspond to the phase I reactions of the metabolism and are also reactions that take place in the environment. Further typical phase II reactions like conjugation or methylation are involved in the metabolism process.

(p0.1) After metabolization or degradation of the parent compounds, TPs (or even the unmetabolized compounds) are excreted and can enter environmental systems (see Figure 2) like water, sediment, soil, and biota, where they could have an impact on these matrices [3,5,6,9]. The environmental surroundings and characteristics (water, light, irradiation, temperature, pH, humidity, atmosphere, and soil [4]) are important for further transformation pathway, including generation of new TPs. On the other hand, industrial processes such as waste water treatment, there are different processes used to eliminate residues or contaminants from the water cycle. Relevant organic compounds are manifold and there are substances found in all areas. Most prominent residues are pharmaceuticals (drugs), pesticides and personal care products. But many more chemical compounds contribute to the environment like brominated flame retardants (BFRs), industrial additives, and surfactants [2,3,6,8]. Next to the artificial compounds occurring in the environment, natural contaminants like mycotoxins (secondary metabolites of fungi), or alkaloids (produced by organisms like bacteria, fungi, plants, and animals) have an impact to environmental and food samples [10,11]. Pharmaceuticals and drugs are used worldwide in a high amount, BFRs have persistent and bioaccumulative properties and mycotoxins show a high toxicity even in low concentrations. Both synthetic and natural compounds are often occurring in foodstuff (milk, eggs, seafood, fish, wheat, etc.) and their consumption is nearly inevitable. Therefore, the investigation of TPs regarding their formation processes, structural identification and occurrence in different foods, and environmental All these processes cause the formation of TPs from organic compounds. Natural detoxification processes aim to generate easily degradable and harmless TPs. Nevertheless, TPs can occur, which are even more (bio)active or harmful to toxic and as well persistent [2][3][4][5][6]. Consequently, TPs need to be investigated in relation to their formation way and structure. The first investigations on identification of TPs of organic compounds were the scouting of relevant matrices like feces, urine, water, soil, and atmosphere. The identification of TPs in real samples is often challenging due to dilution effects. Moreover, TP identification and studies on their formation processes could be hampered by high matrix complexity especially for TP trace levels. The application of different methods to simulate TPs allow the above mentioned issues and moreover these methods are faster and cheaper [7]. Another benefit is the production of TPs in higher amounts with high purity [2]. This offers the possibility for risk assessment purposes, like toxicity tests or the conceivable use of the isolated TPs as reference material. All transformation processes are based on simple chemical reactions like oxidation, reduction, hydroxylation, hydrolysis, cleavage, and dealkylation [2,8]. These reactions correspond to the phase I reactions of the metabolism and are also reactions that take place in the environment. Further typical phase II reactions like conjugation or methylation are involved in the metabolism process.

(p0.2) After metabolization or degradation of the parent compounds, TPs (or even the unmetabolized compounds) are excreted and can enter environmental systems (see Figure 2) like water, sediment, soil, and biota, where they could have an impact on these matrices [3,5,6,9]. The environmental surroundings and characteristics (water, light, irradiation, temperature, pH, humidity, atmosphere, and soil [4]) are important for further transformation pathway, including generation of new TPs. On the other hand, industrial processes such as waste water treatment, there are different processes used to eliminate residues or contaminants from the water cycle. Relevant organic compounds are manifold and there are substances found in all areas. Most prominent residues are pharmaceuticals (drugs), pesticides and personal care products. But many more chemical compounds contribute to the environment like brominated flame retardants (BFRs), industrial additives, and surfactants [2,3,6,8]. Next to the artificial compounds occurring in the environment, natural contaminants like mycotoxins (secondary metabolites of fungi), or alkaloids (produced by organisms like bacteria, fungi, plants, and animals) have an impact to environmental and food samples [10,11]. Pharmaceuticals and drugs are used worldwide in a high amount, BFRs have persistent and bioaccumulative properties and mycotoxins show a high toxicity even in low concentrations. Both synthetic and natural compounds are often occurring in foodstuff (milk, eggs, seafood, fish, wheat, etc.) and their consumption is nearly inevitable. Therefore, the investigation of TPs regarding their formation processes, structural identification and occurrence in different foods, and environmental matrices is of increasing relevance for industry, the scientific community, and regulatory bodies as well. matrices is of increasing relevance for industry, the scientific community, and regulatory bodies as well.
## (s3) Metabolism Methods
Number of References: 12

(p3.0) In vitro and in vivo experimental models are useful approaches to identify major metabolism pathways [1,7]. The metabolism (of living organism) of exogenous compounds is also known as biotransformation processes and takes place mainly in the liver. The biotransformation process is divided into two phases, whereby the aim is to increase the polarity of the compound to allow the elimination from the organism. In phase I mainly oxidation, reduction or hydrolysis occur and they are catalyzed by cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes [12][13][14]. The phase I metabolites can be excreted or a further conjugation reaction (phase II) with biomolecules such as glucuronic acid or glutathione [7,15,16] takes place. There are a lot of different models for tests available with a different complexity, starting from test tube experiments to cell cultures, animals, healthy human subjects, and clinical trials [17]. There are different in vitro human liver models developed, including supersomes, microsomes, S9-fraction, cell lines, transgenic cell lines, primary hepatocytes, liver slices, and There are some reviews dealing with the analysis and characterization of residues and contaminants including TPs [3][4][5]. However, literature on the trends and applications of simulation methods is rather limited. Hence, the aim of this review is to describe current developments and trends of methods to simulate TPs of compounds formed in natural and manmade processes. The simulation methods could be categorized in photochemical-based, electrochemical-based and Fenton-based methods. Also, the well-established in vivo and in vitro methods for investigation of metabolic processes are addressed. Due to the commonly increased polarity of compounds during transformation, TP identification is preferably done by liquid chromatography coupled to (high-resolution) mass spectrometry, LC-(HR)MS.
## (s5) Metabolism Methods
Number of References: 14

(p5.0) In vitro and in vivo experimental models are useful approaches to identify major metabolism pathways [1,7]. The metabolism (of living organism) of exogenous compounds is also known as biotransformation processes and takes place mainly in the liver. The biotransformation process is divided into two phases, whereby the aim is to increase the polarity of the compound to allow the elimination from the organism. In phase I mainly oxidation, reduction or hydrolysis occur and they are catalyzed by cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes [12][13][14]. The phase I metabolites can be excreted or a further conjugation reaction (phase II) with biomolecules such as glucuronic acid or glutathione [7,15,16] takes place. There are a lot of different models for tests available with a different complexity, starting from test tube experiments to cell cultures, animals, healthy human subjects, and clinical trials [17]. There are different in vitro human liver models developed, including supersomes, microsomes, S9-fraction, cell lines, transgenic cell lines, primary hepatocytes, liver slices, and perfused liver [15]. For these methods, only a low concentrated test substance can be used and, consequently, less amounts of metabolites are generated. The biotransformation process is initiated by a single electron transfer or hydrogen atom transfer involving an iron-oxygen complex [18]. Major CYP450 catalyzed reactions are oxidations like carbon hydroxylation, heteroatom dealkylation, heteroatom oxygenation, bond oxidation, hydrocarbon desaturation, dehalogenation, and epoxidation [1,16,19].
## (s7) Photochemical-Based Methods
Number of References: 10

(p7.0) Photolysis is generally a light/photoinduced cleavage of a chemical bond of a molecule. Photolytic processes occur in the atmosphere and at the surface of water and soil [2]. The transformation process is initiated by the absorption of light. Direct photolysis happens when the compound of interest absorbs light and then a transformation process is started, which breaks up bonds. Indirect photolysis occurs, when an additional second molecule, naturally occurring (like humic acid or nitrate), absorbs the light and generate strong reactive oxygen species (singlet oxygen, hydroxyl radicals, or alkyl peroxyl radicals). These radicals initiate the transformation process of the target compound [4,24]. In general, the rate of photolysis is dependent on numerous chemical and environmental factors, including the light absorption properties, reactivity of the compound and the intensity of solar irradiation. Substances with double bonds or hetero atoms can absorb light between 200 nm and 800 nm depending on the present structural properties [9].

(p7.1) The natural photolytic processes are simulated under laboratory conditions to investigate the influence of different parameters on the photolysis and the occurring TPs. For the photolysis experiments, the compounds of interest are irradiated for a determined time with light of certain wavelength. Functional groups of the compounds absorb light of the UV area between 100 nm and 400 nm. The UV light can be divided into four groups: (i) VUV light (100-200 nm), (ii) UV-C (200-280 nm), (iii) UV-B (280-320 nm), and (iv) UV-A (320-400 nm). There are different light sources available, divided into mono-or polychromatic. With polychromatic light sources a defined wavelength range is used for the irradiation and the range is selected by filters. Sunlight is also an irradiation source and can be simulated by polychromatic light sources like a Xe-lamp. In environmental areas sunlight is responsible for the occurring photolysis. Sunlight did not contain UV-C light, but for photolysis experiments this is used, because of its high energy and this light can also simulate processes of particle absorption in the atmosphere. Mercury-vapor lamps and low-pressure mercury-vapor lamps mainly emit light at 254 nm and are used as monochromatic light sources to investigate the influence of UV-C light. Further simulation methods are photocatalytic experiments. The most common catalyst is TiO 2 [25]. The catalyst molecule absorbs the electromagnetic irradiation and the excited TiO 2 produce oxidative or reductive radicals (e.g., hydroxy radicals). These radicals take part in the transformation process of the compound. Simulated reactions are such as hydroxylation, dehydrogenation, and/or hetero atom dealkylation [26].

(p7.2) With ozonation and chlorination highly reactive radicals are built, which start the transformation process. For that purpose, photooxidants (e.g., O 3 and Cl 2 ) are added to the reaction solution and then irradiated with UV light [27,28]. These methods are often used in waste water treatment, where the aim is to eliminate organic substances. Primarily, advanced oxidation processes or disinfection (via chlorination, ozonation, or UV irradiation) are commonly used, but the possibility of generating new TPs by these applications is also given [8,27].
## (s8) Fenton-Based Methods
Number of References: 7

(p8.0) Fenton's reagent contains hydrogen peroxide and iron(II)-ions [28]. It is a chemical process, where the iron salt acts as a catalyst by the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide. Due to the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide are hydroxyl radicals generated. These hydroxyl radicals are highly reactive and initiate the transformation process of the compound of interest [28]. The classical Fenton's reagent is used in an aqueous milieu. Fenton-like reactions use other peroxides and/or iron(III)-salts. Next to the classical Fenton reaction also combinations between electrochemistry or photolytic assisted Fenton reactions are used [26,[28][29][30][31]. Here, the Fenton's reagent is produced either electrochemically (hydrogen peroxide is generated simultaneously through the impact of an applying potential) or photochemically (iron complexes absorb the UV light). The transformation process is initiated by the generated hydroxyl radicals.
## (s12) Pharmaceuticals/Drugs
Number of References: 19

(p12.0) The use of medication has a major role in people's and animal's health. Pharmaceuticals are not only used against human infections, but also intensively in the food industry, veterinary medicine, and agriculture [1]. In drug discovery and development the fate of the drug after disposition in the body is investigated, this involves the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME) [69]. Most drugs are metabolized in the liver, where CYP450 enzymes are highly concentrated. For this reason, HLM or RLM can be used for simulation of phase I biotransformation reactions [70]. Through the excretion unmetabolized drugs (parent compounds) and their metabolites reach the environment [2,27].

(p12.1) Today in the TPs research of drugs there are two different areas, where simulation methods are used as mentioned in the introduction part. First, in drug research and development, TPs are investigated to determine generated metabolites and to understand the possible biotransformation pathway inside the body. Also, the determination of the excreted residues is important [16]. Since the last decades in environmental analytics, especially the water analysis and water treatment, TPs were investigated [4,5]. Descripted above, TPs reach the water cycle and are detected. Through some treatment processes new TPs could be formed [71]. Here photolysis and photocatalytic processes are significant. Often the focus of these studies is the elimination of drugs from wastewater including kinetic studies and not the identification of TPs, but sometimes the degradation pathway is described.

(p12.2) In Table 2 some chosen studies are given, where different simulation techniques are compared. Szultka-Mlynska et al. [69,72] used EC/LC-MS for the investigation of TPs of a various number of chemotherapeutic and cardiovascular drugs. They could show that for the chemotherapeutic drugs some of the EC-generated and identified TPs were also identified in RLM tests. The TPs of the cardiovascular drugs were compared to in vivo samples (urine and plasma). It turned out that some EC-simulated TPs were also available in the in vivo samples. Further to show continuation, three different simulation methods (photocatalysis (TiO 2 ), EC-Fenton, and EC-reactor) were used and the resulting TPs are compared to HLM-identified TPs by Ruokolainen et al. [26]. They tested buspirone, promazine, testosterone, and 7-ethoxycoumarin. A different number of TPs could be simulated for all four compounds, and the number was higher in contrast to HLM identified metabolites. TPs of testosterone and 7-ethoxycoumarin could not be generated by EC. For buspirone could two (hydroxybuspirone and 5-hydroxybuspirone) of three metabolites (plus busprione N-oxide) be found with photocatalysis, but not with the other used methods. For promazine (TPs: N-desmethylpromazine, promazine sulfoxide, and 3-hydroxypromazine), two of three metabolites (N-desmethylpromazine and promazine sulfoxide) were found with EC-reactor (basic pH conditions) and one of them (promazine sulfoxide) also with EC-reactor (acidic pH conditions) and EC-Fenton. The third metabolite 3-hydroxypromazine was found by photocatalysis. For testosterone, both TPs are found with EC-Fenton and one also with photocatalysis. For 7-ethoxycoumarin one TP was found with photocatalysis and EC-Fenton. As a result, photocatalysis simulates better HLM-TPs than the EC-based methods.

(p12.3) Furthermore, Serna-Galvis et al. investigated the β-lactam antibiotic oxacillin with photocatalysis (TiO 2 ), sonochemistry, EC-oxidation (Ti/IrO 2 ), and photo-Fenton (Table 2) [73]. In total, there were nine different TPs (TP1-TP9) detected. The EC-oxidation led to three different TPs (TP1: breakdown of the central secondary amide, TP2: isomerization, and TP3: opening β-lactam ring, S-oxidation), which no other methods simulate. The photo-Fenton generated the other five TPs (TP4: opening β-lactam ring, TP5 breakdown of the central secondary amide, TP6: S-oxidation, TP7: aromatic hydroxylation, TP8: opening β-lactam ring, and TP9: decarboxylation), three of them are also observed with photocatalysis (TP5, TP7, and TP8) and sonochemistry (TP4, TP5, and TP6). Another study by Lecours et al. compared electrolysis, EC-Fenton, and EC-reactor methods for the simulation of TPs of Trimethoprim [18]. The α-OH-Trimethoprim as TP was simulated with all three methods and is described in the literature as a metabolite of rat models. The electrolysis did not produce further TPs. The other both methods produced more, but less selective TPs. Two further TPs were obtained with the EC-reactor and four more TPs with the EC-Fenton. Most of the identified TPs were known from earlier studies with for example photolysis/photocatalysis experiments or photo-Fenton investigations. Also listed in Table 2 is that Gawlik et al. [74] investigated the TPs of the antidepressants moclobemide and toloxatone with photocatalysis (TiO 2 ) and HLM incubation tests. The seven TPs of moclobemide of the HLM tests were all simulated with the photocatalysis experiment. The same results are found for toloxatone, here are four identified TPs simulated with the photocatalysis, but three additionally TPs were identified. Another study of this group dealt with HLM-incubations, TiO 2 photocatalysis, and ZnO-photocatalysis of clozapine [70]. The HLM-study resulted in seven TPs. All TPs could be observed in the ZnO photocatalysis. Among all TPs produced by ZnO and TiO 2 , only a further N-oxidation TP was not generated by HLM. On the other hand, TiO 2 could simulate six if the seven HLM metabolites. The HLM metabolism (seven TPs) could be simulated for this compound completely with the ZnO photocatalysis method. Besides studies comparing different simulation techniques also several investigations with one method are available. The photolytic and photocatalytic experiments are often evaluated in relation to degradation kinetics and toxicity of TPs. This is important for the environmental studies, to predict the impact of the TPs on the general ecosystem.

(p12.4) Depending on the investigation objective, different methods are used. Electrochemistry is commonly used for the simulation of TPs occurring during the metabolism of organism/animal and human. To predict and investigate TPs occurring in the environment, photolytic, and photocatalytic experiments are widely used. However, there are also a few studies where electrochemistry methods are used in the environmental science [18] and photolytic/photocatalytic experiments to simulate in vivo or in vitro metabolites [70,74]. Typical metabolic redox reactions can be mimicked with most of the above described simulation methods. Until today, the one-to-one simulation of metabolic reactions is unfeasible with only one simulation method. The metabolism is a complex procedure and some structural properties of the drug of interest are significant. The simulation methods often produce unspecific reactions, especially if they are radical driven. For the investigation of metabolically-occurring TPs at least microsome tests are necessary as a reference method. For the investigation of environmental relevant TPs environmental samples like soil or water are analyzed, where by nontargeted analytic TPs are found.
