# Epsilon wave: A review of historical aspects-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

CorpusID: 73475704 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a67e855f9d7c364ba5a9ba529a3793831052a677](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a67e855f9d7c364ba5a9ba529a3793831052a677)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Pathological ε waves in patients other than in AC
Number of References: 11

(p7.0) a. Coronary artery disease: the ε wave has been observed in one case of acute inferior myocardial infarction (MI) associated with RV myocardial infarction [28]. b. Uhl's anomaly or "parchment heart": is an unusual myocardial abnormality first described by Henry Uhl in 1952 [29]. It is characterized by partial or complete absence of the RV myocardium, with severe RV systolic and diastolic impairment. Patients with Uhl's anomaly, who survive to adulthood, may develop right-sided heart failure or arrhythmias [30]. The ECG shows tall and wide P waves, right axis deviation, frequent RBBB, prominent ε waves in all QRS complexes, and signs of severe dilatation of the RV and right atrium. c. After repair of Fallot's tetralogy [31]: a case report described a patient with tetralogy of Fallot, who showed all features of the familial form of RV, including an ε wave. The patient had heart transplantation because of numerous episodes of ventricular tachycardia, and chronic heart failure, and he had a right ventricular outflow patch aneurysm. d. Infiltrative diseases: cardiac sarcoidosis may cause the pathological substrate required for production of ε waves [32]. Therefore, differentiating AC from cardiac sarcoidosis is of clinical importance [33]. Fig. 2 shows a single-lead ε wave in a patient with cardiac sarcoidosis. e. Sickle cell anemia [8]: JW Hurst briefly mentions a probably unpublished observation of epsilon waves in a patient with sickle cell disease with RV hypertrophy due to pulmonary arterial hypertension. f. Brugada syndrome (BrS): it is believed that BrS and AC are different clinical entities with respect to the clinical presentation and the genetic predisposition. The coexistence of these two relatively rare clinical entities has been reported [34]. There may be cases where the differential diagnosis is not clear [35]. ε waves appear to be rare in BrS, and were found in 2 of 47 patients by Letsas et al. [36], and in 1 of a total of 12 unrelated index BrS cases included in the study by Yu et al. [37].
## (s8) New names for the identification of depolarization abnormalities?
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Initially, depolarization abnormalities occurring at the beginning, inside or at the end of the QRS complex were classified as ε waves [26]. These changes could also be defined as QRS fragmentation. Later on, it was considered preferable to use the term ε wave only for LPs occurring after the QRS for clinical use. Li et al. proposed to use the terms Presilon, Topsilon and Postsilon for depolarization abnormalities occurring at the beginning, in the top of and at the end of the QRS complex, respectively [26] (Fig. 3).
