# Security, Privacy and Trust for Smart Mobile-Internet of Things (M-IoT): A Survey

CorpusID: 76667957 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99290ce0e864b4e5d4f40711b677ad87bf50d625](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99290ce0e864b4e5d4f40711b677ad87bf50d625)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s1) A. Advantages and Applications of Smart M-IoT
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) Smart M-IoT focuses the applications which help in regulating the daily works of their users. Smart M-IoT provides a different set of applications in largely diversified areas such as a smart factory, smart city, smart home, smart grid [19]- [22], healthcare, personal care, emergencies [23], as shown in Fig. 1. With smart M-IoT, it becomes easier for both users as well as business organization to accommodate and host services through intelligent architecture with effective security. In terms of market trends, business houses are looking at a huge monetary advantage from smart M-IoT networks and applications. Including these, other advantages and applications of smart M-IoT are as follows:
## (s4) II. ROADMAP AND COMPARISON WITH RELATED SURVEY ARTICLES
Number of References: 6

(p4.0) Fig. 2 helps to follow the roadmap of different surveys presented over the period of time that can be used for selecting an appropriate approach for justifying the requirements of M-IoT networks in terms of security, privacy, and trust. In addition to this, Appendix. Table III provides comparative evaluations and reachability of existing studies which are closely related to the survey presented in this article. There are limited works that focus on the details of M-IoT. Only a few of them have written in parts about such requirements and technologies for supporting communications in smart M-IoT. Despite the limited literature in this direction, some of the key and broad surveys have been selected which provides sufficient material to be followed for covering the aspects related to security, privacy, and trust. From the comparisons, it is evident that the closely related survey is the one provided by Feng et al. [24], but it covers major portions related to Mobile Crowdsourcing (MC), which is not so tightly related to the requirements of smart M-IoT. The other studies in [25]- [37] do not focus on major considerations which are mandatory to form a highly secure, private and trustworthy M-IoT networks. Sicari et al. [38], Arias et al. [39] and Yang et al. [40] have discussed the concepts related to M-IoT, but do not cover enough details on the security, privacy and trust management in smart M-IoT. In addition to these, there are no comparative strategies provided for discussing the protocol and framework security in any of these surveys, which is a major limitation. Further, handoffs are the major part of mobile-oriented networks, which are not evaluated in the existing studies. Thus, the necessity of such a study, in-depth evaluations and conceptual-reachability of the proposed survey will help researchers to gain insight into the requirements of secure communications in smart and connected M-IoT. In addition, Appendix.  
## (s9) E. Security, Privacy, and Trust for smart M-IoT
Number of References: 10

(p9.0) Because of a difference in mode of deployment and applicability, security, privacy, and trust of M-IoT devices are of utmost importance. These differences in the characteristics of involved devices raise an alarming factor for securing and isolating each user's operations as the variation in behavior and operations of each device may lead to different kind of threats based on their specifications [76]. Thus, it is important to study all the aspects related to the security, privacy, and trust of smart M-IoT networks. Majority of the threats occur due to inadequate configurations of security properties and some of them are the vulnerabilities that remain undetected over a course of time due to the negligence of their developers [77] [78]. Minimizing data acquisition, supporting M2M routing, resolving hidden terminals and encryption can help to secure and privatize each user's data and information.

(p9.1) F. Methodologies for Analyses of Security, Privacy, and Trust in Smart M-IoT An approach is secure for the time being it is not broken, which means security is difficult to analyze as there are no direct simulators and emulators to be used for evaluation of a system for these requirements. Visualization is another big issue for such requirements. Visualization of trust can be obtained as it is comparatively easier to define trust as a metric between the communicating entities; whereas security and privacy are governed by rules and policies which can only be evaluated in an attacker environment. Creation and demonstration of such an environment are difficult as it requires a lot of automation, which is not applicable to most of the available tools. Majority of the solutions are formally analyzed using BurrowsAbadiNeedham (BAN) logic, which is operated on belief theory [102] [103]. Some approaches follow reduction techniques, while others simply rely on evaluating the computational cost of operations. Apart from these, some other methods include formal semantic evaluations, equational theory, etc [104]. Cryptographic solutions can be evaluated using random oracle model, inductive methods, provable security, etc [105]- [107]. Model checking and theory of proving are used by some approaches for evaluating the flow of their solution. There are certain tools available which can be used for these evaluations like, Automated Validation of Internet Security Protocols and Applications (AVISPA), A Computational Logic for Applicative Common Lisp (ACL2), ProVerif, Scyther, etc [108]- [111]. Irrespective of these evaluations, it is recommended that solutions should conduct certain case studies while presenting outputs of their proposed schemes and should demonstrate the effects on the performance of the system and the network.
## (s10) IV. SECURE FRAMEWORKS FOR SMART M-IOT
Number of References: 6

(p10.0) M-IoT networks are vulnerable to a different set of attacks which can be launched due to improper configurations and deployment strategies. It is required that these networks are deployed with ultra-reliable formations, which help to hinder launching of any unknown as well as known attacks. Further, security implications, assessment, and threat modeling can help to identify any such possibilities at a prior, which may support prevention against intruders during the operations of IoT devices [112] [113] [114]. Siboni et al. [115] highlighted the importance of a framework for securing the content in wearable IoT devices, which are considered as an important part of M-IoT systems. The authors developed an innovative testbed setup for evaluating the security policies of dynamic IoT devices. The need of the hour is to provide such a framework that can be used for supporting the security requirements of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) that heavily rely on M-IoT devices for their regular operations [116]. Authorization, privacy as well as physical security and anonymity should be the core aspect of frameworks, which primarily focus on the security of smart M-IoT networks [117] [118]. Although the existing frameworks provide a base for network formations, these have to be operated with a different set of schemes, protocols, as well as policy-mechanisms for a fully-reliable and secure network establishment.
## (s23) VI. PRIVACY PRESERVATION APPROACHES FOR SMART M-IOT
Number of References: 17

(p23.0) Data in M-IoT is highly crucial as well as sensitive and any eavesdropping may result in leakage of users' personal information [184] [185]. With data processing reaching a fine granularity level, it becomes tedious to privatize the content as new issues arise because of many dependencies on the platform used for transmissions. The collection and control of data are two of the main reasons that increase threat-level for data privacy in M-IoT [186] [187] [188]. With the difference in architectural deployment, smart M-IoT possesses large-scale implications for removing issues which may leak the entire information of the networks. Most of the approaches fail to support access control and authorization while deploying applications for smart M-IoT networks. Reducing the reachability of every user and keeping a watch on the amount and level of contents accessed by an individual can help in privacypreservation [189] [25] [190].

(p23.1) Encryption of data for every link can further help this cause, however, with the networks attaining a high-speed property, it becomes necessary to support both encryption and decryption at a rapid pace [191]. Majority of the intermediate procedures should be done on the cipher itself, as this will help to prevent any unauthorized decryption of the text being shared between M-IoT devices. Further, approaches can use customized identifiers for creating policies for maintaining the anonymity of access between its users. Along with these, prevention of hidden terminals is another major requirement for privacy-preservation [192]- [195].

(p23.2) Practical problems like network partitioning and isolations increase the risks of leakage of data and it is necessary to formulate approaches that can help to identify such issues before-hand and with low-complexity [196]- [200]. Data privacy can be guaranteed by using solutions, which prevent sniffing and do not yield any information even if discovered by intermediates [201] [202] [203]. This can be further enhanced by using non-store approach, which refers to the immediate forwarding of the data without consuming the excessive time stamp as well as keeping the freshness of the keys. Privacy can further be assured by preventing third party-based evaluations as these may disclose the encryption mechanisms of the entire route as well as of the traffic [204].

(p23.3) Distribution of incoming traffic not only prevents DoS or DDoS but also helps to make sure about the identification of any eavesdropper that may be listening to the incoming or outgoing traffic [205] [206]. Updating security policies, maintenance of logs and refining network architecture at regular intervals for the detected traffic and anomalies can further help in privacypreservation of M-IoT networks [207]. Some of the major contributions on data privacy in IoT, which are applicable to M-IoT architecture, are discussed in Appendix. Table VIII. These schemes can be further classified into four major types, encryption-based, architecture-based, protocol-based and toolbased privacy preservation, as shown in Fig. 10. The details of each of these are provided below:
## (s36) E. Summary and Insights
Number of References: 3

(p36.0) In this section, we provided a detailed classification of trust management approaches for smart M-IoT. Trust relationships not only secure the M-IoT but also help in building reliable CPS. Evaluation of trust by using a limited set of metrics is a challenge for M-IoT, however, such a system offers huge scalability and can be operated with less management and better control [28]. Incorporation of software security, privacy control, and security constraints further strengthen the trust modeling in M-IoT. Along with these, trust-based solutions can be modeled into secure communication systems through security protocols, which use encryption policies for defining new security schemes by using a similar model of trust-relaying systems [238] [31] [239].
## (s37) VIII. PHYSICAL LAYER SECURITY FOR SMART M-IOT
Number of References: 8

(p37.0) Unlike traditional security solutions, which focus on the logical aspects of the networks, physical security is hardest and difficult to follow because of a difference in the type and make of an M-IoT device. With each device following a different set of parameters and configurations, it becomes difficult to provide a common solution which can withstand the Channel State Information (CSI) requirements of the entire network while securing the physical transmission of the network [254] [255] [256]. Network coding and multiplexing approaches usually rely on cryptographic solutions only to reduce the complexity of physical layer; however, this makes the system vulnerable to different types of attacks that can be launched over the used mechanisms. With devices being operated on battery, physical layer security becomes far more challenging and should be attained with lesser overheads as well as a lesser number of computations. A highly burdened operation may deplete the energy resources and an operational M-IoT network becomes of no use. The types of technology, 3G, 4G/LTE or upcoming 5G, play a crucial role in selecting an approach that can fit into the physical configurations as well as can support the load at a dedicated frame size [255] [257] [258].

(p37.1) Designing of security schemes on the physical layer may seem to be difficult, but it provides all set of new opportunities for improving the QoS as well as QoE for the end-users. The strength of the physical layer security depends on the adversary model which is used for evaluating the developed solution [254] [259]. Such solutions are usually driven by the assumptions of the CSI as well as device type and may or may not stand once new vulnerabilities are discovered over a course of time [260] [261] [262]. The existing solutions can be broadly classified into two main types, service-based physical layer security, and channel-based physical layer security, as shown in Fig. 12. The details on both of these are presented below:
## (s41) IX. HANDOVER SECURITY FOR SMART M-IOT
Number of References: 7

(p41.0) Handovers can be hard, soft, horizontal, vertical, terminal and network controlled, and terminal and network initiated. The handovers allow the shifting of radios between the same or different media in a network. M-IoT devices undergo handoffs once they leave their service-space and enter an area governed by a different entity. Most of the handovers in M-IoT are vertical that require efficient security measures for the protection of links during their switching [279] [141] [280]. There is a huge requirement of trust as well as seamless shifting of services across the terminals while performing handoffs and mobility management in the network [281] [282]. Usually, the M-IoT networks focus on using an Access Point (AP), M-IoT device, AS, and core terminals for shifting services across the network [140]. Most of the networks require seamless services and faster authentication which can be obtained through proactive mechanisms [283]. These proactive approaches define pre-determined system model over which the authentication is performed and verified against the attacker models. Most of the approaches are selected on the basis of handoff latency, and time consumed in laying off their services onto the next terminals along with their cost of operations [284].
