# Diabetes & Metabolism Journa l o f D ia betes & M e ta b oli sm Igg4-Related Disorder and Endocrine Diseases: A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 78110358 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/197e8fafbc2e7162b0ae11d7231cc0bb8809c003](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/197e8fafbc2e7162b0ae11d7231cc0bb8809c003)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 7

(p0.0) In 2001, Hamano et al. [1] described elevated levels of IgG4 in the sera of patients presenting with autoimmune pancreatitis. A few years later, IgG4-positive cells were described in other organs of these patients, and the term IgG4-related disorders was suggested. This refers to an immune-mediated multi-organ group of disorders previously regarded as isolated single-organ diseases. The link between these diseases has been gradually established in view of the common fibro-inflammatory histopathologic characteristics and the elevation of IgG4 in the serum and tissues. Currently, IgG4-RD are described as "a fibro-inflammatory condition characterized by a tendency for formation of tumefactive lesions, a dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate rich in IgG4-positive plasma cells, storiform fibrosis, frequent, but not invariable elevations of serum IgG4 levels, and a swift initial response to glucocorticoids provided that tissue fibrosis has not supervened" [2].

(p0.1) Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) and the Mikulicz disease (MD) are major entities of IgG4-related disease. AIP is a form of chronic pancreatitis that presents with painless obstructive jaundice. Extrapancreatic sclerosing manifestations were more frequent than previously thought in AIP patients. This could affect the bile duct, liver, gallbladder, retroperitoneum, salivary and lachrimal glands. Extensive IgG4 and plasma cell infiltration were also detected in the affected tissues [3]. Mikulicz disease (MD) presents with bilateral, painless, and symmetrical swelling of the lachrimal and salivary glands leading to dryness of the eyes and mouth-this presentation is easily confused with Sjogren's syndrome [4].

(p0.2) The diagnosis of IgG4-related disorder is based on typical histology makeup (dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates, storiform fibrosis, mild eosinophilic infiltration, and obliterative phlebitis), a high count of IgG4-positive plasma cells per high-power field (HPF), and high IgG4/ IgG ratio. However, non-histologic criteria for diagnosis of IgG4related disease (IgG4-RD) have been proposed [5]. The following two criteria are the most established: IgG4 plasma level of >135 mg/ dl and an IgG4/IgG plasma cell ratio of >40% with more than 10 IgG4-positive plasma cells per HPF. Stricter criteria for diagnosis were proposed by Deshpande et al. [6]. This group suggested that the critical histopathological features include a dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, a storiform pattern of fibrosis, and obliterative phlebitis. The proposed terminology scheme for the diagnosis of IgG4-RD is based primarily on the morphological appearance on biopsy. The tissue IgG4 counts and IgG4:IgG ratios are secondary in importance. This means that the prominent IgG4+ plasma cells in the absence of one or more of the characteristic morphological features are usually not sufficient for diagnosis [6].
## (s4) IgG4-RD and diabetes
Number of References: 6

(p4.0) To date, no data has linked diabetes with IgG4-RD; however we know that the immune system plays a role in the development of diabetes, and diabetes does affect the immune system to activate oxidative stress pathways. Moreover, some medications used for treatment of diabetes result in immune modulation Auto-immune pancreatitis: Auto-immune pancreatitis (AIP) could be the link between diabetes and IgG4-RD. AIP is a chronic form of pancreatitis that results in painless jaundice, dark urine, and pale stool. It may also present with unexplained weight loss and extreme weakness. Systemic symptoms such as weight loss and fever are rare. Newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes malabsorption and pancreatic calcification and stones may be seen in some cases [18,28].

(p4.1) The first suggestion that pancreatitis could be related to an autoimmune process came from Sarles et al. [29] in 1961. However, the concept of auto-immune pancreatitis was introduced by Yoshida et al. [30] in 1995. The autoimmune association of AIP is based on association with other autoimmune disorders like sclerosing cholangitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, Sjogren's syndrome, and inflammatory bowel disease [31]. Autoantibodies commonly associated with AIP include antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, anticarbonic anhydrase II, and antilactoferrin [28].
