# A review of the problematic adhesion prophylaxis in gynaecological surgery

CorpusID: 7892258 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f0e265ac761b47465feb91a5aa079126181c5ea8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f0e265ac761b47465feb91a5aa079126181c5ea8)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Pharmacological agents
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Only a small number of pharmacological agents were ultimately tested in humans; most agents were only tested in animal models. The data from human trials are very limited and were mostly published 20 or more years ago. Based on these data, steroids and heparin cannot be recommended for the pharmacological treatment of adhesion formation, although initially both were promising approaches and were studied in humans. It was presumed that steroids would reduce the peritoneal inflammatory reaction, which enhances adhesion formation, and heparin would prevent the fibrin blood clot formation, which serves as a matrix for adhesion formation. Unfortunately, none of these agents proved effective in adhesion reduction [25]. Treatment with GNRH analogues to achieve hypo-oestrogenism seemed another promising approach, since oestrogen was known to promote angiogenesis and increase growth factor production. A recent study investigating preoperative treatment with GNRH analogues failed to demonstrate their efficacy in reducing adhesions after myomectomy [38]. All studies have in common that their approaches to preventing adhesions had, of course, successfully been tested in animals before.
## (s7) Broad-coverage fluid agents
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Adept Ò (Icodextrin 4% solution; Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, IL, USA): Adept Ò is a clear solution containing icodextrin at a concentration of 4%. Icodextrin is an a-1-4linked glucose polymer and is responsible for the longer absorption time of Adept Ò compared to the previously used crystalloid instillates like lactated Ringer's solution, which is rapidly resorbed by the peritoneum and therefore not suitable for adhesion prevention. At the end of a procedure, 1,000 ml of Adept Ò is instilled into the abdominal cavity. Instillates separate the injured tissue by hydroflotation and should stay in the abdominal cavity during the first days after surgery. Adept Ò is absorbed by the lymphatic system within 4 days and is metabolised by alpha-amylase to lower molecular weight oligosaccharides. In a large randomised controlled trial Adept Ò showed significantly higher adhesion reduction compared with lactated Ringer's solution. An adverse effect of Adept Ò is the labial or vulval swelling which mostly resolves after a short period. Adept Ò is contraindicated in patients with allergy to cornstarch-based polymers, maltose or isomaltose intolerance or with glycogen storage disease. However, all in all Adept Ò is a safe, effective and affordable antiadhesion agent [56,57].
