# Principles and guidelines for managing tooth wear: a review

CorpusID: 81753721 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cd9375af4dde0e3da36f79a773a81767af167fd9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cd9375af4dde0e3da36f79a773a81767af167fd9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s10) Fluoride addition
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) It has been proved to reduce the damage of acid drinks to teeth. Whereas it's application, via mouth rinses gels is recommended to fight acid damage, requiring thus, the use of 0.7% fluoride solution followed by home application of 0.4% fluoride [36]. Other authors report that tooth pastes containing potassium are also considered to be appropriate for the management of sensitive dentine [30].

(p10.1) When it comes to parafunctional activity, patients with GERD are advised to wear a protective occlusal splint. However, specific attention and rigorous hygiene instructions are recommended as acidic substances may accumulate within the splints which may further exacerbate the rate of TW. [30] Reference to other medical specialities is recommended in case of voluntary vomiting and suspected gastro-esophageal reflux [30].
## (s13) Clinical examination
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) An extraoral examination is necessary. [30] It involves palpation and auscultation of temporo mandibular joints (TMJ). The presence of muscle tenderness as well as clicking or crepitations in TMJ must be checked. The opening trajectory is examined and any deviation on opening or closure must be noted. Another important feature to be marked is the enlargement of the parotide gland which is a typical characteristic of bulimic patients [39].
## (s15) Pretreatment phase
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) Impressions must be performed then, and two complete sets of diagnostic casts be poured with die stone. A complete jaw relationship records must be made. Casts are mounted on the semi adjustable articulator. One set is maintained as an unaltered pretreatment record, while the other is modified by reconstructive wax up during diagnostic treatment planning. This blueprint is a pattern integrating a treatment plan that is properly sequenced and used for provisional restorations constructed to a new planned functional occlusion [30,38].
