# A Review of Membrane-Based Biosensors for Pathogen Detection

CorpusID: 822236 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f7f3d0c9adec4d3c46adc5e8a7b47c7671c8e40](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f7f3d0c9adec4d3c46adc5e8a7b47c7671c8e40)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry, Environmental Science, Biology, Computer Science

## (s1) OPEN ACCESS
Number of References: 37

(p1.0) Conventional microbiological to detect bacterial toxins [1][2][3][4]. The combination of PCR and ELISA has also been used for detection of pathogens [5,6] and their toxins [7,8]. These methods still require pre-enrichment to increase bacterial concentration above the detection threshold.

(p1.1) A biosensor is an analytical system designed to detect and/or quantify the presence of a specific biological analyte. A biosensor typically integrates a bio-recognition element with a transduction system, as well as electronic systems such as signal amplifiers, processors, and display. Biosensors have been looked upon as alternative for monitoring of bacterial cells and their toxins [9,10]. Platforms such as quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) [11], micromechanical resonators [12][13][14][15][16], flow cytometry [9,17], amperometry [18,19], and surface plasmon resonance (SPR) [20][21][22][23], have been considered. The specificity of biosensors is imparted by a probe such as a nucleic acid, an antibody, an enzyme, a cell or an artificial receptor. Different biological probes such as DNA [24], RNA [25], monoclonal [26,27] polyclonal antibodies [28], bacteriophages [19,[29][30][31][32][33] and their recombinant binding proteins [32,34] have been used for detection of bacteria.
## (s6) Composite Membranes
Number of References: 9

(p6.0) Composite membranes consist of multiple different membranes which are sandwiched together vertically or side to side to form a complete sensor. One group used a sample application pad consisting of a glass fibre membrane, a conjugate release pad made of a glass membrane, a signal generation pad made of a nitrocellulose membrane, and an absorption pad made of a cellulose membrane. Such devices were employed to monitor the presence of bacterial pathogens such as E. coli 0157 and Yersinia pestis [47,49,50] (Figure 1).

(p6.1) A similar design consisted of sample and absorption pads made of cellulose membranes, a fiberglass membrane for the conjugate pad and a nitrocellulose membrane for the capture pad [48,91]. Instead of the visual output however, electrodes were also included beside the capture pad. Then polyaniline [91] (Figure 2) or iron oxide nanoparticle [48]-conjugated antibodies were used to detect the antigen, and form an electrical circuit. The liquid sample containing the E. coli is placed on the glass fiber membrane sample application pad. The solution flows towards the cellulose membrane absorption pad. Along its path HRP conjugated polyclonal antibody (HRP-pAb) enters the solution as it is released from the glass fiber conjugate release pad. Some of the HRP-pAb binds to the E. coli. The pathogen with attached HRP then binds to the monoclonal antibody (mAb) bound to the nitrocellulose membrane signal generation pad. Some unbound HRP-pAb binds to the pAb to HRP-pAb as a control; (B) A reaction then takes place with a substrate solution which is catalyzed by the HRP to produce a visible output. With permission from [47]. This solution flowed towards the absorption pad, also made of cellulose. Along the way the conductive material-conjugated antibodies were released from the fiberglass conjugate pad and bound to the pathogen. These pathogens then bound to the antibodies linked to the nitrocellulose capture pad and increased the conductivity of the circuit. With permission from [91].
## (s9) Linking Procedure
Number of References: 10

(p9.0) Another important aspect of biosensors is the method that is used to link the capture molecule to the surface, in this case a membrane. This is important because it can substantially affect the sensitivity and specificity of the biosensor. Glutaraldehyde is a simple short crosslinking molecule, and it is commonly used to link two amine groups together. Often one of these is a free amine group on an antibody. It was used to link antibodies to secondary amines in a polypyrrole containing polymer membrane [73,80], a nitrocellulose membrane [59,60,91], Biodyne B membranes [71] and polycarbonate membranes which were aminated using nitric acid and sodium borohydride [75]. Glutaraldehyde was also used to attach aminated DNA probes to an aluminum oxide surface aminated by 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane [36,38,40].
## (s11) Electrical
Number of References: 9

(p11.0) Many transduction methods involve observation of a change in the electrical conditions in the system. Frequently, the simple act of binding of detection molecule and antigen can lead to a change in the electrical characteristics of the biosensor, including the potential, current, resistance, and/or impedance. Oligonucleotide hybridization on a positively charge nanomembrane [81] and glycoprotein binding to a membrane [90] were observed and quantified using electrodes and the resultant current vs. voltage (resistance) plot. Another group quantified bacterial binding to a membrane by recording the change in membrane resistance upon binding [73].

(p11.1) Impedance can likewise be used to record antibody-pathogen binding on a membrane. [37] In another case impedance spectroscopy was used to characterize the formation of spontaneously inserting anion channels from bacteria in biomimetic membranes [85].

(p11.2) A change in electrical current is often observed in transduction methods. Catalase-positive and -negative bacteria were identified by hydrogen peroxide consumption. The hydrogen peroxide was detected amperometrically using a graphite-Teflon-peroxidase-ferrocene electrode [69]. In another study, a change in current of the modified patch-clamp pipette electrode was recorded, which allows changes in concentration of nucleic acids to be determined [87]. Bacteria bound to membranes were detected electrochemically by cellular uptake of ferrocyanide through chronocoulometry [80]. Another group used antibodies to bind E. coli cells to a membrane. Horseradise peroxidase-conjugated antibodies were then used to detect the E. coli cells as in a sandwich ELISA (enzyme linked immunosorbent assay). NaI, ortho-phenylenediamine and hydrogen peroxidase substrates caused a current to develop which allowed for quantification of the E. coli cells [71].
## (s13) Color Change
Number of References: 13

(p13.0) A visual colour change is one of the major optical transduction methods. In some cases it was used as a method of detection by the naked eye, while in others a reflectometer or absorbance measurement was performed for quantification. A number of experiments have been performed with liposome-conjugated DNA probes which were used to detect pathogen DNA/RNA. Short single stranded DNA or RNA probes were used to link single stranded DNA or RNA from the pathogen to a membrane. Subsequently, DNA-linked liposomes containing a dye were used to label the other end of the pathogen's DNA/RNA. The dye was then released, and the colour change was quantified via a reflectometer [61][62][63][64][65][66].

(p13.1) Another way to produce a visual colour change is through the attachment of gold [46] or carbon [55] nanoparticles to sensing molecules (Figures 3 and 4). Similar work was performed using commercially available carboxylated magnetic nanoparticles. These particles were coated with BSA using EDC/NHS chemistry. Through electrostatic attraction, gold nanoparticles were attached to the BSA on the magnetic nanoparticles. Subsequently, antibodies were attached to the composite nanoparticles through physical adsorption. These nanoparticles were used to bind to bacteria, and filtered through the membrane. The bacteria with bound particles were trapped while the unbound nanoparticles passed through the pores of the membranes. The bacteria were then detected by visual colour change caused by the aggregated gold nanoparticles, and this colour change was enhanced by the addition of hydroxylamine and HAuCl4 [77].

(p13.2) Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) is commonly used to catalyze colourimetric reactions. HRP-conjugated antibodies bind to the pathogen, and the addition of substrates such as tetramethylbenzidene [47,75] and SuperSignal West Femto [47] in addition to hydrogen peroxide allow the colourimetric reaction to take place. Protein phosphatases (PP) may also be used to catalyze colourimetric reactions, as seen in an experiment with Microcystins. Microcystins are toxic proteins produced by cyanobacteria such as Microcystis, Anabaena, Oscillatoria and Nostoc which inhibit the activity of protein phosphatases. In this experiment, PP were immobilized on the membrane surface, and microcysteins were introduced in solution. Subsequently, colourless p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP) was introduced in the PP. This converts the pNPP to yellow p-nitrophenol (pNP), which can be used to measure enzyme activity using a microplate reader, which in turn can be used to determine the presence of microcystins [67].
