# Overview of diagnosis and management of paediatric headache. Part I: diagnosis

CorpusID: 8504880 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9565ebe3f2c8db0e6d84f561be6fffb9b98ed2c4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9565ebe3f2c8db0e6d84f561be6fffb9b98ed2c4)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) How to diagnose headache
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) A thorough evaluation of headache in children and adolescents is necessary to make the correct diagnosis and initiate treatment. The evaluation should include detailed history of children and adolescents (including parent and teacher observations, observations of child-carer, family relationships, medical history of children and parents) and completed by detailed general and neurological examinations. One has to keep in mind that some symptoms may be referred from the child's behaviour only (e.g. stopping to watch a favourite movie, interrupting a computer game, or the child's wish to go to bed in a quiet, darkened room during daytime). Children may also be asked to draw a picture of what their headache, since children, especially younger ones, communicate better through pictures than verbally [28,29].
## (s7) Psychological examination
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Repeated pain experiences have some negative effects on daily living activities (i.e. sleep, appetite, play, attention, etc.). During the prepuberty and puberty period changes of emotional status and personality stand in the forefront. It should be differentiating whether the emotional problem or change is a comorbidity or the main problem. Symptoms of depression, which include sadness, tearfulness, withdrawal from activities, hopelessness, need to be checked. It has been shown that migraine is not related to family and housing conditions, school situation, or peer relations, whereas TTH is associated with a higher rate of divorced parents and fewer peer relations [34]. As an associative comorbidity, the frequency of migraine headache in a clinic sample of Tourette syndrome subjects was nearly fourfold more than the frequency of migraines reported in the general population [35]. The evaluation process should be completed with scales (including depression, anxiety, self-esteem, CBCL, etc.) and family interview.
## (s22) Cluster headache and other trigeminal autonomic cephalgias
Number of References: 9

(p22.0) Cluster headache (CH), the most painful of the primary headaches is a disorder with well-known diagnostic criteria. The condition usually begins in the second decade of life; the prevalence of childhood onset is approximately 0.1% and the sex ratio is in favour of men (M:F *3.2:1), but with a wide variation of range (1:1-6:1). Onset may be as soon as 3 years, but there is a relatively low number of cases with onset \10 years old. A suspected case in a 1-year-old infant has also been described [88][89][90]. There are relatively few reports on the prevalence and clinical features in CH in children and adolescents, since only few population studies have also considered the paediatric population [88,91,92].

(p22.1) Paroxysmal hemicrania is a rare headache with a prevalence of 0.02%. Paroxysmal hemicrania generally begins in adulthood with onset generally after the third decade of life. Characterised by brief, unilateral attacks of intense pain around the supraorbital and temporal region, afflicted patients may have from usually 5-6 to as many as 30 attacks per day that last from 2 to 45 min. Like other trigeminal autonomic cephalgias, paroxysmal hemicrania is associated with autonomic symptoms. A key element defining paroxysmal hemicranias is their exquisite sensitivity to indomethacin. Relatively few paediatric cases have been reported in the literature. Children as young as 3 years of age have been described with the disorder [93][94][95].
