# Fats and oils: The health concerns and issues-A review

CorpusID: 86814731 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1052c748821cbab1457e6430052422d768cbabca](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1052c748821cbab1457e6430052422d768cbabca)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s2) ISSUES AND CONCERNS
Number of References: 7

(p2.0) Trans Fats: Conjugated Linoleic acid (CLA), a natural trans fatty acid, is found in dairy products and a report even suggests reduced risk of heart disease with diet consisting of CLA (Bonthuis et al.,2010). Intake of dairy products was not associated with mortality of increased heart risk. The study was conducted over a period of sixteen years. Natural sources of fatty acids contain small amounts of Trans fats. However studies on artificial Trans fats have confirmed their bad effects. Replacement of Saturated fatty acids with hydrogenated fats (trans fats) resulted in decreased HDL in blood and ability of arteries to dilate was also impaired (de Roos et al., 2001). Trans fats are bad in a way that they reduce HDL and increase LDL in blood increasing the risk of cardiovascular disease greatly. Food and Drug Agency of USA (FDA) has directed edible oil manufactures to completely phase out Trans fats by 2018. Trans fatty acid contents in erythrocytes have been found to be associated with an elevated risk of Cardiovascular Heart Disease (CHD) in a nested case-control study among US women (Sun et al., 2007). Another study carried out on Finish men over a period of 6 years observed a significant positive association between the intake of trans-fatty acids and the risk of coronary death (Pietinen et al., 1997). Younger women were found to be at higher risk of CHD owing to high trans fat intake (Oh et al., 2005) Omega 3 vs. Omega 6 fatty acids: Omega-3 and omega-6 refers to the position of double bond from methyl end of the fatty acid. Studies show a link between diet containing omega-3 fatty acids and reduction in life threatening diseases such as heart diseases, arthritis and cancer (The nutrition source). Apart from these benefits omega-3 has been found to have anti-inflammatory properties and prevents diabetes. Omega-3, EPA (Eicosapentaenoic acid), DHA (Docosahexaenoic acid) and ALA (alpha-linolenic acid) are three important omega-3 acids. DHA is good for nervous system, good sleep and improved mood. EPA and DHA are considered good for pregnant women while humans being cannot directly use ALA but are able to convert ALA to DHA (DHA.EPA Omega-3 Institute). Human body is capable of producing all fatty acid except LA (Omega-6) and ALA (Omega-3). Hence LA and ALA are essential fatty acids i.e. they must be a part of the diet. Excessive intake of omega-6 fatty acids is reported to interfere with health benefits of omega-3 fatty acids as both types compete for same enzymes (Simopoulos, 2002). Typically an omega 6 to omega 3 ratio in diet should be 1:1 based on evolutionary trends (Simopoulos, 2006). Modern diet ratio for the same is 16:1 which indicates lower omega-3 intake. A study in India has also documented low omega-3 intake across large segments of the population (Ghafoorunissa, 1998). Some studies have linked this diet to breast cancer in post menopausal women and prostate cancer. Many other studies suggest an ideal ratio of 4:1 is good for health. One thing is for sure we are taking much higher amounts of omega 6 fatty acids than are actually needed. We need to either considerably reduce refined oils (that are rich in omega-6) or increase consumption of omega-3 fatty acids to maintain healthy ratio.
