# A review on health benefits of kombucha nutritional compounds and metabolites

CorpusID: 90806994 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd2da06842b31703376ae6f616eaa45115049f7b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd2da06842b31703376ae6f616eaa45115049f7b)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Biology

## (s2) Preparation of kombucha
Number of References: 5

(p2.0) This beverage is prepared by fermenting sugared tea with a SCOBY (Jayabalan, Malbaša, Lončar, Vitas, & Sathishkumar, 2014). Its flavour is slightly sweet and sour at the same time, plus it may contain traces of carbon dioxide (Nummer, 2013).

(p2.1) The typical production of kombucha beverage is based on black, green or oolong tea. For its production, 5 g of tea leaves per litre of water may be used, then, sugar is added, which will serve as a substrate for tea fermenting bacteria and yeasts. Approximately 50 g of sugar per litre of water is enough. Before adding the SCOBY or a bit of prepared kombucha, the beverage should be at a temperature close to 20°C. It is extremely important to use sanitized utensils and work in clean areas while making kombucha, in order to have control over the growth of microorganisms and to prevent unwanted contamination (Watawana et al., 2015). Likewise, it is important to control pH levels during fermentation of kombucha, and preferably stop this process when a pH level of 4.2 is reached, since the overproduction of acetic acid may be counterproductive (Kovacevic et al., 2014). Other food safety methods include pasteurizing the final product to prevent overproduction of alcohol and carbon dioxide, as well as the addition of 0.1% of sodium benzoate and 0.1% of potassium sorbate as food preservatives, and finally, keeping it refrigerated (Watawana et al., 2015).
## (s9) Polyphenols
Number of References: 8

(p9.0) Polyphenols are active substances with more than one phenol structural unit per molecule. They represent the largest group of phytochemicals and they are the most abundant antioxidants present in the diet. Total intake of polyphenols can be up to 1 g/day (Scalbert, Johnson, & Saltmarsh, 2005). Moreover, they play a role in preventing several diseases related to oxidative stress, such as cancer, CVDs, and neurodegenerative diseases (Manach, Scalbert, Morand, Rémésy, & Jiménez, 2004). They modulate the activity of a variety of enzymes and cell receptors as a means of defence against oxidative stress caused by reactive oxygen species (Tsao, 2010). Main dietary polyphenol sources include fruits, vegetables, cereals, legumes, natural fruit juices, tea, coffee, and red wine (Scalbert et al., 2005).

(p9.1) The protective effect of kombucha beverage is mainly due to polyphenol activity, compounds produced during fermentation, and the synergistic effect of the different compounds found in the tea (Jayabalan, Subathradevi, Marimuthu, Sathishkumar, & Swaminathan, 2008). Total polyphenol content in kombucha tea shows a linear increase during fermentation time (Chu & Chen, 2006). As an example, both epicatechin (EC) and epigallocatechin (EGC) are found predominantly in the tea (Manach et al., 2004). A higher level of EC (~150%) was found on day 12 of fermentation of kombucha made with green tea, and of EGC (~115%) on the same day of one made with black tea (Jayabalan, Marimuthu, & Swaminathan, 2007).
