# Island ecosystem services: insights from a literature review on case-study island ecosystem services and future prospects

CorpusID: 90212387 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c6fd0d2c8723e0f3720c33450d4c9cd052cdaf47](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c6fd0d2c8723e0f3720c33450d4c9cd052cdaf47)

Fields: Environmental Science, Geography, Business

## (s9) Pollination
Number of References: 25

(p9.0) Pollination is important for delivering key benefits in the form of a marginal increase in production of market-based or subsistence crops, fibre, forage, timber and non-timber forest products, and through the reproduction of wild plants that play a role in other ecosystem services (Kremen et al. 2007). A total of 23 studies investigated pollination in small islands. Most considered several island ecosystems (11), while a few focussed specifically on forest (6) and dryland (3) ecosystems. Only two of the studies dealt with cultivated ecosystems whilst no studies investigated crop pollination. The majority (15) investigated drivers and pressures affecting pollination services. Our review suggests that generally the ecology of pollination remains relatively poorly studied, even though many islands are biodiversity hotspots and the conservation of pollinators is important for ensuring the reproduction of endemic plants (Anderson 2003;Potts et al. 2006;Nielsen et al. 2011;Chamorro and Heleno 2012). The value of animal pollinators was emphasised in a study of plant assemblages pollinated by bats by Scanlon et al. (2014), who found that they coincided with habitats valued by humans for medicinal, cultural and economic uses.

(p9.1) Island pollination networks often have high degree of generalisation caused by the asymmetrical plantpollinator relationships (Cox et al. 1993) and depauperate pollinator fauna on islands compared to continental communities (MacArthur and Wilson 1967). Even relatively large and isolated temperate island groups such as New Zealand have smaller pollinator faunas compared to mainland areas (Lloyd 1985). Pollination interaction webs in the Mauritius were observed to be dominated by a few abundant and generalised species even though several rare and specialised species were also recorded (Kaiser-Bunbury et al. 2009). The loss of a generalist pollinator may therefore be a significant threat for the reproduction and survival of island plant species. Plants on remote islands are also reproductively isolated, have evolved towards dependence on few indigenous pollinators and demonstrate an inability to adjust to the loss of pollinators (Cox et al. 1993). Flying foxes (Pteropus sp.) pollinate several plant species in South Pacific Oceanic Islands, and their decline is hypothesised to lead to a cascade of linked plant extinctions. Bird pollination was associated with a higher fruit set for flowers from New Zealand (Anderson 2003), whilst in another study from the island of Lesvos, bee diversity and the provision of pollination services were associated with habitats with high floral diversity and availability of floral resources (Potts et al. 2006).

(p9.2) Threats to plant-pollinator interactions on many islands are mostly driven by alien species and their direct and indirect competition for pollination (plants) and for floral resources (animals) (Kaiser-Bunbury et al. 2010). Two studies from this review investigated the effect of invasive plants on pollination services. The abundance of the invasive Solanum elaeagnifolium Cavanilles has a negative impact on pollination services and seed set of the native Glaucium flavum Crantz on Lesvos Island, and the presence of the invasive significantly increased pollen limitation (Tscheulin and Petanidou 2013). The invasive Opuntia spp. was also found to modify the number of links between plants and pollinators in the Canary and Balearic Islands, but by linking to generalist natives, Opuntia spp. remained peripheral and the pollination network was not affected unless invasion is intense (Padrón et al. 2009). Alien plants may be facilitated by generalist pollinators, hence resulting in the integration of the invading plants in resident communities (Kaiser-Bunbury et al. 2010). Similarly, native pollinators might be outcompeted by an invasive pollinator, depending on its exploitative or competitive superiority (Traveset and Richardson 2006). A wide range of potential host plants and the ability to achieve large population sizes are important traits that increase the competitiveness of the invading pollinators (Groom et al. 2014). The introduction of managed species, such as the honey bee Apis mellifera and Bombus terrestris was observed to result in lower visitation of flowers by native pollinators and the displacement of the latter (Kato and Kawakita 2004;Ishii et al. 2008). The introduced A. mellifera were observed to lead to lower nectar-feeding activity and pollination services by two endemic birds in the Mauritius, and to a lower reproductive success of these native birds. Honey bees were also less efficient pollinators; reduced setting of seed in native plants potentially reduced their reproductive success (Hansen et al. 2002). On the other hand, the removal of an invasive nectar thief and arthropod predator, Vespula pensylvanica Saussure, in Hawaii resulted in an increase in bee visitation, especially from introduced honeybees, and in an increased fruit production of an endemic tree (Hanna et al. 2013). This finding supports the observation that introduced pollinator species may be acting as a substitute for threatened or extinct island pollinators, and hence the eradication of the newly established species is not always the best strategy for the conservation of plant diversity in island systems. The reintroduction of native species from outlying islands (Abe et al. 2008) or the introduction of functional replacement species (Kaiser-Bunbury et al. 2010) have also been suggested as a potential management strategy.

(p9.3) Pollination IES are susceptible to habitat disturbance (Kaiser-Bunbury et al. 2010), indirectly threatening plant diversity and food provisioning. Small populations in fragmented landscapes are subject to higher competition from invading species for pollinators, and native trees were characterised by pollination limitation and decreased fruit production in La Réunion (Indian Ocean) (Gigord et al. 1999). Higher intensity of land use management is associated with lower pollinator diversity. In a study from South Island, New Zealand, pollinator diversity declined as pollinators with a narrow diet, large body size, solitary behaviour and a preference for nonfloral larval food were the first pollinators to be lost (Rader et al. 2014). These observations suggest that more intensively managed or disturbed landscapes are characterised by common or exotic plant species with generalised pollination requirements.
