# REVIEW ARTICLE Delirium rating scales in critically ill patients: a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 9041455 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fad20e4f5ca8f22211db01a45c26e83806bd8a8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fad20e4f5ca8f22211db01a45c26e83806bd8a8)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 18

(p0.0) Delirium is a common neurological dysfunction observed in intensive care units (ICU). Its incidence ranges from 5 to 92% according to the population studied, (1)(2)(3)(4) and delirium is associated with high mortality, longer ICU hospitalizations, extended periods of mechanical ventilation, and long-term cognitive and functional deficits. (1)(2)(3)(5)(6)(7) Despite being a major neurological syndrome, delirium is underdiagnosed, (1,3) particularly in patients on mechanical ventilation. (3,6,8) Based on this observation, several tools have been developed to facilitate the diagnosis of delirium in critically ill patients.

(p0.1) The criteria recommended by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4 th edition (DSM-IV), and the International Classification of Disease, 10 th revision (ICD-10), are the most frequently used tools in individuals who are able to communicate verbally and are typically used by professionals specialized in the neuroscience field. In critically ill patients, the diagnostic scales most commonly used due to their simplicity and adequate accuracy are the Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU) and the Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist (ICDSC). (9)(10)(11) However, both the DSM-IV and the ICD-10 as well as the CAM-ICU tools are dichotomous and do not permit stratification according to the severity of the condition. The DSM-IV and ICD-10 are based on the signs and symptoms necessary to diagnose or exclude a certain pathology (including delirium). In turn, the CAM-ICU was created based on the DSM-IV criteria to facilitate the diagnosis of delirium in the ICU and to allow the assessment of patients on mechanical ventilation (who are unable to communicate verbally). The CAM-ICU only permits diagnosis and does not establish a correlation with the severity of the condition.
## (s3) Delirium Detection Score
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) The Delirium Detection Score (DDS) is a validated scale that considers eight of the symptoms of delirium. Each one of these symptoms receives a score of 0, 1, 4, or 7 points. (14) The scale was created by modifying an instrument for the evaluation of alcohol withdrawal syndrome (Clinical Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol -CIWA-Ar). (23,24) Therefore, it is a useful scale to assess the degree of delirium and guide treatment, and the tool may also serve as a diagnostic scale. The scale   exhibited good correlation between examiners, as long as the examiners were previously trained in the scale's application. (24) 
## (s4) Cognitive Test of Delirium
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) The Cognitive Test of Delirium (CTD) evaluates five items, each of which receives a score of 0, 2, 4, or 6 points. Thus, the scale has a total of 30 points possible. There is no subdivision described in the literature that correlates the severity levels with the respective CTD values. However, the lower the CTD value, the worse the clinical outcome. (12) The scale is able to differentiate delirium from other psychiatric illnesses such as dementia. (12) Due to the long application time, an abbreviated form of the CTD was created, requiring only a few minutes of application time, but it has not yet been validated for routine use in the ICU. (13) 
## (s5) Memorial Delirium Assessment Scale
Number of References: 21

(p5.0) The Memorial Delirium Assessment Scale (MDAS) was initially created to diagnose delirium in patients with advanced cancer, but it has already been tested and validated for use in the general ICU. (17,21) The scale assesses variables of two major groups: cognition and behavior. (17,21) Based on the score obtained, the MDAS allows the stratification of delirium by severity. (19,21) Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist The Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist (ICDSC) is a scale for delirium stratification, but it can also be used as a diagnostic scale, (10) and the scale's application is easy and quick. (18) The ICDSC consists of eight observed variables that are compared with the assessment of the previous day, and increasing values on the ICDSC are compatible with severity stratification. (11) In addition, the ICDSC is useful in the diagnosis of subsyndromal delirium. (25) The ICDSC has the advantage of being adapted to Portuguese and validated for routine use in Brazil by Gusmao-Flores et al. (11) The ICDSC have been demonstrated to be a good scale to assess and monitor delirium. (10,11) The Neelon and Champagne Confusion Scale The Neelon and Champagne Confusion Scale (NEECHAM) was created as an instrument for nurses to assess delirium daily and has been validated for patients in the ICU (15) and those on mechanical ventilation. (20) Delirium Rating Scale-Revised-98

(p5.1) The Delirium Rating Scale-Revised-98 (DRS-R-98) is the oldest and most traditional scale, created to measure the degree of delirium in patients. Among the scales that allow delirium stratification, the DRS-R-98 is one of the most well-known and frequently used in intensive care. (12,16,18) The DRS-R-98 consists of a scale with 16 items (3 of them used only at the moment of diagnosis and 13 used for stratification in successive evaluations). Each item receives 0 to 2 or 0 to 3 points, and the higher the final score, the higher the severity of the condition. (22) One of the difficulties of this scale is its complexity, as it requires training of qualified professionals, which sometimes generates divergent results. (16) The DRS-R-8 has already been studied and validated for Portuguese by Negreiros et al. (22) 
## (s6) DISCUSSION
Number of References: 17

(p6.0) Many scales are used to detect and evaluate patients with delirium. The present review identified six stratification scales used in ICU patients. The six scales have already been adequately validated in their original language. However, only the ICDSC and DRS-R-68 (11,22) have been translated and validated for the Portuguese language. Other scales need to be validated specifically for use in sedated critically ill patients (DDS), as they should only be applied in patients with Ramsay scale ≤3. (14) The CTD and ICDSC have the advantage of having dichotomous variables (ICDSC) and using nonverbal language (CTD), allowing simpler and affordable evaluations for intubated patients. However, the level of sedation may influence the accuracy of the scale. (10) Regarding the time of application of each instrument, the CTD and MDAS have a long application time for each patient, hindering the adherence for effective use in the ICU. The ideal tool would be one with an application time that would allow a periodic assessment during each shift in the ICU (due to the fluctuating nature of delirium), such as the ICDSC, NEECHAM or DDS.

(p6.1) Most of the variables assessed in each scale were chosen based on the diagnosis by the DSM-IV criteria. However, some variables incorporated other symptoms that are less common in delirium, which decreases the sensitivity of the tool. (23) One such example is the DDS, which evaluates signals such as tremors and paroxysmal sweating, findings that are not frequent in the course of delirium. (23) Another important aspect is that most scales have variables that assess hyperactive delirium, such as agitation, anxiety, and hallucinations, but few are able to assess hypoactive delirium, which is the most common subtype of the disease, with specificity. (18,23) The hypoactive nature of the disease (drowsiness, passivity, and inactivity), in most cases, is an intrinsic difficulty of disease, which makes it virtually unrecognizable without the use of a suitable tool. (18) The evaluation of behavior (and not just the agitation), attention, sleep-wake cycle, and the level of consciousness, such as the evaluation permitted by the ICDSC, allows for the evaluation of patients with hypoactive delirium. However, changes in the sleep-wake cycle, present in DDS, MDAS, and ICDSC, hinder precise evaluation, requiring longitudinal information, which can limit its use.

(p6.2) Scales such as the NEECHAM and ICDSC have the advantage of being previously validated, allowing the application both by nurses and nursing home residents, as long as they are properly trained. (11,20) With respect to the DRS-R-98, its validation study for use in Brazil was applied only by psychiatrists, although these physicians would not be responsible for its application in the ICU. (22) The other tools (DDS, MDAS, and CTD) were tested with the physician-on-duty as the evaluator. The MDAS was also validated when applied by residents. (17) However, training and qualification must be applied prior to the use of the various instruments. With previous training of the professionals, most scales exhibited good correlations between evaluators. (21,26) The subgroups of patients to be evaluated are another important factor to be considered when choosing the scale. The choice of the tool, based on the admission type and the severity of the patient, influences its accuracy and correlation with other scales. (27) The ICDSC was more sensitive than the CAM-ICU in the subgroup of surgical patients, for example. (27) Therefore, the choice of the scale that will be used is at the discretion of each intensive care unit, as long as it is correctly used with the most suitable professionals.
