# The diagnostic value of serum creatinine and cystatin c in evaluating glomerular filtration rate in patients with chronic kidney disease: a systematic literature review and meta-analysis

CorpusID: 11585709 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/363a8492cc1aa9cad26089f6f60900c611a88f71](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/363a8492cc1aa9cad26089f6f60900c611a88f71)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Synthesis and analysis of data
(p6.0) Meta-analysis was carried out by the software RevMan version 5.3, and Meta-Disc version 1.4. Publication bias analysis was performed using Stata 14.0 (Stata Corp, College Station, TX, USA). When a fourfold table contained a cell with a value of 0, the calculations were corrected with the addition of 0.5 in the cell. Studies containing two cells with the value of 0 were not included in the analysis [26]. Each document was summarized by SPE, SEN, ± PVs, ± LRs for diagnostic tests, and also analyzed for heterogeneity with the χ 2 test. This was evaluated using the I 2 method, and significant study heterogeneity was considered when I 2 > 50%. I 2 values between 25 and 50% were deemed to show modest heterogeneity and I 2 values < 25% were thought to indicate low heterogeneity. Clinical utility of SCysC and SCr for estimated GFR (eGFR) was evaluated by a Fagan plot. We drew the SROC curve based on the literature included in this study, and calculated the zone under the receiver operating characteristic curves. All results are presented with 95% confidence intervals (CI) [27].
## (s13) DISCUSSION
(p13.0) SCr, SCysC and endogenous creatinine clearance rates were utilized as endogenous indicators to estimate GFR in the clinical setting. In the estimation of GFR, ideal endogenous blood substances incorporate the following CKD = chronic kidney disease; SCr = serum creatinine; SCysC = serum cystatin C; GFR = glomerular filtration rate; mGFR = measured GFR; PETIA = particle-enhanced turbidimetric immunoassay; PENIA = particle-enhanced nephelometric immunoassay; NA or "/"= not applicable.   properties: release into the blood stream at a steady speed, free filtration by the glomerulus, no reabsorption or secretion by the renal tubules, and removal through the kidneys [28]. Most research mentions many factors that effect the generation of SCr, including age, gender, muscle mass, pharmaceutical or other drug use, among others. In addition, until kidney function loss has reached 50%, a typical concentration of SCr may be seen due to tubular secretion and additional clearance through the viscera [29].
