# A REVIEW ON THE PROGRESS OF POLYMER NANOSTRUCTURES WITH MODULATED MORPHOLOGIES AND PROPERTIES, USING NANOPOROUS AAO TEMPLATES

CorpusID: 119030467 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54bfdc064ba68ac3721790e8a5c5bed292e900cd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54bfdc064ba68ac3721790e8a5c5bed292e900cd)

Fields: Materials Science, Physics

## (s14) Effect on polymerization kinetics and chemical structure
(p14.0) In a recent work [168], the polymerization of styrene in the AAO nanotemplates has been carried out as an example of vinyl polymerization by free radicals mechanism.   In the case of free radical polymerization of styrene in AAO nanocavities, the polystyrene nanostructures extracted from the AAO templates have been characterized by SEC and NMR spectroscopy, as a function of the percentage of conversion. Up to 50% conversion, no significant differences in the values of M w or PDI for bulk and confinement polymerization processes were found, which means that the growth radical termination mechanisms is the same in both cases [168]. At high conversion (>65%), it was observed that M w and PDI values are higher for bulk polymerization than nanopolymerization and the difference is more pronounced as the reaction conversion progresses. This behavior was attributed to the better control of the temperature inside of the nanomold, in comparison to the bulk polymerization, where the heat transfer will occur in a very much higher volume. Concerning the steoregularity of the nanostructured polymer, NMR results showed that nanopolymerized PS has a higher degree of syndiotacticity than bulk polymerized. Although the authors cannot attribute this difference to any particular confinement effect, they speculate if the difference in the diffusion of growing chains in confinement with regard to the bulk and/or nanocavities wall obstruction, could favor a kind of regiorigidity of the chain that would allow a rather stereoregular growing. From these results, it is thus evident the influence of nanoconfinement both on the styrene polymerization and the polymer microstructure, therefore, these changes will be accompanied by the variation in the physical properties of the polymer. Nonetheless, considering that confinement and surface effects may not be necessarily identical to all the monomer and polymerization processes, it seems obvious the need of systematic studies of polymerization in confinement, polymer characterization and modelling.
