# Modulation of Fear Extinction by Stress, Stress Hormones and Estradiol: A Review

CorpusID: 17282833 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7af75741e584736819c73178d7f857fedbc52d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7af75741e584736819c73178d7f857fedbc52d)

Fields: Psychology, Biology, Medicine

## (s12) Mediators of the First-Wave Stress Response Monoamines
(p12.0) Overview. There is increasing evidence that the monoamines, i.e., NA, DA, and 5-HT, which are involved in the (firstwave) stress response (see ''Features and mediators of the stress response'' Section), also have roles in fear extinction: projections from noradrenergic, dopaminergic, and serotonergic fibers reach the main structures of the fear extinction network, the amygdala, the hippocampus, and the prefrontal cortex. Accordingly, administering agonists and/or antagonists of the respective monoamine transmitter in a fear extinction setting can elucidate the role of these monoamines. Moreover, experimental trials administering the respective drugs and testing their impact on extinction can serve as an experimental model for examining effects of the combination of drug therapy and behavioral exposure therapy (i.e., extinction learning). We will thus review animal data, preclinical data from healthy humans and clinical evidence from patient studies that address the therapeutic effects of the corresponding pharmacotherapy-also as an adjunct to cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)-in anxiety disorders and/or PTSD (see also the excellent reviews of Fitzgerald et al., 2014;Bowers and Ressler, 2015;Singewald et al., 2015).
## (s14) Opioids
(p14.0) Endogenous opioids (including endorphins, enkephalins, dynorphins and hemorphins; Singewald et al., 2015) are also involved in improving extinction learning ). An increase of endogenous opioids is among the quick (<1 min) changes after stressor exposure (e.g., Sapolsky et al., 2000). Thus, a stress-mediated increase of opioids might participate in stress-mediated improvement of extinction, mainly via stressors affecting the first-wave stress response.

(p14.1) Opioid receptors (µ-, κ-, and δ receptors) are expressed in extinction-relevant brain areas, i.e., in amygdala, prefrontal cortices, and the hippocampus (for a review, see Singewald et al., 2015). Interestingly, ITC show a high expression of µ-opioid receptors (Blaesse et al., 2015), further suggesting that µ-opioid signaling might contribute to an improvement of fear extinction. The ventrolateral PAG (vlPAG) is a main site of the opioid actions during extinction learning, and vlPAG opioids are assumed necessary for extinction learning to occur. A very convincing interpretation for the involvement of opioids in extinction learning is that omission of an expected aversive US is rewarding .
