# A Survey on Hardware-based Security Mecha-nisms for Internet of Things

CorpusID: 198967727 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/25a3a164acfefaef93a476e6882b3939c35da619](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/25a3a164acfefaef93a476e6882b3939c35da619)

Fields: Computer Science, Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s7) I) Authentication:
(p7.0) The authentication refers to the process of verifying the identity of devices to grant them with information access. Data integrity and unauthorized access to the IoT networks such as impersonating attacks are critical issues in these systems. The objective of the authentication process is to assure that the nodes only carry validated information from the legitimated sources. In order to manage numerous IoT networks offered by different vendors, the IoT devices need to be authenticated to validate their identities before routing any information. The authentication mechanisms usually rely on a certification authority (CA) that involves a fairly heavy load of message exchange between the CA and the low power IoT nodes. The authors of [62] proposed an authentication scheme based on hashing and element extraction used for application layer in IoT nodes. An access control method is implemented in [116] that adopts an ECC-based key establishment. For access control policy, the authors utilized a role-based access control (RBAC) authentication method employing the nodes' particular role(s) and applications in the corresponding IoT network. One drawback of this work is that it incurs a large number of overhead messages during the access control and authentication mechanisms. In [182], a new authentication method is developed which considers the IoT perception layer. This method enhances mutual authentication between the user and the sensor nodes, and intermediate processes.
