# The Effects of Titanium Implant Surface Topography on Osseointegration: Literature Review

CorpusID: 197636975 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c6b5bdea28954f2df178c2804310396ffd54734b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c6b5bdea28954f2df178c2804310396ffd54734b)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s16) Stem-Cell Therapies and Surface Modification
(p16.0) Surface treatment of titanium screw-shaped implants creates a nanopattern that has been demonstrated in vivo to be associated with an enhanced osteogenesis. Several studies confirmed the observation, stating the promotion of stem cells' growth, provided by oxidative nanopattering. Furthermore, the most suitable nanoarrangement of TiO 2 nanotubes was with a diameter of 15 nm in a vertical alignment and was associated with a high spreading and differentiation of rat mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into the osteogenic lineage. Notably, 15 nm roughly correspond to the predicted lateral spacing of integrin receptors in the flourapatitecomplexes. In adults, the osteoblast is derived from a bone marrow stromal fibroblastic stem cell, termed the MSC, a nonhematopoietic multipotent stem-like cell vital for the osteogenic process capable of differentiating into both osteoblastic and nonosteoblastic lineages, thus enhancing the bone commitment and osseointegration [69][70][71].
## (s18) Photofunctionalization
(p18.0) UV treatment of dental implant surfaces enhances bioactivity and osseointegration by altering the TiO 2 on the surface. By promoting interactions of cells and proteins to the implant on a molecular level, UV light is believed to enhance the osteoconductivity. UV treatment reduces the degree of surface hydrocarbon and increases surface energy and wettability by converting hydrophobic implants to superhydrophilic. UV light has been suggested to raise the level of protein absorption and cellular attachment to titanium surfaces, and it has been shown to restore bioactivity caused by age-related degradations. UV treatment is simple and cost effective for all types of titanium surfaces [72,73].
