# Radar and Communication Co-existence: an Overview

CorpusID: 202561030 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd6e46880757904ae5b9b41fab42a6e48bf7d31d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd6e46880757904ae5b9b41fab42a6e48bf7d31d)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s5) 4)
(p5.0) A multi-antenna transmitter wherein each antenna transmits a train of unsophisticated signals, amplitude-modulated by the slow-time code. In this case, P r = 1 and the N ×M T space-time code matrix G = [g 1 , . . . , g M T ] is the degree of freedom at the transmitter side [17]. Radars use radio waves to determine the range, angle, or velocity of objects. The operation of a typical MIMO radar receive chain is summarized in the box of Page 4. The radar range resolution is dictated, for a given Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), by the transmit bandwidth, i.e., 1/T r in (1). The velocity resolution is determined by the duration of coherent integration, i.e., N T in (2). In situations 1) and 3) no Doppler processing is undertaken, mainly due to the fact that typical single-pulse durations are too short to allow measuring the Doppler shift induced by targets in moderate radial motion. In settings 2) and 4) moving objects generate steering vectors and Doppler shifts up to 1 T can be unambiguously measured. Likewise, pulse trains with Pulse Repetition Time (PRT) T generate range ambiguities whereby scatterers located at distances corresponding to delays which are integer multiples of T contribute to the same range cell.
## (s7) C. Uncoordinated design: communication centric
(p7.0) The approach of optimizing radar waveforms, although theoretically well established, is not always applicable, mainly due to the fact that governmental and military agencies are unwilling to make major changes in their radar deployments, which may impose huge costs. Thus, coexisting communication systems must be equipped with proper counter-measures to guarantee required Quality of Service (QoS) when the radar system(s) do not modify their transmission policy. Attention is thus shifted back to the communication transceiver, which explains the name "communication-centric" design. The approaches so far available in the literature focus either on the receiver [11], when prior information on the radar signals is not available, or on the transmitter [13], when the structure of the radar transmitted waveform is known.

(p7.1) Assume first the scenario considered in [11], wherein a multiplicity of radars may be potentially active in full spectral overlap with a communication system. Each radar is allowed to transmit a sophisticated waveform, but no prior knowledge as to the number of active systems, their distance from the communication receiver or the channel gains is available. The scenario is thus akin to the one outlined in situation 3) of the list of Sec. II-A, wherein M T now plays the role of the maximum number of potentially active emitters. The antennas of such a "multiple input" system are widely spaced, so that the delays with which their signals arrive at the communication receiver are all different and unknown.

(p7.2) As to the communication signal, the scenario assumed in [11] is fairly general. The transmitted symbols are assumed to undergo suitable pre-coding, where the choice of the precoding matrix dictates the type of system, ranging from Code-Division Multiple Access (CDMA) to Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing (OFDM). In particular, suppose the communication and radar systems have the same bandwidth, i.e., L = 1, T c = T r and ψ L (t) = ψ(t). The signal transmitted by the communication system in the interval [0, P r T r ] is assumed to have the form
## (s31) 4)
(p31.0) A multi-antenna transmitter wherein each antenna transmits a train of unsophisticated signals, amplitude-modulated by the slow-time code. In this case, P r = 1 and the N ×M T space-time code matrix G = [g 1 , . . . , g M T ] is the degree of freedom at the transmitter side [17]. Radars use radio waves to determine the range, angle, or velocity of objects. The operation of a typical MIMO radar receive chain is summarized in the box of Page 4. The radar range resolution is dictated, for a given Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), by the transmit bandwidth, i.e., 1/T r in (1). The velocity resolution is determined by the duration of coherent integration, i.e., N T in (2). In situations 1) and 3) no Doppler processing is undertaken, mainly due to the fact that typical single-pulse durations are too short to allow measuring the Doppler shift induced by targets in moderate radial motion. In settings 2) and 4) moving objects generate steering vectors and Doppler shifts up to 1 T can be unambiguously measured. Likewise, pulse trains with Pulse Repetition Time (PRT) T generate range ambiguities whereby scatterers located at distances corresponding to delays which are integer multiples of T contribute to the same range cell.
## (s33) C. Uncoordinated design: communication centric
(p33.0) The approach of optimizing radar waveforms, although theoretically well established, is not always applicable, mainly due to the fact that governmental and military agencies are unwilling to make major changes in their radar deployments, which may impose huge costs. Thus, coexisting communication systems must be equipped with proper counter-measures to guarantee required Quality of Service (QoS) when the radar system(s) do not modify their transmission policy. Attention is thus shifted back to the communication transceiver, which explains the name "communication-centric" design. The approaches so far available in the literature focus either on the receiver [11], when prior information on the radar signals is not available, or on the transmitter [13], when the structure of the radar transmitted waveform is known.

(p33.1) Assume first the scenario considered in [11], wherein a multiplicity of radars may be potentially active in full spectral overlap with a communication system. Each radar is allowed to transmit a sophisticated waveform, but no prior knowledge as to the number of active systems, their distance from the communication receiver or the channel gains is available. The scenario is thus akin to the one outlined in situation 3) of the list of Sec. II-A, wherein M T now plays the role of the maximum number of potentially active emitters. The antennas of such a "multiple input" system are widely spaced, so that the delays with which their signals arrive at the communication receiver are all different and unknown.

(p33.2) As to the communication signal, the scenario assumed in [11] is fairly general. The transmitted symbols are assumed to undergo suitable pre-coding, where the choice of the precoding matrix dictates the type of system, ranging from Code-Division Multiple Access (CDMA) to Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing (OFDM). In particular, suppose the communication and radar systems have the same bandwidth, i.e., L = 1, T c = T r and ψ L (t) = ψ(t). The signal transmitted by the communication system in the interval [0, P r T r ] is assumed to have the form
