# The Significance of Biobanking in the Sustainability of Biomedical Research: A Review

CorpusID: 216031727 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1081f09c72d142d57db1302f30859efe76065a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1081f09c72d142d57db1302f30859efe76065a3)

Fields: Environmental Science, Political Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s10) "Collaboration and standardization"
(p10.0) In a non-collaborative state, access to biospecimens is isolated to an investigator's own institution, and research questions are limited by the scope of the available samples. As a result, collaboration at national or international level is essential. Poor or unknown quality of biospecimens can lead to doubts regarding research findings. The disparity in research findings arises from the lack of standardized procedures for collecting, storing, processing, and annotating biospecimens [7] . One evidence is a report by Moore et al. [9] who showed that only 30 out of 660 commercial tests available for measuring gene alterations, and germline mutations can be used to predict response to a specific treatment. It is also apparent that standardization of practices, procedures, and policies is key to achieve optimal results. To overcome the aforementioned challenges, the International Society of Biological Environmental Repositories was established to take a leading international role in standardizing the preservation and storage of biobanked material. Also, BRN under the supervision of OBBR was established in 2005 to coordinate and support systematic investigation with regards to collection, processing, and storage of human biospecimens. However, standardization processes might be a threat to smaller biobanks, because they might not be able to meet the benchmarks [33,34] .
## (s16) Living biobanks
(p16.0) Recently, in the field of chronic disease treatment, especially cancer, the inefficiency of the "one-size-fitsall" approach has been proven. Today, with the development of human genetics, pharmacogenomics, and the success of human gene mapping, the "one dose-one patient" approach in the growing field of personalized medicine needs to be replaced. In this field, the major challenge is finding a link between functional genomics and pathological data while focusing on the patient's outcome. Many different personalized tumor models have been proposed to address this challenge. One of the newest models in a three-dimensional culture tumor model named organoid [47] . With the improvements in this field, many tumor organoids derived from tumor specimens from the intestine, stomach, liver, mammary glands, retina, brain, etc.has been developed, which emphasizes the need for living biobanks [47,48] . Sachs et al. [49] have recently built a living biobank with more than 100 primary and metastatic breast cancer organoid lines.
