# Overview of Randomized Controlled Trials in Primary Total Hip Arthroplasty (34,020 Patients): What Have We Learnt?

CorpusID: 221187990 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8266dc1a9ce05f4f9eb5cc36b10cba6e91c7ad7d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8266dc1a9ce05f4f9eb5cc36b10cba6e91c7ad7d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Surgical Approach
(p2.0) Seventy-two RCTs with 6728 patients evaluated different surgical approaches or related aspects with only five RCTs (6.9%) reporting significant differences between the intervention groups (Table 2). Hamilton et al 12 evaluated the use of implant positioning software with fluoroscopy in anterior THA in 200 patients and reported closer results to target but with longer operative and fluoroscopy time. Takada et al 15 compared direct anterior with anterolateral approaches in bilateral THA in 30 patients at a 1-year follow-up focusing on nerve injury and muscle atrophy measured on CT and MRI. They reported no differences in clinical outcomes despite significant differences in muscle atrophy and increased nerve injury with the anterior approach. Acetabular implant positioning was compared radiographically in 60 patients using supine versus lateral patient positioning through a modified Watson-Jones approach with more accurate cup positioning in the supine position. 13 Moon et al 14 compared two techniques of posterior soft tissue repair in 167 hips (150 patients) at a 28-month follow-up and reported better outcomes and less dislocations with trans-osseous repair compared with gluteus medius/short rotators tendon-to-tendon repair. Finally, Kruse et al 16 compared radiographic outcomes of posterior and lateral approaches in 80 patients and reported that the femoral offset and abductor moment arm were significantly increased when using posterior compared with lateral approach.
## (s27) Surgical Approach
(p27.0) Seventy-two RCTs with 6728 patients evaluated different surgical approaches or related aspects with only five RCTs (6.9%) reporting significant differences between the intervention groups (Table 2). Hamilton et al 12 evaluated the use of implant positioning software with fluoroscopy in anterior THA in 200 patients and reported closer results to target but with longer operative and fluoroscopy time. Takada et al 15 compared direct anterior with anterolateral approaches in bilateral THA in 30 patients at a 1-year follow-up focusing on nerve injury and muscle atrophy measured on CT and MRI. They reported no differences in clinical outcomes despite significant differences in muscle atrophy and increased nerve injury with the anterior approach. Acetabular implant positioning was compared radiographically in 60 patients using supine versus lateral patient positioning through a modified Watson-Jones approach with more accurate cup positioning in the supine position. 13 Moon et al 14 compared two techniques of posterior soft tissue repair in 167 hips (150 patients) at a 28-month follow-up and reported better outcomes and less dislocations with trans-osseous repair compared with gluteus medius/short rotators tendon-to-tendon repair. Finally, Kruse et al 16 compared radiographic outcomes of posterior and lateral approaches in 80 patients and reported that the femoral offset and abductor moment arm were significantly increased when using posterior compared with lateral approach.
