# Management of a Pregnant Woman during the Pandemic of COVID-19: A Review

CorpusID: 233273477 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9fd15a3203cf033e9acd21dd543abc5681458cf0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9fd15a3203cf033e9acd21dd543abc5681458cf0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Mother during pregnancy with Covid19
(p5.0) It is recommended that pregnant women with suspected respiratory illness be transferred to a single room immediately after being visited by a doctor, medical examinations be minimized, and patients be kept at home as much as possible. In special cases, doctors recommend preterm delivery. In such cases, corticosteroids are recommended by doctors to accelerate fetal lung maturation. Examination of fetal heart rate using ultrasound or electrical procedures should be monitored regularly according to fetal age. Contamination of immune fluid with COVID-19 infection in an infected mother is usually not examined unless in special circumstances [18,19] . COVID-19 infection is associated with cytokine storms, which are associated with increased IL2, IL7, IL10, GCSF, GIFN, inflammatory MQ1, and α TNF levels.
## (s12) Postpartum care
(p12.0) Complete separation of the baby from the mother is not recommended, unless the strict precautions for the isolation of mother are discontinued. Breastfeeding for mothers with or suspected of having COVLD-19: No virus has been detected in breast milk of mothers with SARS infection. Given the presence of antibodies in breast milk, it is recommended to minimize the mother's contact with the baby for 14 days. It is recommended that the mother wash her hands before touching the baby and use a mask when feeding the baby either by breastmilk or bottle. Although there is a possibility of transmitting antibodies from breast milk to infants, limited evidence has been reported in this regard so far [18] . Limited studies have been performed on women with COVID-19 and other coronavirus infections, including SARS; however, no virus has been detected in breast milk so far, and it is not well known if mothers with COVID-19 could transmit it to their babies through breastfeeding. It is recommended that if the patient is asymptomatic or has mild symptoms, breastfeeding and room-mating of mother and her baby be done in coordination with health care providers. Because the main concern is that the virus may be transmitted through respiratory droplets instead of breast milk, breastfeeding mothers must wash their hands and wear a three-layer surgical mask before contact with the baby. In the case of a mother and baby roommate, the baby's bed should be at least 2 meters away from the mother, and a physical barrier such as a curtain should be used. If the mother is very ill, separation seems to be the best option, trying to get the breast milk out in order to maintain milk production. Precautions should be taken when cleaning breast pumps. Breast milk protects the baby against many diseases. But in rare cases, breastfeeding is not recommended. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has not provided any specific guidelines for breastfeeding of mother infected with similar viruses, such as SARS or MERS. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that a mother with influenza continue to breastfeed outside the postpartum position by following health tips to prevent the transmission of the disease to the baby [27,28] .
## (s13) If the child is infected through contact with an infected mother
(p13.0) There is still no comprehensive information on the transmission of coronavirus from infected mothers to infants or how the disease affects the infant. On the other hand, limited studies have been performed on infants with COVID-19, indicating that the symptoms of the disease are very mild in infants. The youngest infant infected was reported to be a 36-hour-old baby [28] . Studies have shown that babies whose test results are positive and show symptoms from 5 to 17 days are often infected through the infected mother's cough during breastfeeding, embracement of the baby by relatives, or through the contaminated environment. The US CDC recommends that the baby not need to be separated from the mother, but if the mother is definitely infected with COVID-19 infection, the baby should be placed in a separate room or, if not possible, at a distance of 2 meters [29] . According to algorithm Number 1, If the result of the mother's test is positive, the use of a mask is necessary for the mother, and in order to reduce the risk of exposure, the number of staff and nurses in the delivery room should be minimized, and the baby should be separated from the mother immediately after delivery and kept in a separate room. The recommended test for a baby's mouth and throat while swallowing is performed 24 hours after birth, and if the test is negative, it is repeated 48 hours after birth. If the test is negative, the child could be discharged, and if the test is positive, and the baby is asymptomatic, the baby may be discharged but may be quarantined at home. These guidelines vary with the evidence and symptoms of the disease.
