# Molecular basis of essential thrombocythaemia in humans and dogs -a review

CorpusID: 233271629 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b26fbf7d61eb942f183ae326bdefaa8f7f192d21](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b26fbf7d61eb942f183ae326bdefaa8f7f192d21)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s2) Genetic engineering -animal models of essential thrombocythaemia (ET)
(p2.0) In-depth knowledge of the aetiology of essential thrombocythaemia will make it possible to devise an effective method of treatment and prevention of the disease in animals. Genetic engineering methods have been used to investigate how expression of the JAK2 gene with the V617F mutation affects the development of myeloproliferative diseases, including essential thrombocythaemia (ET), and how this mutation contributes to pathogenesis. Mice transplanted with bone marrow cells, transduced by a retrovirus encoding JAK2V617F, did not initially show phenotypic features manifested in myeloproliferative diseases. After 4 months, one line showed granulocytosis. Of 43 mice, 8 (19%) showed polycythaemia and 15 (35%) showed thrombocythaemia. The second line exhibited extreme leukocytosis and thrombocytosis. Megakaryocytes dominated in the bone marrow of the animals, and splenomegaly was also observed. The expression of JAK2V617F mRNA in bone marrow cells was 0,45 and 1,35 for wild-type endogenous JAK2 expression in two lines. In vitro analysis of bone marrow cells from both lines showed constitutive activation of ERK1/2, STAT5 and AKT and an increase in their phosphorylation by cytokine stimulation. The researchers concluded that expression of JAK2V617F in vivo causes myeloproliferative diseases, including essential thrombocythaemia (Shide et al., 2008). Genetic instability, which results in the V617F mutation in the JAK2 gene, not only affects the occurrence of myeloproliferative diseases, but also their significant progression. Marty et al. (2013) showed that the JAK2V617F mutation induced accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the haematopoietic stem cell compartment in a knock-in (KI) mouse model and in patients suffering from myeloproliferative cancer JAK2V617F. An increased amount of reactive oxygen species resulted in a decrease in catalase expression, with consequent increased numbers of 8-oxoguanine and double-stranded DNA breaks. There is evidence of mitotic recombination in mice resulting in the loss of JAK2V617F heterozygosity. Polycythaemialike disorders were observed in mice vaccinated with 30% of bone marrow cells with the JAK2V617F mutation. Antioxidant treatment with N-acetylcysteine (NAC) restored blood parameters and reduced DNA damage. Researchers have shown overproduction of reactive oxygen species to be a mediator of JAK2V617F-induced DNA damage. Preventing the accumulation of reactive oxygen species could prevent the development of JAK2V617F myeloproliferative syndromes. Activation of STAT1 by IFNγ in the presence of JAK2V617F has been shown to reduce erythrocyte differentiation and promote megakaryocyte development, resulting in a phenotype characteristic of essential thrombocythaemia (ET). Another research team focused on the consequences of STAT1 deficiency on the action of Janus 2 (JAK2)-V617F kinase in vivo by crossing JAK2V617F-expressing mice with STAT1 knockout mice. Removal of STAT1 reduced megakaryocyte colony formation driven by JAK2V617F, but the modification made was not sufficient to completely normalize platelet counts. These studies confirm the role of STAT1 in increasing the number of platelets and reducing the number of erythrocytes in JAK2V617F-induced myeloproliferative syndromes (Duek et al., 2014). Subsequent researchers pointed out differences in JAK2V617F gene expression between polycythaemia (PV) and essential thrombocythaemia (ET). Higher levels of JAK2 activation associated with homozygosity of JAK2V617F may be manifested in PV, while lower levels signalling activation may result in the appearance/disclosure of ET (Levine, 2008). Pardanani et al. (2007) developed therapies based on inhibition of JAK2 kinase activity by oral administration of TG101209 (N-tert-butyl-3-(5-methyl-2-[4-(4-methyl-piperazin-1-yl)-phenylamino]-pyrimidin-4ylamino)-benzenesulfonamide). In the JAK2V617F human acute myeloid leukaemia cell line, cell cycle arrest and apoptosis as well as inhibition of JAK2V617F, STAT5 and STAT3 phosphorylation have been observed.
