# Pregnancy, Preeclampsia, and COVID-19: Susceptibility and Mechanisms: A Review Study This open-access article has been published under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial 3.0 (CC BY-NC 3.0)

CorpusID: 249237488 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92df17bba2472a309998ef619f1005647d01eb92](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92df17bba2472a309998ef619f1005647d01eb92)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Pregnant patients infected with SARS-CoV, and Middle
(p6.0) East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)-CoV had more adverse outcomes of pregnancy, including intrauterine growth restriction, spontaneous miscarriage, and premature delivery. And also, the rate of mortality among infected pregnant patients was more than the general infected population (25 vs. 10%, respectively) (23). Among French pregnant women, mostly symptomatic it was revealed that COVID-19 can be serious and acute in pregnant women. Although, the most serious COVID-19 was observed in women with the highest rates of comorbidities such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and advanced age (33). A retrospective study was conducted to compare clinical outcomes and the results of laboratory tests of COVID-19 infected pregnant women of ≥ 20 weeks gestational age with non-pregnant women from four large hospitals of France and Belgium. This study found a significant high risk of ICU admission among pregnant women in comparison with non-pregnant women. Also, they did not report mortality in the groups (38). This study along with a report from Iran with 7 out of 9 deaths due to severe COVID-19 in their pregnant women (39) and one study from Sweden with higher risk of ICU admission in the pregnant and postpartum women with COVID-19 in comparison with non-pregnant women (40) indicated more severe outcomes of COVID-19 in pregnant women than their non-pregnant women. However, Blitz et al. (41) evaluated the data from a large hospital system in the New York State, USA among hospitalized women with COVID-19 and reported that the risk of ICU admission in the pregnant women was not higher than the non-pregnant women. In a retrospective study of Wuhan, China patients (n=82), an increase in the COVID-19 susceptibility and its severity were not observed in the pregnant women (n=28) in comparison with the non-pregnant women (n=54) (42).
## (s7) Maternal COVID-19 and placental infection
(p7.0) The infection of the placenta and SARS-CoV-2 vertical transmission is rare. In a meta-analysis including 1316 pregnant women infected with SARS-CoV, MARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2, no transmission of CoVs from the mother to the fetus was detected (43). In the Di Mascio et al. study, analysis of a small number of cases (n=41) suggested that COVID-19 was associated with a higher preterm birth rate, preeclampsia, cesarean delivery, and prenatal death, with no clinical evidence of vertical transmission (27). Also, no evidence of vertical transmission through intrauterine infection in the COVID-19 pneumonia affected woman in the late pregnancy was found (30). However, significant abnormalities in the placenta morphology have been detected among COVID-19 infected patients (44). Examination of 16 placentas from mothers with COVID-19, including 15 live births and one intrauterine fetal death that demonstrated an increased prevalence of maternal vascular malperfusion in the COVID-19 patients, placentas compared with controls, a pattern indicative of injury of the placenta that is associated with adverse perinatal outcomes (45). Although, one COVID-19 infected pregnant woman in the second trimester was reported that placental infection and severe early-onset preeclampsia were detected. This study suggested that COVID-19 might contribute to placental inflammation and consequently result in early-onset preeclampsia. Both infections with SARS-CoV-2 and hypertensive disorders of pregnancy decrease the ACE2 activity which leads to enhanced tissue levels of Ang II. It seems that RAAS dysregulation in the COVID-19 patients might contribute to hypertensive complications of pregnancy such as preeclampsia; and COVID-19 may increase the severity of these complications by infecting the placenta (46). The ACE2 is involved in the placentation and also plays a role in the multiple pregnancy adverse outcomes, including miscarriage, ectopic pregnancy, and preeclampsia. Regarding its presence in the placenta, it is likely SARS-CoV-2 might bind to ACE2, which leads to infection and affecting placental function and fetal development; this entity should be elucidated (44).
## (s8) Diagnostic and therapeutic roles of exosomes in COVID-19 and preeclampsia
(p8.0) Exosomes are nano-sized extracellular vesicles that are secreted by all cell types and have structural similarities with viruses. Exosomes are secreted by cells infected with viruses and mediated in communication between infected and un-infected cells. Also, the contents of exosomes induce the inflammation through activation of the receptors of the cells. So, it seems exosomes be involved in the propagation of the SARS-CoV-2 and inflammation induction contributing to organ dysfunction in the severe COVID-19. Also, theses extracellular vesicles are involved in the pathogenesis of pregnancy complications such as preeclampsia. Due to modulation of the production and composition of exosomes by SARS-CoV-2, they can be used for COVID-19 diagnosis and also could have therapeutic benefits in the COVID-19. The engineered exosomes can be used as a therapeutic tool for different, diseases (47,48). The exosomal contents can be released into the circulation. This various content can be acted as potential diagnostic biomarkers. Exosomes can be used in the early detection of complications of pregnancy including preeclampsia. In preeclampsia, exosomes contain specific miRNA, DNA and proteins that secreted by trophoblasts and could help in the preeclampsia onset prediction much earlier than blood protein markers (48). Also, the engineered exosomes can be used as different antiviral therapeutics types including COVID-19 treatment.
