# A Review of Nanotechnology for Treating Dysfunctional Placenta

CorpusID: 247768248 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd503807943af3812c11e80f7d638b3bfa9afa4d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd503807943af3812c11e80f7d638b3bfa9afa4d)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) The placenta is a highly specialized transient organ during pregnancy. Placental dysfunction has been shown to be strongly associated with major obstetric diseases, such as fetal growth restriction (FGR), preeclampsia (PE), preterm premature membrane rupture, preterm labor, late spontaneous abortion, and placental abruption (Brosens et al., 2011). Although significant progress has been made in preventing the disease, current obstetric interventions in clinical obstetric practice are limited for management of the disease, after it has set in (Chappell and David, 2016). The interventions in current practice deal mostly with maternal symptoms or terminating pregnancy when maternal condition deteriorates. According to recent studies, the world population is growing by approximately 80 million people each year, most of whom may experience maternal and neonatal disorders. Over 90% of pregnant women take at least one medication during their perinatal period, either over-the-counter or prescribed. Approximately 10% of pregnant women need medical prescriptions due to serious obstetric complications (Mitchell et al., 2011). The embryo is exceptionally sensitive and systemic toxicity of therapeutic agents may endanger the health of the mother and cause side effects to the fetus. This explains why only a limited number of therapeutic agents are applied for obstetric complications. Therefore, it is important to explore effective therapeutic drugs, seeking a balance between minimizing harmful effects on the fetal compartment and maximizing the dose to mothers.
