# Articular Cartilage Assessment Using Ultrashort Echo Time MRI: A Review

CorpusID: 249048040 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf59abfaf20d933a0f43101d6529054a54c2be84](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf59abfaf20d933a0f43101d6529054a54c2be84)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) BASIC UTE
(p1.0) Basic UTE, or UTE without any preparation pulses, has mainly been employed for morphological imaging of the articular cartilage. However, by using UTE images at varying echo times (TEs) or at varying repetition times (TRs) and flip angles (FAs), basic UTE has been used to measure cartilage T * 2 (39, 61) and cartilage T1 (4,29,31), respectively. Basic UTE can also be performed with different readout trajectories. Figure 2 illustrates three representative UTE pulse sequence diagrams. In UTE sequences, a short rectangular or half soft pulse is employed for signal excitation. Ramp sampling and fast transmit/receive switching strategy are utilized to minimize TE for the excited fid signals. Non-Cartesian k-space trajectories, such as radial and spiral, are the most commonly used spatial encoding patterns.
## (s4) INVERSION RECOVERY UTE (IR-UTE)
(p4.0) UTE MRI has been shown to be capable of visualizing the superficial and deep layers of articular cartilage. Deep layer cartilage and ZCC zones are of great interest to researchers because of their roles in the progression of OA; consequently, several inversion recovery (IR) preparation pulses have been proposed to be used in combination with UTE MRI for visualization and quantification of these clinically significant cartilage layers (12,68). Figure 9 compares clinical images (PD-weighted FSE in first column and T 2 -weighted FSE in second column) with UTE images (IR prepared fat saturated UTE (IR-FS-UTE) in the third and fourth columns and FS-UTE in last column).

(p4.1) In most IR-UTE techniques, an adiabatic full passage inversion pulse is used before the UTE acquisition to invert the longitudinal magnetization of water without incurring a B1 inhomogeneity penalty. Pure short T 2 water pool imaging depends on the optimized inversion time (TI) which is required to let the inverted long T2 magnetization reach the nulling status. UTE MRI acquisition after the nulling point results in short T 2 water visualization, which is dominant in the deep layer and ZCC of articular cartilage. Maximizing the short T 2 signal while simultaneously avoiding long T 2 signal contamination has been investigated by Ma et al. and Jang et al. (12,68) who have optimized several sequence parameters such as TI. Figure 10 shows the single-and bi-component analysis of IR-FS-UTE imaging of more superficial cartilage (blue box) and OCJ (red box) regions. As can be seen from these fitting curves, the bicomponent model performs much better than the singlecomponent model with regard to data fitting. The T * 2 relaxations for both the short and long T 2 components in the more superficial cartilage region are longer than those in the OCJ region. Higher short T 2 fraction is also found in the OCJ region. These results demonstrate that the collagen matrix is more densely distributed or there is more calcification existed in the OCJ region.

(p4.2) For deep cartilage and ZCC cartilage layer assessment, dual adiabatic IR-UTE (Dual-IR-UTE) has also been developed as a method that avoids fat signal contamination that may not be nulled by just a single adiabatic IR pulse (13,14). Dual-IR-UTE is  designed to employ two adiabatic IR pulses that invert and suppress long T 2 water and fat magnetizations at their respective frequencies.
## (s7) CHEMICAL EXCHANGE SATURATION TRANSFER (CEST) UTE
(p7.0) The chemical exchange saturation transfer (CEST) phenomena occurs when water-soluble macromolecules with exchangeable protons (generally, the amide side of the chains in contrast agents typically injected into joints) become exposed to water or body fluid protons (76). Because CEST is assumed to occur more intensely in an acidic environment where there are more free protons available, it has been hypothesized that quantification of CEST can be used to detect pH changes in tissues, which themselves may be a sign of lactic acid accumulation and pain triggers. AcidoCEST-UTE has been introduced recently by Ma et al. as a potential technique for measuring extracellular PH in tissues with short T 2 values such as articular cartilage (50). The feasibility of the acidoCEST-UTE technique was investigated on a liquid phantom and ex vivo human cartilage phantoms doped with iodinated contrast agent in a 3T scanner. Among iodinated contrasts tested in liquid phantoms, iopamidol and iohexol were determined to be feasible for pH detection using AcidoCEST-UTE., with iohexol having the best performance in determine the tissue pH (50).
## (s9) UTE WITH FAT SUPPRESSION
(p9.0) Fat saturation techniques are regularly used to improve image contrast for better visualization of the target tissue. In a novel study, Ma et al. proposed a soft-hard composite RF pulse to suppress fat signals in UTE imaging for tissues with short T 2 (78). The soft pulse of this composite pulse has a narrow bandwidth, small negative flip angle, and is centered on the fat peak. The hard pulse is a short rectangular pulse and has a small positive flip angle. The outcome is fat magnetization that tips down and back with an identical flip angle, i.e., that returns to a state of equilibrium, so that only the excited water magnetization remains. Ma et al.'s feasibility study investigated the knees and tibias of respectively five and six healthy volunteers between the ages of 22 and 35 on a 3T scanner. For comparison, a conventional fat saturation (FatSat) model was used; for evaluation of the novel technique's efficiency, signal suppression ratio (SSR) was introduced. Higher SSR was consistent with better fat suppression or water attenuation induced by fat suppression. The soft-hard composite pulse approach resulted in much lower signal attenuation of water imaging than the conventional FatSat method on simulation studies, performed well for in vivo fat suppression, and produced better preservation of both long and short T 2 signals, significantly higher SSR specifically for short T 2 signals, and better contrast between water and fat. Jang et al. developed the ultrashort echo time cones double echo steady state (UTE-Cones-DESS) sequence for fast volumetric and high quality image contrast of MSK tissues (22). This technique was performed in the knee joints of both healthy volunteers and patients with osteoarthritis. To achieve a scan time of less than 5 minutes without compromising image quality, Jang et al. applied fat suppression using a novel, singlepoint Dixon (spDixon) approach (79). This high contrast morphological imaging method of short T 2 tissues, including the deep layers of cartilage, has the potential to assess musculoskeletal diseases.
