# Molecular Sciences The Fascinating Effects of Baicalein on Cancer: A Review

CorpusID: 250595 - [None](None)

Fields: 

## (s7) Baicalein and Gastric Cancer
(p7.0) Gastric cancer (GC) is the fourth most common aggressive cancer in the world. There are approximately 990,000 newly-diagnosed cases and about 740,000 gastric cancer-related deaths every year [41]. The main treatment strategy for patients with gastric cancer remains a combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy. However, the prognosis of these patients is still poor due to the various side effects and multiple forms of drug resistance. A recent study reported that baicalein induced cell cycle arrest at the S phase of division and promoted apoptosis in SGC-7901 gastric cancer cell lines via downregulation and upregulation of Bcl-2 and Bax levels, respectively. An in vivo study also revealed that baicalein excellently inhibited tumor growth in subcutaneous xenograft models [42]. Baicalein treatment inhibited the migration and invasion of GC cells in Transwell and wound-healing assays. Baicalein also decreased the expression of metastasis-associated molecules, including N-cadherin, vimentin, ZEB1, and ZEB2. This study provided the basic mechanism for baicalein's inhibition of metastasis in gastric cancer cells by inactivation of the TGF-β/Smad4 pathway [43]. Similarly, another study revealed that baicalein inhibited the invasion of gastric cancer cells by inhibition of the p38 signaling pathway and subsequent MMP-2 and MMP-9 suppression [44]. Baicalein was reported to reverse hypoxia-induced 5-FU resistance in gastric cancer AGS cells. Baicalein enhanced the sensitivity of AGS cells to 5-FU and suppressed glycolytic flux. Furthermore, it suppressed the expression of glycolysis-associated enzymes such as HK2, LDH-A, and PDK1 under hypoxic conditions, possibly via activation of the PTEN/Akt/HIF-1α pathway [45]. In conclusion, these studies reveal that baicalein may be developed as an effective therapy for treating patients with gastric cancer.
