# Relations between sleep patterns early in life and brain development: A review

CorpusID: 250053668 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ee0ced25dc6627be7d93366c59475bb2c734d09](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ee0ced25dc6627be7d93366c59475bb2c734d09)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) It is widely accepted that sleep is important for children. Sleep during the preschool years (~3-5 years) is especially unique in that children transition from a biphasic (naps and overnight sleep) to a monophasic (primarily overnight sleep) sleep pattern (Chokroverty, 1994;Weissbluth, 1995). Naps in young children have been shown to enhance learning through sleep-dependent memory consolidation (i.e., the notion that consolidation processes preferrentially occur during sleep; Cremone et al., 2017;Kurdziel et al., 2013;Lokhandwala and Spencer, 2021;Spanò et al., 2018;Williams and Horst, 2014). Moreover, sleep macrostructure (organization of sleep stages) and microstructure (characteristics of the sleep electroencephalogram (EEG) which measure electrical activity in the brain) change during this period. Brain maturation in particular is suggested to impact the biphasic to monophasic transition and the accompanying changes in EEG.
## (s5) Relations between sleep and structural brain development
(p5.0) Sleep has been shown to modulate brain activity during development. For instance, Cao and colleagues (2020) developed a framework for modeling neural repair, metabolic clearance, and sleep changes during development. Results reveal differences in sleep across phylogeny and during late ontogeny (after 2-3 years of age) are primarily due to sleep functioning for repair or clearance, while changes in sleep during early ontogeny (before 2-3 years of age) primarily support neural reorganization and learning. This process occurs primarily in REM and not NREM (Cao et al., 2020). One cross-sectional study examined the prospective relations between sleep disturbances across childhood and brain morphology at 7 years of age (Kocevska et al., 2017). They found that sleep disturbances from 2 years of age onward were associated with smaller gray matter volumes. In particular, children with sleep disturbances had a thinner dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. While the study did not include any sleep EEG and therefore was unable to examine associations between altered sleep physiology and brain morphology, the results suggest the influence sleep disturbances may have on neurodevelopment. It is important to keep in mind that as the study was cross-sectional and did not include baseline magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, it is possible that rather than being an outcome of sleep disruptions, brain structural development may underlie sleep disturbances in childhood. A study in cats found that sleep augmented the effects of a preceding period of monocular deprivation on visual cortical responses . This was not the case for wakefulness in complete darkness. This study illustrates that sleep (and the lack thereof) may be critical to modulating experience-dependent plasticity.
## (s8) Topography of SWA
(p8.0) With regards to human studies, while many are cross-sectional in nature and thus make it difficult to rule out causality, they provide valuable insight into the possible associations and trajectories of sleep and brain maturation. There appear to be age-dependent changes in SWA topography. For instance, one cross-sectional study examined the topographical distribution of sleep EEG from early childhood to adolescence (Kurth et al., 2010). The results illustrated age-dependent differences in SWA topography. That is, SWA was most concentrated over posterior regions during early childhood and then gradually shifted to more central and then frontal derivations by late adolescence.This trajectory of SWA parallels the course of cortical gray matter maturation (Huttenlocher and Dabholkar, 1997;Shaw et al., 2008). These results are further supported by a study investigating the relationship between sleep SWA and various markers of cortical maturation during adolescence (Buchmann et al., 2011). Using MRI and high-density EEG, the authors found that SWA and cortical gray matter decreases during adolescence (possibly due to synaptic pruning) and that the relationship between SWA and gray matter volume/thickness is heightened in areas showing the greatest maturational changes. Thus, it is possible that the large gray matter volume in children reflects, at least in part, higher synaptic density. As children are learning immensely and rapidly from their environment, frequent consolidation of the days' learning may be necessary in the form of naps.
## (s9) Relation between brain development and early sleep patterns
(p9.0) It may be that memory and brain development play a role in nap habituality (the frequency at which a child naps or not). Napping status is of particular interest, as studies have found that when deprived of a midday nap, habitually napping children have greater memory detriment than children who are non-nappers (Kurdziel et al., 2013;Leong et al., 2021). An explanation for this difference is that habitual nappers may have a less developed short-term memory storage (i.e., hippocampus) and thus require frequent consolidation in the form of naps to secure learning from the day. Non-nappers in comparison may have more mature hippocampi and, therefore, staying awake does not confer a similar detriment to memory. Riggins and Spencer (2020) showed that in younger children (4-6-year-olds), hippocampal subfield volume varied as a function of nap status. That is, children who were "nappers," had larger CA1 volumes in the body of the hippocampus compared to children who were no longer napping. This supports the hypothesis that hippocampi in nappers may be less developed (i.e., larger prior to synaptic downscaling) compared to non-nappers. While this study did not assess sleep physiology in relation to hippocampal volume, it provides support for the notion that early sleep patterns parallel development in the brain.
## (s10) SWA localization
(p10.0) More recent work demonstrates that sleep topography and sleep EEG coherence reflect developing neural networks. However, most of these studies are cross-sectional and/or involve prospective brain measures. While such studies make it difficult to illustrate the development of electrical cortical activity and brain maturation, these works collectively provide support that in early childhood and adolescence, sleep microstructure parallels and changes with brain development. For instance, one longitudinal study examined sleep physiology every 6 months over a period of 6 years in children 6-18 years of age found that delta power decreased earliest at an occipital derivation (O1) and latest at a frontal derivation (Fz; Feinberg et al., 2011). This propagation of delta power is similar to the trajectory of cortical thickness, where occipital regions mature first and frontal regions last (Shaw et al., 2008). A very similar time course of SWA has been found in non-human animals (Olini et al., 2013;Song et al., 1997). The parallel shift in distribution provides support that delta activity may reflect underlying processes of cortical maturation.
