# Journal of Physics: Energy OPEN ACCESS A review of chemical looping reforming technologies for hydrogen production: recent advances and future challenges

CorpusID: 257593391 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f583fed9a93a895a8ded4ab2802a7373a71789aa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f583fed9a93a895a8ded4ab2802a7373a71789aa)

Fields: Environmental Science, Physics, Chemistry, Engineering

## (s9) Cu-based oxygen carriers
(p9.0) Cu-based oxygen carriers with attractive properties have been widely studied in the literature. Great oxygen transport capacity, low toxicity, high reactivity in both reduction and oxidation cycles as well as moderate cost make Cu-based materials one of the most known oxygen carriers in chemical looping processes (Abad et al 2007). One of the interesting advantages of this type of material is that reduction and oxidation reactions are exothermic which results in no heat supply energy requirement in the reduction reactor. Furthermore, sulphurous impurities in the fuel do not significantly affect the properties of Cu oxygen carriers (Forero et al 2010). However, the main issue with Cu-based material is their relatively low melting point which results in agglomeration problems.
## (s45) Cu-based oxygen carriers
(p45.0) Cu-based oxygen carriers with attractive properties have been widely studied in the literature. Great oxygen transport capacity, low toxicity, high reactivity in both reduction and oxidation cycles as well as moderate cost make Cu-based materials one of the most known oxygen carriers in chemical looping processes (Abad et al 2007). One of the interesting advantages of this type of material is that reduction and oxidation reactions are exothermic which results in no heat supply energy requirement in the reduction reactor. Furthermore, sulphurous impurities in the fuel do not significantly affect the properties of Cu oxygen carriers (Forero et al 2010). However, the main issue with Cu-based material is their relatively low melting point which results in agglomeration problems.
