# Utilization of kinase inhibitors as novel therapeutic drug targets: A review

CorpusID: 256583582 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7b9fc5e977e382294f58d7cc4353f7a5372e10](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7b9fc5e977e382294f58d7cc4353f7a5372e10)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) JNK1
(p4.0) The JNKs are c-Jun N-terminal kinases comprising three isoforms, JNK 1/2/3, which are the subdivision of MAP kinases termed "anxiety/stress-triggered kinase". Accordingly, these have been linked to checking inflammatory responses by triggering cytokine expressions like eotaxin, GM-CSF, and IL-1 employing downstream targets such as p53, AP-1, ATF2, and BAD. Like a few other MAP kinases, JNKs are regulated by phosphorylation of the A-loop through higher kinases like MKK4/ MKK7. Stebbins et al. examined 30000 compounds using DELFIA, i.e. Dissociation Enhanced Lanthanide Fluoro-Immuno Assay, and determined a series of tiny compounds that interfere with JNK1-pepJIP1 binding [73]. Whereas several of these drugs compete successfully via pepJIP1 binding, and BI-78D3 like compounds were capable of subsiding JNK1 phosphorylation pursuit with IC50 value, both in the micromolar and nanomolar range [74].
## (s7) CDK2
(p7.0) Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are specifically Ser/Thr type kinases, and CDK2 is the fundamental unit in the transition phase of the cell cycle from G1 to S-phase. Misregulation of CDKs can result in various diseases, like inflammation and cancer. Although, some kinases may adopt unique A-loop configurations like DFG-in/ out that are usually markers of their activity level, others, like CDK2, exhibit difficulty in adopting the DFG-out conformation [80,81]. Betzi et al. discovered ANS, i.e., 8-anilino-1naphthalene sulfonate as a unique allosteric CDK2 antagonist in addition to a distinct mechanism of binding.
