# Clinical applications of gene therapy for rare diseases: A review

CorpusID: 258677712 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad7c526080b645dfc566f2130f34aa737bda3afd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad7c526080b645dfc566f2130f34aa737bda3afd)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s17) Onpattro RNAi and Tegsedi ASO
(p17.0) Familial transthyretin amyloidosis is a rare genetic disease of the Transthyretin (TTR) gene that causes the protein to misfold. [161][162][163] The misfolded protein forms amyloids that deposit into and damage tissues. This is a slow gradual process, so the symptoms typically begin in adulthood. The exact onset age is variable and correlates with disease progression. The peripheral nervous system is particularly vulnerable, so neuropathies are among the earlier symptoms, but as the disease progresses, eyes, kidney, heart, and CNS typically become involved. FTA is eventually fatal on average 10 years after the onset of symptoms, with a younger onset being associated with more aggressive disease. The prognosis in patients presenting with early cardiac involvement is extremely poor. Few patients survive for longer than 5 years.

(p17.1) Genetically, FTA mutations are autosomal dominant, but progression and penetrance vary depending on the exact genetic defect. 161 Most patients are heterozygotes. The global prevalence of FTA is of the order of 1 in 10,000, 164 though clusters have been observed within certain ethnic groups or populations, such as in certain areas of Portugal, Sweden, Japan, and West Africa. 162,164 The current gold standard treatment for FTA is liver transplantation [161][162][163] since the liver is a major source of TTR. Liver transplantation arrests the development of polyneuropathies and slows but does not prevent progressive degeneration of the eyes, heart, and kidney.
