# Energy efficiency in cloud computing data centers: a survey on software technologies

CorpusID: 251951184 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1e58d26463223d6f4bfb12a23ba5f040013bae1f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1e58d26463223d6f4bfb12a23ba5f040013bae1f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s20) Renewable energy
(p20.0) In the last few years, it can be seen that there is an exponential rise in data centers developed by different companies to provide services like cloud computing. They consume very large amounts of electricity for normal functioning. Apart from the high consumption of electricity, the increase in the consumption of energy by cloud data centers results in adverse effects on the environment. In many parts of the world, the electricity is produced by burning coal that leads to negative results like increased carbon dioxide emission and increase in pollution. The growing use of renewable energy plants, in particular, presents a tremendous potential for more effective administration of dispersed data centres. Dynamic workload allocation and migration across data centres might help to save costs by shifting workload to regions where energy is cleaner or cooling costs are lesser. After obtaining the user's query, the cloud hosting has the option of selecting the target region depending on a variety of factors. The authors in [142] have worked upon the already proposed technique called EcoMultiCloud. They looked at the example of a complex network made up of data centres (DCs) spread around the country, with renewable energy producers co-located with cloud services to reduce the amount of electricity purchased by the power grid. Since renewable energy sources are infrequent, infrastructure load control solutions must be customised to the intermittent nature of the sources. Furthermore, the authors in [143] have addressed the problem of reducing energy costs for geographically distant data centres while maintaining assured service quality (i.e., service latency) under timevarying system dynamics. They proposed a green geographical load balancing (GreenGLB) online solution for interactive and indivisible work distribution based on the greedy algorithm design approach. An indivisible job is something that cannot be divided further and must be allocated to a single data centre.
