# A review of the management of central retinal artery occlusion

CorpusID: 251263853 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e073c0e4dde850f3b07bf184acd7db4a157b0a7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e073c0e4dde850f3b07bf184acd7db4a157b0a7)

Fields: Medicine

## (s12) Secondary prevention: Systemic control and prevention of future vascular ischemic events
(p12.0) Patients with CRAO have an increased risk of future ischemic events. [66] Therefore, a multidisciplinary team involving an ophthalmologist, neurologist, and a primary care physician or internist is important for long-term secondary prevention in patients with CRAO. [11] Sixty-four (64%) patients after CRAO had at least one undiagnosed vascular risk factor, with hyperlipidemia being the most common (36%). [65] Systemic atherosclerotic risk factors should be addressed through medical treatment, diet counseling, and lifestyle modification in order to decrease the risk of future ischemic disease. [10] This includes treatment of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity, and obstructive sleep apnea. A plant-based diet, regular physical activity, and smoking cessation are also important modifications for secondary prevention after CRAO. [11] The recommendation for antiplatelet therapy in CRAO parallel the guides from American Heart Association for transient ischemic attack or minor stroke. In the patients without contra-indication, an initial course of 21 days of dual antiplatelet therapy may be reasonably followed by long-term treatment with a single antiplatelet agent, typically aspirin 81 mg daily or clopidogrel 75 mg daily, as recommended by current guidelines. [11] Suggested management When a patient presents with a sudden loss of vision in one eye, with suspected CRAO, a thorough history should be taken, including the duration of symptoms, systemic symptoms indicating giant cell arteritis, and associated neurological symptoms, and it is important to rule out contraindications of tPA such as recent surgeries or severe bleeding. A complete eye examination should then be performed, preferably by an eyecare physician. If the patient's vision loss has been less than 4.5 h, IV tPA should be considered in collaboration with the stroke team. If the patient has had symptoms for over 4.5 h, the patient should be commenced on antiplatelet therapy and reviewed by the acute stroke unit for workup and secondary prevention. The American Heart Association has recommended that if there is no eye care specialist present on site and the treating physician is not comfortable in diagnosing, telemedicine/telestroke can be used to confirm the diagnosis. [43] Conclusion CRAO is an ocular emergency and is analogous to an ischemic stroke. The risk factors associated with nonarteritic CRAO are similar to that of acute ischemic syndrome or myocardial infarction. While various reports suggest different treatment modes for CRAO, there is little evidence supporting an optimal management plan. After taking a thorough history, ocular examination, and investigations, the principles of management of CRAO include acute management to restore blood flow, subacute management to prevent secondary complications, and secondary prevention.
