# Edinburgh Research Explorer a review of the tools used for marine monitoring in the UK Citation for published version

CorpusID: 28523414 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/71965057c5aa9e83d7700cf1ec734f29f0a22c31](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/71965057c5aa9e83d7700cf1ec734f29f0a22c31)

Fields: Political Science, Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s11) Satellite
(p11.0) Earth observation (EO) data have the potential to provide considerable support to in situ and/or field-based marine monitoring; offering synoptic observations of systems at relatively high temporal frequencies. Indeed, ocean color EO data are becoming widely used to provide information on indicators of water quality at increasingly relevant spatiotemporal scales (Tyler et al., 2016). The uncertainties associated with EO products have raised concerns about their applicability to monitoring activities under official directives, such as MSFD. However, in the UK's optically-complex coastal and shelf sea waters, satellite retrievals of chlorophyll-a (Chl-a), suspended particulate matter (SPM), turbidity (Kd) and colored dissolved organic matter (CDOM) have benefited substantially from the recent development and validation of tailored algorithms (Mitchell et al., 2016;Tilstone et al., 2017). Integration of EO data with in situ data from research vessels, AUVs and ROVs, fixed point marine observing systems, SOO and subsurface floats is essential for validation of EO products. Recent validation studies of MERIS chlorophyll (Cristina et al., 2015) support the feasibility of integrating EO data for marine monitoring, specifically for MSFD Descriptor 5 (minimizing eutrophication).

(p11.1) In continuity of MERIS, the ESA has launched the Sentinel-3 OLCI instrument for improved and complete coverage of oceans at 300 m full resolution every 1-4 days. EO measurements from next-generation satellites have the potential to improve data collection for a range of current and future monitoring requirements, including identification and differentiation of phytoplankton functional types for harmful algal bloom detection, measuring of total suspended particulate materials, pigmented fraction of dissolved organic matter, and changes to systems in response to changes in climate (Cristina et al., 2015;Tyler et al., 2016).
## (s25) Fisheries Stock Assessment
(p25.0) The primary objective of fisheries monitoring is to underpin management to achieve maximum sustainable yields (MSYs) for all commercial fish and shellfish species. This has been an integral part of the EU's Common Fisheries Policy (CFP), which was first implemented in 1983. It has been gradually acknowledged that commercial fisheries have dramatically changed the structure of marine ecosystems and that fish stocks should be managed as part of the ecosystem. Currently, a policy framework to support the integration of European environmental and fishery management is largely in place (Jennings and Le Quesne, 2012). The main policies driving this integration are the Habitats Directive (Council Directive 92/43/EEC), the CFP (Council Regulation (EC) No, 2371/2002) and more recently the MSFD (Council Directive, 2008/56/EC). The CFP aims to fulfill its objectives by defining regional fisheries multi-annual management plans that take account of species and fishery interactions in establishing conservation and technical measures to achieve the targets (Lynam and Mackinson, 2015).
## (s39) THE FUTURE OF MONITORING Total Ecosystem Approach
(p39.0) The "total ecosystem approach" to monitoring is a coherent evidence-to-advice package, supported by a fully-integrated ecosystem monitoring programme, and potentially a way to implement many of the new approaches identified above (Borja et al., 2016;Kupschus et al., 2016). At the center of this package is a dynamic model of the ecosystem function and its responses to pressures based on process relationships. Monitoring data help to parameterize the relationships with individual states that contribute to one or more parameter estimates (Kupschus et al., 2016). Ideally, legislative assessments of ecosystem state are produced from results of this model, and future states are predicted for different sets of pressure and environmental trajectories. Such an idealized system offers several benefits and improvements over the current monitoring approach: 1) Ecosystem processes are fixed over evolutionary timescales;
