# Active Aging for Individuals with Parkinson's Disease: Definitions, Literature Review, and Models

CorpusID: 2925549 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c02ac0b14e4ec659e025b96f32ebe0a53616cadd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c02ac0b14e4ec659e025b96f32ebe0a53616cadd)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Social Communication.
(p6.0) Recent efforts have emphasized that active aging is not only the ability to be physically active but also continuing participation in spiritual and civic affairs in which social communication plays an important role. Individuals with PD might have difficulties in social communication through different perspectives. The PD-related spectrum of communication barriers contains somatic problems such as masking face, speech disturbances, and movement problems to spiritual issues as disease stigma and depression. Some PD patients have difficulties in their facial expressions that could lead to a profound impact on social interactions especially among the individuals with atypical forms of the disease such as progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) [21]. On the other hand, the stigma attitudes and feelings of shame towards PD are other determinant factors to prohibit patients from socializing activities [22]. In addition to having an efficient management approach for the symptoms such as speech problems, masking face, and depression, it is of utmost importance to improve the attitudes of both patients and their surrounding persons towards PD. Educational meetings and programs for families, caregivers, and even the employers of the individuals with PD could help in avoiding stigmatizing behaviors and facilitating patients' involvement in social activities as an important part of active aging.
## (s12) Self-Care.
(p12.0) Considering the visions of the active aging concept, it is clear that visiting patients with chronic diseases only every several months could not be helpful, especially when it comes to PD with a highly stochastic clinical presentation. As a result, there is an extreme need to develop a new model of caring approach for PD that copes with the concepts of active aging. Recently, the middle-range theory of self-care for chronic illnesses has been introduced, which contains three main domains: self-care maintenance, self-care monitoring, and self-care management [39]. In the context of PD, self-care maintenance reflects in patients' behaviors to maintain physical and emotional stability, which is promotable through patients' education and enhances their insight into the motor and nonmotor parts of PD. Self-care monitoring refers to the process of observing and preferably recording oneself for the fluctuations in signs and symptoms of PD. Nowadays, there is an increasing intention among the PD community towards self-measurement of the symptoms and tracking of the changes in the severity of motor problems such as tremor. A growing number of gadgets and tools are being developed to help PD patients in self-monitoring of their symptoms such as mobile apps, computer-based software, charts, and diaries [40]. After self-measurement, gathered information is used in self-care management with appropriate timely responses to the fluctuations in signs and symptoms. The ultimate vision of this self-care approach is to dynamically manage PD that has certain benefits for the elderly suffering from this disease. Nonetheless, it must be noted that such a pragmatic approach still needs to be supported by research-based evidences for the healthcare decision makers on one side and increased health literacy in the patients' side as well. Self-care can optimize opportunities for health in elderly with chronic illnesses, which is in line with the concept of active aging.
