# Variable selection -A review and recommendations for the practicing statistician

CorpusID: 36995051 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19f95708abff60963d78f0d34934ff1b09112a56](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19f95708abff60963d78f0d34934ff1b09112a56)

Fields: Computer Science, Mathematics, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Statistical models are useful tools applied in many research fields dealing with empirical data. They connect an outcome variable to one or several so-called independent variables (IVs; a list of abbreviations can be found in the Supporting Information Table  S1) and quantify the strength of association between IVs and outcome variable. By expressing these associations in simple, interpretable quantities, statistical models can provide insight to the way how multiple drivers cooperate to cause a specific outcome. In life sciences, many such mechanisms are still not well understood but it is often plausible to assume that they are multifactorial. Therefore, empirical data collection and multivariable analysis are important contributors to knowledge generation. experience, we assume that the statistician is responsible for statistical study design and analysis, but is working in an interdisciplinary environment with the possibility to discuss questions on the meaning of variables with applied life scientists, who often act as the principal investigators (PI). We will first review various statistical prerequisites for variable selection, and will subsequently use this toolbox to describe the most important variable selection methods that are applied in life sciences. We will discuss the impact of variable selection methods on properties of regression coefficients, confidence intervals, and p-values. Recommendations for practitioners and software developers are then given, and their application exemplified in analysis of a real study. Shmueli (2010) identified three main purposes of statistical models. Within predictive research questions, predictive (or prognostic) models have the aim to accurately predict an outcome value from a set of predictors. Explanatory models are used in etiological research and should explain differences in outcome values by differences in explanatory variables. Finally, descriptive models should "capture the association between dependent and independent variables" (Shmueli, 2010). In the life sciences, models of all three types are needed. Still, they differ in the way they are used and interpreted. While prognostic models focus on predictions, explanatory models are used to estimate (causal) effects of risk factors or exposures by means of adjusted effect estimation, and descriptive models can have elements of both.
