# Molecular Sciences Therapeutics for Inflammatory-Related Diseases Based on Plasmon-Activated Water: A Review

CorpusID: 44099186 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19ae0bdcf1b10b054e908675a901a11263db946a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19ae0bdcf1b10b054e908675a901a11263db946a)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s6) Innovative Therapeutic Strategy Utilizing PAW
(p6.0) Gross observations of whole lungs to lung metastasis in LLC-1 xenograft mice are shown in Figure 6a. All tumor-like lesions were identified on lung lobes and thoracic walls, but not present in other organs of thoracic and abdominal cavities. These tumor-like lesions were further identified by hematoxylin and eosin staining as LLC-1 tumor lesions (Figure 6b). As shown in Figure 6b, the LLC-1 tumor lesions localized around blood vessels suggested that the injected LLC-1 cells invaded pulmonary tissues via circulation. The metastasis rate of LLC-1 cells was calculated according to gross observations of the LLC-1 lung tumor presence, and was analyzed by a two-tailed Fisher's test. Interestingly, five of 17 LLC-1 grafted mice drinking DI water demonstrated lung metastasis, compared to zero of the 14 LLC-1 grafted mice drinking PAW. The metastasis rate in PAW-consuming mice was significantly lower than that of DI water-consuming mice. The average survival time of PAW-fed mice was 6.57 ± 0.66 days, whereas in DI water-fed mice, it was 4.62 ± 0.71 days. In cisplatin-administrated mice, PAW-fed mice also had a prolonged survival time of 8.01 ± 0.77 days, compared to 6.38 ± 0.61 days for DI water-fed mice (Figure 6c). This result suggests that PAW may enhance the tumor suppression efficiency of cisplatin in LLC-1-implanted mice. This can be attributed to the different states of cisplatin in DI water and in PAW. It was reported that cisplatin is poorly soluble in water [98], indicating some aggregations of cisplatin molecules are generated in DI water [77]. 
