# Critical Reviews in Oral Biology & Medicine A Review of the Impact of Implant Biomaterials on Osteocytes

CorpusID: 46929501 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92b27c6ad80703b9f5488c140f05da97da47d88e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92b27c6ad80703b9f5488c140f05da97da47d88e)

Fields: Chemistry, Materials Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s2) Direct Attachment to the Implant Surface
(p2.0) More recent evidence of osteocyte attachment has been provided with resin cast etching (Fig. 2). However, certain artifacts (e.g., tissue shrinkage attributable to sample preparation routines) induce the development of a narrow space between the implant surface and bone, which is subsequently filled by a thin film of the embedding medium, thus obscuring the direct osteocyte-implant contact (Shah, Stenlund, et al. 2016). Such artifacts are more frequent in relation to relatively smooth machined surfaces that afford little mechanical interlocking. With increasing complexity of the implant surface, osteocytes adjacent to topologically modified but micrometersmooth (S a = 456 nm) implants tend to become aligned with their long axes parallel to the implant surface, extending up to 20-µm-long canaliculi toward it (Shah, Stenlund, et al. 2016). Adjacent to microrough implants (R a = 1.55 µm), osteocytes form an interconnected lacuno-canalicular system and attach to the implant surface through canaliculi . Direct attachment of osteocytes to minimally rough (S a = 519 nm) and microrough (S a = 906 nm) implants has also been demonstrated in ovariectomized and sham-operated conditions . Where the dimensions of implant surface features are appropriate (e.g., submicron topography achieved through acid etching), canaliculi may become closely interdigitated with the topographic features (Shah, Stenlund, et al. 2016).
## (s7) Future Perspectives
(p7.0) In addition to being indicators of bone quality, osteocytes are important structural markers of osseointegration and can prove exceptionally valuable in characterizing the biological response to currently available and novel materials for loadbearing applications in dental rehabilitation and orthopedics. Despite a clinical success rate >95%, knowing the status of the host bed prior to implant placement may be advantageous in certain situations. In compromised conditions, for instance, could radiologic assessment be accompanied by another parameter? Recent developments in third harmonic generation microscopy have made label-free (Genthial et al. 2017), intravital (Tokarz et al. 2017) imaging of the osteocyte lacunocanalicular network possible. We therefore propose that evaluation of peri-implant osteocytes should be a necessary component in future investigations of osseointegration. Particular emphasis must be placed on investigating the physical and chemical interactions among osteocytes and more recently developed bioceramics, polymers, and composites. Specifically, questions to address include the following: 1) How do osteocytes respond to stimuli other than mechanical loading (e.g., bacteria) on the molecular level? 2) Could sudden high-impact trauma lead to a cascade of structural deterioration and implant loosening? 3) What is the role of osteocytes in bone maintenance around biomedical implants in disease states? 4) Is peri-implantitis associated with changes in the osteocyte lacuno-canalicular network?
