# A review of heterogeneous data mining for brain disorder identification

CorpusID: 4646590 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66ec3f4b107d2d5b1dec0dc8ba0fc31dfa03259c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66ec3f4b107d2d5b1dec0dc8ba0fc31dfa03259c)

Fields: Psychology, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s12) Modeling feature correlations
(p12.0) One of the key issues for multi-view classification is to choose an appropriate tool to model features and their correlations hidden in multiple views, since this directly determines how information will be used. In contrast to modeling on views, another direction for modeling multiview data is to directly consider the correlations between features from multiple views. Since taking the tensor product of their respective feature spaces corresponds to the interaction of features from multiple views, the concept of tensor serves as a backbone for incorporating multi-view features into a consensus representation by means of tensor product, where the complex multiple relationships among views are embedded within the tensor structures. By mining structural information contained in the tensor, knowledge of multi-view features can be extracted and used to establish a predictive model. Smalter et al. formulate the problem of feature selection in the tensor product space as an integer quadratic programming problem [73]. However, this method is computationally intractable on many views, since it directly selects features in the tensor product space resulting in the curse of dimensionality, as the method (b) shown in Fig. 6. Cao et al. propose to use a tensor-based approach to model features and their correlations hidden in the original multi-view data [51]. The operation of tensor product can be used to bring m-view feature vectors of each instance together, leading to a tensorial representation for common structure across multiple views, and allowing us to adequately diffuse relationships and encode information among multi-view features. In this manner, the multi-view classification task is essentially transformed from an independent domain of each view to a consensus domain as a tensor classification problem.
