# Complexity and stability of ecological networks: a review of the theory

CorpusID: 49583525 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/947884589a6622bcbb937f0e5262cacf9cf9d966](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/947884589a6622bcbb937f0e5262cacf9cf9d966)

Fields: Biology, Mathematics, Environmental Science

## (s12) Degree distribution
(p12.0) Degree distribution in food webs differ from a Poisson distribution (typical of random networks). However, there is no universal shape that fits food webs degree distribution. Most of the webs display exponential degree distribution (Camacho et al. 2002;Dunne et al. 2002b) and those with high connectance show a uniform distribution. Power-law and truncated power-law with an exponential drop-off in the tail also fit few of food webs degree distribution (mostly those having very low connectance) (Dunne et al. 2002b;Montoya and Solé 2002).
## (s19) Strength of interactions
(p19.0) Instead of only considering qualitative interactions (presence or absence), quantitative measurement of strength of interaction also prevails in mutualistic network studies. In plant-pollinator as well as in plant-frugivory interactions, strength of interaction often refers to the relative number of visits of the animal to the plant. Jordano (1987) observed an extremely skewed distribution of species dependences in mutualistic communities: weak dependences greatly exceed in number strong ones. By including more datasets in their  Bascompte et al. (2006) confirmed Jordano's (1987) finding of a skewed distribution of interaction dependences. Additionally, mutualistic networks were also found to be highly asymmetric in terms of species roles: while animals depend strongly on the plants, plants rely poorly on their animal pollinators or seed dispersers (Bascompte et al. 2006). The maintenance of biodiversity was suggested to be facilitated by both the heterogeneity of species strength distribution and the asymmetry of species dependences (Bascompte et al. 2006). Localization, or the ability of the system to reduce the propagation of perturbations through the network, has also been shown to be enhanced by the heterogeneity of species strength distribution (Suweis et al. 2015). Notice that Suweis et al. (2015) defined the strength of a species as its weighted degree or the sum of interaction strengths in which the species is involved. Opposed to the finding of Bascompte et al. (2006) who used a linear functional response in their model, Okuyama and Holland (2008) argued that the asymmetry of species dependences, implying an asymmetry of strength of interaction between animals and plants (measured as similarity of the pairwise half-saturation constants), has a negative effect (although small) on the resilience of mutualistic communities when a nonlinear functional response is used. Feng and Takemoto (2014) also showed that the heterogeneity of the distribution of strength of interaction (estimated from visiting frequencies adjusted for uneven species abundances) indeed impacts negatively on the local stability of mutualistic communities. Moreover, by also using a saturating functional response, Rohr et al. (2014) demonstrated that regardless of the distribution of interaction strength, mutualistic communities that have on average a high level of interaction strength are more likely to be structurally stable (have a wider domain of feasible and stable coexistence).
