# Mycoplasmal PID: A Review of Natural and Experimental Infections

CorpusID: 79028226 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bad9c02543e9dde45a199a568c400f425dc75cf0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bad9c02543e9dde45a199a568c400f425dc75cf0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) EXPERIMENTAL INFECTION WITH MYCOPLASMA HOMINIS IN MONKEYS
(p3.0) In grivet monekys, parametritis and salpingitis developed within three days when M. hominis was inoculated directly into the fallopian tubes. Thus there was swelling and hyperemia of the tubes and the parametria became edematous. The tubal subserosa was heavily infiltrated with lymphoid cells and an increased number of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. In the parametria many lymphocytes and some granulocytes were found, as well as fat necrosis and granulation tissue. After four to five weeks the upper genital tract of the monkeys was virtually normal again [36].
## (s12) EXPERIMENTAL INFECTION WITH MYCOPLASMA HOMINIS IN MONKEYS
(p12.0) In grivet monekys, parametritis and salpingitis developed within three days when M. hominis was inoculated directly into the fallopian tubes. Thus there was swelling and hyperemia of the tubes and the parametria became edematous. The tubal subserosa was heavily infiltrated with lymphoid cells and an increased number of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. In the parametria many lymphocytes and some granulocytes were found, as well as fat necrosis and granulation tissue. After four to five weeks the upper genital tract of the monkeys was virtually normal again [36].
## (s21) EXPERIMENTAL INFECTION WITH MYCOPLASMA HOMINIS IN MONKEYS
(p21.0) In grivet monekys, parametritis and salpingitis developed within three days when M. hominis was inoculated directly into the fallopian tubes. Thus there was swelling and hyperemia of the tubes and the parametria became edematous. The tubal subserosa was heavily infiltrated with lymphoid cells and an increased number of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. In the parametria many lymphocytes and some granulocytes were found, as well as fat necrosis and granulation tissue. After four to five weeks the upper genital tract of the monkeys was virtually normal again [36].
