# A Comprehensive Survey on Multi-hop Machine Reading Comprehension Approaches

CorpusID: 254408864 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bad1ea60373fc77c1ff82c5ff99f1fd38c972ae8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bad1ea60373fc77c1ff82c5ff99f1fd38c972ae8)

Fields: Computer Science, Linguistics

## (s7) Decomposition technique:
### Question: How does decomposition simplify multi-hop MRC into single-hop problems?

(p7.0) Complicated question is a basic challenge of multi-hop MRC, unlike the single-hop questions, they cannot be answered easily and require complicated reasoning. Since the human reasoning about complex questions is done by decomposition, answering subquestions, summarizing, and comparing [26], then this technique has focused on simplifying the problem by decomposition of a complex question into multiple simple sub-questions. It means it reduces multi-hop MRC to multiple single-hop MRC. This technique mostly uses the single-hop MRC models to find the answers to sub-questions and then combine the answers to obtain the final answer. In the following, the models which use this technique for multi-hop MRC will be reviewed in detail.

### Question: What is the self-assembling neural modular network for multi-hop reasoning described by Jiang and Bansal?

(p7.1) Self-assembling MNM: Jiang and Bansal [18] focused on identifying the sub-questions in the correct reasoning order and presented an interpretable and controller-based self-assembling neural modular network for the multi-hop reasoning process which includes two main parts, Modular Network with a Controller (top) and the Dynamically-assembled Modular Network (bottom) that can be seen in Figure 10. The main idea of the model to handle multi-hop questions is done with Controller that computes an attention distribution over all question words at every reasoning step, which finds the sub-question that should be answered at the current step. In summary, Controller reads the question and predicts a series of modules that could be executed in order to answer the given question. Each module deals with a single-hop sub-question, then they will be chained together according to the predicated order by controller to get the final answer. The mentioned modules are described as follows: All modules take the question representation , context representation ℎ, and sub-question vector as input.

## (s11) Recurrent reasoning-based technique
### Question: What are state-based reasoning models in multi-hop MRC and their key features?

(p11.0) The sequence models have been first used for single-hop MRC tasks, and most of them are based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), some studies focus on using them in multi-hop MRC. It can be called state-based reasoning models and they are closer to a standard attention-based RC model with an additional "state" representation that is iteratively updated. The changing state representation results in the model focusing on different parts of the passage during each iteration, allowing it to combine information from different parts of the passage [28]. Most models, presented in this section, have used advanced neural network concepts, such as attention mechanism and network memory for multi-hop reasoning. In the following the models which use this technique will be reviewed in detail including the architecture alongside the superiority and the motivation of them.

## (s15) •
### Question: What approach does PathNet use for multi-hop MRC passage representation?

(p15.2) The Evidence Assembler (EA) module extracts a key sentence containing the proposed answer from every path and combines them to predict the final answer. Figure 14: Architecture of EPAr [33] PathNet: Kundu et al. [34] proposed a path-based reasoning approach for multi-hop MRC which first extracts all paths in the passages based on implicit relations between entities, and then composes the passage representations along each path to compute a passage-based representation. In other words, the passages representation is achieved by considering the paths.

## (s16) Rank-2 Path:
### Question: How does the SMR approach utilize sentence-level multi-hop reasoning for text comprehension?

(p16.1) As Figure 16 shows, after embedding sentences into a matrix and constructing a graph, the policy is run to select the next sentence. In this regard, the convolution-based policy network is used to learn a traversal policy from current options, previously accepted sentences, and the current question. For example, in this figure, the policy has learned to select the correct next sentence (ct) from the previous sentence (ct-1). After this action, the answer sentence (o1) can be selected during the next step. SMR: Huo, Ge and Zhao [37] proposed a Sentence-level Multi-hop Reasoning approach named SMR while most existing approaches only use document-level or entity-level inferences. In this regard, an initial sentence is first found based on the main entity in the question, and that sentence is then used to find more relevant sentences to create multiple sentence-based reasoning chains as a memory network. Besides, some sentences are concatenated to prevent the mistakes of Co-Reference resolution methods and to reduce the number of hops. An example of such a concatenation is shown in Figure 17.

### Question: What are the phases and methods in ChainEx's sentence-based model for multi-hop reasoning tasks?

(p16.2) There are two phases in this model: 1) the Selecting phase to select the most relevant sentence to the network memory state as the initial sentence of the current hop, and 2) the Establishing phase to prepare to go to the next hop by updating the network memory state. Finally, the information of the reasoning chains is used to predict the final answer. Figure 17: Representation enrichment via concatenation of adjacent sentences [37] ChainEx: Chen, Lin and Durrett [38] proposed a sentence-based model that does not rely on gold annotated chains or supporting facts at the training and test phases, instead, pseudo-gold reasoning chains are derived using some heuristics based on named entity recognition and coreference resolution during the training time, and it learns to extract chains from raw texts at the test time. They first extract a reasoning chain over the text for a multi-hop reasoning task, and then apply a BERT-based QA system to find the answer by learning from these chains.

## (s17) Graph-based technique
### Question: Why have graph-based techniques become attractive in multihop machine reading comprehension (MRC)?

(p17.0) Graph-based techniques because of their natural language relationship representation ability [39] has attracted attention in multihop MRC. It is natural to model natural language context into graph structure and the process of multi-hop reasoning as moving among nodes [14]. The main idea of the Graph-based technique is to construct a graph based on the context and question, and then the reasoning is performed by message passing over this structure using graph neural networks. The process of constructing the graph from large textual data and reasoning over it are challenging tasks. There are a lot of studies that focus on these challenges which are explained in this subsection in detail.

## (s19) MHQA-GRN:
### Question: What model did Song et al. propose for enhancing multi-hop reading comprehension's global context inference?

(p19.0) Song et al. [40] focused on inferring global context as an important key in multi-hop reading comprehension, while previous studies approximate global evidence with local coreference information with DAG-styled GRU. They proposed a model for better connecting global evidence, with a more complex graph compared to DAGs. They construct an entity graph with three types of edges: the edge between the same entity within a passage, the edges between two mentions of different entities within a context window, and coreference-typed edges. The graph might also have cycles which makes it difficult to apply a DAG network to it. (A graph with three types of edges and a DAG graph are shown in Figure 21).

## (s22) HDE:
### Question: What is the structure and purpose of the Heterogeneous Document-Entity graph proposed by Tu et al.?

(p22.0) Tu et al. [46] proposed a more complex graph named Heterogeneous Document-Entity (HDE) graph with different types of nodes and edges. This graph can cover different granularity levels of information in context and also enables rich information interaction among different types of nodes for accurate reasoning. The nodes in the HDE graph are candidates, documents, and entities. Besides, it has seven types of edges: 1) between a document node and a candidate node that appears in the same document.

### Question: What does the SAE system by Tu et al. propose for enhancing model interpretability in multi-hop reasoning?

(p22.2) However, [35] have shown that if the number of inferences increases, the complexity of models will rise sharply due to the iteration of cumbersome message passing algorithm, resulting in low efficiency.  [46] SAE: Tu et al. [47] proposed an interpretable system named Select, Answer, and Explain (SAE) with multi-hop reasoning graphs based on GNN with contextual sentence embeddings as nodes. This kind of sentence graph makes lead to an interpretable model because it can directly output supporting sentences with the answer prediction. The edges capture the global information presented within each document and also the cross-document reasoning path. Also, the contextual sentence embedding used in GNN is summarized over token representations based on a novel mixed attentive pooling mechanism. The attention weight is calculated from both answer span logits and self-attention output on token representations. This attention-based interaction enables the exploitation of complementary information between "answer" and "explain" tasks. The SAE system first filters unrelated documents, and selects gold documents using a document classifier trained with a novel pairwise learning-to-rank loss function.

## (s24) Graph-free technique
### Question: What findings did studies by Shao et al. and Yuntao et al. reveal about graph structure and document filters in multi-hop question answering?

(p24.1) GF: Shao et al. [53] attempted to answer this question: How much does graph structure contribute to answer a multi-hop question. They reimplement a graph-based model-Dynamically Fused Graph Network [54]-and claimed that the graph structure can play an important role only if the pre-trained models are used in a feature-based manner, while if the pre-trained models are used in the fine-tuning approach, the graph structure may not be helpful. Then the adjacency matrix based on manually defined rules and the graph structure can be regarded as prior knowledge, which could be learned by self-attention or Transformers. They proved that when texts have been modeled as an entity graph, both graph-attention and self-attention can achieve comparable results, but when texts have been modeled as a sequence structure, only a 2-layer Transformer could achieve similar results as DFGN. As you can see in Figure 40 when the entity graph is fully connected, a graph-attention layer will degenerate into a selfattention layer. However, this study as the first attempt of a graph-free model suffers from huge performance gap compared to the state-art-of the graph based-models [14]. Figure 40: An example of the relation between the graph-attention network and the self-attention network [53] AMS: Yuntao et al. [52] proposed another non-graph model with a focus on the document filters step to denoise irrelevant documents, and proves that if this step has been done properly, even a single-hop model can be used for multi-hop. They investigate that promising performance of the filter from Hierarchical Graph Network (HGN) (Fang et al., 2020) and showed that for 2paragraph selection, both precision and recall can achieve around 95%, and for 4-paragraph selection, recall will be nearly 99%.

## (s29) HotpotQA
### Question: How are model performances on HotpotQA evaluated using EM, F1, and various metrics sets?

(p29.0) In this section, the performance of models on HotpotQA [11] will be investigated. Exact-match (EM) and F1 metrics have been used in this study to evaluate the model performance. EM is used to show whether the predicated answer and the ground-truth answer are exactly the same. F1 measures the average overlap between the predicted answer and the ground-truth answer. In addition, there are three sets of metrics: 1) Answer EM/F1 to evaluate the answer span prediction, 2) Support EM/F1 to evaluate the supporting facts prediction, and 3) Joint EM/F1 to combine the two previous ones.

