# materials Powder Bed Fusion Additive Manufacturing Using Critical Raw Materials: A Review

CorpusID: 232086481 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4c0776cb66db3f8621cae42f6bc3d07c9b800ba6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4c0776cb66db3f8621cae42f6bc3d07c9b800ba6)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science, Engineering

## (s12) Chromium and Cobalt Alloys
(p12.0) Despite strategic importance and widespread use, chromium was not included in the CRMs lists released in 2011 and 2017. The main chromium producers are South Africa (producing about two-fifths of the chromite ores and concentrates), together with Kazakhstan (producing one-third of Cr). India, Russia, and Turkey are also substantial producers of Cr.

(p12.1) Significant chromium demand comes for the production of iron-based alloys. As one of the major alloying elements in stainless steel, Cr content ranges between mass fractions of 10.5% and 30% [13]. Owing to its strong reactivity with oxygen, it provides the ability to passivate the surface by an adherent, insoluble, ultrathin layer that protects the underlying metal against attacks of the corrosive agents, mainly acids and/or chloride-containing environments. Cr is also responsible for surface self-healing in presence of oxygen [13].

LLM judge: YES

## (s23) Powder Handling Safety Issues
(p23.0) Safety precautions in handling CRM-containing powders used in AM are always mandatory. Many of the CRM-containing materials are listed as "dangerous" in quite different ways, so studying the safety precautions and safety data sheets related to the involved chemical elements and materials is advised. Handling with care, i.e., avoiding spillage and anything promoting contaminating the air with fine material powders, is always advised. Fine particles can cause severe dysfunctions, skin problems, lung diseases, or cancer upon exposure or inhalation. Prolonged exposure to some of the metals was linked to the onset of Alzheimer's disease [135]. Special powder-safe respirators should be used to prevent small particles from reaching the bronchus and lungs, and powder-free gloves should protect the hands.

(p23.1) In addition to potential health risks, metal powders are combustible and flammable; when aerated, they present a risk for explosion. Facilities where metallic powders are kept or handled should have proper protection from electrostatic and electrical sparks (including nonstatic flooring, special clothing and shoes for the staff, grounding wires, and special vacuum cleaners, as the majority of domestic vacuum cleaners have spark-producing electric motors). Additionally, only specialized fire extinguishers rated for combusting metals should be used in such facilities.

(p23.2) At the same time, with correctly deployed preventive measures and proper handling protocol implementation in corresponding AM facilities, levels of danger are no higher than those found in many common industrial facilities.

LLM judge: YES

