# Introduction/overview Clinical and preclinical translation of cell-based therapies using adipose tissue-derived cells R E V I E W

CorpusID: 10560276 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ed517e19445445f90bd602760b58fb268b0aa54](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ed517e19445445f90bd602760b58fb268b0aa54)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s8) Conclusions: opportunities or roadblocks?
(p8.0) Th e application of ASCs and SVF cells is still in its infancy and the fi eld has made progressive advances towards clinical applications. In general, the clinical investi gators who have published their fi ndings have taken pains to address the important regulatory questions before advancing from animal models to patients. Th ese researchers are to be applauded for treating the regulatory guidelines not as roadblocks but as oppor tunities for documenting the safety of their cell-based products. Still, there have not been many published safety studies address ing the legitimate concerns of regulatory authorities that include the following questions.

(p8.1) Can human ASCs and SVF cell implants cause tumors either directly through transformation or indirectly by promoting the growth of endogenous tumor cells? At least one manuscript has reported that human ASCs expanded long term in vitro will cause sarcomas when implanted in vivo in an immunodefi cient mouse [50].

(p8.2) Has a current good manufacturing practice scheme of manufacture been developed for the cell products? While this information must be available to support existing clinical trials, details of standard operating protocols have not been made public. International standardization of ASCs and SVF cells would signifi cantly advance clinical translation. Published defi nition of the cell identity with a panel of surface antigens and establishment of universally applied quality assurance/ quality control testing criteria would benefi t the fl edgling adipose stem cell community.

(p8.3) As discussed above, there is no shortage of diseasesboth acute and chronic -where adipose-derived cell therapies could have a potential clinical impact. Th e next steps will include documenting the reproducibility of the current preclinical and clinical fi ndings, and controlled testing of the safety and effi cacy of ASCs and SVF cells in a range of human conditions. In another decade, we postulate that the cells will prove benefi cial to some, but not all, of the disease models tested. We expect initial successes to come in applications relating to acute disorders; however, we are hopeful that chronic diseases amenable to SVF cell therapy or ASC therapy will also be identifi ed.
