# Optimal planning of hybrid renewable energy systems using HOMER: A review

CorpusID: 114655892 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0851ade1e448726d1bc1ce63df4a3c5716b71e3a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0851ade1e448726d1bc1ce63df4a3c5716b71e3a)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s18) Discussion on HOMER's outputs
(p18.0) After all required data are fed into HOMER and the simulation and optimization stages are done, the results of each plan including the NPC ($), the initial capital cost ($), the operation cost ($/yr), renewable fraction (percent), CoE ($/kWh), and emissions produced (kg/yr) are calculated. Although best plan is determined according to the minimum NPC by HOMER, the best plan may be selected with notice to the other criteria considering the investors' perspective. This issue is discussed in details in [79].

(p18.1) CoE is an appropriate criterion to choice the best plan that is used in the literature. This criterion indicates the average cost per kWh of each plan to supply the demand. Table 7 shows the CoE for best plans which are obtained in the literature. Since in some articles the value of CoE for the best plans is not mentioned, these data is shown in Table 7 as unknown data. The CoE is high in some cases due to high investment cost of component, high fuel prices, high distance from the main grid and so on. For electrification to remote and rural areas which have high distance from the main grid, there are two main solutions including the extension of the main grid and using of HRESs. Although extension of the main grid may lead to lower NPC in comparison with HRESs, it has several disadvantages including power losses, low power quality, and high operation and maintenance cost. Moreover, in some cases the grid extension in not possible with notice to the topography of region. On the other hand, in urban areas the CoE for best plans is higher than the grid electricity prices. Therefore, to encourage the private investors to invest on HRESs in rural and urban areas, the governments should determine attractive regulations to give more Table 5 Type of uncertain parameters considered in different articles.
