# Molecular Sciences Pathophysiological, Molecular and Therapeutic Issues of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease: An Overview

CorpusID: 128359346 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f11076ff4a97f43b6b9bf4fdbb6d9f11b0400c06](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f11076ff4a97f43b6b9bf4fdbb6d9f11b0400c06)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Genetic Factors
(p6.0) Interethnic variations and familial aggregation, associated with the fact that NAFLD is not always sufficiently supported by the presence of environmental and metabolic factors, convinced the scientific community that genetic factors may play a key role in liver steatosis. Genome-wide association and gene expression profiling studies have associated several genes to the development and progression of NAFLD. These sequences play a central role in different pathways: lipogenesis, FA oxidation, lipoprotein transport, glucose homeostasis, detoxification and inflammation. Since the pathogenesis of NAFLD is multifactorial, the interaction with the environment is still crucial [118,121].
## (s8) Does Insulin Resistance Cause NAFLD?
(p8.0) Insulin signaling stimulates glucose utilization and favors lipid accumulation by acting on insulin sensitive organs such as muscle, adipose tissue and liver. If insulin resistance develops, hormone-sensitive lipase is not suppressed and consequently the adipose tissue releases a great amount of NEFA into the bloodstream, leading to ectopic deposition of fat in organs such as the liver and pancreas. Several NEFA-specific transporters have been described, not only in hepatocytes, but generally in hepatic cells, including macrophages. These transporters, e.g., fatty acid transport protein (FATP5), could be a potential target of therapy aiming at reducing hepatic NEFA intake and consequently NAFLD [149].
## (s12) Overweight and Obesity
(p12.0) As mentioned above, obesity is strictly related to NAFLD. Adipose tissue is a very active endocrine organ that produces hormones and cytokines known as adipokines or adipocytokines. It mediates endocrine, inflammatory and immune interactions, protecting or favoring insulin resistance and liver steatosis [179].
