# metals Corrosion, Erosion and Wear Behavior of Complex Concentrated Alloys: A Review

CorpusID: 139438036 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a46757cea4259eaac45a12ae1ede0ad021896b8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a46757cea4259eaac45a12ae1ede0ad021896b8)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s18) Future Opportunities and Outlook
(p18.0) Complex concentrated alloys present a plethora of opportunities for the development of next generation materials. The scope is not just limited to bulk materials and melt-deposition coatings but also in the form of thin films and powder-metallurgy products. However, critical knowledge gaps in surface degradation mechanisms need to be assessed prior to determining the true application worthiness of these alloys. The effect of processing on surface degradation mechanisms are not well understood for welding and joining, severe-plastic deformation, and hot working. Another area with very limited number of studies includes extreme environments, such as molten/fused salts, heavy ion/neutron irradiation, and high temperatures.

(p18.1) Understanding the nature and chemistry of the surface passivation layer is critically important for corrosion, erosion, and wear applications. This has not been done in a comprehensive way. Surface characterization using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultra-violet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) could reveal valuable information about the chemistry and electronic structure of the surface passivation layer and help in fundamental understanding of the underlying mechanisms. This knowledge may be utilized to develop specific surface treatments to produce strongly passivating and non-porous oxides that can offer exceptional surface degradation resistance. Slight changes in composition (micro-alloying) or processing conditions have shown large variations in properties, compounding the complexity in analyzing these multi-component systems. In complex precipitation hardened CCAs, composition fluctuations at multiple length-scales (atomic, nano, micro) may lead to "local" effects that nucleate the breakdown of passivation layers. These effects may be captured by phase-specific corrosion and wear tests at the microstructural length-scales, including scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) and nano-scratch/wear tests.

(p18.2) There are very limited reports on the lubricity and friction behavior of complex concentrated alloys. This may be of interest in tribology for developing super-lubricity complex composition coatings. Phase-specific friction studies will provide significant insights into surface degradation from multi-body wear in multi-phase CCAs [101]. Ni free complex alloys might be attractive for biomedical applications. Evaluating in-vitro wear behavior and quantifying cytotoxicity of the wear products will significantly help in developing new biomaterials. Recently reported refractory CCAs may be attractive for highly stressed bearing applications, where high temperature wear behavior, evolution of oxide layers, kinetics of spalling, and pesting are of significant fundamental interest.

(p18.3) Advanced additive manufacturing, LASER melt-deposition, and combinatorial development using powder bed and powder feed techniques for CCAs hold tremendous potential towards meeting long-standing challenges like highly corrosion resistant surface materials and thermal barrier coatings. CCA claddings via melt-deposition is yet to be explored. Electrodeposition of CCA/HEA coatings via co-deposition and auto-catalytic reactions could dramatically enhance functional applications of these alloys. CCA thin films could be potentially transformative as diffusion barriers in integrated circuit (IC) manufacturing because of extremely sluggish diffusion and lattice distortion. The future opportunities and outlook for complex concentrated alloys in different areas are summarized in Figure 34. 
