# Multi-criteria decision making approaches for green supply chains: a review more multi-criteria models for real-life GSCs, especially with inclusion of uncer- tainty in parameters that are associated with GSCs

CorpusID: 157976762 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e390b556106da981d2e16487f44542f4077513c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e390b556106da981d2e16487f44542f4077513c)

Fields: Computer Science, Business, Economics, Environmental Science

## (s9) Solution approaches
(p9.0) It is observed that the use of MADM approaches to balance conflicting criteria in eco-efficient SCs is well represented. Numerous approaches such as AHP, TOPSIS, ANP, PROMETHEE, DEMATEL, VIKOR and their combinations are used. In 78 out of 188 studied articles (41%) one or more MADM approaches were applied. The most commonly used approach is AHP (32 publications), TOPSIS (23 publications), and ANP (16 publications). Most of the MADM approaches are applied to supplier selection or evaluation problems (44 publications, 56% of all MADM approaches), and technology or material selection (9 publications, 12%). Within the relevant publications, 129 articles (69%) use an MODM approach, mostly based on linear and non-linear programming problems. In some studies two or more approaches are presented. It is observed that MODM approaches most commonly focus on deriving a set of Pareto-efficient solutions (or Pareto-efficient frontier). Pareto efficient solutions are derived to aid a decision maker in selecting most preferable solution that balances environmental and economic objectives. The methods most frequently used are the e-constraint method (44 papers, 34% of all MODM approaches) and weighting methods (35 papers, 27%). Some problems are solved using heuristics (in case the problem is too difficult or takes too much computational effort to solve with standard optimisation approaches), such as genetic algorithms (14 papers, 11%), other evolutionary algorithms, multi-objective gravitational search algorithm, memetic algorithm, multi-objective heuristic based on variable neighbourhood search, or greedy heuristic. Additionally, in 19 publications (10%) MADM and MODM approaches are combined to arrive at a final solution. In these articles AHP, ANP, and/or TOPSIS are used to obtain weights for multi-objective optimisation problems, and a single solution out of the efficient set is selected, e.g. in Validi et al. (2014a) an AHP constraint is introduced to include decision makers' consensus opinions for vehicles used for distribution, and TOPSIS approach is used to evaluate results generated by (three genetic algorithm-based) optimizers to highlight the best candidate to a decision maker.
