# A Survey on Metric Learning for Feature Vectors and Structured Data

CorpusID: 168956 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6f0cde3fcab0044f386b5b8a4244c371507bec15](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6f0cde3fcab0044f386b5b8a4244c371507bec15)

Fields: Computer Science, Mathematics

## (s30) Other Advances in Metric Learning
(p30.0) So far, we focused on (linear) Mahalanobis metric learning which has inspired a large amount of work during the past ten years. In this section, we cover other advances and trends in metric learning for feature vectors. Most of the section is devoted to (fully and weakly) supervised methods. In Section 4.1, we address linear similarity learning. Section 4.2 deals with nonlinear metric learning (including the kernelization of linear methods), Section 4.3

(p30.1) 28. Source code is available at: http://www-cse.ucsd.edu/~bmcfee/code/mlr 29. The feature map ψ is designed such that the ranking p which maximizes M , ψ(x, p) F is the one given by ascending d 2 M (x, ·). 30. Notice that this is different from noisy side information, which was investigated by the method RML (Huang et al., 2010) presented earlier in this section.

(p30.2) with local metric learning and Section 4.4 with metric learning for histogram data. Section 4.5 presents the recently-developed frameworks for deriving generalization guarantees for supervised metric learning. We conclude this section with a review of semi-supervised metric learning (Section 4.6).
## (s60) Ristad and Yianilos
(p60.0) The first method for learning a string edit metric, in the form of a generative model, was proposed by Ristad and Yianilos (1998). 46 They use a memoryless stochastic transducer which models the joint probability of a pair p e (x, x ′ ) from which p e (x ′ |x) can be estimated. Parameter estimation is performed with an EM procedure. The Expectation step takes the form of a probabilistic version of the dynamic programing algorithm of the standard edit distance. The M-step aims at maximizing the likelihood of the training pairs of strings so as to define a joint distribution over the edit operations:
