# Reviews Palliative Care in Huntington Disease: Personal Reflections and a Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 16760422 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/17b15a3f628d4d2a0822d7ceef06f93afef40849](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/17b15a3f628d4d2a0822d7ceef06f93afef40849)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) Case 5
(p8.0) Jim had been diagnosed with HD nearly 13 years earlier and he had progressed to late-stage disease. He continued to live at home with home nursing and a supportive family. Jim remained able to communicate, despite his advanced disease, but he fell frequently, was increasingly depressed, and was losing weight. Jim had been hospitalized three times in the same number of months with episodes of unresponsiveness in the setting of recurrent aspiration pneumonias. With each hospitalization, Jim's family had been told that it was the end, yet Jim would surprise everyone, recovering and returning home. A hospice was repeatedly discussed, but Jim didn't feel ready, worried that enrolling in a hospice meant giving up.

(p8.1) Jim eventually met the hospice admission criteria and agreed to referral with more rapidly advancing swallowing difficulties and an inability to maintain an adequate weight. He and his family agreed to hospice admission, and he was moved to a hospice home. He became unresponsive again one day, and his family prepared to say goodbye for the last time. Yet Jim recovered again, becoming more conversant, but also irritable and agitated. His mood and behavior continued to fluctuate over the following days and his hospice team questioned whether he was still eligible for their services. Our care team and Jim's family advocated for him: that the terminal phase of HD is unpredictable, and Jim remained there, dying peacefully within the week.

(p8.2) Hospice care refers to a purely palliative approach to end-of-life care, specifically directed toward improving quality of life for those with a prognosis of 6 months or less. Beyond symptom-directed care, the hospice also provides dedicated nursing, counseling, respite care, and familial support, including bereavement services. It can be an invaluable asset for dying patients.

(p8.3) Modern hospice care was conceptualized more than 50 years ago and the 6-month requirement for hospice candidacy developed from the relatively predictable decline in patients with terminal cancer, the population traditionally enrolled. 50 Unlike oncologic diagnoses, however, most other terminal illnesses including HD have a less predictable trajectory at the end of life, with significant fluctuation and variance in patient course once they enter ''end-stage'' disease. 51 Patients approach what seems like the end of life, then recover; or patients have a sudden worsening that results in death unexpectedly.
