# A Review of the Role of Neurotensin and Its Receptors in Colorectal Cancer

CorpusID: 16735617 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/286affa8a6c59d03b34a679014450be78b3feda1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/286affa8a6c59d03b34a679014450be78b3feda1)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s7) Discussion
(p7.0) Similar to other cancers, there is a convincing, albeit predominantly experimental, body of evidence to implicate NTS and its receptors in the carcinogenesis of human CRC. Human research on this subject remains sparse and lacking in strength. To date, only retrospective series have been reported in colorectal cancers. Prospective studies have been carried on in other cancers, for example, glioma, which demonstrated that increased NTS and NTSR1 expression is associated with significantly decreased 3-year survival [63]. The potential for NTS/NTSR pathway as novel targets for cancer therapies has been advocated in CRC as well as other cancers such as non-small-cell lung cancers [64]. NTS as a diagnostic and therapeutic target is being explored in numerous other cancers, for example, cancers in the pancreas, prostate, and breast [65]. In breast cancer, NTSR1induced activation of EGFR and HER2 receptors rendered these cancers aggressive, yet highly responsive to lapatinib and metformin in mice [66]. However, translational studies into clinical settings are awaited in all of these cancers.

(p7.1) NTS and NTSR expression appear to be related to increased aggressiveness and invasiveness of colon cancers highlighting its potential role as a prognostic marker in CRC. Furthermore, NTS and NTSR can be easily quantified in resection specimens as a part of routine histopathological diagnosis. The NTS/NTSR status of a cancer, much like Herceptin and oestrogen receptor status in breast carcinoma, could be used to stratify patients for adjuvant chemotherapy agents. However, there has only been small retrospective case series reported thus far. The validity of NTS/NTSR as a prognostic factor requires improved understanding of the prevalence of human CRC which expresses them at a genetic and protein level. Cancer genetic databases may hold the answer. Prospective cohort studies are required to establish the effect of NTS or NTSR expression on disease aggressiveness, recurrence, and survival.

(p7.2) Functional imaging targeting NTS/NTSR is in the experimental stages but is fast approaching clinical validation. Targeting of cancer cells which express NTSR1 ectopically is a useful strategy for both detection and therapy of NTSR1 expressing cancers. The rapidly expanding fields of nanotherapeutics and immune therapeutics may be able to take advantage of NTS and NTSR to advance the treatment of CRC and other cancers. The technological aspects await validation in the clinical setting.

(p7.3) Antagonists of NTSRs, much like tamoxifen in breast cancer, may be a hitherto unexplored endocrine modulatory chemotherapy in patients with CRC expressing NTS/NTSR. The efficacy and safety of these antagonists require future clinical studies to assess both its safety and efficacy before it can be used in the treatment of cancers.

(p7.4) The road to developing a new cancer drug is long and arduous. For example, in the case of breast cancer, the role oestrogen played was described as early as 1896. George Beatson found that the lives of breast cancer patients were extended by bilateral oophorectomies. It took eight decades of work for tamoxifen, the oestrogen receptor antagonist, to be used in the treatment of breast cancer. Even more recently, almost 20 years separated the discovery of the HER2 receptor and the licensing of Herceptin (trastuzumab). It is clear that significant future work and investment is required if NTS pathways are to be exploited for the benefit of patients with cancer. The increasing body of evidence should propel ongoing research and be built upon by robust prospective studies to achieve this goal.
