# An overview and methodological assessment of systematic reviews and meta-analyses of enhanced recovery programmes in colorectal surgery

CorpusID: 18059443 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2613034cadd1a4d8160338ff0bc135337430412a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2613034cadd1a4d8160338ff0bc135337430412a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s11) Findings in relation to previous studies
(p11.0) The existence of multiple systematic reviews covering the same topic was investigated by Siontis et al. 31 They found that of 73 systematic reviews (with meta-analysis) published in 2010, 49 (67%) had at least one other published meta-analysis on the same topic. A particularly striking example was the existence of 11 meta-analyses of statins to prevent atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery; all except the first of these showed a large positive effect of the intervention. Our findings reinforce those of Siontis et al, although even where reviews included exactly the same trials, their pooled estimates of effect were not necessarily identical. Enhanced recovery differs from an intervention like statins after cardiac surgery, being more complex and changing over time as more elements are incorporated into routine practice. This would tend to favour increased variation between reviews along the lines we observed.

(p11.1) A slightly different approach to investigating overlap between systematic reviews was taken by Woodman et al, 32 who looked at the differences between eight reviews of community interventions to promote physical activity. Across the eight reviews, there were 28 included studies, of which 22 (79%) were only included in one review. There was little cross-citation between reviews. For most reviews, Woodman et al could explain why primary data were not included, which was usually due to the reviews having a relatively narrow scope. Despite these issues, the review conclusions were similar. Comparing our results with those of Woodman et al, the enhanced recovery reviews had a higher degree of overlap, although they differed with respect to inclusion of non-randomised studies (not discussed in this paper). The differences between the enhanced recovery and physical activity reviews probably reflect the fact that enhanced recovery, although a complex intervention, is more narrowly defined than interventions to increase physical activity.
