# Deep Learning for Spatio-Temporal Data Mining: A Survey

CorpusID: 186206569 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a54c647f6db73621ec496ea86355726161c0898d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a54c647f6db73621ec496ea86355726161c0898d)

Fields: Computer Science, Mathematics, Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s2) A. Data Types
(p2.0) There are various types of ST data that differs in the way of data collection and representation in different real-world applications. Different application scenarios and ST data types lead to different categories of data mining tasks and problem formulations. Different deep learning models usually have different preferences to the types of ST data and have different requirements for the input data format. For example, CNN model is designed to process image-like data, while RNN is usually used to process sequential data. Thus it is important to first summarize the general types of ST data and represent them properly. We follow and extend the categorization in [4], and classify the ST data into the following types: event data, trajectory data, point reference data, raster data, and videos.

(p2.1) Event data. Event data comprise of discrete events occurring at point locations and times (e.g., crime events in the city and traffic accident events in a transportation network). An event can generally be characterized by a point location and time, which denotes where and when the event occurred, respectively. For example, a crime event can be characterized as such a tuple (e i , l i , t i ), where e i is the crime type, l i is the location where the crime occurs and t i is the time when it occurs. Fig. 1(a) shows an illustration of the event data. It shows three types of events denoted by different shapes of the symbol. ST event data are common in realworld applications such as criminology (incidence of crime and related events), epidemiology (disease outbreak events), transportation (car accident), and social network (social event and trending topics).

(p2.2) Trajectory data. Trajectories denote the paths traced by bodies moving in space over time. (e.g., the moving route of a bike trip or taxi trip). Trajectory data are usually collected by the sensors deployed on the moving objects that can periodically transmit the location of the object over time, such as GPS on a taxi. Fig. 1(b) shows an illustration of two trajectories. Each trajectory can be usually characterized as such a sequence {(l 1 , t 1 ), (l 2 , t 2 )...(l n , t n )}, where l i is the location (e.g. latitude and longitude) and t i is the time when the moving object passes this location. Trajectory data such as human trajectory, urban traffic trajectory and location based social networks are becoming ubiquitous with the development of Mobile applications and IoT techniques.

(p2.3) Point reference data. Point reference data consist of measurements of a continuous ST field such as temperature, vegetation, or population over a set of moving reference points in space and time. For example, meteorological data such as temperature and humidity are commonly measured using weather balloons floating in space, which continuously record weather observations. Point reference data can be usually represented as a set of tuples as follows {(r 1 , l 1 , t 1 ), (r 2 , l 2 , t 2 )...(r n , l n , t n )}. Each tuple (r i , l i , t i ) denotes the measurement of a sensor r i at the location l i of the ST filed at time t i . Fig. 3 shows an example of the point reference data (e.g. sea surface temperature) in a continuous ST field at two time stamps. They are measured by the sensors at reference locations (shown as while circles) on the two time stamps. Note that the locations of the temperature sensors change over time.

(p2.4) Raster data. Raster data are the measurements of a continuous or discrete ST field that are recorded at fixed locations in space and at fixed time points. The major difference between point reference data and raster data is that the locations of the point reference data keep changing while the locations of the raster data are fixed. The locations and times for measuring the ST field can be regularly or irregularly distributed. Given m fixed locations S = {s 1 , s 2 , ...s m } and n time stamps T = {t 1 , t 2 , ...t n }, the raster data can be represented as a matrix R m×n , where each entry r ij is the measurement at location s i at time stamp t j . Raster data are also quite common in realworld applications such as transportation, climate science, and neuroscience. For example, the air quality data (e.g. PM2.5) can be collected by the sensors deployed at fixed locations of a city, and the data collected in a continuous time period form the air quality raster data. In neuroscience, functional magnetic resonance imaging or functional MRI (fMRI) measures brain activity by detecting changes associated with blood flow. The scanned fMRI signals also form the raster data for analyzing the brain activity and identifying some diseases. Fig. 4 shows an example of the traffic flow raster data of a transportation network. Each road is deployed a traffic sensor to collect real time traffic flow data. The traffic flow data of all the road sensors in a whole day (24 hours) form a raster data.

(p2.5) Video. A video that consists of a sequence of images can be also considered as a type of ST data. In the spatial domain, the neighbor pixels usually have similar RGB values and thus present high spatial correlations. In the temporal domain, the images of consecutive frames usually change smoothly and present high temporal dependency. A video can be generally represented as a three dimensional tensor with one dimension representing time t and the other two representing an image. Actually, video data can be also considered as a special raster data if we assume that there is a "sensor" deployed at each pixel and at each frame the "sensors" will collect the RGB values. Deep learning based video data analysis is extremely hot and a large number of papers are published in recent years. Although we categorize videos as a type of ST data, we focus on reviewing related works from the perspective of data mining and video data analysis falls into the research areas of computer vision and pattern recognition. Thus in this survey we do not cover the ST data type of videos.
