# A Survey on Hardware-based Security Mecha-nisms for Internet of Things

CorpusID: 198967727 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/25a3a164acfefaef93a476e6882b3939c35da619](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/25a3a164acfefaef93a476e6882b3939c35da619)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s35) FUZZY EXTRACTORS
(p35.0) A Fuzzy Extractor (FE) extracts a uniformly random string R and non-secret string P (helper data) from its initial input w. This mechanism allows the string R to be used as a key and reproduced exactly with the help of P, even though the input changes to some w ′ but remains close to w. Fuzzy extractors are said to be information-theoretically secure,

(p35.1) i.e., a crypto-system whose security is derived only from information theory, where a hacker does not have enough information to break the encryption, thereby allowing them to be used in cryptography. FEs are constructed using Secure Sketch (SS), which is a pair of randomized procedures "sketch" and "recover" that allow precise reconstruction of the initial input from noisy input by making use of some helper data P.

(p35.2) In the "sketch" phase, Helper Data P is extracted from initial input w, which can be made publicly available. This output P will be used in the "recover" phase along with noisy input w ′ to recover w. This method is secure because the publicly available Helper Data reveals little to no information about w. Figure 10 describes a secure sketch. FE is defined by a pair of randomized procedures "generate" and "reproduce". In the "generate" phase, the fuzzy extractor uses the "sketch" phase of the SS where Helper data, P and Key, R are extracted from the given input w. The Shamsoshoara and Korenda, et al.

(p35.3) "reproduce" phase uses the "recover" phase of the secure sketch which makes use of the Helper data to recover the original input w from a noisy input w ′ along with the random extractor used in the "sketch" phase, to extract the randomness from the recovered w. The ability to recover w from w ′ is highly dependent on the technique, usually an error correction scheme, used in the "sketch" phase of the FE. If the distance between the noisy input w ′ and input w is too large, it may not be possible to recover w from w ′ . Figure 12 shows the construction of a FE using a secure sketch.

(p35.4) Due to the error tolerance capability of Secure Sketches, their construction is based on error correcting codes. The error Fig. 12. Construction of a fuzzy extractor using secure sketch extractor correcting code C is used to correct errors in w ′ by shifting the codeword, although w ′ may not be in C. Two different constructions are used for secure sketch are presented [46]:

(p35.5) • Code-Offset Construction: For input w, a uniformly random codeword c is selected from C, and SS(w) to be the shift needed to get from c to w: SS(w) = w − c. To compute Rec(w ′ , s), the shift s is subtacted from w ′ to get c ′ = w ′ − s: c ′ is decoded to retrieve c and w is computed by shifting back to get w = c + s. When code C is linear, the information in s is essentially the syndrome of w.
