# A Comparative Survey of Recent Natural Language Interfaces for Databases

CorpusID: 195316636 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c4e3955219e8b008e4a14fbd0a1aac17cdba568d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c4e3955219e8b008e4a14fbd0a1aac17cdba568d)

Fields: Computer Science, Linguistics

## (s32) QuestIO (QUESTion-based Interface to Ontologies)
(p32.0) QuestIO (Damljanovic et al, 2008) is an NLI to query ontologies using unconstrained natural language. It automatically extracts human-understandable lexicalization from the ontology. Therefore, the quality of the semantic information in the ontology has to be very high to contain enough human-understandable labels and/or descriptions. For example, the attribute Movie.Release-Date would be extracted as 'Release Date', which is a human-understandable label. In contrast, the attribute Movie.OriginalLang would result in 'Original Lang', where the token 'Lang' is a shortened version for 'Language' and is not human-understandable.

(p32.1) QuestIO translates the input question with three steps: In the first step, the key concept identification tool identifies all tokens which refer to mentions of ontology resources such as instances, classes, properties or property values. This is similar to the dependent phrases of NLQ/A. In the next step, the context collector identifies patterns (e.g., key phrases like 'how many') in the remaining tokens that help the system to understand the query (similar to independent phrases of NLQ/A). The last step identifies relationships between the ontology resources collected during the previous steps and formulates the corresponding formal query. After executing the query, it will be sent to the result formatter to display the result in an user-friendly manner.

(p32.2) The automatic extraction of semantic information out of the ontology is both a strength and a weakness of QuestIO. It is highly dependent on the development of the human-understandable labels and descriptions, without them QuestIO will not be able to match the input questions to the automatic extracted information.

(p32.3) QuestIO (Damljanovic et al, 2008) is an NLI to query ontologies using unconstrained natural language. It automatically extracts human-understandable lexicalization from the ontology. Therefore, the quality of the semantic information in the ontology has to be very high to contain enough human-understandable labels and/or descriptions. For example, the attribute Movie.Release-Date would be extracted as 'Release Date', which is a human-understandable label. In contrast, the attribute Movie.OriginalLang would result in 'Original Lang', where the token 'Lang' is a shortened version for 'Language' and is not human-understandable.

(p32.4) QuestIO translates the input question with three steps: In the first step, the key concept identification tool identifies all tokens which refer to mentions of ontology resources such as instances, classes, properties or property values. This is similar to the dependent phrases of NLQ/A. In the next step, the context collector identifies patterns (e.g., key phrases like 'how many') in the remaining tokens that help the system to understand the query (similar to independent phrases of NLQ/A). The last step identifies relationships between the ontology resources collected during the previous steps and formulates the corresponding formal query. After executing the query, it will be sent to the result formatter to display the result in an user-friendly manner.

(p32.5) The automatic extraction of semantic information out of the ontology is both a strength and a weakness of QuestIO. It is highly dependent on the development of the human-understandable labels and descriptions, without them QuestIO will not be able to match the input questions to the automatic extracted information.
## (s100) QuestIO (QUESTion-based Interface to Ontologies)
(p100.0) QuestIO (Damljanovic et al, 2008) is an NLI to query ontologies using unconstrained natural language. It automatically extracts human-understandable lexicalization from the ontology. Therefore, the quality of the semantic information in the ontology has to be very high to contain enough human-understandable labels and/or descriptions. For example, the attribute Movie.Release-Date would be extracted as 'Release Date', which is a human-understandable label. In contrast, the attribute Movie.OriginalLang would result in 'Original Lang', where the token 'Lang' is a shortened version for 'Language' and is not human-understandable.

(p100.1) QuestIO translates the input question with three steps: In the first step, the key concept identification tool identifies all tokens which refer to mentions of ontology resources such as instances, classes, properties or property values. This is similar to the dependent phrases of NLQ/A. In the next step, the context collector identifies patterns (e.g., key phrases like 'how many') in the remaining tokens that help the system to understand the query (similar to independent phrases of NLQ/A). The last step identifies relationships between the ontology resources collected during the previous steps and formulates the corresponding formal query. After executing the query, it will be sent to the result formatter to display the result in an user-friendly manner.

(p100.2) The automatic extraction of semantic information out of the ontology is both a strength and a weakness of QuestIO. It is highly dependent on the development of the human-understandable labels and descriptions, without them QuestIO will not be able to match the input questions to the automatic extracted information.

(p100.3) QuestIO (Damljanovic et al, 2008) is an NLI to query ontologies using unconstrained natural language. It automatically extracts human-understandable lexicalization from the ontology. Therefore, the quality of the semantic information in the ontology has to be very high to contain enough human-understandable labels and/or descriptions. For example, the attribute Movie.Release-Date would be extracted as 'Release Date', which is a human-understandable label. In contrast, the attribute Movie.OriginalLang would result in 'Original Lang', where the token 'Lang' is a shortened version for 'Language' and is not human-understandable.

(p100.4) QuestIO translates the input question with three steps: In the first step, the key concept identification tool identifies all tokens which refer to mentions of ontology resources such as instances, classes, properties or property values. This is similar to the dependent phrases of NLQ/A. In the next step, the context collector identifies patterns (e.g., key phrases like 'how many') in the remaining tokens that help the system to understand the query (similar to independent phrases of NLQ/A). The last step identifies relationships between the ontology resources collected during the previous steps and formulates the corresponding formal query. After executing the query, it will be sent to the result formatter to display the result in an user-friendly manner.

(p100.5) The automatic extraction of semantic information out of the ontology is both a strength and a weakness of QuestIO. It is highly dependent on the development of the human-understandable labels and descriptions, without them QuestIO will not be able to match the input questions to the automatic extracted information.
