# Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY Current Trends & Challenges in Prosthetic Product Development: Literature Review

CorpusID: 199087607 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/49b2e0179ebe2ddbd58a71fc38371278dff90967](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/49b2e0179ebe2ddbd58a71fc38371278dff90967)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s18) Discussion
(p18.0) So far, material, prosthetic human compatibility, functionality and cost are the biggest hurdles. At present, it is now possible to achieve the real-life motion of lost limbs, but not affordably. Thus, cost concern is driving inexpensive prosthetics such as Jaipur Leg, Nepal Hand and Swiss leg. As a trade-off, these prosthetics have limitations when it comes to functioning same as a lost limb.

(p18.1) The amputation of a limb, whether upper or lower, is an extremely traumatic experience for the patient and carries both emotional and physical side effects with it. Once finally adjusted to a prosthetic limb, a patient then encounters numerous health issues, such as skin infection and muscle strains. Recent advancements in bionic limbs point toward a brighter future for prosthetic users, as these devices both replicate the missing body part and respond to brain signals just as the replaced limb would. Bionic limbs also allow users to perform a much wider array of motions, including dancing and climbing. [Li 2017] proposes artificial muscles inspired by origami (Japanese paper art) and actuated by fluid gives a direction towards having prosthetics powered by these artificial muscles. Similar studies have been done by Professor Dieter Mankau at the Hochschule fürGestaltung in Offenbach show promising results specifically in prosthetic development. Application of this can be seen by the FESTO Robotics in Bionic handling assistant (elephant trunk) that showcases the capabilities of such concept. But the shortcoming with this technology is the inability to pressurize the power fluids by an actuator required to be as small as the size and energy of human heart. R&D in micro-power applications is an ongoing research need.
## (s47) Discussion
(p47.0) So far, material, prosthetic human compatibility, functionality and cost are the biggest hurdles. At present, it is now possible to achieve the real-life motion of lost limbs, but not affordably. Thus, cost concern is driving inexpensive prosthetics such as Jaipur Leg, Nepal Hand and Swiss leg. As a trade-off, these prosthetics have limitations when it comes to functioning same as a lost limb.

(p47.1) The amputation of a limb, whether upper or lower, is an extremely traumatic experience for the patient and carries both emotional and physical side effects with it. Once finally adjusted to a prosthetic limb, a patient then encounters numerous health issues, such as skin infection and muscle strains. Recent advancements in bionic limbs point toward a brighter future for prosthetic users, as these devices both replicate the missing body part and respond to brain signals just as the replaced limb would. Bionic limbs also allow users to perform a much wider array of motions, including dancing and climbing. [Li 2017] proposes artificial muscles inspired by origami (Japanese paper art) and actuated by fluid gives a direction towards having prosthetics powered by these artificial muscles. Similar studies have been done by Professor Dieter Mankau at the Hochschule fürGestaltung in Offenbach show promising results specifically in prosthetic development. Application of this can be seen by the FESTO Robotics in Bionic handling assistant (elephant trunk) that showcases the capabilities of such concept. But the shortcoming with this technology is the inability to pressurize the power fluids by an actuator required to be as small as the size and energy of human heart. R&D in micro-power applications is an ongoing research need.
