# Medical graduate views on statistical learning needs for clinical practice: a comprehensive survey

CorpusID: 209516527 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ef68930a51caeb5b369db4a6333a9c7200b063e3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ef68930a51caeb5b369db4a6333a9c7200b063e3)

Fields: Education, Medicine, Psychology, Mathematics

## (s5) Data preparation
(p5.0) For the survey question pertaining to nature of employment, we merged response categories to form all possible combinations of choices made by respondents, including single categories and multiple categories. This resulted in the seven categories Academic Research; Academic Teaching; Clinical Practice; Academic Teaching & Academic Research; Clinical Practice & Academic Research; Clinical Practice & Academic Teaching and Clinical Practice, Academic Teaching & Academic Research. This was in order to more fully capture an individual's employment status. For the purpose of summarizing our key findings and aligning these with our intended mixed model analyses, we also merged a) the option comprising carry out the procedure or calculate the statistic(s) using appropriate data as a sole competency with b) the option both of the above, comprising both the latter competency and understand the theory. We then assigned the abbreviated title includes practice to the resultant category. Also, we merged the remaining response categories to form the complementary category does not include practice. We in turn defined the response variable for our mixed model analyses as a binary variable with categories includes practice and does not include practice.

(p5.1) The classification of clinical specialisms provided by respondents (Q. 12) was informed both by a previous study involving medical graduates [11] and by a thematic approach whereby new specialisms ("the codes") were derived retrospectively from responses (Additional file 2).
