# Image Classification with Deep Learning in the Presence of Noisy Labels: A Survey

CorpusID: 209202519 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33a2e0c7ea17031f4e6f28496a9b8f3222cb2904](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33a2e0c7ea17031f4e6f28496a9b8f3222cb2904)

Fields: Computer Science, Mathematics

## (s2) A. Problem Statement
(p2.0) Classical supervised learning consists of a input dataset D = {(x 1 , y 1 ), ..., (x n , y n )} where x i denotes the i th sample and y i is the corresponding true class which are coming from set {X, Y }. Task is to find the mapping function of neural network parameterized by θ so that f (x i , θ) = y i for ∀i. When there exists noisy labels in dataset it turns intoD = {(x 1 ,ỹ 1 ), ..., (x n ,ỹ n )}, whereỹ represents the observable noisy label. Task remains to find out the function that can predict the true classes even without observing them. Throughout this paper {D, y} will be used to represent the noise-free dataset and label respectively and {D,ỹ} for their noisy counterparts. Final dataset is represented with D f , which can be one of two: datasets with small amount of reference set

(p2.1) In case of existence of reference set, which is noise-free subset of dataset, performance of algorithms can be tested on this subset or it can be further used to utilize learning. If such a subset is not available, possible methodologies to obtain test set is discussed in detail in subsection V-A Label vector y can either be binary variable for binary classification task or one-hot vector for multi-class classification problem. In case of multi-labeled data, there can be more than oneỹ i for instance x i , while there is only one y i . If instances contain multiple objects, y i can represent more than one class. In this setup annotator may skip to label some classes in an instance which would result in partial labels, where corresponding labels for a particular instance are not changed but omitted.

(p2.2) While most of the works assumes y,ỹ ∈ Y , it is not always necessarily the case that y is from set Y . That means instances associated with noisy labels may have true class which is not contained in Y , which is named as open-set noisy labels problem [23].
## (s14) B. Meta Learning
(p14.0) With the recent advancements of deep neural networks, necessity of hand designed features for computer vision are mostly eliminated. Instead, these features are learned autonomously via machine learning techniques. Even though these systems are able to learn complex functions on their own, there still remains many hand designed parameters such as network architecture, hyper-parameters, optimization algorithm and so on. Meta learning aims to eliminate these necessities by learning not just the required complex function for the task, but also learning the learning itself [145], [146].
