# The Needs of Women Who Have Experienced "Maternal Near Miss": A Systematic Review of Literature Review Article

CorpusID: 207933412 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a35a8f147e806b4649b1405527755be6567e5805](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a35a8f147e806b4649b1405527755be6567e5805)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s2) Materials and Methods
(p2.0) This study was designed based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) checklist. [18] This literature review was conducted in March 2019. In this study, to achieve the intended information, systematically published articles in PubMed and Web of Science databases were searched, where 498 and 617 of the published articles before March 2019 were found in each, respectively. We reviewed the list of reference of the relevant articles. Furthermore, to cover more articles, the Google Scholar database was searched, whereby 1022 articles were extracted. All articles were searched in English. The search strategy focused on three keywords or phrases: "maternal morbidity" OR "maternal near miss" AND "needs." We used broad inclusion criteria to provide a detailed systematic review of the topic. It must be noted that article search was conducted by two independent reviewers and all the studies reviewed eligible articles by reviewing the title and abstract. Any disagreement between these two was resolved through discussion and by considering the goals of the study, and the opinion of a third person was requested, if necessary. The full texts of the selected abstracts were, subsequently, screened. After the primary search of different databases, 2140 articles were found. The extracted articles were evaluated according to the inclusion criteria in two steps. During the first step, 2052 articles out of 2140 were eliminated because of being a duplicate or qualifying the exclusion criteria. During the second step, nine articles were eliminated for having different (irrelevant) titles and goals as well as due to lack of a full text. Eventually, 77 articles including 20 qualitative and 57 quantitative studies were enrolled for final evaluation [ Figure 1].

(p2.1) The articles presented in conferences and seminars, case reports, and letters to editor were excluded. Furthermore, lack of access to the full texts of the articles was considered as an exclusion criterion. Eventually, the selected articles were studied to determine the needs of mothers who have experienced MNM.
## (s17) www.SID.ir
(p17.0) Archive of SID programs should deal with both averting the loss of life and with ameliorating care of severe maternal morbidities at all levels including primary care. [32] Need to develop a physical, psychological, and social of care packages
