# future internet Modeling and Simulation Tools for Fog Computing-A Comprehensive Survey from a Cost Perspective

CorpusID: 219441455 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b045522376072d4f1071dd09bcecba0f540a764f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b045522376072d4f1071dd09bcecba0f540a764f)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s19) Simulation Tools
(p19.0) Simulators shed light on existing or prototype systems by imitating their operation. Simulators are used to study the system behavior and understand the factors that affect system performance as it evolves over time. Before applying new technologies to real systems it is salutary to test them using simulation tools. Fog computing trends as the latest extension of cloud computing. Although there is a wide range of simulation tools for cloud computing, they cannot be used as-is for studies in the field of fog computing; they have thus been adapted to meet the new needs. At the same time, novel simulation tools have been proposed and developed, specifically for the fog. In this section, we survey all such tools that are used in the fog computing area.

(p19.1) The Edge-Fog cloud simulator [23] is implemented in Python. It is composed of two layers: (i) the outer layer which includes the edge devices and (ii) the inner layer which consist of fog devices. All those devices are connected and form a distributed system. The authors also implement the Least Processing Cost First (LPCF) algorithm, which is used to assign tasks to available nodes. The assignment aims to reduce the processing time and network costs.
