# molecules An Overview of the Potential Antineoplastic Effects of Casticin

CorpusID: 212738428 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0303a9699d1626f45ccd2fedf3745417cd883691](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0303a9699d1626f45ccd2fedf3745417cd883691)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) In vitro Cancer Cell lines
(p6.0) Casticin possesses antineoplastic activities in various cancer cell lines conducted in vitro, including breast, bladder, cervical, colon, esophageal, gallbladder, lung, oral, ovarian and prostate cancers, as well as hepatocellular carcinoma, leukemia and melanoma. Below is a brief summary of the specific effects of casticin on each of the aforementioned malignancies. Casticin is a novel phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor, which is the predominant mechanism for its anticancer activity. Casticin can also upregulated in the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio through an increase in ROS generation in the mitochondria, as discussed in detail below [48]. The IC50 values, or half-maximal inhibitory concentrations, for available cell lines are also given. A visual representation of the specific molecular pathways targeted by the casticin is illustrated in Figure 2, while the various proteins affected by casticin are illustrated in Figure 3.   
## (s7) Casticin and Breast Cancer
(p7.0) Breast cancer is the most prevalent type of cancer in women and is a major cause of mortality worldwide due to its poor prognosis and diagnostic procedures [49][50][51][52]. Pretreatment of casticin on MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cells resulted in downregulation of MMP-9 mRNA protein expression but has no significant effect on MMP-2, suggesting that casticin can suppress both migration and invasion abilities in breast cancer cells. Although both proteins have similar properties, MMP-9 is directly involved in response to invasion, whereas MMP-2 is found only in malignant tumors, so it is not involved in initial invasive events. Within the AP-1 pathway, casticin suppressed c-Jun and c-Fos expression, leading to an increase in proliferative properties. Casticin also decreased the levels of phosphorylated Akt in the Akt signaling pathway. The reduction in MMP-9 protein levels reserved the invasion abilities of the breast cancer cell lines. The findings in this particular research paper suggest that casticin has properties to inhibit the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, preventing cell invasion and migration in various tumor cells, including breast cancer [48]. The Akt signaling pathway is crucial for regulating both tumorigenesis (the formation of a tumor) and the cell cycle. The pathway is activated by a large number of receptor tyrosine kinases-for example, epidermal cell growth factor receptor (EGFR) and insulin-like growth factors (IFGRs)-with protein kinase B (PKB) being the central node that can be stimulated [48,53,54]. Casticin significantly inhibits cell viability by suppressing Akt activation in a concentration-dependent manner and also inhibits selfrenewal and invasionary behaviors of cancer cells. Besides opioid receptors, casticin may also directly bind to several proteins, including estrogen receptors, threonine-protein kinase Pim-1 and reticuline oxidase, as revealed by docking studies [48,53]. As a result, casticin could be utilized as an antineoplastic drug for human breast cancers.
## (s9) Casticin and Breast Cancer
(p9.0) Breast cancer is the most prevalent type of cancer in women and is a major cause of mortality worldwide due to its poor prognosis and diagnostic procedures [49][50][51][52]. Pretreatment of casticin on MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cells resulted in downregulation of MMP-9 mRNA protein expression but has no significant effect on MMP-2, suggesting that casticin can suppress both migration and invasion abilities in breast cancer cells. Although both proteins have similar properties, MMP-9 is directly involved in response to invasion, whereas MMP-2 is found only in malignant tumors, so it is not involved in initial invasive events. Within the AP-1 pathway, casticin suppressed c-Jun and c-Fos expression, leading to an increase in proliferative properties. Casticin also decreased the levels of phosphorylated Akt in the Akt signaling pathway. The reduction in MMP-9 protein levels reserved the invasion abilities of the breast cancer cell lines. The findings in this particular research paper suggest that casticin has properties to inhibit the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, preventing cell invasion and migration in various tumor cells, including breast cancer [48]. The Akt signaling pathway is crucial for regulating both tumorigenesis (the formation of a tumor) and the cell cycle. The pathway is activated by a large number of receptor tyrosine kinases-for example, epidermal cell growth factor receptor (EGFR) and insulin-like growth factors (IFGRs)-with protein kinase B (PKB) being the central node that can be stimulated [48,53,54]. Casticin significantly inhibits cell viability by suppressing Akt activation in a concentration-dependent manner and also inhibits self-renewal and invasionary behaviors of cancer cells. Besides opioid receptors, casticin may also directly bind to several proteins, including estrogen receptors, threonine-protein kinase Pim-1 and reticuline oxidase, as revealed by docking studies [48,53]. As a result, casticin could be utilized as an antineoplastic drug for human breast cancers.
