# biomimetics Biomimetic Nanomembranes: An Overview

CorpusID: 219284372 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fdc711b2c07ea752f7c07b54aff26b080ef0f54](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fdc711b2c07ea752f7c07b54aff26b080ef0f54)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s37) Functionalization
(p37.0) Similarly to their biological counterparts, the role of synthetic nanomembranes would be more or less purely mechanical and protective if there were no additional functionalities. Most of the roles performed by biological nanomembranes are due to built-in protein structures that ensure additional functions. A very similar situation is encountered in synthetic structures. The difference is that structures enabling biological functionalities are much more sophisticated than the artificial ones, but for the price that they resort to a much smaller toolbox, in the sense of chemical composition and the available choice of materials, operating temperature and humidity ranges and available functionalities. With artificial structures the methods are much more crude and imperfect, but the number of possible ways to perform functionalization is much larger, and the material choice is wider, as is the pure range of functionalities. The latter include many options and paths not encountered in nature. One is free to avoid the limitations of protein chemistry and reach for a much larger toolbox to incorporate in a biomimetic way many novel non-biological properties, including plasmonic, magnetic, electric and optical ones. In 2010, the authors published a review of possible approaches to multifunctionalization of nanomembranes [117]. Here we give just a brief overview of the methods and approaches, concentrating to the more recent findings published in the meantime and to the methods that were skipped in [117].
## (s64) Application Field Application Type
(p64.0) Environmental Protection One might argue that the speed of contemporary active nanofluidic devices is much lower than that of their electronic counterparts. On the other hand, a counterclaim may be found in the fact that all our neural processes are based on nanofluidic ion transport. Hence, we are talking about a process that brought to this development the most sophisticated micro-and nanostructured biological machines that ever existed, namely our brains. This proves the point that there is much room for further biomimetic development. In 2020, Bocquet proposed [175] the development of ionic machines inspired by the functioning of our neuronal systems, including building synthetic neuromorphic biomimetic computer elements.
## (s73) Food and Beverages
(p73.0) Nanomembranes in the food industry find applications in removal or photocatalytic/enzymatic destruction of viruses, bacteria, aflatoxin, cyanotoxins and other toxins, pesticides, bisphenol and other undesired contaminants, also for filtering inorganic substances including heavy metals, etc. Among examples are bioconversion and removal by separation of lactose in milk and dairy products, obtaining cheese and other fermented products from milk, filtering beer from mother solution, etc. [201]. Other uses of biomimetic nanomembranes in the food and beverage industry include nanomembrane-based sensors for in situ monitoring of various critical ingredients that contribute to the overall quality, also the detection of the above mentioned dangerous, cancerogenic and even potentially lethal contaminants.
## (s86) Quantum Functionalities
(p86.0) Nanomembranes represent quasi-2D objects, which means that charge carrier transport in them will obey the rules of low-dimensional systems and thus will show marked quantum mechanical effects. This in itself is a large field of investigation, since each low-dimensional material will have its own set of properties and peculiarities, including effects rarely or never observed in nature. It may be said that the topic of combining biomimetic nanoobjects and quantum physics is in its very infancy, although the results to date are encouraging and have already brought us to a host of novel effects and even novel and improved electronic devices [48].
