# cells Methods for Separation and Characterization of Extracellular Vesicles: Results of a Worldwide Survey Performed by the ISEV Rigor and Standardization Subcommittee

CorpusID: 221360613 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e86577f9085f9add2acb903dda639c262f8a9de](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e86577f9085f9add2acb903dda639c262f8a9de)

Fields: Computer Science, Biology, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Studies of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in health and disease have increasingly confirmed the biological relevance of these membrane-delimited particles. The resulting groundswell of interest in the EV field has provoked an influx of new scientists, who bring fresh ideas to EV research. At the same time, the combination of rapid progress and incomplete penetrance of established experience has led to a certain amount of misunderstanding, miscommunication, and publication of less than rigorous results, in turn rousing continuous scientific debate and presenting opportunities for improved sharing. Since its founding in 2012, the International Society for Extracellular Vesicles (ISEV) has sought to seize these opportunities, expending extensive efforts to increase rigor and reproducibility. These initiatives have included the founding and evolution of a journal, the Journal of Extracellular Vesicles [1], and producing guidelines [2], position papers [3][4][5][6], dedicated courses during ISEV educational days, and massive open online courses (MOOCs) aimed at reaching general scientists interested in EV research. Both MOOC I [7] and MOOC II are freely available through Coursera (www.coursera.org/) and at the ISEV homepage (www.isev.org). Finally, ISEV announced the establishment of a Rigor and Standardization subcommittee at the annual ISEV meeting in Kyoto, Japan, in 2019 (ISEV2019).

(p0.1) An important part of the ISEV efforts for rigor and standardization is taking a regular "pulse" of the field, to understand which techniques are in use and where new developments might be needed. In 2016, Gardiner et al. published the results of a first worldwide survey on "Techniques used for the isolation and characterization of extracellular vesicles". Organized by ISEV, this survey elicited 196 responses from researchers in 30 countries [8]. In addition, Soekmadji et al. performed a worldwide survey with a focus on RNA techniques, which was published in 2018 [2]. These two surveys were aimed at understanding how methods are being used in the EV field and at improving the comparison of results. With the formation of the ISEV Rigor and Standardization Subcommittee in 2019, a new survey was distributed, not only as a pulse-checking exercise, but also to identify expertise and interest for topic-specific task forces. Here, we report the results of the general survey. The presented data reflect the current status of the field, reveal how the field has evolved, and identify the next steps towards overcoming apparent challenges that are encountered in EV research.
## (s1) The Survey
(p1.0) Survey questions were generated by the ISEV Rigor and Standardization Subcommittee and are shown in the Supplementary Information (Supplementary Table S1). For comparison, questions from the original survey can be found in the Supplementary Material of Gardiner et al. [8]. The new survey was not simply a recapitulation of the earlier survey, so some questions and options were removed while others were added. The questions about the EV source and EV preparation methods were nearly identical, though, with only a few new options in 2019. ISEV advertised this effort in several electronic messages to the ISEV mailing list, on ISEV social media channels (e.g., Facebook and Twitter), and at the ISEV2019 annual meeting. The survey was opened on 24 March 2019 and closed in mid-August, 2019. A total of 620 full or partial submissions were recorded. Of these, 320 (approximately 52%) were complete (i.e., all questions answered). However, since it was not obligatory to answer all questions, all non-duplicated submissions were accepted for all questions. Overall, engagement was almost twice the level achieved in the previous, 2015 survey [8]. The number of respondents to each question is reported in the corresponding figure legends, and this number was used to calculate the indicated percentages for each answer. Of the respondents 85% were members of ISEV, and 86% belonged to academia. More than half were principal investigators, reflecting a strong level of engagement with the current survey at the senior level. Respondents also included industry participants (5%), government employees, and heads of flow cytometry or other core facilities or good manufacturing practice (GMP) units. As indicated by IP addresses, 40 countries on five continents were represented. The number of respondents per country is indicated (Figure 1). Notably, compared with the 2015 survey [8], there was increased participation of Asia-Pacific countries such China, South Korea, and Australia, as well as European countries such as Italy and Portugal. 
## (s7) Quality Control of EV Preparations: Relationship with Biobanking
(p7.0) The use of biobanks to store or share EVs is common to only a minority of EV researchers. About 25% of respondents reported using samples from biobanks, while a similar percentage prepared samples for biobanks. Since biobanking usually requires strict quality control (QC), relationships with biobanks may mean that quality control information and other metadata are more likely to be available for biobanked samples. The survey data supports this supposition. Overall, 63% of responding researchers did not perform a quality analysis of their samples prior to separation, 55% did not perform quantification of recovery versus contaminants, and 79% did not normalize according to the dilution of the biofluid of origin ( Figure 4). However, of respondents who biobank (dark brown column, Figure 4), a majority (59%) quality controlled the EV source (odds ratio 3.2, 95% C.I. 2.055 < OR < 6.751), and 70% quantitated EV recovery (odds ratio 4.1, 95% C.I. 2.138 < OR < 8.198). Thus, researchers in contact with biobanks appear to give more attention to QC. . Differences in the application of different quality controls among researchers who prepare samples for biobanks (called "biobankers") and those who do not. The question referenced as "Prior QC" reads, "Do you perform any form of quality sample control prior to EV separations?" The question referenced as "Recovery" reads, "Do you quantify recovery, specific activity, and/or contaminants in your concentrated or separated EV preparation?" and the question referenced as "Normalize" reads, "Do you normalize EV yield for any possible biological dilution of the biofluid?". The percentage was calculated over 357, 341 and 326 respondents for each question, respectively.

(p7.1) The survey results also revealed practices for source material QC (prior to EV separation) and EV recovery. Regarding QC prior to EV separation from blood or fractions thereof, hemolysis and platelet counting are the most commonly controlled parameters as observed previously [6], along with other blood chemistry parameters (i.e., hemoglobin). For cell culture, cell viability is often reported, as is the presence of specific cell/EV surface markers. To quantitate recovery and purity, those who work with blood plasma commonly use lipoproteins, immunoglobulins, and albumin as controls, while urine researchers look at combinations of parameters of total protein, Tamm-Horsfall protein (uromodulin), particle numbers, and RNA. Finally, those who wish to control for biofluid dilution usually track internal reference proteins from the biological system of interest (such as creatinine in urine or albumin in blood) or control for particle numbers prior to and after separation, taking in account the dilution factor.
## (s8) EV Biomolecule Cargo Types of Interest
(p8.0) Most researchers specified two broad types of EV biomolecular cargo of interest, e.g., protein, DNA, RNA, lipids, etc.; see insert in Figure 5. Of the respondents 33% reported measuring or profiling three or more biomolecule categories. Among these, the most studied are proteins, followed by RNA ( Figure 5). Almost 20% of researchers also mentioned DNA as a molecule of interest. We should clarify that, under the category of "others", which allowed free entry of text, most respondents cited a particular protein or miRNA. A similar question from the 2015 survey focused on "downstream applications" rather than biomolecules of interest, so we do not compare answers in the graph. . Differences in the application of different quality controls among researchers who prepare samples for biobanks (called "biobankers") and those who do not. The question referenced as "Prior QC" reads, "Do you perform any form of quality sample control prior to EV separations?" The question referenced as "Recovery" reads, "Do you quantify recovery, specific activity, and/or contaminants in your concentrated or separated EV preparation?" and the question referenced as "Normalize" reads, "Do you normalize EV yield for any possible biological dilution of the biofluid?". The percentage was calculated over 357, 341 and 326 respondents for each question, respectively.

(p8.1) The survey results also revealed practices for source material QC (prior to EV separation) and EV recovery. Regarding QC prior to EV separation from blood or fractions thereof, hemolysis and platelet counting are the most commonly controlled parameters as observed previously [6], along with other blood chemistry parameters (i.e., hemoglobin). For cell culture, cell viability is often reported, as is the presence of specific cell/EV surface markers. To quantitate recovery and purity, those who work with blood plasma commonly use lipoproteins, immunoglobulins, and albumin as controls, while urine researchers look at combinations of parameters of total protein, Tamm-Horsfall protein (uromodulin), particle numbers, and RNA. Finally, those who wish to control for biofluid dilution usually track internal reference proteins from the biological system of interest (such as creatinine in urine or albumin in blood) or control for particle numbers prior to and after separation, taking in account the dilution factor.
## (s10) Increased Implementation and Diversity of Characterization Methods
(p10.0) To characterize EVs, most researchers reported using Western blotting, single particle tracking, protein concentration, and electron microscopy (not including cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM)) to characterize EVs ( Figure 6). The next most widespread method, with the potential to provide either population-level or single-particle biochemical and physical information, is flow cytometry, also in agreement with the previous survey [8]. In the current survey, researchers were also asked about methodologies that address EV composition, such as mass spectrometry. Various approaches were reported to assess physical characteristics of single EVs (e.g., atomic force microscopy), biochemical composition (such as Raman spectroscopy), or identification/quantification of surface markers (for example, by surface plasmon resonance imaging). Altogether, these results show that respondents now use around four to six EV characterization methods (histogram Figure 6), whereas 60% of the 2015 respondents mentioned three or fewer. Indeed, for all methods queried in both the 2015 and 2019 surveys, usage appears to have increased; protein concentration measurements are two-fold what was reported in 2015 [8]. 
## (s11) Increased Implementation and Diversity of Characterization Methods
(p11.0) To characterize EVs, most researchers reported using Western blotting, single particle tracking, protein concentration, and electron microscopy (not including cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM)) to characterize EVs ( Figure 6). The next most widespread method, with the potential to provide either population-level or single-particle biochemical and physical information, is flow cytometry, also in agreement with the previous survey [8]. In the current survey, researchers were also asked about methodologies that address EV composition, such as mass spectrometry. Various approaches were reported to assess physical characteristics of single EVs (e.g., atomic force microscopy), biochemical composition (such as Raman spectroscopy), or identification/quantification of surface markers (for example, by surface plasmon resonance imaging). Altogether, these results show that respondents now use around four to six EV characterization methods (histogram Figure 6), whereas 60% of the 2015 respondents mentioned three or fewer. Indeed, for all methods queried in both the 2015 and 2019 surveys, usage appears to have increased; protein concentration measurements are two-fold what was reported in 2015 [8]. 
## (s12) Normalization Methods for In Vitro and In Vivo Assays
(p12.0) Controlling input of EVs for functional studies, whether in vitro or in vivo, is crucial for interpretation of results, so we sought to gather information on normalization in the 2019 survey. Here, 34% of respondents reported performing in vitro assays of EV function, while 34% performed both in vitro and in vivo, and 3% performed only in vivo assays. Of the researchers, 27% did not perform any kind of functional assay (in comparison with the 2015 survey, reported in vivo assay use has increased by more than 25%, while in vitro assay usage has stayed at about the same level [8]). To control input into functional assays, most respondents reported using "EV number" and "protein quantification". Since normalization is assay-dependent, we also analyzed the data after stratifying for the different categories of functional assays (and none). As displayed in Figure 7, the most employed normalization methods are "EV number", "protein concentration", "number of cells", and "starting volume prior to EVs isolation". Internal housekeeping molecules or added spike-ins are also used, although less commonly than the above. 
## (s13) Normalization Methods for In Vitro and In Vivo Assays
(p13.0) Controlling input of EVs for functional studies, whether in vitro or in vivo, is crucial for interpretation of results, so we sought to gather information on normalization in the 2019 survey. Here, 34% of respondents reported performing in vitro assays of EV function, while 34% performed both in vitro and in vivo, and 3% performed only in vivo assays. Of the researchers, 27% did not perform any kind of functional assay (in comparison with the 2015 survey, reported in vivo assay use has increased by more than 25%, while in vitro assay usage has stayed at about the same level [8]). To control input into functional assays, most respondents reported using "EV number" and "protein quantification". Since normalization is assay-dependent, we also analyzed the data after stratifying for the different categories of functional assays (and none). As displayed in Figure 7, the most employed normalization methods are "EV number", "protein concentration", "number of cells", and "starting volume prior to EVs isolation". Internal housekeeping molecules or added spike-ins are also used, although less commonly than the above. Regarding the differences between groups, it is clear that researchers who do not perform functional assays rely more on EV number and protein concentration, while those who perform in vivo assays rely less on particle counts. According to these results, in vivo assays may be perceived as demanding greater standardization, since among scientists who perform in vivo assays, less than 1% chose the option "none" for functional assays. Regarding the differences between groups, it is clear that researchers who do not perform functional assays rely more on EV number and protein concentration, while those who perform in vivo assays rely less on particle counts. According to these results, in vivo assays may be perceived as demanding greater standardization, since among scientists who perform in vivo assays, less than 1% chose the option "none" for functional assays.
