# An Overview of Vitamins and Minerals in the Prevention of COVID-19 Infection COVID-19 Enfeksiyonunun Önlenmesinde Vitamin ve Minerallere Genel Bakış

CorpusID: 226714299 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2059a2625da4ce88b84645ff890b2718819f927f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2059a2625da4ce88b84645ff890b2718819f927f)

Fields: Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) In December 2019, many serious respiratory illness and death were reported in Wuhan, Hubei province, China. After that, the number of cases increased dramatically, and it spread all around the world due to transmit readily among humans. The World Health Organization (WHO) firstly named the disease as "2019-nCoV", or "Wuhan Coronavirus", but then, the disease was officially declared as "coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)". It was revealed that new coronavirus is phylogenetically close to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) by the genome analysis. Therefore, it was subsequently called as SARS-CoV-2 by the coronavirus Study Group of the International Committee on Virus Taxonomy (1,2).
## (s3) Micronutrients
(p3.0) Vitamins, minerals and phytochemicals that have beneficial effects, have been investigated for their potential benefits related to respiratory and inflammatory conditions (8). In this section, healthy micronutrients are examined in relation to the current COVID-19 outbreak.
## (s5) Zinc
(p5.0) Zinc is an essential trace mineral of the diet that is significant for maintenance and development of cells in immune systems (both the innate and adaptive), and also a critical cofactor for many enzymes including antioxidant defense, especially SOD and antiinflammatory proteins, and for zinc-finger transcription factors implicating in DNA and RNA synthesis (8,9,31,40). Zinc deficiency can affect immunity resulting in impaired stimulation, production and maturation of lymphocytes, disruption of the intercellular communication through cytokines, and attenuation of the innate host defense (31). Zinc supplementation in healthful individuals has been demonstrated to lower oxidative stress concerned byproducts, block TNF-α and IL1β induction, protect versus NFκβ (nuclear factorκβ) activation in mononuclear cells and regulate intracellular killing and cytokine generation via macrophages (41). It was suggested that insufficient zinc stores might be a risk factor for pneumonia in the elderly (42). Moreover, a study on children with pneumonia indicated that zinc supplementation improved the clinical status, the respiratory rate, and the oxygen saturation. In the zinc group, it was observed that IFNγ and IL-2 increase after treatment. Authors concluded that zinc supplementation ameliorated some clinical symptoms in children with pneumonia in fewer hours and triggered a cellular immune response (43). Zinc has been demonstrated to be significant for maintenance of skin and integrity of mucosal membrane, and also has antiviral effects such as on rhinovirus replication in vitro. An increased risk of viral infections has been associated with a low zinc status (40). Inhibition of corona-and arterivirus replication by increased Zn2 + levels has been reported in cell culture (44). Furthermore, zinc has antiviral properties versus several viral species such as HIV or HCV, and its deficiency leads to increased risk of acquiring infections.

(p5.1) Despite limited number of mechanistic studies, zinc seems to block virus attachment, infection, uncoating, and also viral protease and polymerase enzymatic processes. Nevertheless, these mechanisms have not been wellelucidated in clinical studies on zinc supplementation against viral infections (45). To date, there are no studies evaluating zinc for COVID-19 management, despite a few trials testing zinc as a part of diet to treat COVID-19 (46).
