# Deep Learning in Computer-Aided Diagnosis and Treatment of Tumors: A Survey

CorpusID: 226227182 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed0c052a5e9d24042ed5d420d296d50c84394ff1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed0c052a5e9d24042ed5d420d296d50c84394ff1)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s4) DeepMedic
(p4.0) DeepMedic is an efficient 11-layers deep, multi-scale, 3D CNN architecture, which is an improved model specific to brain MRI images from BRATS 2015 and ISLES 2015 [29]. Figure 2 is the structure of DeepMedic. The baseline of DeepMedic is a CNN, followed by Conditional Random Fields (CRF).

(p4.1) It proposes a solution with parallel convolutional pathways for multi-scale processing, which efficiently incorporate both local and contextual information and improves the segmentation results. At last, the author uses CRF to achieve space regularization.
## (s6) FCN
(p6.0) As an improved method, Fully Convolutional Network (FCN [7]) exchanged the fully connected layer into a deconvolution layer. The structure of the FCN is shown in Figure 3, which is an encoder-decoder model. The form of FCN provides a foundation for the future development of semantic segmentation. In this way, FCN allows end-to-end pixel-level classification, the original size of the feature map in up-sampling, and several roughnesses of the up-sampling. Above all, FCN can accept input images of any size and do well in medical image segmentation at medical tasks.
## (s7) U-Net
(p7.0) As the extension of FCN, U-Net is arguably the advanced deep learning model that improved based on medical data. U-Net inherits all advantages form FCN but improves the number of deconvolution layer and skip connection layer [8]. Also, it has a symmetrical U-shape shown in Figure 4. The left side of U-Net is a contractive path, which extracts features by convolution and max pooling. Also, the right side is an expansive path, which combines the feature map from the left side using concat and sampling the feature map.
## (s15) MRI diagnosis in ID
(p15.0) MRI has good discrimination of soft tissue and no ionizing radiation damage to the human body, so it is good at imaging tumors in the brain, bladder, rectum, reproductive system, and other parts.

(p15.1) In segmentation, we have to introduce the work written by Drozdzal et al. [66], which combines Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) with Fully Convolutional Residual Networks (FC-ResNets [93]) to segment medical images, such as electron microscopy (EM) image, CT of the liver, and MRI of the prostate. The results reveal that this model is working well in both 2D and 3D medical images, which means that it could achieve accurate segmentations on a variety of image modalities and different anatomical regions. Details are shown in Figure 10, which uses the FCN to obtain pre-normalized images, and then iteratively refined employing the FC-ResNet to generate a segmentation prediction.
## (s16) CT diagnosis in ID
(p16.0) CT is of high diagnostic value for tumors of the central nervous system, head and neck, chest and abdomen, and pelvic cavity. It is widely used in the diagnosis and treatment of computer-assisted tumors.

(p16.1) In segmentation, Guo et al. [70] employs U-Net which refined by Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) and morphological operations to segment 3D pancreas tumor. To finish the morphological operations, the authors adopt a model named LO-GISMOS, which is a graph-based framework that translates geometric constraints of interacting surfaces and objects into graph arcs and the likelihood of segmentation surface positioning into graph node/arc costs. The details are shown in Figure 12, which combines U-Net (to integrate intra-slice and adjacent-slice contexts) and LOGISMOS (to regulate the 3D shape) for 3D tumor segmentation.
## (s24) Mammography diagnosis in ID
(p24.0) Now, mammography only uses for breast screening. Thus most of the researchers focus on the detection and classification of early cancer. As Figure 16 shown, Ribli et al. [81] adopt Faster R-CNN by optimized both the object detection and classifier part to detect and classify malignant or benign lesions on mammogram without any human intervention. Also, the mammogram images come from the public INbreast database. This research could realize computer-aided detection in mammographic screening.
## (s25) Ultrasound (US) diagnosis in ID
(p25.0) Ultrasound (US) is the most widely used tumor screening method, thanks to its non-radioactive, multi-directional crosssectional imaging, real-time dynamic, easy to operate, fast, and other characteristics. However, ultrasound needs the assistance of deep learning because of its disadvantages of lack of specificity, focus on local areas, and is easily influenced by doctors' experience.

(p25.1) For instance, Li et al. [77] employs Faster R-CNN to add a spatial constrained layer before the output layer of CNN, as the pipeline is shown in Figure 17, which concatenated and normalized the conv3 and conv5 layer and then add a spatial constrained layer before the output layer. This work is more suitable for thyroid papillary carcinoma detection in ultrasound images, and the property of classification is better than SVM. This work could improve the ability of screening cancer in thyroid papillary carcinoma images fast.

(p25.2) As a summary, Image Diagnosis runs through the whole process of tumor diagnosis and treatment. Its data is easy to obtain and the data is huge. It is an essential part of the current research on computer-assisted tumor diagnosis and treatment thanks to the rapid development of computer vision. As can be seen from this section, the research on individual organs (especially large organs or organs that are easy to inspect) has reached a saturation point, and the future trend is nothing more than improvement in accuracy and speed. However, targeted studies are still needed for small organ tumors, such as pancreas and ovary. These small organ tumors are high malignancy and a short course of the disease (which means the data is scarcity). Besides, there is still little research on multi-modal data (although such multi-modal databases like TCIA has existed).
