# Radiological aspects in patients diagnosed with saRs-coV-2 infection -a liteRatuRe ReView

CorpusID: 225772279 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5cdffc47d128ad3c95a45d77a65d9c300adc0bfc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5cdffc47d128ad3c95a45d77a65d9c300adc0bfc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) IMAGING OF LUNG INJUrIEs IN cOVID-19
(p1.0) Knowing the substrate of both attachment and intracellular penetration of SARS-CoV-2 virus, namely the ACE2 receptor (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2), which is richly represented on the surface of pneumocytes, it can be stated that the main clinical expression of COVID-19 is pneumonia. As a result, imaging characterization of lung lesions is of interest in assessing the impact of the disease at this level, which is not always correlated with symptoms' severity. Moreover, follow-up of the radiological aspect (either with chest radiography or computed tomography) may have a prognostic role. Last but not least, the diagnostic role of CT is debated, as it can sometimes reveal specific tissue damage prior to confirmation of infection through the classical method -detection of viral RNA by RT-PCR.

(p1.1) The first relevant studies on these topics were published in Asia, especially in China, the country that reported the first human cases of this new coronaviral infection. In the following, we will review some of these articles, in order to describe the lung lesions' pattern and its evolution, as well as perform a comparative analysis of images obtained by radiography and chest computed tomography, respectively.

(p1.2) In contrast to CT scan, fewer data concerning classical radiology have been published, given the lower sensitivity of early detection of lung damage due to COVID-19 using the latter, but also because higher resolution imaging has become widely accessible, making detailed and discriminatory lesion description possible within short time. In a study published in late February in South Korea on a group of 9 patients with molecular confirmed disease, all underwent a chest X-ray at the time of hospitalization, but pathological changes were identified in only three cases (33%). In contrast, CT initially revealed changes in 8 of the 9 cases (approximately 89%), also demonstrating lesions in the ninth patient at follow-up, one week later (1). Another study conducted in China on a group of 21 symptomatic patients (with one exception) diagnosed with COVID-19 reported a higher success rate in the initial detection of lesions by using chest radiography (3 out of 5 cases tested -60%), but this may be due to the small subset of patients who underwent this type of investigation. In comparison, CT-suggestive images were obtained in 19 of the 21 subjects (90%), including the two patients with non-informative radiographs (2). Although these results are inferred from small groups' analysis, it is well known that CT scan carries a higher resolution and sensitivity, which also seems to be the case for SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia's early imaging documentation, according to the papers cited above.

(p1.3) Regarding the type of impairments identified by standard radiology, there are several parameters against which they are described: which lung is involved (left/right/bilateral involvement), cephalocaudal distribution (apical/middle/basal region), midlateral distribution (central/peripheral/both), the shape of the lesions (unique, poorly delimited -"flu"/nodular) and their density ("ground-glass"/alveolar consolidation).

(p1.4) The first study shows that two of the three patients had bilateral involvement, exhibiting irregular multilocular opacities, while the third one developed a single nodular lesion within the left lower lung field. In total, 10 distinct pathological images were revealed by chest radiography, being mostly represented by consolidation areas (70%), located mainly in the lower lung fields (50%), peripherally (80%). Moreover, the three subjects were assessed by daily lung radiography and initial progression to confluent lesions over a 3-4 days period was documented for two of them, followed by improvement over the next days. In the case of the third patient, no significant changes were reported during the 8 days of collecting data (1). Similarly, the second study cited shows that bilateral damage was found in the same proportion (two out of three individuals), in the form of lobar consolidation, mainly located within lungs' bases, but without a predilection for peripheral regions, although the CTs of these same patients subsequently proved a predominantly eccentric disposition (2).

(p1.5) CT imaging often reveals details that cannot be observed with classical radiology and describes the pathological processes more accurately, which is also the case for COVID-19 pneumonia. Unlike the only 10 individual images spotted by radiography, 77 lesions were detected by computed tomography within the South Korean study's group. With respect to their total number, the majority (40, respectively 52%) were unique but had the tendency to confluence, whilst the others were of nodular shape. Within the first category, the most common aspect found was a mixture of "ground-glass" opacities and alveolar consolidation (50%), followed by "ground-glass" as single pattern (35%). The localization was preferentially peripheral (75%), more precisely subpleural, posterior (70%) and basal (60%). The nodules were mainly of "ground-glass" appearance (57%) or partially solid (43%), with peripheral (81%) and posterior (65%) distribution, respectively. Also, most of them were depicted along the bronchovascular bundle (59%). Referring to patients, 8 of them suffered bilateral involvement, while the most frequently affected lobe was the right lower one (in 8 patients), followed by the left upper and the left lower ones, in that order (1).

(p1.6) Although a description of the entire group of pulmonary pathological changes is useful in understanding the pattern of COVID-19 pneumonia, it does not fully satisfy the need to visualize the individual as a whole, who may associate various lesional types as previously presented. In this light, the work of Ng et al. also exposes the particular lesion characteristics of the patients submitted to the study group: of the total of 21, two had normal examinations; 11 of those affected showed predominantly "ground-glass" opacities (>50% of the abnormal images found in the same patient), 4 of them mainly developed alveolar consolidation (>50% of the abnormal images found in the same patient), whilst the last 4 expressed an equal ratio between the two types of pulmonary opacities. 95% of the subjects experienced exclusively peripheral involvement. Regarding the vertical axis, the distribution was as follows: 8 patients had lower lobes involvement prevalence, another 8 experienced equal involvement between the upper and lower lung halves, respectively, while in the case of the last 3 patients, lesions of the upper lobes were mainly noticed (2). Beyond the actual description of the radiological picture exhibited by the new coronaviral pneumonia, the inclusion of CT acquisitions in the corroboration between clinical and paraclinical information contributes to assessing disease severity and allows for monitoring the evolution under treatment, as well as even establishing a prognostic link between the dynamics of lung lesions and the outcome of patients.

(p1.7) In this light, the work of Shi et al. (3) makes important clarifications. The study group comprises 81 patients with confirmed infection, having a mean age of 49.5 years, most of whom are male (52%). It is divided into 4 subgroups depending on the time of the first CT scan performed: in group I individuals whom had been tested prior to the onset of symptoms were included, group II consisted of those tested one week after onset at most, group III included patients tested beyond the first week of illness, but no later than two weeks after onset, whereas the last group enrolled those who had benefited from the investigation between the second and third week of illness. To start with, the study enhances the detection of frequent subclinical condition (15 patients included in the first group, all of them experiencing lesions), a topic discussed here below. Further on, although the lesion characteristics are not entirely comparable (coming from different individuals), the authors consider that this particular division is representative for a model of lung damage evolution during COVID-19 pneumonia. Thus, even if its generic pattern showed mostly bilateral (79% of patients) and peripheral (54%) disposition of opacities which were predominantly of "ground-glass" appearance (65%), poorly delimited (81%) and especially involved the right lower lobe, a picture largely similar to the one described in the studies mentioned above, these aspects differ along the clinical course of the disease. If within the subgroup of asymptomatic subjects the lesions were predominantly unilateral (60%) and multifocal (53%), represented mainly by "ground-glass" opacities (93%), they subsequently became more diffuse, frequently bilateral, being gradually replaced by pulmonary consolidation and mixed aspects. In addition, interstitial fibrosis was observed towards the end of illness, as well as pleural thickening or pleural effusion, the latter being cited in the work of Lin et al., as well (4).

(p1.8) The authors also performed a proper imaging follow-up, as 57 patients underwent serial CT investigations and the results were grouped into 4 possible ways of evolution: 1 -initial progression, followed by improvement (46% of them, of whom 92% were eventually discharged), 2 -deterioration (32%, with two patients later succumbing to the disease -11% of those belonging to this category), 3 -improvement (14% of patients, most of whom have been discharged), respectively 4 -steady state (9%, all remaining hospitalized at the end of data collection). As a result, the authors concluded that, in addition to other variables considered in the study (old age, male gender, associated comorbidities), worsening radiological picture could be a risk factor for poor prognosis in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia. However, the data should be interpreted with caution, taking into account that 9 of the 81 patients (11%) suffered from a pre-existing chronic lung pathology, which could have influenced the lesional characteristics observed in this paper and led to bias of results (3).
