# Silent Speech Interfaces for Speech Restoration: A Review

CorpusID: 221507674 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02b75480b6bb368346648e65bd9c722340c37571](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02b75480b6bb368346648e65bd9c722340c37571)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s2) A. Aphasia
(p2.0) Aphasia is a disorder that affects the comprehension and formulation of language and is caused by damage to the areas of the brain involved in language [49]. People with aphasia have difficulties with understanding, speaking, reading or writing, but their intelligence is normally unaffected. For instance, aphasic patients struggle in retrieving the words they want to say, a condition known as anomia. The opposite mental process, i.e., the transformation of messages heard or read into an internal message, is also affected in aphasia. Aphasia affects not only spoken but also written communication (reading/writing) and visual language (e.g., sign languages) [49].
## (s11) C. Articulator motion capture
(p11.0) Production of the acoustic speech signal requires the movement of different speech articulators. Therefore, monitor-ing the movement of these articulators is a straightforward approach enabling us to capture meaningful biosignals for speech characterisation. In this subsection, we describe different techniques for capturing articulatory movement, using kinematic sensors attached to the vocal tract or by means of imaging techniques to visualise these changes. As most of these techniques do not capture glottal activity, they are best suited to restore communication capabilities for persons with voice disorders, such as laryngectomised patients.

(p11.1) 1) Magnetic articulography: The techniques described in this section employ magnetic tracers attached to the articulators and sense their movement by measuring the changes in the magnetic field generated (or sensed) by these magnets. There are two variants of this technique, EMA and PMA, which differ according to where the generation and sensing of the magnetic field take place. A comparative study of these variants can be found in [238].
