# minerals Applications of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in Mining from Exploration to Reclamation: A Review

CorpusID: 225462413 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c65a9f2b4d413d8c02763720aa4b2f637a1666aa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c65a9f2b4d413d8c02763720aa4b2f637a1666aa)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) In recent years, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have been used for various purposes, such as safety inspection, construction site management, monitoring of infrastructure system elements, crop monitoring, invasive weed mapping, water status estimation, land-use classification, emergency response, humanitarian aid and disaster relief, conservation, disease control, healthcare, weather forecasting, telecommunications, advertising, and foodservice . The utilization of UAVs and related research is expanding across industries owing to the significant cost reduction in vehicles and sensors and significant advances in data processing software [18].
## (s12) Monitoring of Soil and Water Pollution
(p12.0) The existing literature related to soil and water pollution monitoring reveals that UAVs are used to mainly acquire hyperspectral images and investigate the concentration of hazardous minerals. In addition, it was observed that UAVs are being used for data acquisition via sensors installed on them as well as for tasks, such as water sampling.

(p12.1) Martin et al. [92] used a UAV to map gamma radiation from uranium veins located in Cornwall, England. Sourt Terras, one of the mines containing the vein, was a major source of uranium and radium ores between 1870 and 1930. Currently, these regions are characterized by localized radioactivity. Furthermore, the documentation of the region is outdated, hindering the application of traditional survey methods. Therefore, incident radiation was recorded by attaching a lightweight gamma-ray spectrometer to the UAV. The data was stored on the device and transmitted in real time to the user of the remote base station. Thereby, they were able to generate high-resolution radiation maps at significantly faster collection rates over large areas using UAV-based systems. In addition, it was shown that the attenuation effect of incident gamma rays by a person carrying a detector, which is observed in conventional ground-based surveys, can be eliminated.
