# materials A Review of Functional Separators for Lithium Metal Battery Applications

CorpusID: 224828398 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/62259414541eea6f0a73423b8a9f86f8e9c7cfd5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/62259414541eea6f0a73423b8a9f86f8e9c7cfd5)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering, Materials Science

## (s40) Strategies for Stabilization of Li-Metal
(p40.0) Some methods to stabilize the Li-metal anode exist: (1) changing direction of Li dendritic growth by placing Li crystal seeds on the separator and (2) coating materials that react with Li-ions on the separator.

(p40.1) To address Li-dendrite formation, Liu group conducted a study on inhibiting dendritic growth by attaching polyacrylamide (PAM)-grafted GO to a commercial PP membrane (GO-g-PAM@PP) [91]. The GO-g-PAM@PP separator had high porosity that increased electrolyte uptake and provided Li-ion channels. Moreover, PAM has a strong lithiophilic property. Therefore, these properties guarantee rapid ionic conduction and low electrode/electrolyte interface resistance, resulting in stable cyclic performance. However, without the addition of GO, the PAM@PP film was brittle, breaking even at a small impact. By adding GO to PAM, the durability increased; it was no longer brittle even bent or folded conditions. As a result, a Li-metal electrode completed a 2600 h cycles at 2 mA cm −2 for a Li|Li symmetric cell, and a current density with high CE values (98%) for a Li|Cu cell was achieved.
## (s42) Separators for LSBs
(p42.0) As described earlier, currently used polyolefin-based separators cannot prevent LiPS crossover during the LSB cycles. Therefore, several studies on blocking LiPS in a separator are being conducted [126]. Establishing a multi-functional separator that increases the conductivity of the Li-ions and effectively blocks LiPS is necessary. Electrostatic repulsion and chemical trapping of LiPS are actively investigated approaches to achieve this aim. In this section, we introduce studies on suppressing the shuttle effect chemically and physically using various materials.
