# DEMYSTIFYING COVID-19 DIGITAL CONTACT TRACING: A SURVEY ON FRAMEWORKS AND MOBILE APPS

CorpusID: 220714281 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aa57e69c51803b2be67a51dd5bd9a15e1245239b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aa57e69c51803b2be67a51dd5bd9a15e1245239b)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s21) DP-3T
(p21.0) In regards to security, the DP-3T framework describes three main aspects: fake contact events exploited by a potential attacker to trick the user; suppressing at-risk contacts, in which people are blocked from knowing they are at risk; and prevent contact discovery, in which the system functionality is obstructed due to, say, jamming of Bluetooth radio. As discussed by the DP-3T consortium [6], to cope with fake contact events, the low-cost design prevents relay attacks in which an EphID is relayed with a delay of more than one day, because the seeds of infected users are bound to the day on which they are valid. In the case of the unlinkable design, this aspect is further mitigated, because EphIDs are linked to a certain epoch, so that the attacker should rebroadcast the EphIDs in the same epoch. To avoid a user claiming another user's EphID as their own, the use of a hash function and a pseudo-random function to derive EphIDs from a seed makes infeasible to learn another user's seed from observing their broadcasts.

(p21.1) With respect to privacy concerns, the DP-3T specification considers several aspects. First, the social graph represents the social relationships between users in the system. The DP-3T approach does not reveal such a graph to any party, except for the two users involved in a contact. Second, the interaction graph reflects close-range physical interactions between users. In this case, it is not possible to infer about people in contact from the EphIDs being shared. Third, location traceability should be also avoided. In DP-3T, the EphIDs are unlinkable, and only the user's smartphone knows the seed to generate them. In case a user is infected and gives permission, the seed of the first contagious day is uploaded to the backend. Taking into account this seed, the user's EphIDs are linkable from the start of the contagious day until the seed is uploaded, when the phone will generate a new seed. In the case of the unlinkable design, EphIDs remain unlinkable, as long as the server is considered honest. Fourth, at-risk individuals make reference to people who recently contacted with infected individuals, and only they should know about this circumstance. The system does provide this feature since the seeds of an infected person do not reveal anything about their contacts. Fifth, COVID-19 positive status means that the system should ensure that only infected people and the corresponding health authority know about this circumstance. In the case of the unlinkable design, this issue is mitigated because of the unlinkability properties of the EphIDs of infected people.

(p21.2) PEPP-PT According to its designers, malicious backend admins are not considered as adversaries because the cost to succeed in the attack outweighs the benefits. Also, state-level adversaries are considered out of scope of the threat model of the system; a potential mitigation is that users can change their pseudonym at any time by re-installing the app and, thus, evade a continuous tracking by a state-level adversary.

(p21.3) Regarding Sybil attacks, i.e., registration of multiple accounts by the same user, PoW and Captcha are used. The authentication of the EBIDs is addressed by using authenticated channels between the app and the backend. By using a TAN provided by a healthcare professional it is ensured that only officially diagnosed users can upload EBID lists to the backend server. The backend server is the only one having in possession -ideally stored in a hardware security module -the secret key to produce EBIDs from the persistent ID (PUID) of the user. Thus, EBIDs are linkable to a PUID by the backend server only. In scenario A3, the possibility of turning a short encounter with a user (that would not be relevant for a Covid-19 infection) into a longer encounter that might be deemed as relevant by the risk scoring algorithm is described. A potential solution could be to use signed EBIDs, but this would create key management issues considering the large scale of proximity tracing apps.

(p21.4) Regarding the privacy properties of the system, the temporary IDs exchanged through BLE are pseudorandom and changed regularly, making it difficult for an attacker to associate multiple temporary IDs to the same device and consequently identify its user. Also, these IDs remain stored in the collecting devices and sent to the server only if the user is positive to COVID-19. The network traffic of all users when requesting updates of their risk score is indifferent, so that an eavesdropper cannot distinguish at-risk from not-at-risk users. Periodically, older data are erased, reducing the probability of data misuse. The location privacy of users is protected by not collecting location data. An adversary can determine that a user is positive to COVID-19 by observing network traffic, namely the user uploads a higher volume of data than usual; a mitigation measure is to use mix networks like Tor.
