# Roads to objectivity: Quantum Darwinism, Spectrum Broadcast Structures, and Strong quantum Darwinism -a review

CorpusID: 220403353 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66f74c4cb15e2e0807d7f294c01ac7fd1ba8f703](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66f74c4cb15e2e0807d7f294c01ac7fd1ba8f703)

Fields: Computer Science, Physics, Philosophy

## (s3) IV. THE ROLE OF CONDITIONAL QUANTUM MUTUAL INFORMATION IN QUANTUM DARWINISM
(p3.0) So far I have analyzed quantum mutual information and the notion of disturbance without any reference to condition (1). But the right hand side of (1) puts strong mathematical constraints on I and it can still happen that despite the above objections, these constraints somehow force the discord to vanish. This is to some extent so. It will be helpful to first look at (1) from the classical information theory point of view, substituting density matrices with random variables X, Y, and entropic functions H and I with their classical counterparts H and I. Let us consider three random variables X, Y, Y with the corresponding joint probability distribution p(x, y, y ). Then the "redundancy" part of (1), demanding that including more degrees of freedom brings no new information about the system, can be in the simplest form written as:
## (s4) V. SPECTRUM BROADCAST STRUCTURES (SBS)
(p4.0) In [4,5] another approach to the objectivity problem was taken. Instead of using somewhat classically motivated conditions for redundant information proliferation, the authors formalized Def. 1 and surprisingly were able to derive a unique state structure compatible with it. I will repat the process below, generalizing it compared to the original derivation [5] Let us look at the phrase 'finding out of the state of S by many independent observers' of Def. 1. First of all, the 'state of the system' is understood as one of the eigenstates |i of the reduced density matrix of the system:

(p4.1) Thus what we are trying to make objective is |i , or more precisely its index i, since when talking about objectivity of a certain property, i.e. position or momentum, we should first of all know which property we are talking about. Then 'finding out [...] by many independent observers' is formalized as observers performing uncorrelated von Neumann measurements, {Π k i k }, on their respective subsystems E k . Note that the number of observers need not be specified at all and is in a sense a 'free parameter'. Common sense says that at least two as for one observer everything is objective by definition. A notation remark: The subscript k enumerates here the environment subsystems so that Π k i k is a projector acting in the space of E k and corresponding to the result i k . Von Neumann measurements are chosen over generalized ones as the most informative (due to their orthogonality property).
