# A global comparison of implementation and effectiveness of materiovigilance program: overview of regulations

CorpusID: 237495336 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d8acb409281d45d724f8f79d76599a61d0e06ddf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d8acb409281d45d724f8f79d76599a61d0e06ddf)

Fields: Medicine

## (s22) Reporting of medical devices
(p22.0) In Japan, as soon as an adverse event occurs, it is captured by the MAH. Then, within 15 days, the MAH reports AE15, i.e., an ADR that caused death or any serious health damage to the patient which is not listed elsewhere. Any foreign death event or serious case that is already listed is denoted as AE30, and it is reported within 30 days by the MAH (Handa et al. 2015).
## (s30) Challenges in regulating medical devices
(p30.0) Mutual control is the foundation of the relationship between policy and creativity. Effective regulations clearly control the mechanism of innovation in a given area. Technical developments and improvements, on the other hand, have significant effects on regulation. This relationship must be seen as an effective tool in reforming the existing regulations. The adjustment of laws thoroughly affects the changes in the technological, social, and economic circumstances affecting it.

(p30.1) When it comes to medical devices and the regulatory changes that are now being debated, the focus should be on ensuring improved patient safety. In the context of determining compliance, this also reflects increased economic pressure on medical equipment manufacturers. The question now is whether such reforms will put a significant strain on small and midsize enterprises (which are indeed the primary innovators in the areas of pharmaceutical devices), to the point where development will be limited, or whether they will end up serving as a strong catalyst for more innovation, as several other examples of well-enforced legislation have done. Transparent innovation is a popular trend in a variety of industries, including the medical device industry. Open innovations have become the dominant model for connecting developing technologies and markets. In the field of medical equipment, the value of open innovations is proved, for example, by the fact that patients will provide impulses for long-term progress (Gupta 2015).
