# TEXTRONIC SOLUTIONS USED FOR PREMATURE BABIES: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 235725082 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f1163996865816c789ebf4bf602721de4ef5002](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f1163996865816c789ebf4bf602721de4ef5002)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Literature analysis
(p1.0) The activity of the sensors used for monitoring life parameters is based on general rules of detection and processing of the collected data. Changes in life parameters may indicate potential changes in the organs, which is why, they should be monitored and, at the right moment, preventive measures should be implemented [9].

(p1.1) Assessment of the stability of cardiovascular and respiratory systems in premature babies is part of the basic care process in the ICU. During the entire period of stay in the hospital, the frequencies of the infant's life activities, such as HR, respiratory rate, and breathing frequency, are constantly monitored. Blood pressure is observed within the first days after birth and in case of severe illness. Another important parameter that is monitored is the temperature; however, its measures may be distorted by external heat sources [13].
## (s2) Temperature sensors
(p2.0) Newborn's body temperature is one of the most important parameters that require constant monitoring. Temperature acts as a signal of an infection and the general stability of the infant. The temperature is generally measured at one point on the body. Moreover, this parameter is used for establishing the Pulse and heart rate [9] Optical Pressure Force-sensitive resistor system of all crucial newborn parameters: ECG, respiration rate, and peripheral oxygen saturation level (SpO 2 ).

(p2.1) The applied sensor must be calibrated first, and the next step is to connect the belt to a digital oscilloscope, so that data collection and temperature measurements would be displayed. Figure 1 illustrates the scheme of the setup used as a temperature monitoring system.

(p2.2) In order to establish the resistance, measurements were taken at various temperatures (25°C-43°C). The sensor was tested in connection with both traditional and textile cords. On the basis of five measurements for each cord, an equation was introduced, and the temperature was measured based on the sensor's resistance value. It was observed that the higher the temperature, the lower is the sensor resistance, and that the textile cord's resistance is slightly above that of traditional ones.

(p2.3) The material used has an impact on the comfort, for which the infant's body temperature is measured. Apart from comfort, the material should be safe and breathable. Various materials were considered for prototype application. Attention was paid to textile features and ecological aspects. The material selected for the prototype belt was bamboo fabric, which is characterized by antibacterial properties that no other material has (e.g., linen, wool). Bamboo fabric is soft and provides appropriate air flow, which makes it comfortable to wear.
