# Organoids as host models for infection biology -a review of methods

CorpusID: 239025417 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9027ac32be7bfa611f75f8cd333f732f13a4b1f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9027ac32be7bfa611f75f8cd333f732f13a4b1f)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s1) Why we need new models
(p1.0) As the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has illustrated all too clearly, infections are still a major threat worldwide. Laboratory model systems are key to reaching a mechanistic understanding of disease development. In the study of host-pathogen interactions, such model systems must rise to the challenge of modeling not only a single organism, i.e., the host, but also its interplay with microorganisms. Infecting microorganisms often initiate a host response, such as inflammation, and may even manipulate the host response to benefit their own survival, e.g., by repressing the inflammatory response. Evolution has thus yielded highly specialized and adapted pathogens that engage with the host to create their very specific local environment or niche. Scientists have used many different model systems, each with their specific advantages and each leading to important and valuable results (Fig. 1).

(p1.1) Given that epithelial cells are generally the first point of contact with a pathogen and first to respond to it, epithelial cell lines are one of the most commonly used cell models. Since the establishment of HeLa cells in the 1950s, a vast number of cell lines have been developed and have become workhorses in biomedical research, including epithelial, immune, endothelial, neural, and mesenchymal cell lines. They are cheap, easy to expand, and easy to handle, allowing convenient implementation and enabling the high-throughput screening of drugs and virulence factors, among others. However, they are frequently cancerous, transformed or genetically immortalized, and often fail to mimic important epithelial functions, such as polarization, barrier formation, and cell differentiation. They are usually grown as 2D flat monolayers that contain only one cell type and lack the 3D structural characteristics of tissue, as well as the interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM) and other cell types, such as immune cells, endothelial cells, or neurons. Even when grown in 3D structures, only one cell type from the epithelium is present, providing a reductionist model that is most suited to facilitating the understanding of a given specific cellular mechanism.

(p1.2) Primary cell cultures and explants can overcome some of these drawbacks. They are isolated directly from the specific tissue and are therefore not transformed and can recapitulate tissue functions in vitro. However, their low expansion potential and dependence on significant amounts of fresh tissue prevent their wide use in the study of human cells.

(p1.3) Animal models allow the study of infectious diseases with higher complexity, considering the interconnections among different organs and tissues involved, such as the epithelium and immune cells. A wide selection of animal models has been adapted for studying host-pathogen interactions, ranging from low-complexity models, such as the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, to models with high complexity and similarity to humans, such as nonhuman primate models 1 . For a number of practical reasons, including the availability of genetic tools, mice are the most widely used model of experimental infection. However, the limitations of murine models are particularly evident in drug development, where more than 80% of therapeutic treatments that are effective and safe in animal models fail to succeed in human trials 2 . Furthermore, some pathogens have a narrow tropism for humans, which limits the use of mice and other animal models, although the development of humanized mouse models may help to overcome some of these limitations 3 . For example, the newly described SARS-CoV-2 virus does not cause disease in wild-type mice but does so in mice engineered to express the human receptor ACE2 4 .
