# catalysts Clostridium thermocellum as a Promising Source of Genetic Material for Designer Cellulosomes: An Overview Clostridium thermocellum as a Promising Source of Genetic Material for Designer Cellulosomes

CorpusID: 238690924 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b9c37e571d123df87a112bfb3ead5c97a2e84fd2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b9c37e571d123df87a112bfb3ead5c97a2e84fd2)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science, Biology, Chemistry, Materials Science

## (s13) Impacts of Catalytic Enzyme Positions on Enzymatic Activity of Designer Cellulosomes
(p13.0) The position of catalytic subunits in the Scaf structure may govern the catalytic activity of DCs. In a study by Stern and coworkers [31], three recombinant T. fusca enzymes such as the processive EG Cel9A, EG Cel5A, and exoglucanase Cel48A were recombinantly generated and converted into the cellulosomal mode for DC constructions. Besides, ten chimeric Scaf(s), namely Scaf4, Scaf5, Scaf6, Scaf9, Scaf18, Scaf19, Scaf20, Scaf21, Scaf22, and Scaf23, with different designated orders of enzymes and CBMs were also produced. The enzymatic assay was carried out in 50 mM acetate buffer (pH 5.0), 12 mM CaCl2, 2 mM EDTA, 10% (w/v) Avicel, incubated at 50 °C for 24-72 h with shaking. The two optimal trivalent Scaf configurations Scaf20 (i.e., ScafABT:a-Cel9A/b-Cel48A/Cel5At) with the T. fusca processive EG Cel9A and the C. thermocellum carbohydrate-binding module (CBM3a) located at the left side of Scaf20 structure, and Scaf9 (i.e., ScafTBA:Cel5A-t/b-Cel48A/a-Cel9A) with the T. fusca Cel9A and the C. thermocellum CBM3a positioned at the right side of its structure demonstrated the maximum catalytic activity on Avicel ( Figure 5A). Similar results were observed when the T. fusca Cel9A, Cel5A, and Cel48A were substituted with their orthologues C. thermocellum Cel9R, Cel5G, and Cel48S, respectively ( Figure 5B). Based on their hydrolytic efficiencies, the suggestion for future artificial cellulosomes design is that the processive EG should not be placed in 
## (s14) Impacts of Catalytic Enzyme Positions on Enzymatic Activity of Designer Cellulosomes
(p14.0) The position of catalytic subunits in the Scaf structure may govern the catalytic activity of DCs. In a study by Stern and coworkers [31], three recombinant T. fusca enzymes such as the processive EG Cel9A, EG Cel5A, and exoglucanase Cel48A were recombinantly generated and converted into the cellulosomal mode for DC constructions. Besides, ten chimeric Scaf(s), namely Scaf4, Scaf5, Scaf6, Scaf9, Scaf18, Scaf19, Scaf20, Scaf21, Scaf22, and Scaf23, with different designated orders of enzymes and CBMs were also produced. The enzymatic assay was carried out in 50 mM acetate buffer (pH 5.0), 12 mM CaCl 2 , 2 mM EDTA, 10% (w/v) Avicel, incubated at 50 • C for 24-72 h with shaking. The two optimal trivalent Scaf configurations Scaf20 (i.e., ScafABT:a-Cel9A/b-Cel48A/Cel5A-t) with the T. fusca processive EG Cel9A and the C. thermocellum carbohydrate-binding module (CBM3a) located at the left side of Scaf20 structure, and Scaf9 (i.e., ScafTBA:Cel5A-t/b-Cel48A/a-Cel9A) with the T. fusca Cel9A and the C. thermocellum CBM3a positioned at the right side of its structure demonstrated the maximum catalytic activity on Avicel ( Figure 5A). Similar results were observed when the T. fusca Cel9A, Cel5A, and Cel48A were substituted with their orthologues C. thermocellum Cel9R, Cel5G, and Cel48S, respectively ( Figure 5B). Based on their hydrolytic efficiencies, the suggestion for future artificial cellulosomes design is that the processive EG should not be placed in the middle of the trivalent chimeric Scaf because the processive EG functions by cutting β-1,4-glycosidic bonds in the interior of the cellulose chain, followed by a processive cleavage of the even-numbered short oligosaccharides [48], its middle position within the trivalent Scaf likely restricted its movement along the substrate. In contrast, the processive EG should be located close to a CBM in the Scaf to properly fulfill its catalytic function. The third conclusion that can be drawn is that two enzymes with parallel characteristics (i.e., processive Cel9A and Cel5A from T. fusca or processive Cel9R and Cel5G from C. thermocellum) should not be placed in proximity with each other since this might lead to an unnecessary functional competition between them.

(p14.1) Catalysts 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 27 the middle of the trivalent chimeric Scaf because the processive EG functions by cutting β-1,4-glycosidic bonds in the interior of the cellulose chain, followed by a processive cleavage of the even-numbered short oligosaccharides [48], its middle position within the trivalent Scaf likely restricted its movement along the substrate. In contrast, the processive EG should be located close to a CBM in the Scaf to properly fulfill its catalytic function. The third conclusion that can be drawn is that two enzymes with parallel characteristics (i.e., processive Cel9A and Cel5A from T. fusca or processive Cel9R and Cel5G from C. thermocellum) should not be placed in proximity with each other since this might lead to an unnecessary functional competition between them. 
