# Progress in Emerging Contaminants Removal by Adsorption/Membrane Filtration-Based Technologies: A Review

CorpusID: 238995840 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e204bd907775407fd198339466a4118946afcd68](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e204bd907775407fd198339466a4118946afcd68)

Fields: Chemistry, Environmental Science

## (s8) Adsorption Mechanism
(p8.0) Adsorbent and adsorbate interact in two ways: chemi-and physisorption. In the former, the adsorbate forms a monolayer. The adsorbate interacts with the external surface of the adsorbent, enters the internal pores through pore diffusion, and interacts with the active sites (Khulbe & Matsuura, 2018). The adsorbent and the adsorbate form a new electronic configuration through electron sharing or electron transfer, and chemical interaction occurs. In the latter, adsorbent and adsorbate interact through the Van der Waals force in solid-liquid or solid-gas systems (Khulbe & Matsuura, 2018). Electrostatic forces or Van der Waals forces occur without the transfer or sharing of electrons. The adsorbate retains its identity, although a surface force field may deform it.
## (s9) Factors Affecting Adsorption
(p9.0) Internal and external factors influence the adsorption process. The internal factors include structure features (e.g., molecular weight, functional groups, morphology, pore size, surface area, etc.). The external factors include adsorbent dosage, adsorbate concentration, contact time, pH, temperature, and competitiveness.

(p9.1) Those factors need to be optimized to achieve desirable performances. A high concentration of adsorbate leads to lower adsorption efficiency. High temperature is preferred for endothermic reactions. Contact time relates to the saturation of all adsorbent active sites. The presence of competitive ions can also compete on the active site of the adsorbent. An adsorbent's chemical properties (e.g., functional group, ionization, steric effect) also influence the adsorption capacity (Rom치n et al., 2020). Pore size and surface area affect the number of available active sites on the adsorbent surface. There is also a relationship between pore size and surface area, in which smaller pore size results in higher surface area.
## (s12) Materials
(p12.0) Most of the commercial membranes were prepared from synthetic polymers. The materials often used for UF and MF are polysulfone, polyvinylidene fluoride, polyacrylonitrile, and polypropylene, including recently inorganic/ ceramic, which has been of great interest. The most common material for RO membrane is polyamide, while the materials for NF membrane are polysulfone, polyimide, and ceramic. The application of membrane technology for ECs removals is challenged by various limitations on membrane physicochemical characteristics and other factors that influence the separation process. Some membrane materials such as polymers, inorganic membranes, and others need further tests (K치r치szov치 et al., 2020).
