# A Review on Deep Learning in UAV Remote Sensing

CorpusID: 231709807 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6a78801c67313c67e20c76375d6a704964f50abb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6a78801c67313c67e20c76375d6a704964f50abb)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s3) Classification and Regression Approaches
(p3.0) When considering remote sensing data processed with DL-based algorithms, the following tasks can be highlighted: scene-wise classification, semantic and instance segmentation, and object detection. Scene-wise classification involves assigning a class label to each image (or patch), while the object detection task aims to draw bounding boxes around objects in an image (or patch) and labeling each of them according to the class label. Object detection can be considered a more challenging task since it requires to locate the objects in the image and then perform their classification. Another manner to detect objects in an image, instead of drawing bounding boxes, is to draw regions or structures around the boundary of objects, i.e., distinguish the class of the object at the pixel level. This task is known as semantic segmentation. However, in semantic segmentation, it is not possible to distinguish multiple objects of the same category, as each pixel receives one class label [195]. To overcome this drawback, a task that combines semantic segmentation and object detection named instance segmentation was proposed to detect multiple objects in pixel-level masks and labeling each Figure 2: A DNN architecture. This is a simple example of how a DNN may be built. Here the initial layer (X input ) is composed of the collected data samples. Later this data information can be extracted by hidden layers in a back-propagation manner, which is used by subsequent hidden layers to learn these features' characteristics. In the end, another layer is used with an activation function related to the given problem (classification or regression, as an example), by returning a prediction outcome (Y label ). where a dropout layer is added between each conv layer, and a max-pooling layer is adopted each time the convolution window-size is decreased. By the end of it, a deconvolutional layer is used with the same size as the last convolutional, and then it uses information from the previous step to reconstruct the image with its original size. The final layer is of a softmax, where it returns the models' predictions.
## (s21) Photogrammetric Processing
(p21.0) Although not as developed as other practices, DL-based methods can be adopted for processing and optimizing the UAV photogrammetric processing task. This process aims to generate a dense point cloud and an orthomosaic, and it is based on Structure-from-Motion (SfM) and Multi-View Stereo (MVS) techniques. In SfM, the interior and exterior orientation parameters are estimated, and a sparse point cloud is generated. A matching technique between the images is applied in SfM. A recent survey on image matching [129] concluded that this thematic is still an open problem and pointed out the potential of DL is this task. The authors mentioned that DL techniques are mainly applied to feature detection and description, and further investigations on feature matching can be explored. Finally, they pointed out that a promising direction is the customization of modern feature matching techniques to attend SfM.
