# polymers Development of Graphene-Based Polymeric Nanocomposites: A Brief Overview

CorpusID: 237468825 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8bdcf511904ad872ca0e6ef96dc8c0f1c9067e82](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8bdcf511904ad872ca0e6ef96dc8c0f1c9067e82)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s8) Covalent Functionalization with Polymers
(p8.0) This approach involves a chemical reaction between G-based compounds and polymer chains. The irreversible linking of polymers can take place either at functional groups located on the basal planes or at the edges, and can take place in two different ways Scheme 5. Schematic illustration of graphene-based nanomaterials, and covalent and non-covalent functionalization approaches. Reprinted from Ref. [38].
## (s14) Grafting-to Methods
(p14.0) This approach involves the grafting of the polymer chain itself onto the G-based compound surface, although it may require former functionalization steps of either the G surface or the polymer. The goal of these functionalization steps is to provide reactive groups that can be employed for a coupling reaction. In contrast with grafting from procedures, grafting-to methods are strongly affected by steric hindrance, due to the G flakes' size. However, they are highly versatile, since a wide variety of functional groups can be employed [51]. Besides, they allow the selection of the location of graphene, which influences the final properties. Grafting-to techniques can be divided into three types: (1) esterification/amidation reactions; (2) cycloaddition reactions; and (3) click coupling reactions.
## (s15) Grafting-to Methods
(p15.0) This approach involves the grafting of the polymer chain itself onto the G-based compound surface, although it may require former functionalization steps of either the G surface or the polymer. The goal of these functionalization steps is to provide reactive groups that can be employed for a coupling reaction. In contrast with grafting from procedures, grafting-to methods are strongly affected by steric hindrance, due to the G flakes' size. However, they are highly versatile, since a wide variety of functional groups can be employed [51]. Besides, they allow the selection of the location of graphene, which influences the final properties. Grafting-to techniques can be divided into three types: (1) esterification/amidation reactions; (2) cycloaddition reactions; and (3) click coupling reactions.
## (s18) Scheme 12.
(p18.0) Schematic representation of the different interactions between PEDOT:PSS and hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI)-modified GO. Taken from [74]. Similarly, different types of interactions, including H-bonding, π-π stacking, hydrophobic as well as electrostatic have been reported between PANI, in the form of emeraldine salt, and HDI-GO (Scheme 13), that result in improved interaction between the two nanocomposite components, hence very high electrical conductivity [71].

(p18.1) Similarly, different types of interactions, including H-bonding, π-π stacking, hydro phobic as well as electrostatic have been reported between PANI, in the form of emerald ine salt, and HDI-GO (Scheme 13), that result in improved interaction between the tw nanocomposite components, hence very high electrical conductivity [71]. Scheme 13. Schematic representation of the different interactions between PANI and hexameth ylene diisocyanate (HDI)-modified GO. Taken from [71].
