# information A Comprehensive Survey of Knowledge Graph-Based Recommender Systems: Technologies, Development, and Contributions

CorpusID: 235826036 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48e2adf2d8d6b24060174c5a262542c885d12149](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48e2adf2d8d6b24060174c5a262542c885d12149)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s8) Recommender Systems over Knowledge Graphs
(p8.0) In 2012, Google proposed the term knowledge graph to refer to the use of semantic knowledge in web searches. Although the term associated with KG is new, representing pieces of knowledge as interconnected nodes is not a new idea. We can consider current KGs as an evolution of semantic networks, an old concept that emerged from the literature on cognitive science and artificial intelligence.

(p8.1) When Google created its KG, the purpose was to improve the search engine's capability and to enhance users' search experience [21]. Today, several companies and researchers have joined this movement and have created different KGs to describe specific domains. Before the term "knowledge graph" became popular, DBPedia and other linked data (LO) sets were generated thanks to Semantic Web technologies and the Linked Data-Design Issues proposed by Berners-Lee.

(p8.2) A knowledge graph provides machine-readable data organized as a graph; graphdata describes and interconnects entities of an open or a close domain. The data in a KG is accessible through the web and can be consumed automatically; these characteristics have facilitated the creation of applications such as [21] question-answering, recommender systems, information retrieval, domain-specific applications by knowledge area, and other applications (social networks and geoscience).
## (s12) Path-Based Recommendation
(p12.0) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].

(p12.1) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].
## (s59) Recommender Systems over Knowledge Graphs
(p59.0) In 2012, Google proposed the term knowledge graph to refer to the use of semantic knowledge in web searches. Although the term associated with KG is new, representing pieces of knowledge as interconnected nodes is not a new idea. We can consider current KGs as an evolution of semantic networks, an old concept that emerged from the literature on cognitive science and artificial intelligence.

(p59.1) When Google created its KG, the purpose was to improve the search engine's capability and to enhance users' search experience [21]. Today, several companies and researchers have joined this movement and have created different KGs to describe specific domains. Before the term "knowledge graph" became popular, DBPedia and other linked data (LO) sets were generated thanks to Semantic Web technologies and the Linked Data-Design Issues proposed by Berners-Lee.

(p59.2) A knowledge graph provides machine-readable data organized as a graph; graphdata describes and interconnects entities of an open or a close domain. The data in a KG is accessible through the web and can be consumed automatically; these characteristics have facilitated the creation of applications such as [21] question-answering, recommender systems, information retrieval, domain-specific applications by knowledge area, and other applications (social networks and geoscience).
## (s63) Path-Based Recommendation
(p63.0) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].

(p63.1) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].
