# Molecular Sciences In Vitro and Vivo Identification, Metabolism and Action of Xenoestrogens: An Overview

CorpusID: 233397048 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dfc1561847cbd61164f780ca26ddd411a676107f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dfc1561847cbd61164f780ca26ddd411a676107f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s2) E-SCREEN
(p2.0) Soto et al. [33] used the E-SCREEN assay to investigate the effects of XEs and 17β-estradiol on cells. Employing human MCF-7 (breast cancer cells) as a target in the assay, XEs were observed competing with E2 for binding to the ER and increased the levels of progesterone receptor (PR) and pS2 in MCF-7 cells. The E-SCREEN assay results have confirmed the estrogenic materials, including alkylphenols, phthalates, PCB congeners, and hydroxylated PCBs. The insecticides dieldrin, endosulfan, and toxaphene are also detected in the assay.
## (s20) DDT [2,2-Bis(p-chlorophenyl)-1,1,1-trichloroethan] and Its Metabolite DDE
(p20.0) Another example of XEs is DDE, a metabolite of DDT and a component of pesticides. DDE is seen as more effective due to its affinity and lipophilicity, and it is unlikely to be catabolized by organisms. Both DDT and DDE are XEs with estrogenicity, which could influence the reproduction function of organisms in the environment. For instance, in the alligators of Lake Apopka, biologists have discovered that male crocodiles have a micropenis and various abnormalities of the testes due to their exposure to DDT and DDE substances [108].
## (s26) Discussion
(p26.0) On the molecular level, many XEs are known to be structurally related to the steroid hormones produced by the human body (structural similarity to the natural estrogens). Therefore, they have estrogenicity or antiestroginecity and can be bound with the receptors of the organism, manipulating differentiation and modulation of cell proliferation, apoptosis, cytokine production, and cell cycle progression, which should have been controlled over by the endogenous 17β-estradiol [3,6]. On the other hand, some substances, such as Cd, PCB and dioxin, can function as potential endocrine disruptors despite no structural similarity to the natural estrogens. However, the exact mechanism by which this metal Cd may interfere with the reproductive system has not been fully elucidated. The interruption in the steroidogenic pathway by Cd toxic action may be explained in a few different ways [175]. The changes in E2 and progesterone levels may result from the impairment of steroidogenic enzymatic activities by Cd. Under the actions of Cd, conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone is supposed to be the cause of abnormalities in the metabolism of sex hormones. Thus, endocrine disruptors, including Cd, PCB and dioxin, can exert effects via various pathways other than classical ER-signaling.
