# Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitors in COVID-19: A Review Filipe Ferrari 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 , I Vítor Magnus Martins 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 , II Flá vio Danni Fuchs 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 , I,III Ricardo Stein 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 I,IV, *

CorpusID: 232770549 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6cb178e94b7ff995b42b10dcfdb36d11cc9693b3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6cb178e94b7ff995b42b10dcfdb36d11cc9693b3)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) ' INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) In March 2020, a research letter published in The Lancet suggested that patients with hypertension, heart disease or diabetes who were on renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) inhibitors, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs), might be at greater risk of severe disease with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection (1). This hypothesis was based on the fact that SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of COVID-19, must bind to ACE2 for entry into cells. Since RAAS inhibitors can increase ACE2 levels, their use could facilitate viral entry, and thus lead to a worse prognosis.
## (s2) SARS-CoV-2 and the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System
(p2.0) RAAS exerts key physiological functions in the homeostasis of the cardiovascular and renal systems (85). This complex pathway begins with the release of renin by the juxtaglomerular cells, catalyzing the conversion of angiotensinogen into angiotensin I. This is subsequently converted into angiotensin II in the lungs and kidneys by ACE. Angiotensin II, in turn, is transformed into angiotensin 1-7 by ACE2 (86) (Figure 1).
## (s3) COVID-19 and Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitors
(p3.0) Evidence of Neutral Effect Based on Observational Studies and in a Randomized Clinical Trial. A population-based case-control study (10) with data from 6,300 patients and 31,000 controls from the Lombardy region in Italy, found no association between the use of ACE inhibitors or ARBs and SARS-CoV-2 infection among overall COVID-19 patients or patients with severe or fatal disease. Reynolds et al. (14) evaluated 12,594 individuals who were tested for COVID-19, of whom 4,357 had hypertension. They further analyzed the relationship between treatment with five classes of antihypertensive drugs, including ACE inhibitors (22% of patients) and ARBs (28% of patients), and the probability of a positive or negative COVID-19 test result. No association was observed between the use of RAAS inhibitors and the risk of a positive test result for COVID-19 (14). A study conducted in Saudi Arabia found no differences in ICU admission, ICU admission within 24 hours of hospitalization, ICU stay (days), and ICU death (p=0.19; p=0.23; p=0.13; p=0.58, respectively) (20) among patients receiving ACE inhibitors/ARBs vs. non-ACE inhibitors/ARBs.
## (s4) Evidence of Potential Benefits Based on Observational Studies
(p4.0) In Madrid, Spain, de Abajo et al. (35) conducted a population-based case-control study on patients diagnosed with COVID-19. When users of other antihypertensive drugs were compared to users of RAAS inhibitors, no increased risk was observed with ACE inhibitors or ARBs. Interestingly, they observed a reduction in the odds of hospital admission in diabetic patients receiving RAAS inhibitors. Meng et al. (94) studied hypertensive patients with COVID-19, who were divided into a RAAS inhibitor group (ACE inhibitors/ARBs, N=17) and other antihypertensive agent group, including calcium channel blockers, beta-blockers, and diuretics (N=25). Patients using ACE inhibitors or ARBs showed an increase in CD3 + and CD8 + T-cell counts, in addition to a lower frequency of severe illness and a trend towards lower interleukin-6 levels in peripheral blood. These findings point to new pathways that may explain the possible benefits of the use of these drugs in hypertensives with COVID-19.
