# Finding Critical Scenarios for Automated Driving Systems: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 239016131 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7eac16f6e5c63fd983155947b18f1721af87beaf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7eac16f6e5c63fd983155947b18f1721af87beaf)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s13) Scenario Representation
(p13.0) Menzel et al. [22] classified scenario representations into three levels of abstraction, namely functional scenario, logical scenario and concrete scenario. Functional scenario and logical scenario describe scenario spaces on two different levels of abstraction, while concrete scenario describes a particular scenario.

(p13.1) Functional scenario: A scenario space representation on a semantic level with linguistic scenario notations. [22] "The vocabulary used for the description of functional scenarios is specific for the use case and the domain and can feature different levels of detail." [22] Logical scenario: A scenario space representation on a state-space level with parameter ranges in the state space. Each parameter correlates to one influential factor. The parameter ranges can optionally be specified with probability distributions. A logical scenario includes a formal notation of the scenario space. [22] Additionally, "the relations of the parameter ranges can optionally be specified with the help of correlations or numeric conditions." [22] In this paper, it is assumed that a logical scenario cannot fully reflect its corresponding functional scenario since relevant parameters cannot be completely listed.

(p13.2) Concrete scenario: A parameterized representation of a particular scenario. Each concrete scenario is an instantiation of a logical scenario, with a concrete value for each parameter. [22] According to a concrete scenario, an executable scenario can be constructed, which can be either a simulation model or a real test. An executable scene refers to an image from a camera or a point cloud from a LiDAR.

(p13.3) In the rest of this paper, functional scenario, logical scenario and concrete scenario are also used to denote a scenario space or a scenario represented with the corresponding levels of abstraction. Fig. 4 depicts the transitions between the three levels of abstraction, which are defined as follows:
## (s16) Related Survey Papers
(p16.0) While there is a vast amount of literature on various aspects of CSI methods, there are much fewer related survey papers. Other related topics, although outside the scope of this review, are briefly introduced in Section 8.

(p16.1) According to our literature search, to the best of our knowledge, related relevant survey papers are [32] and [33]. Neurohr et al. [32] reviewed and analyzed the literature about the scenario-based testing method for automated vehicles. The authors presented fundamental arguments, principles and assumptions of the scenario-based approach. They also proposed a generic framework (from scenario elicitation to test evaluation) for scenario-based testing and analyzed in detail the individual steps based on the reviewed articles. As a result, they presented various considerations for using and implementing scenario-based testing to support automated vehicle homologation.

(p16.2) Riedmaier et al. [33] performed a survey of scenariobased approaches for safety assessment of automated vehicles. The authors provided an overview of various approaches. They also developed a taxonomy for the scenariobased approach and compared the summarized methods with each other. In the end, this paper integrated the formal verification with the scenario-based approach as an alternative concept.
## (s22) Literature search and selection
(p22.0) The primary studies for this literature review are collected through an iterative process with automatic search and snowballing as shown in Fig. 8. This section describes the details of how we conducted each stage. Stage 1: A comprehensive initial search string can reduce the number of iterations to determine the final search string as described in Stage 3. To better define the initial search strings, an initial set of relevant studies was gathered from two sources. The first source was publications from recent relevant research projects including AutoDrive, Prystine, Pegasus, Enable-S3 and AdaptIVe. The second source are the relevant papers included in the two relevant survey papers  Fig. 8. The stages to collect the primary studies. The numbers on the arrows indicate the numbers of studies given to the next stage [32], [33] introduced in Section 2.6. The initial set contains 151 potentially relevant studies. After being filtered by the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 49 studies remained.

(p22.1) Stages 2 and 6: To filter a given set of potentially relevant studies, we reviewed the title abstract and author keywords of each paper with respect to the inclusion and exclusion criteria defined in Section 3.1. After reviewing, each paper was labelled as either "included", "excluded" (together with the violated criterion) or "unclear". Unclear studies were further checked by going through their introduction, conclusion and some other parts. When necessary, a discussion among multiple researchers would be conducted to determine the inclusion of an unclear study.
## (s50) Exploration Methods
(p50.0) Sampling: The sampling method instantiates a concrete scenario by randomly assigning each parameter's value in a logical scenario space. A predetermined number of samples are taken statistically based on probability distributions of parameters, and its sampling size is determined by the required coverage and computation time for simulation. The applied sampling methods are summarized in Fig. 18 Fig. 18. Sampling method in scenario exploration the parameter distributions are taken into account. We assume that a uniform distribution is adopted if the parameter distribution is not mentioned. Near-random sampling, such as Latin Hypercube sampling [67], can improve the coverage when the sampling size is small. It splits the multidimensional parameter space into even grids and selects samples in each grid with a given number.
## (s80) Online risk assessment
(p80.0) Online risk assessment refers to the methods which evaluate and predict in real time if a situation could be dangerous and result in harm. As summarized in [158], these methods analyze the predicted trajectories of other vehicles and the potential colliding point. The methods presented in section 6.1.3 are mainly offline methods, whereas the methods here are for real-time vehicle application.

(p80.1) Relation: For both online and offline approaches, the identified influential factors as well as the critical scenario based on unexpected behaviors or events can be used. Second, the end-to-end scene risk prediction used in online risk assessment can also be used offline to determine a scene's criticality. Furthermore, risk indicators such as Time-To-Collision and Time-To-React can be used for both methods.

(p80.2) Differences: The online methods can only utilize the real street data whereas the CSI methods can utilize groundtruth environmental information. Offline methods, on the other hand, are not so easily transferred to online methods because the offline approach typically requires exhaustive searches, and computing all the potential trajectories of the vehicles is computationally costly hens not real-time capable.
## (s93) Other Sources of Harm
(p93.0) Potential lack of Communication: As shown in [172], some functional insufficiencies cannot be resolved without V2V (Vehicle to Vehicle) and V2I (Vehicle to Infrastructure) communication. Examples of such functional insufficiencies include occlusions, traffic violation by other road users, and the uncertainty of behavior prediction.
