# Article title: Are herbal drugs effective in COVID management? A review to demystify the current facts and claims Are herbal drugs effective in COVID management? A review to demystify the current facts and claims Are herbal drugs effective in COVID management? A review to demystify the current facts and claims

CorpusID: 230725372 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8688ffd7c1527ce4a6ffd0a431681948cd0441cb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8688ffd7c1527ce4a6ffd0a431681948cd0441cb)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Lopinavir/ritonavir:
(p4.0) During this COVID-19 outbreak a combination of Protease inhibitors i.e. Lopinavir/Ritonavir was frequently proposed and prescribed. It is the same drug which is used in the treatment of HIV-AIDS. It is readily available at a economic price point as it one of the HIV medication under the WHO essential list of medicines (7). The off-label use of this combination was considered because it inhibits one of the crucial enzyme3-chymotrypsin-like protease (3CLpro) which is essential for processing of viral RNA leads to disruption of viral replication process. However, the SARS-CoV-2 is devoid of C2-symmetric pocket which is the major target of HIV protease inhibitors. Hence, raised several questions on the potency and efficacy of this combination (8).

(p4.1) During this COVID-19 outbreak a combination of Protease inhibitors i.e. Lopinavir/Ritonavir was frequently proposed and prescribed. It is the same drug which is used in the treatment of HIV-AIDS. It is readily available at a economic price point as it one of the HIV medication under the WHO essential list of medicines (7). The off-label use of this combination was considered because it inhibits one of the crucial enzyme3-chymotrypsin-like protease (3CLpro) which is essential for processing of viral RNA leads to disruption of viral replication process. However, the SARS-CoV-2 is devoid of C2-symmetric pocket which is the major target of HIV protease inhibitors. Hence, raised several questions on the potency and efficacy of this combination (8).

(p4.2) During this COVID-19 outbreak a combination of Protease inhibitors i.e. Lopinavir/Ritonavir was frequently proposed and prescribed. It is the same drug which is used in the treatment of HIV-AIDS. It is readily available at a economic price point as it one of the HIV medication under the WHO essential list of medicines (7). The off-label use of this combination was considered because it inhibits one of the crucial enzyme3-chymotrypsin-like protease (3CLpro) which is essential for processing of viral RNA leads to disruption of viral replication process. However, the SARS-CoV-2 is devoid of C2-symmetric pocket which is the major target of HIV protease inhibitors. Hence, raised several questions on the potency and efficacy of this combination (8).
## (s5) Nitazoxanide:
(p5.0) It is an antiviral agent with broad-spectrum of activity against influenza and other respiratory viral infections. It was highly prescribed and used during Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus. It was one of the drugs under anti-protozoal class for the treatment of intestinal infection caused by protozoan Cryptosporidium parvum (registered in US as immediate release formulation) and Giardia intestinalis. Apart from the specific use it is general broad-spectrum antiparasitic agent use widely in south-east Asia (9). Though the mechanism of action is not fully understood but it selectively targets the viral haemagglutinin maturation process and block it at posttranslational stage in influenza viruses. It is also reported that it improves the natural innate immunity of host against viruses like HIV, rotavirus, and coronavirus (10).

(p5.1) It is an antiviral agent with broad-spectrum of activity against influenza and other respiratory viral infections. It was highly prescribed and used during Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus. It was one of the drugs under anti-protozoal class for the treatment of intestinal infection caused by protozoan Cryptosporidium parvum (registered in US as immediate release formulation) and Giardia intestinalis. Apart from the specific use it is general broad-spectrum antiparasitic agent use widely in south-east Asia (9). Though the mechanism of action is not fully understood but it selectively targets the viral haemagglutinin maturation process and block it at posttranslational stage in influenza viruses. It is also reported that it improves the natural innate immunity of host against viruses like HIV, rotavirus, and coronavirus (10).

(p5.2) It is an antiviral agent with broad-spectrum of activity against influenza and other respiratory viral infections. It was highly prescribed and used during Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus. It was one of the drugs under anti-protozoal class for the treatment of intestinal infection caused by protozoan Cryptosporidium parvum (registered in US as immediate release formulation) and Giardia intestinalis. Apart from the specific use it is general broad-spectrum antiparasitic agent use widely in south-east Asia (9). Though the mechanism of action is not fully understood but it selectively targets the viral haemagglutinin maturation process and block it at posttranslational stage in influenza viruses. It is also reported that it improves the natural innate immunity of host against viruses like HIV, rotavirus, and coronavirus (10).
## (s15) TMPRSS2
(p15.0) After receptor interaction, different host proteases can activate the virus-host cell membrane fusion for subsequent viral genome delivery. The host cell surface transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) activates spike protein present in the SARS-CoV-2.Cleavage of spike protein by TMPRSS2 is favoured in coronavirus infection over other proteases.SARS-CoV-2 entry is facilitated by TMPRSS2 and using the protease inhibition viral infection is decreased.TMPRSS2 is expressed in different cell types of lung tissue increasing their liability for SARSCoV-2 infections. Therefore,TMPRSS2 has emerged as a potential drug target for COVID-19.

(p15.1) Despite the fact that molecular docking indicates it as a strategy in COVID-19 treatment TMPRSS2 inhibitions search is the lowest within the major replication proteins.TMPRSS2 natural inhibitors includes terpenes, flavonoids, and peptides (49). Flavonoids baicalein and baicalin were reported as a down-regulators of the TMPRSS-2 expression, Lignans iridoids and diterpenes were also evaluated by in silico studies as potential TMPRSS2 inhibitors.

(p15.2) Other Potential Targets RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) facilitates the transcription and replication of RNA genome during infection and with its importance for the virus life cycle makes it as a drug target for antiviral development. The replication-transcription complex in coronavirus is formed after cleavage of the polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab into non-structural proteins. SARS-CoV RdRp need nsp7 and nsp8 as cofactors to stimulate polymerase activity. The association with exoribonuclease lead to the formation of a macromolecular assembly for systematic nucleotide polymerization, proofreading and cap-modifying. This multifunctional protein assembly and the 2-O-methyltransferase coordinate the replication-transcription machinery of SARS-CoV. The non-structural protein 15 have endoribonuclease activity that cleaves preferably at uridine residues. Helicase is an important protein in the replication-transcription complex of coronavirus that catalyses the processive separation of double -stranded DNA and RNA in a 5ꞌ -to -3ꞌ direction. As this protein is essential for the RNA viral synthesis therefore, it is considered as an emerging target for COVID-19.

(p15.3) Natural ligands from NPASS (natural product activity and species source) database were screened against six potential therapeutic targets such as helicase, endoribonuclease, exoribonuclease, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, N-methyltransferase and Mpro by molecular docking experiment. Compound 2,3,4-trihydroxy benzoic acid, an anti-oxidant showed encouraging dockings scores compared to controls against endoribonuclease, exoribonuclease, RdRp, Methyltransferase and Mpro. Compounds such as astilbin and neostilbin also showed better docking scores against the aforementioned targets. (50). Astilbin is a flavanonol and neostilbin is enantiomer of astilbin. Astilbin have role as a radical scavenger, an anti-inflammatory agent.
## (s31) Lopinavir/ritonavir:
(p31.0) During this COVID-19 outbreak a combination of Protease inhibitors i.e. Lopinavir/Ritonavir was frequently proposed and prescribed. It is the same drug which is used in the treatment of HIV-AIDS. It is readily available at a economic price point as it one of the HIV medication under the WHO essential list of medicines (7). The off-label use of this combination was considered because it inhibits one of the crucial enzyme3-chymotrypsin-like protease (3CLpro) which is essential for processing of viral RNA leads to disruption of viral replication process. However, the SARS-CoV-2 is devoid of C2-symmetric pocket which is the major target of HIV protease inhibitors. Hence, raised several questions on the potency and efficacy of this combination (8).

(p31.1) During this COVID-19 outbreak a combination of Protease inhibitors i.e. Lopinavir/Ritonavir was frequently proposed and prescribed. It is the same drug which is used in the treatment of HIV-AIDS. It is readily available at a economic price point as it one of the HIV medication under the WHO essential list of medicines (7). The off-label use of this combination was considered because it inhibits one of the crucial enzyme3-chymotrypsin-like protease (3CLpro) which is essential for processing of viral RNA leads to disruption of viral replication process. However, the SARS-CoV-2 is devoid of C2-symmetric pocket which is the major target of HIV protease inhibitors. Hence, raised several questions on the potency and efficacy of this combination (8).

(p31.2) During this COVID-19 outbreak a combination of Protease inhibitors i.e. Lopinavir/Ritonavir was frequently proposed and prescribed. It is the same drug which is used in the treatment of HIV-AIDS. It is readily available at a economic price point as it one of the HIV medication under the WHO essential list of medicines (7). The off-label use of this combination was considered because it inhibits one of the crucial enzyme3-chymotrypsin-like protease (3CLpro) which is essential for processing of viral RNA leads to disruption of viral replication process. However, the SARS-CoV-2 is devoid of C2-symmetric pocket which is the major target of HIV protease inhibitors. Hence, raised several questions on the potency and efficacy of this combination (8).
## (s32) Nitazoxanide:
(p32.0) It is an antiviral agent with broad-spectrum of activity against influenza and other respiratory viral infections. It was highly prescribed and used during Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus. It was one of the drugs under anti-protozoal class for the treatment of intestinal infection caused by protozoan Cryptosporidium parvum (registered in US as immediate release formulation) and Giardia intestinalis. Apart from the specific use it is general broad-spectrum antiparasitic agent use widely in south-east Asia (9). Though the mechanism of action is not fully understood but it selectively targets the viral haemagglutinin maturation process and block it at posttranslational stage in influenza viruses. It is also reported that it improves the natural innate immunity of host against viruses like HIV, rotavirus, and coronavirus (10).

(p32.1) It is an antiviral agent with broad-spectrum of activity against influenza and other respiratory viral infections. It was highly prescribed and used during Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus. It was one of the drugs under anti-protozoal class for the treatment of intestinal infection caused by protozoan Cryptosporidium parvum (registered in US as immediate release formulation) and Giardia intestinalis. Apart from the specific use it is general broad-spectrum antiparasitic agent use widely in south-east Asia (9). Though the mechanism of action is not fully understood but it selectively targets the viral haemagglutinin maturation process and block it at posttranslational stage in influenza viruses. It is also reported that it improves the natural innate immunity of host against viruses like HIV, rotavirus, and coronavirus (10).

(p32.2) It is an antiviral agent with broad-spectrum of activity against influenza and other respiratory viral infections. It was highly prescribed and used during Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus. It was one of the drugs under anti-protozoal class for the treatment of intestinal infection caused by protozoan Cryptosporidium parvum (registered in US as immediate release formulation) and Giardia intestinalis. Apart from the specific use it is general broad-spectrum antiparasitic agent use widely in south-east Asia (9). Though the mechanism of action is not fully understood but it selectively targets the viral haemagglutinin maturation process and block it at posttranslational stage in influenza viruses. It is also reported that it improves the natural innate immunity of host against viruses like HIV, rotavirus, and coronavirus (10).
## (s42) TMPRSS2
(p42.0) After receptor interaction, different host proteases can activate the virus-host cell membrane fusion for subsequent viral genome delivery. The host cell surface transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) activates spike protein present in the SARS-CoV-2.Cleavage of spike protein by TMPRSS2 is favoured in coronavirus infection over other proteases.SARS-CoV-2 entry is facilitated by TMPRSS2 and using the protease inhibition viral infection is decreased.TMPRSS2 is expressed in different cell types of lung tissue increasing their liability for SARSCoV-2 infections. Therefore,TMPRSS2 has emerged as a potential drug target for COVID-19.

(p42.1) Despite the fact that molecular docking indicates it as a strategy in COVID-19 treatment TMPRSS2 inhibitions search is the lowest within the major replication proteins.TMPRSS2 natural inhibitors includes terpenes, flavonoids, and peptides (49). Flavonoids baicalein and baicalin were reported as a down-regulators of the TMPRSS-2 expression, Lignans iridoids and diterpenes were also evaluated by in silico studies as potential TMPRSS2 inhibitors.

(p42.2) Other Potential Targets RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) facilitates the transcription and replication of RNA genome during infection and with its importance for the virus life cycle makes it as a drug target for antiviral development. The replication-transcription complex in coronavirus is formed after cleavage of the polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab into non-structural proteins. SARS-CoV RdRp need nsp7 and nsp8 as cofactors to stimulate polymerase activity. The association with exoribonuclease lead to the formation of a macromolecular assembly for systematic nucleotide polymerization, proofreading and cap-modifying. This multifunctional protein assembly and the 2-O-methyltransferase coordinate the replication-transcription machinery of SARS-CoV. The non-structural protein 15 have endoribonuclease activity that cleaves preferably at uridine residues. Helicase is an important protein in the replication-transcription complex of coronavirus that catalyses the processive separation of double -stranded DNA and RNA in a 5ꞌ -to -3ꞌ direction. As this protein is essential for the RNA viral synthesis therefore, it is considered as an emerging target for COVID-19.

(p42.3) Natural ligands from NPASS (natural product activity and species source) database were screened against six potential therapeutic targets such as helicase, endoribonuclease, exoribonuclease, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, N-methyltransferase and Mpro by molecular docking experiment. Compound 2,3,4-trihydroxy benzoic acid, an anti-oxidant showed encouraging dockings scores compared to controls against endoribonuclease, exoribonuclease, RdRp, Methyltransferase and Mpro. Compounds such as astilbin and neostilbin also showed better docking scores against the aforementioned targets. (50). Astilbin is a flavanonol and neostilbin is enantiomer of astilbin. Astilbin have role as a radical scavenger, an anti-inflammatory agent.
## (s58) Lopinavir/ritonavir:
(p58.0) During this COVID-19 outbreak a combination of Protease inhibitors i.e. Lopinavir/Ritonavir was frequently proposed and prescribed. It is the same drug which is used in the treatment of HIV-AIDS. It is readily available at a economic price point as it one of the HIV medication under the WHO essential list of medicines (7). The off-label use of this combination was considered because it inhibits one of the crucial enzyme3-chymotrypsin-like protease (3CLpro) which is essential for processing of viral RNA leads to disruption of viral replication process. However, the SARS-CoV-2 is devoid of C2-symmetric pocket which is the major target of HIV protease inhibitors. Hence, raised several questions on the potency and efficacy of this combination (8).

(p58.1) During this COVID-19 outbreak a combination of Protease inhibitors i.e. Lopinavir/Ritonavir was frequently proposed and prescribed. It is the same drug which is used in the treatment of HIV-AIDS. It is readily available at a economic price point as it one of the HIV medication under the WHO essential list of medicines (7). The off-label use of this combination was considered because it inhibits one of the crucial enzyme3-chymotrypsin-like protease (3CLpro) which is essential for processing of viral RNA leads to disruption of viral replication process. However, the SARS-CoV-2 is devoid of C2-symmetric pocket which is the major target of HIV protease inhibitors. Hence, raised several questions on the potency and efficacy of this combination (8).

(p58.2) During this COVID-19 outbreak a combination of Protease inhibitors i.e. Lopinavir/Ritonavir was frequently proposed and prescribed. It is the same drug which is used in the treatment of HIV-AIDS. It is readily available at a economic price point as it one of the HIV medication under the WHO essential list of medicines (7). The off-label use of this combination was considered because it inhibits one of the crucial enzyme3-chymotrypsin-like protease (3CLpro) which is essential for processing of viral RNA leads to disruption of viral replication process. However, the SARS-CoV-2 is devoid of C2-symmetric pocket which is the major target of HIV protease inhibitors. Hence, raised several questions on the potency and efficacy of this combination (8).
## (s59) Nitazoxanide:
(p59.0) It is an antiviral agent with broad-spectrum of activity against influenza and other respiratory viral infections. It was highly prescribed and used during Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus. It was one of the drugs under anti-protozoal class for the treatment of intestinal infection caused by protozoan Cryptosporidium parvum (registered in US as immediate release formulation) and Giardia intestinalis. Apart from the specific use it is general broad-spectrum antiparasitic agent use widely in south-east Asia (9). Though the mechanism of action is not fully understood but it selectively targets the viral haemagglutinin maturation process and block it at posttranslational stage in influenza viruses. It is also reported that it improves the natural innate immunity of host against viruses like HIV, rotavirus, and coronavirus (10).

(p59.1) It is an antiviral agent with broad-spectrum of activity against influenza and other respiratory viral infections. It was highly prescribed and used during Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus. It was one of the drugs under anti-protozoal class for the treatment of intestinal infection caused by protozoan Cryptosporidium parvum (registered in US as immediate release formulation) and Giardia intestinalis. Apart from the specific use it is general broad-spectrum antiparasitic agent use widely in south-east Asia (9). Though the mechanism of action is not fully understood but it selectively targets the viral haemagglutinin maturation process and block it at posttranslational stage in influenza viruses. It is also reported that it improves the natural innate immunity of host against viruses like HIV, rotavirus, and coronavirus (10).

(p59.2) It is an antiviral agent with broad-spectrum of activity against influenza and other respiratory viral infections. It was highly prescribed and used during Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus. It was one of the drugs under anti-protozoal class for the treatment of intestinal infection caused by protozoan Cryptosporidium parvum (registered in US as immediate release formulation) and Giardia intestinalis. Apart from the specific use it is general broad-spectrum antiparasitic agent use widely in south-east Asia (9). Though the mechanism of action is not fully understood but it selectively targets the viral haemagglutinin maturation process and block it at posttranslational stage in influenza viruses. It is also reported that it improves the natural innate immunity of host against viruses like HIV, rotavirus, and coronavirus (10).
## (s69) TMPRSS2
(p69.0) After receptor interaction, different host proteases can activate the virus-host cell membrane fusion for subsequent viral genome delivery. The host cell surface transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) activates spike protein present in the SARS-CoV-2.Cleavage of spike protein by TMPRSS2 is favoured in coronavirus infection over other proteases.SARS-CoV-2 entry is facilitated by TMPRSS2 and using the protease inhibition viral infection is decreased.TMPRSS2 is expressed in different cell types of lung tissue increasing their liability for SARSCoV-2 infections. Therefore,TMPRSS2 has emerged as a potential drug target for COVID-19.

(p69.1) Despite the fact that molecular docking indicates it as a strategy in COVID-19 treatment TMPRSS2 inhibitions search is the lowest within the major replication proteins.TMPRSS2 natural inhibitors includes terpenes, flavonoids, and peptides (49). Flavonoids baicalein and baicalin were reported as a down-regulators of the TMPRSS-2 expression, Lignans iridoids and diterpenes were also evaluated by in silico studies as potential TMPRSS2 inhibitors.

(p69.2) Other Potential Targets RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) facilitates the transcription and replication of RNA genome during infection and with its importance for the virus life cycle makes it as a drug target for antiviral development. The replication-transcription complex in coronavirus is formed after cleavage of the polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab into non-structural proteins. SARS-CoV RdRp need nsp7 and nsp8 as cofactors to stimulate polymerase activity. The association with exoribonuclease lead to the formation of a macromolecular assembly for systematic nucleotide polymerization, proofreading and cap-modifying. This multifunctional protein assembly and the 2-O-methyltransferase coordinate the replication-transcription machinery of SARS-CoV. The non-structural protein 15 have endoribonuclease activity that cleaves preferably at uridine residues. Helicase is an important protein in the replication-transcription complex of coronavirus that catalyses the processive separation of double -stranded DNA and RNA in a 5ꞌ -to -3ꞌ direction. As this protein is essential for the RNA viral synthesis therefore, it is considered as an emerging target for COVID-19.

(p69.3) Natural ligands from NPASS (natural product activity and species source) database were screened against six potential therapeutic targets such as helicase, endoribonuclease, exoribonuclease, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, N-methyltransferase and Mpro by molecular docking experiment. Compound 2,3,4-trihydroxy benzoic acid, an anti-oxidant showed encouraging dockings scores compared to controls against endoribonuclease, exoribonuclease, RdRp, Methyltransferase and Mpro. Compounds such as astilbin and neostilbin also showed better docking scores against the aforementioned targets. (50). Astilbin is a flavanonol and neostilbin is enantiomer of astilbin. Astilbin have role as a radical scavenger, an anti-inflammatory agent.
