# Data-Driven Decision Making in COVID-19 Response: A Survey

CorpusID: 236521932 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92d044230c5ea2fdc87acac0f68cad1d22ae8e65](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92d044230c5ea2fdc87acac0f68cad1d22ae8e65)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s3) Tracing Close Contacts
(p3.0) Close contact tracing is a common intervention to control outbreaks of infectious diseases [39]. In the early stages of the epidemic, traditional door-to-door surveys and paper form filling were still adopted in most areas, which was organized and implemented step by step [53]. If the execution was not strong enough or the provided information was wrong, it would affect the judgement and prevention of the epidemic.
## (s5) Hospital Relevant Policies
(p5.0) COVID-19 has extremely challenged medical processes such as hospital admissions. Data-driven hospital decision making has become more and more important. To better mitigate the epidemic and meanwhile limit collateral economic damage, proper hospital policies should be undertaken. Duque et al. [32] presented a strategy to minimize the number of days of disruption. When hospital admissions exceed a certain threshold, short-term in-place placement orders can be triggered. Random optimization is employed to export the triggers to make sure that the hospital admission capacity will not be insufficient. Based on COVID-19 hospitalization data, this work provides a flexible framework, which allows optimization using a relatively small discrete grid. Similar epidemics can be simulated with this proposed model.

(p5.1) The medical examination process can also be improved by using data analysis. Cohort-level clinical data, patient-level hospital data, and census-level epidemiological data can be analysed to develop an integrated optimization model. In the city of Daegu, the South Korean government reorganized the health system along with hospital-level interventions. Equipment are concentrated to relieve the shortage of medical resources. This policy ultimately protected patients and health care staff. The Iranian government added 3,000 hospital beds to the Iran Mall Exhibition based on data analysis. Meanwhile, a 2000-bed army hospital has been opened to accommodate more patients.

(p5.2) While optimizing the medical configuration and treating confirmed cases, scientists from all over the world are working towards effective vaccines for COVID-19. The United States, Australia, Russia, UK, China, South Africa, Korea, and many other countries have made progress towards the COVID-19 vaccine. With the progress of vaccine development, many hospitals have provided vaccine injections.
## (s9) Enterprise Policies
(p9.0) Significantly, most psychological intervention guiding measures have been taken up by hospitals and psychological counselling agencies. The decreed isolation policies also prevent enterprises from resuming work. Whether it is a private enterprise or a state-owned enterprise, employees are also isolated to their homes like most people. Due to the isolation policies, face-to-face communication is not possible, so hospitals and consulting agencies have jointly built many online consultation platforms [59]. Zhang et al. [99] proposed a mental health intervention model, which uses an Internet technology platform to provide timely psychological counselling to patients and their families. Doctors need the courage to overcome disease meanwhile, they need to deal with certain extreme emotions of patients due to illness, who can be physically and mentally exhausted. Therefore, their psychological guidance is also a top priority. Chen et al. [25] detailed the psychological guide measures for medical staff, including the establishment of a psychological intervention medical team, the establishment of a psychological assistance hotline team and psychological skills training.
