# Generative Adversarial Networks: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 232895648 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c7db4378b9a677a301e25f7340e5ee1db904d571](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c7db4378b9a677a301e25f7340e5ee1db904d571)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s12) Inception Score (IS)
(p12.0) During the ILSVRC competition in 2014, Google proposed a network called Inception Net [42]. It not only controlled the number of parameters, but also achieved good classification performance. In 2015, Inception net-v3 was proposed and it was exactly the model required for IS calculation in this part [43,44].
## (s20) Text Processing
(p20.0) Reinforcement learning is often used in NLP. Yu et al. raised a model named SeqGAN, which innovatively combined RL with GAN and made a breakthrough in the development of GAN on NLP [82]. SeqGAN treats error as a reward for RL and the generation of a sequence as a sequential decision makes process. The strategy gradient algorithm is used in reinforcement learning. The result was a Chinese poem and a collection of Obama's speeches.

(p20.1) Li et al. followed Yu's steps and proposed Dialog Generation [83]. The model adopted Seq2Seq instead of the generator. By entering the historical Dialogue, RNN generated each word to answer the question one by one, and finally got the reply message. This paper shows the generated statement effect, further proving GAN's infinite potential on NLP.

(p20.2) In the field of information retrieval (IR), Wang et al. proposed IRGAN [84]. The model transforms the generator and discriminator into two IR systems according to the characteristics of IR, generates the model to predict the related documents, and discriminant model to judge the correlation between the given documents. Under GAN framework, RL method based on strategy gradient is still adopted, which greatly improves the performance of information retrieval.
## (s23) Image Synthesis
(p23.0) Image synthesis literally means the process of synthesizing some existing images into new ones. At present, it is mainly applied to human faces and natural scenes. In 4.2, we mentioned that the idea of vector addition and subtraction of DCGAN is applied in image synthesis, the model obtained a group of smiling male images through multiple images of smiling female and natural male and female facial expressions [71].

(p23.1) It has always been a difficult problem for image synthesis to generate a face from a person's side face. Two-Pathway Generative Adversarial Network (TP-GAN) was proposed by Huang et al. solved this problem [91]. The feature of the model is that the generator contains two paths, one infers global structure, the other infers local texture, and the final features of the two paths are fused.
## (s29) Cyber Security
(p29.0) Nowadays, Cyber Security has attracted more and more attention from researchers because of the progress of big data, Internet of things (IoT), blockchain and other hot spots [108]. At the same time, the gradually increasing numbers of network anomalies threaten the normal operation of the network, such as Challenge Collapsar (CC) attack, distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack, malware, worm [109]. However, network abnormal behavior is not a simple image or text, and it is difficult to process with GAN. Meanwhile, as the detection technology of abnormal network behaviors, the researchers turn to the source of the attack and plan to use the method of generating abnormal behavior samples to simulate the attack, so as to improve the detection ability of the existing detection technology.
## (s30) AI Security
(p30.0) In the development of artificial intelligence, deep learning is one of the most critical technologies in the field of artificial intelligence. However, researchers have found that deep learning algorithms are vulnerable to attacks against samples, so it is urgent to improve the robustness and security of the algorithms. Akhtar et al. [113] summarized three main directions of deep learning algorithm against adversarial attacks:
## (s31) Summary and perspectives
(p31.0) In recent years, GAN model has flourished in natural language processing, computer vision and other aspects, and has been deeply involved in medicine, physics, security and other fields. The arrival of AI era has raised people's spiritual demands, which has promoted the development of GAN. However, GAN also has many shortcomings, which leads to many optimization models of GAN put forward in recent years. The optimization of GAN is mainly modified and improved from the loss function and structure. We list three optimization models (CGAN, DCGAN, WGAN) that have a profound impact on the development of GAN, and introduce in detail the principles, processes, and variations of these models. According to previous studies, GAN has unlimited development potential. However, there are still some problems yet to be solved in the development of GAN.

(p31.1) The first problem is the convergence problem of GAN. In equation (3), we can theoretically reach Nash equilibrium through iterative training according to the idea of game theory. In reality, the loss function of generator and discriminator, we need to add many parameters to reach the final balance. The two main cases of non-convergence are as follows. On the one hand, the mode collapse means that the generation model cannot solve the problem of sample diversity in GAN function. When the generator is optimized, the gradient descent method is adopted to generate some similar samples that are easy to fool the discriminator. The generation of some similar or identical samples will affect the diversity of the final generated model. On the other hand, gradient disappearance is caused by too many layers or loss function. Since there is a big gap between the initial generation of samples and the real samples, the discriminator can easily achieve a high recognition ability, which leads to the generator being prone to the gradient cannot be updated or even disappear. How to find a better method with a lower cost in the future is the problem that GAN needs to solve.

(p31.2) The second is the quality problem of GAN generating samples. The method of characterizing VQ-VAE [115,116] model proposed by the Google team has surpassed the image generation ability of GAN`s models. The Glow model generated along the flow-based model has gained a foothold in the development of deep learning due to its reversible advantages over GAN. On the one hand, the specific solution is to combine the advantages of other generated models to produce hybrid models. On the other hand, better evaluation criteria are proposed. In section 3.3.2, we introduced some GAN evaluation indicators, but they all have corresponding shortcomings, such as IS cannot solve the over-fitting situation, FID cannot solve the spatial relationship of sample characteristics, etc. How to put forward a better and more identical evaluation index is also an urgent problem to be solved.
