# Flying Free: A Research Overview of Deep Learning in Drone Navigation Autonomy

CorpusID: 236298796 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1e33066557b26f24113450c9a852f7821aea874](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1e33066557b26f24113450c9a852f7821aea874)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s20) Issues
(p20.0) Most research works explain their approach to model training and testing, explaining the chosen ground truth, labels and descriptions of how the navigation system interfaces with the CNN model. One issue to highlight, however, is a lack of uniformity of metrics in the domain. Some papers evaluate their approach using environment-specific metrics, such as the number of successful laps [46] and performance at different speeds [23]. In the DNN research space, the inclusion of visual descriptions of architectures and evaluation results comparing similar architectural or function-level approaches is crucial to the explainability of the project. The use of research work-specific metrics, when displayed without connection to a more common metric such as accuracy, makes it difficult to compare the performance of autonomous navigation approaches across the domain.

(p20.1) Another typical issue found in the research pool is various computer and electronic engineering hurdles not attempted too be overcome, not addressed, or the solutions carefully designed to work inside the boundaries of such hurdles. This reduces the robustness of the implementation and potentially limits the use cases in which the solution can operate. Power consumption, data processing, latency, sensor design and communication are all areas affected by this issue. We suggest that drone autonomy research projects could benefit greatly from interdisciplinary interaction.   
