# Automating Laboratory Processes by Connecting Biotech and Robotic Devices-An Overview of the Current Challenges, Existing Solutions and Ongoing Developments

CorpusID: 236425030 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b0418d05b0cc868fe7a59cf6a28d81de19eff5c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b0418d05b0cc868fe7a59cf6a28d81de19eff5c)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s5) Loading Devices
(p5.0) One of the automation-intended devices is the PCR device QTower3 Auto (Analytik Jena GmbH, Jena, Germany). PCR devices control genome duplication reactions by continuously heating up and cooling down the sample, mostly by using a heating plate that the sample plate is pressed into. Inserting and later removing the sample with force is difficult for robots and can result in the robot losing touch. The QTower3 Auto does not require such an insertion with force. It provides an opening drawer that moves out of the front of the device, thus offering much operating space for the robot. The sample plate is simply put onto the drawer. After it is retracted, the sample plate and heating block are connected inside of the device. Removing the sample is carried out in a similar fashion.

(p5.1) Another example is the microplate sealer ALPS3000 (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA). It takes sealing foil from a roll, cuts it into pieces and heat-attaches these onto the sample plates. The device provides a drawer with enough space for handling the plates with a robot. Hereby, no force is needed for putting or taking the material.

(p5.2) The centrifuge 4-16 KRL by Sigma (Sigma Laborzentrifugen, Osterode am Harz, Germany) has a strong shell for protection and heat-sealing with only a small opening on the top. For loading and unloading, the user needs to reach through the opening to place the sample into the device. This is problematic because a robot arm is usually thicker and less flexible than a human arm. Adapting the design of the robot's grippers solves this issue. Long grippers enable the robot to reach to the bottom of the centrifuge. However, they can be at a disadvantage when performing other operations in space-limited areas of the automated platform.

(p5.3) Another solution to this problem has been realized in the cooling storage for falcontubes, which is a custom-made device integrated in the automated platform StemCellDiscovery [13]. This device also controls its inside temperature for cooling the cell medium and has temperature-isolated walls with only a small opening at the top. As this opening is too small for a robot gripper, the device has a lifting mechanism. The tubes are vertically moved through the opening where the robot can easily take them.
