# Impact of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic on scientific research and implications for clinical academic training -A review

CorpusID: 231610946 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/304317e56f223185bccb2d841bc8e1f3d6d3758f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/304317e56f223185bccb2d841bc8e1f3d6d3758f)

Fields: Education, Medicine

## (s1) The evolution and current status of COVID-19
(p1.0) The last ten months have necessitated unprecedented global efforts to understand SARS-CoV-2 and the disease that it is responsible for causing, COVID-19. When SARS-CoV-1 was first identified in humans in 2002, the genomic sequencing of the virus cost several months [4]. Technological advancements have since allowed SARS-CoV-2 to be mapped within weeks of the first recognised case [5]. Months later, this genetic information has enabled sophisticated tracing of transmission chains, allowing researchers to understand that a particularly infectious variant of the virus has now become globally dominant [6,7].
## (s4) Impact on researchers
(p4.0) Early-career researchers (ECR) and PhD students have been particularly hard struck by the COVID-19 pandemic [31]. The income of both are vulnerable to economic change and research programme time is often limited. PhD students typically rely on fellowships spanning one to four years in length. Added time due to lost productivity owing to COVID-19 may result in the incurrence of additional tuition and research consumable fees. ECRs are expected to yield high outputs during their short-term contracts, spanning one to two years in length. An inability to complete the originally proposed research programme objectives within a pre-defined timeline could impact future job applications [31].
## (s15) The evolution and current status of COVID-19
(p15.0) The last ten months have necessitated unprecedented global efforts to understand SARS-CoV-2 and the disease that it is responsible for causing, COVID-19. When SARS-CoV-1 was first identified in humans in 2002, the genomic sequencing of the virus cost several months [4]. Technological advancements have since allowed SARS-CoV-2 to be mapped within weeks of the first recognised case [5]. Months later, this genetic information has enabled sophisticated tracing of transmission chains, allowing researchers to understand that a particularly infectious variant of the virus has now become globally dominant [6,7].
## (s18) Impact on researchers
(p18.0) Early-career researchers (ECR) and PhD students have been particularly hard struck by the COVID-19 pandemic [31]. The income of both are vulnerable to economic change and research programme time is often limited. PhD students typically rely on fellowships spanning one to four years in length. Added time due to lost productivity owing to COVID-19 may result in the incurrence of additional tuition and research consumable fees. ECRs are expected to yield high outputs during their short-term contracts, spanning one to two years in length. An inability to complete the originally proposed research programme objectives within a pre-defined timeline could impact future job applications [31].
## (s29) The evolution and current status of COVID-19
(p29.0) The last ten months have necessitated unprecedented global efforts to understand SARS-CoV-2 and the disease that it is responsible for causing, COVID-19. When SARS-CoV-1 was first identified in humans in 2002, the genomic sequencing of the virus cost several months [4]. Technological advancements have since allowed SARS-CoV-2 to be mapped within weeks of the first recognised case [5]. Months later, this genetic information has enabled sophisticated tracing of transmission chains, allowing researchers to understand that a particularly infectious variant of the virus has now become globally dominant [6,7].
## (s32) Impact on researchers
(p32.0) Early-career researchers (ECR) and PhD students have been particularly hard struck by the COVID-19 pandemic [31]. The income of both are vulnerable to economic change and research programme time is often limited. PhD students typically rely on fellowships spanning one to four years in length. Added time due to lost productivity owing to COVID-19 may result in the incurrence of additional tuition and research consumable fees. ECRs are expected to yield high outputs during their short-term contracts, spanning one to two years in length. An inability to complete the originally proposed research programme objectives within a pre-defined timeline could impact future job applications [31].
## (s43) The evolution and current status of COVID-19
(p43.0) The last ten months have necessitated unprecedented global efforts to understand SARS-CoV-2 and the disease that it is responsible for causing, COVID-19. When SARS-CoV-1 was first identified in humans in 2002, the genomic sequencing of the virus cost several months [4]. Technological advancements have since allowed SARS-CoV-2 to be mapped within weeks of the first recognised case [5]. Months later, this genetic information has enabled sophisticated tracing of transmission chains, allowing researchers to understand that a particularly infectious variant of the virus has now become globally dominant [6,7].
## (s46) Impact on researchers
(p46.0) Early-career researchers (ECR) and PhD students have been particularly hard struck by the COVID-19 pandemic [31]. The income of both are vulnerable to economic change and research programme time is often limited. PhD students typically rely on fellowships spanning one to four years in length. Added time due to lost productivity owing to COVID-19 may result in the incurrence of additional tuition and research consumable fees. ECRs are expected to yield high outputs during their short-term contracts, spanning one to two years in length. An inability to complete the originally proposed research programme objectives within a pre-defined timeline could impact future job applications [31].
