# MINI REVIEW Digital Twin for Accelerating Sustainability in Positive Energy District: A Review of Simulation Tools and Applications

CorpusID: 235487125 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c420aefdf055022fe1d0afb2128941ee551833cb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c420aefdf055022fe1d0afb2128941ee551833cb)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s1) CONCEPT AND WORKING PRINCIPLE FOR PEDs
(p1.0) A digital PED twin usually consists of four important components: (1) a virtual model of PED, (2) sensor network integration, (3) data analytics, and (4) stakeholder layer, which combines capacities of a virtual model, data management, analytics, simulation, system controls, visualization, and information sharing. Figure 1 displays a schematic of how a digital PED twin is made. The virtual model is a visualization process for a PED that can derive from 3D models extracted from building information modeling (BIM) or the custom 3D models of PED. The information and data within a digital PED twin can be collected and transferred by various sensor networks to create real-time monitoring, which often includes weather conditions (temperature, solar irradiation, etc.), material (new or wasted), cost, carbon emissions and footprint, facility/system status, indoor air quality (IAQ), inhabitant behavior, electric vehicle (EV) mobility, energy demand, local energy supply, and social structural information. These data will be further analyzed by and exchanged in actions/decisions with different stakeholders for operations. In this sense, the stakeholders may refer to public institutions or government, property owners or managers, inhabitants, urban planners, engineers, financial company, utilities, and service providers, etc. This dynamic interaction allows for real-time analytics, informed decision making, resource efficiency, and comfort enhancement (Khajavi et al., 2019).

(p1.1) Ideally, in a digital PED twin, the real-time data are collected and transferred to a data analytic center, where all kinds of data are analyzed along with their complex systems for either prediction or optimization for a number of objectives of sustainability. The majority of energy data are used in improving energy self-consumption, maximizing economic benefits, and minimizing carbon emissions, etc. The growing platform also incorporates other real-time dynamics, such as climate data, occupancy, monitored air quality data, and traffic data, as well as information about socio-demographics. For individual buildings, some of these data can be interpreted for maintaining IAQ level as a virtual model provides an extra opportunity for analytical insights for urban planners to explore the microenvironment impact of constructing new buildings. At the district level, the possibilities of generated heat and noise maps can help planners to create a more comfortable and cooler living environment for residents. In view of the features of dynamics information, it is also possible to identify enormous potential in social dimension. The representations using 3D semantic modeling are capable of improving conceptual urban design, simulating emergency, and carrying out socio-economic impact studies. The predicted or optimized information is, if necessary, sent further to stakeholders for decisions, or returned to the individual systems in reality for regular operations. Such a digital twin increases system resilience by considering interdependent systems and optimizing the decisions and operations of the future.

(p1.2) The considerable benefits of a digital PED twin can be anticipated. The digital twin environment will facilitate interaction and collaboration between all stakeholders involved in a PED's life cycle, by enabling integrated data, information, knowledge, and decision sharing capabilities. Such activity will further increase public and individual awareness. Since data and feedback are provided in real time, they can increase energy systems' flexibility and robustness during operation. A PED-centered digital twin can aggregate all data through the whole life cycle of a PED from design and construction (renovation), to operational and demolishment phases, hence improving the sustainability by more resourceefficient, economic and environmental decision taking (Alonso et al., 2019). 
