# Ethical practice in medicine: a review

CorpusID: 242372802 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4697db2f16e526790a5f7f5c460537ee0ac827d5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4697db2f16e526790a5f7f5c460537ee0ac827d5)

Fields: Medicine, Philosophy

## (s1) Method And Materials
(p1.0) The qualitative research design was used in developing this review. The review process followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines [14]. The guideline was used for checking the eligibility of published materials issued in the English language by peer-reviewed journals. Conceivable key term combinations were done using Boolean operators AND and/or OR. Published articles issued by reputable journals were accessed from PubMed and Google Scholar databases. However, the searching strategy is not applicable by unique combination of keywords. Searching was done by KA and TD separately.

(p1.1) Published journals were subsequently screened, selected and checked using the title, abstract and fulltext articles check for eligibility. Duplications were also checked after articles were searched by the two investigators. Citation and referencing were done using EndNote X 5 version citation manager software to manage the citation. Data extraction was done independently using a prede ned data extraction checklist. Inconsistent data between the two data abstracters were resolved by discussion and reconciliation. Data were abstracted using ( rst author, year of publication, setting) and key ndings ('medical ethics, code of ethics, bioethics, and healthcare ethics) and additional related ndings were paraphrased ( g 1). Then, after abstraction, relevant studies were included using texts and graphical presentation.
