# Potential therapeutic effect of Shufeng Jiedu capsule and its major herbs on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): A review

CorpusID: 245582870 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/13e633fc63aa4f94894f3f1794b1392f0e83f703](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/13e633fc63aa4f94894f3f1794b1392f0e83f703)

Fields: Medicine

## (s10) Glycyrrhiza uralensis
(p10.0) Glycyrrhiza uralensis is a medicinal herb that belongs to the Leguminaceae family (24). Glycyrrhiza uralensis is found in southern Europe (Glycyrrhiza glabra) and East Asia (Glycyrrhiza uralensis), and has been used for traditional medicinal purposes for almost two thousand years (24). According to phytochemical studies, the main bioactive constituents of Glycyrrhiza uralensis are flavonoids and triterpenoid saponins, including licochalcone A, glycyrrhizic acid, isoliquiritigenin, liquiritigenin, and liquiritin, which exhibit a variety of wide range of pharmacological activities, including antiasthmatic, antiemetic, antipyretic, antitussive, depurative, diuretic, febrifuge, lithontriptic, sedative, sialogogue, and stomachic (39). Phytochemical investigations have proven that this genus is rich in terpenoids, flavonoids, coumarins, acetylenes, caffeoylquinic acids, sterols, and amylase (40).
## (s13) Potential therapeutic effect of SFJDC on COVID-19
(p13.0) Currently, SARS-CoV-2 infection and immune dysfunction are believed to be the two main factors driving the pathogenesis of COVID-19 (53). In the early course of infection, the manifestation of the disease is primarily driven by the replication cycle of SARS-CoV-2. In the late course of infection, the severity of the disease is driven by a remarkable inflammatory/immune response to the virus. Thus, the anti-viral and antiinflammatory/anti-oxidative capabilities and properties of SFJDC might act in tandem to improve the outcomes of infected patients. The potential therapeutic effects of SFJDC on SARS-CoV-2 are summarized in Figure 3. 
## (s18) Network pharmacology tools to analyze the mechanism of SFJDC prevention and treatment of COVID-19
(p18.0) More recently, to identify new candidates with potential activity against SARS-CoV-2 viral targets, several studies employed computer modeling to explore the mechanism of SFJDC using network pharmacology and molecular docking technology. In this section, the active ingredients of SFJDC for the treatment of COVID-19 were predicted by network pharmacology methods, including quercetin, resveratrol, emodin, and phillyrin.

(p18.1) Among the viral proteins of SARS-CoV-2, 3C-like protease (3CLpro), a protease highly conserved among coronaviruses, is an attractive target for antiviral inhibitors owing to its indispensable role in viral replication and gene expression of viral proteins (78). Thus, molecules that can inhibit SARS-CoV-2 3CLpro would hinder viral replication and represent appropriate candidates for the development of low-toxicity drugs against this devastating pathogen. Quercetin has been reported to interact with 3CLpro using biophysical techniques and bind to the active site in molecular simulations (79). In particular, the study revealed a significant inhibition by quercetin of 3CLpro with a docking binding energy corresponding to -6.25 kcal/ mol (79). Consistently, protein-chemical interactions suggest quercetin is a promising drug candidate against COVID-19 and other SARS-like viral infections (80).

(p18.2) Recently, network pharmacology and bioinformatics analysis were conducted to uncover the pharmacological mechanisms of resveratrol against COVID-19 (81). A significant overlap in geneontology (GO) terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways was found between SFJDC targets and SARS-CoV-2 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (81). The shared targets were highly enriched in inflammationrelated pathways, including the IL-17 signaling pathway, NF-κB signaling pathway, and TNF signaling pathway (81). Resveratrol has also been suggested to be a promising drug candidate against COVID-19 through protein-chemical interactions (80). Collectively, these studies revealed that resveratrol is a promising therapeutic candidate for COVID-19 and highlighted the probable key targets and pathways involved.
