# How Does Learning Analytics Contribute to Prevent Students' Dropout in Higher Education: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 243785565 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/abcec95da0d4c7cd5aa33b902362556dd62d5181](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/abcec95da0d4c7cd5aa33b902362556dd62d5181)

Fields: Computer Science, Education

## (s20) How Effective Is LA in Reducing Student Dropout?
(p20.0) In general terms, the models and works described in the analysed documents are able to perform early prediction of the intended information (for example, students' performance or grades), allowing the teacher and/or the institution to take actions to avoid undesired effects (attrition, dropout, desertion, risk of failure or retention). Next, we present a summary of the work described in each of the analysed studies.

(p20.1) In the work in [71], the objective of the study was to implement an algorithm to predict grades. The results indicate that the early prognosis of students at risk of failure can be accurately achieved, compared to supervised models, even for a small amount of initially collected data from the first two semesters. This yields an early alert tool with interpretable models. The future work of the study includes generating synthetic data, applying preprocessing stages that may help discriminate better the initially gathered data, combining semi-supervised clustering with other learners and active learning with semi-supervised learning, the use of transfer learning, and the modification of transductive approaches.

(p20.2) In [72], the objective was to perform an in-depth analysis of the learning behaviour patterns of MOOC learners; for this, the authors proposed a feature matrix for keeping information related to the local correlation of learning behaviours and a CNN model for predicting the dropout. The results showed that the proposed CNN model can be used for temporal dropout prediction and early dropout prediction once a sufficiently large amount of data are obtained. In the future, the authors wish to construct more reasonable network structures to predict dropout and further explore the correlations between parallel MOOCs selected by learners.
