# Design of Fieldable Cross-Layer Optimized Network using Embedded Software Defined Radios: Survey and Novel Architecture with Field Trials

CorpusID: 246240861 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0fef09969a3bbb45fd9a38cae3f5a6588f8472fa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0fef09969a3bbb45fd9a38cae3f5a6588f8472fa)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) In recent years, we have seen explosive growth in the number of wireless devices that have become an inevitable component of our daily lives. This includes everything such as the connected devices in our smart homes, cellular network, the entire concept of Internet-of-Thing (IoT) networks controlling manufacturing, monitoring smart grids, space communications, underwater networks, tactical networks, among others. As we move from 5G (5th Generation) to 6G (6th Generation), the need to optimize the scarce resources is becoming evident and inevitable [1]- [7]. We have also seen a drive towards the software virtualization of these devices and networks to provide much-required flexibility and adaptability to the growing needs of each application. The inability to adapt the network operations depending on varying requirements and dynamic deployed scenarios due to black-box style wireless stack leads to inefficient resource usage and suboptimal performance. Dynamic network control and agile management (user scheduling, radio resources, mobility management) are the envisioned benefits of the next-generation wireless network paradigms such as software-defined networking (SDN), network function virtualization (NFV), and multi-access edge computing (MEC) [8]. Therefore, a reconfigurable radio stack that can be transformed based on diverse applications as well as to adapt to the dynamic wireless conditions is favored.
## (s1) A. Motivation, Problem Statement, and Contribution
(p1.0) Motivation: Even with the advances discussed above, to the best of our knowledge, there does not exist a ruggedized and arXiv:2201.09454v1 [cs.NI] 24 Jan 2022 fieldable SDR with a comprehensive cross-layer optimization capable software module implemented on an embedded ARM processor. The main reason for this is the various hurdles that are associated with developing the solution from theory to effective hardware deployable software. In this article, we aim to demonstrate that this challenge can be overcome using a Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) embedded SDR (e-SDR) and a novel efficient software architecture. Therefore, in this article, we present the first, completely stand-alone, ruggedized, and fieldable cross-layer optimized solution built using a low SWaP (Size, Weight, and Power) e-SDR.

(p1.1) Problem Statement: Driven by our motivation, we define a specific problem statement that is considered in this work. Design a fieldable e-SDR with an energy-aware cross-layer optimized protocol that aims to maximize network lifetime for enabling telemetry collection of tactical test and evaluation ranges.

(p1.2) The primary objective of this work is the transition of theoretical cross-layer concepts that have been shown to be effective in simulations to a fieldable hardware entity. Our implementation principle has been to facilitate rapid reconfiguration of network objectives with only a few lines of code thereby enabling a truly software-defined radio that evolves with the growing requirements. To accomplish this, in the extension to our prior work [15], we first discuss the hardwarelevel modifications required to customize the baseline e-SDR into a fieldable solution. Next, we outline how the software protocol stack was designed and implemented on a computationally constrained ARM processor. To demonstrate the feasibility of the implementation and the designed transceiver in terms of throughput and reliability, we performed extensive outdoor experiments with up to 10 nodes in the network. The proposed architecture and design principles can be leveraged to implement and mature several of the novel cross-layer optimized solutions to meet the evolving needs of both tactical and commercial communication systems. We hope and believe the unique cross-layer design methodologies and extensive outdoor evaluations (field trials) will serve as an impetus for the maturation of novel cross-layer solutions.
