# Genus Tetrastigma: A review of its folk uses, phytochemistry and pharmacology

CorpusID: 247531762 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5744152bf44194c4f93914758db4f46da5af2464](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5744152bf44194c4f93914758db4f46da5af2464)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Tetrastigma (Vitaceae) contains over 100 species widely spreading in Asia and Oceania. Among them, 45 species are distributed in China, mainly in Guangdong, Yunnan and Zhejiang Provinces and Guangxi autonomous region, in China . Some Tetrastigma species have a long history as ethnomedicines for the treatment of many diseases, such as menstrual disorders, rheumatic pain, bruises, gastralgia and other diseases in southwest China. These medicinal plants with remarkable curative effects were deeply loved by local people, especially Tetrastigma hemsleyanum Diels et Gilg, which was awarded as one of the new ''eight famous TCMs" in Zhejiang Province (Ji et al., 2021). The medicinal plants in this genus attracted increasing attention due to their structural diversity and remarkable pharmacological activities. Besides, many studies showed that the crude extracts and the monomeric compounds from Tetrastigma species exhibited diverse biological activities, such as antitumor, antioxidative, hepatoprotective, antiviral, anti-inflammatory, and analgesic activities (Fig. 1). The chemical and pharmacological research on this genus is limited, except the species T. hemsleyanum. In order to provide theoretical reference for further research and to comprehensively understand the medicinal applications on this genus, this paper systematically reviewed folk uses, chemical constituents, pharmacological activities and clinical applications of Tetrastigma species based on available databases including SciFinder, Pubmed, Google Scholar, CNKI and others over the past 20 years.
