# biomolecules A Review on Microbial Products and Their Perspective Application as Antimicrobial Agents

CorpusID: 245213230 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af99cb079f68c5892716b28c39cd1e8a34cfed01](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af99cb079f68c5892716b28c39cd1e8a34cfed01)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Chemistry, Environmental Science

## (s23) Marine-Derived Fungi
(p23.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 
## (s24) Marine-Derived Fungi
(p24.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 
## (s25) Marine-Derived Fungi
(p25.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 
## (s26) Marine-Derived Fungi
(p26.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 
## (s27) Marine-Derived Fungi
(p27.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity.   
