# Integrating Multiple Inputs Into an Artificial Pancreas System: Narrative Literature Review

CorpusID: 247083479 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d68eb2f2d0738233cff1fb95037447afdaa23f7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d68eb2f2d0738233cff1fb95037447afdaa23f7)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s2) Objectives
(p2.0) The main objective of this survey is to identify and review the MAPS that have been proposed to date in terms of used inputs, control architectures, and validation methods. To develop better systems, it is critical to understand the current state of MAPS and identify associated complexities. We aim to achieve this through conducting an in-depth analysis of previous related studies. The current pace of APS development has been slow, prompting movements such as #WeAreNotWaiting by people with T1D, which focuses on do-it-yourself APS [32]. This synthesis may accelerate work on developing improved MAPS. This survey identified a variety of additional signals that have been integrated into experimental APS. Most of the reviewed publications focused upon noninvasive inputs from wearable devices. These additional input signals have been integrated into different architectures to augment the controllers, in particular (1) for activity detection and switching of controller modes, (2) as direct inputs to the controller for decision-making, and (3) for the development of intermediate modules of the controller (eg, hypoglycemia prediction or meal detection). A variety of physiological models, simulation environments, and clinical studies have been used for validation of the results. A detailed analysis is presented in later sections.
