# Dioptric power and refractive behaviour: a review of methods and applications

CorpusID: 247867326 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03ea6242c2fac54c2919b3e17e52064d34f48388](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03ea6242c2fac54c2919b3e17e52064d34f48388)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Myopic astigmatism
(p7.0) We have isolated this topic from the previous sections due to the rapidly increasing global prevalence of myopia and the large impact, now and in the future, that myopia is likely to exert on the global public health system and individual quality of life also. 131 Moderate to severe myopia are important for effects in relation to foveal integrity and retinal nerve fibre layer thickness as well as factors such as retinal detachment. 131 Treatments for myopia (such as refractive surgery, low-dose atropine, gene therapy, lenses and others) 132-136 need further study with power vectors and matrices but studies are available and more emerge each year.

(p7.1) Although the emphasis in studies of myopic astigmatism is towards understanding distributions of refractive behaviour and especially that relating to myopia, power vectors and matrices are also of interest when considering reliability, validity and precision of measurement instruments in relation to refractive behaviour. For example, Cervino et al 137 used power vectors to study instrument myopia in adults (mean age: 20.8±2.5 years) with three different wavefront analysers and a binocular open-view autorefractor (SRW-5000). Their sample was relatively small at 80 eyes (21 women and 19 men) and measurements were obtained without cycloplegia. They considered outliers and concluded there was slightly more myopia on average (0.3 D) with the wavefront aberrometers than with binocular open view autorefraction but, overall, they found good agreement across the different instruments and there were no significant inter-instrumental differences for the antistigmatic coefficients (F J =J 0 and F K =J 45 ). Detailed exploration of myopia is outside the scope of this paper but research over the last two decades has emphasised myopia and its consequences and management and power vectors and matrices are important in that regard.

(p7.2) We have isolated this topic from the previous sections due to the rapidly increasing global prevalence of myopia and the large impact, now and in the future, that myopia is likely to exert on the global public health system and individual quality of life also. 131 Moderate to severe myopia are important for effects in relation to foveal integrity and retinal nerve fibre layer thickness as well as factors such as retinal detachment. 131 Treatments for myopia (such as refractive surgery, low-dose atropine, gene therapy, lenses and others) 132-136 need further study with power vectors and matrices but studies are available and more emerge each year.

(p7.3) Although the emphasis in studies of myopic astigmatism is towards understanding distributions of refractive behaviour and especially that relating to myopia, power vectors and matrices are also of interest when considering reliability, validity and precision of measurement instruments in relation to refractive behaviour. For example, Cervino et al 137 used power vectors to study instrument myopia in adults (mean age: 20.8±2.5 years) with three different wavefront analysers and a binocular open-view autorefractor (SRW-5000). Their sample was relatively small at 80 eyes (21 women and 19 men) and measurements were obtained without cycloplegia. They considered outliers and concluded there was slightly more myopia on average (0.3 D) with the wavefront aberrometers than with binocular open view autorefraction but, overall, they found good agreement across the different instruments and there were no significant inter-instrumental differences for the antistigmatic coefficients (F J =J 0 and F K =J 45 ). Detailed exploration of myopia is outside the scope of this paper but research over the last two decades has emphasised myopia and its consequences and management and power vectors and matrices are important in that regard.
## (s25) Myopic astigmatism
(p25.0) We have isolated this topic from the previous sections due to the rapidly increasing global prevalence of myopia and the large impact, now and in the future, that myopia is likely to exert on the global public health system and individual quality of life also. 131 Moderate to severe myopia are important for effects in relation to foveal integrity and retinal nerve fibre layer thickness as well as factors such as retinal detachment. 131 Treatments for myopia (such as refractive surgery, low-dose atropine, gene therapy, lenses and others) 132-136 need further study with power vectors and matrices but studies are available and more emerge each year.

(p25.1) Although the emphasis in studies of myopic astigmatism is towards understanding distributions of refractive behaviour and especially that relating to myopia, power vectors and matrices are also of interest when considering reliability, validity and precision of measurement instruments in relation to refractive behaviour. For example, Cervino et al 137 used power vectors to study instrument myopia in adults (mean age: 20.8±2.5 years) with three different wavefront analysers and a binocular open-view autorefractor (SRW-5000). Their sample was relatively small at 80 eyes (21 women and 19 men) and measurements were obtained without cycloplegia. They considered outliers and concluded there was slightly more myopia on average (0.3 D) with the wavefront aberrometers than with binocular open view autorefraction but, overall, they found good agreement across the different instruments and there were no significant inter-instrumental differences for the antistigmatic coefficients (F J =J 0 and F K =J 45 ). Detailed exploration of myopia is outside the scope of this paper but research over the last two decades has emphasised myopia and its consequences and management and power vectors and matrices are important in that regard.

(p25.2) We have isolated this topic from the previous sections due to the rapidly increasing global prevalence of myopia and the large impact, now and in the future, that myopia is likely to exert on the global public health system and individual quality of life also. 131 Moderate to severe myopia are important for effects in relation to foveal integrity and retinal nerve fibre layer thickness as well as factors such as retinal detachment. 131 Treatments for myopia (such as refractive surgery, low-dose atropine, gene therapy, lenses and others) 132-136 need further study with power vectors and matrices but studies are available and more emerge each year.

(p25.3) Although the emphasis in studies of myopic astigmatism is towards understanding distributions of refractive behaviour and especially that relating to myopia, power vectors and matrices are also of interest when considering reliability, validity and precision of measurement instruments in relation to refractive behaviour. For example, Cervino et al 137 used power vectors to study instrument myopia in adults (mean age: 20.8±2.5 years) with three different wavefront analysers and a binocular open-view autorefractor (SRW-5000). Their sample was relatively small at 80 eyes (21 women and 19 men) and measurements were obtained without cycloplegia. They considered outliers and concluded there was slightly more myopia on average (0.3 D) with the wavefront aberrometers than with binocular open view autorefraction but, overall, they found good agreement across the different instruments and there were no significant inter-instrumental differences for the antistigmatic coefficients (F J =J 0 and F K =J 45 ). Detailed exploration of myopia is outside the scope of this paper but research over the last two decades has emphasised myopia and its consequences and management and power vectors and matrices are important in that regard.
