# Biobanking in dentistry: A review-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

CorpusID: 245603885 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/731fd80328f3ed2297a559a0d4e52ade5b6aa08d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/731fd80328f3ed2297a559a0d4e52ade5b6aa08d)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s5) Future perspectives
(p5.0) It is very important not to consider biobanks as static archives of samples and data. They are a dynamic resource, continuously evolving, improving and innovating, developing new techniques and serving new scientific requirements. The overall future goals of the development of biobanks should include an ever-increasing international networking and sharing of data and samples. As an example, the BBMRI-ERICs (BBMRI-European Research Infrastructure Consortium) Sample Locator (retrieved as a "request sample" link at https://directory.bbmri-eric.eu, 16 March 2021) is a federated tool enabling researchers to query biobanks about individual-level data stored in the Connectors of different biobanks in order to find out which biobanks host the samples and/or sample-related data meeting the researchers' needs. A Minimum Information About Biobank Data Sharing (MIABIS) terminology has been developed to describe samples, sample donors, and events [61].

(p5.1) Specifically as regards biobanks in dentistry, some aspects need to be further explored. Not all the biological material recoverable in dentistry is currently stored in repositories. The chances of retrieving further data and valuable samples could be increased by developing new biobanks for collecting uncommon biospecimens, such as alveolar bone, periodontal ligament, loose and adherent gum. Cells derived from these tissues may provide hope for future applications not only in bone and periodontal regeneration, but even for treating various systemic diseases [62].

(p5.2) It is also worth mentioning that the collection or use of oral samples from biobanks in everyday clinical work is still not feasible because some issues have yet to be fully addressed. For example, how long oral samples should be stored remains to be seen, and ethical regulations are still needed on the use of biospecimens (especially dental stem cells). Although biobanking is certified for long-term preservation, samples may change with time, and the analyses conducted on them when they were collected may no longer exactly reflect their condition. In the case of stem cells, whether they could still be used effectively after very long-term cryopreservation remains to be established.
