# Fat obtained from plastic surgery procedures-stem cells derived from adipose tissue and their potential in technological innovation: a narrative literature review and perspective on dissociative methods

CorpusID: 247387764 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed650ab73ce7179c1e5afe1d42d873b63b0756a1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed650ab73ce7179c1e5afe1d42d873b63b0756a1)

Fields: Medicine

## (s9) Computational model
(p9.0) Our search also identified a 3D computational fluid dynamics model based on a differential pressure laminar flow bioreactor prototype developed to examine the performance of constant changes in the culture environment [41]. This model characterizes the flow and pressure distribution within a perfusion bioreactor prototype, uniting biotechnology with computational Big Data, resulting in more precise control of the culture media. Next, we will discuss articles that reported innovative approaches for incorporating ASCs into tissue scaffolds, a theme observed in most of the selected articles.
## (s10) Tissue scaffolds
(p10.0) In the study by Tang et al. (2019), the effect of monocytes/ macrophages on the osteogenic differentiation of adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) in three dimensional (3D) cocultures was evaluated [42]. The authors showed that monocytes and macrophage subtypes inhibit the osteogenic differentiation of ASCs in 3D PLGA/PCL structures. More specifically, the cocultured monocytes/macrophages decreased the expression of osteogenic markers such as ALP, BSP, and RUNX2. These results highlight the overlooked fact that inflammation can regulate osteoblasts from MSC-based bone constructs within the bone microenvironment. In this sense, the tight control of inflammation may be necessary to create an anabolic environment and improve cell-based bone construct performance.

(p10.1) McMaster et al. (2019) demonstrated that melt electrowriting (MEW) could be adapted for seeding multicellular spheroids [43]. The authors manufactured this scaffold in sheet form and produced spheroids containing 1000-2000 ASC aggregates inside each pore. The cultures are easy to handle and can be transferred to other sites for mixed implants containing living organic and inorganic elements, augmenting implant grip and adaptation. This purely innovative and applied technology was due to the utility of 3D printers and the new electro-engraving by fusion technique.

(p10.2) In the study by Pati et al. (2014), the authors developed a method of biological imprinting with laden cells incorporated into a decellularized extracellular matrix (dECM) [44]. The bioink provides a favorable microenvironment for 3D tissue growth. The ability to print analog tissue structures by providing living cells with the appropriate material in a defined and organized way, in the right place, in sufficient numbers, and in the right environment, is critical for many emerging technologies. The concept of tissue and organ printing or bioprinting is performed in a liquid medium, making it useful for in vivo tissue engineering experiments and in vitro experiments with drugs and tissue models and tumor growth.
