# From the Contents An overview on CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated paraneoplastic neurological syndromes

CorpusID: 258798939 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2d831ee79544240a219d02cc8cc45b068607a7ae](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2d831ee79544240a219d02cc8cc45b068607a7ae)

Fields: Medicine

## (s21) Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis
(p21.0) The diagnostic criteria for PNS were established in 2004 and updated in 2021. Therefore, the diagnosis of PNS is well documented. Antibody detection is of great value in the diagnosis of PNS. Moreover, different antibodies correspond to different types of PNS, which have different clinical characteristics. Summarizing their unique clinical characteristics can help identify and diagnose antibody-negative PNS, especially when multiple antibodies coexist, and help discern whether one of them is a pathogenic antibody or only an immune concomitant antibody reflecting the presence of cancer. In  conclusion, documenting the unique clinical characteristics corresponding to different types of antibodies is crucial to improving the accuracy of clinical diagnosis and precision of treatment. Based on this, we summarized and condensed the clinical features of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS based on the available literature as follows: The diagnosis of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS is based on: (1) the presence of a clinical syndrome as described above, (2) the presence of CV2/CRMP5 antibodies in the serum or CSF, and (3) reasonable exclusion of alternative causes, including those causing CV2/CRPM5 antibody production (i.e., LEMS). According to the diagnostic criteria for PNS updated in 2021, CV2/ CRMP5 antibody-positive patients can be diagnosed with definite/probable/ possible PNS based on the PNS-Care score. The diagnostic level of "probable" or "possible" may change with the follow-up time (> or < 2 years, found tumor/not found) (Graus et al., 2021). Overall, the different manifestations of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS need to be differentiated from other diseases ( Table 2).
