# Author affiliations Health care costs and resource use of managing hemophilia A: A targeted literature review

CorpusID: 259089906 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/afb3da7f5b1f9f17362fe0cf1b2fe0a0ba622cb1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/afb3da7f5b1f9f17362fe0cf1b2fe0a0ba622cb1)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Implications for managed care pharmacy
(p1.0) The cost of managing HA is substantial and varies by disease severity, treatment type and intensity, age, weight, and inhibitor status. This study provides an in-depth analysis of current health care costs and resource utilization, providing a useful benchmark to understand the comparative cost-effectiveness of future therapies that may alter the costs of managing HA (eg, in-development gene therapies). This will have implications for clinical and coverage policies that guide managed care pharmacy benefits.

(p1.1) Health care costs and resource use of managing hemophilia A: A targeted literature review cost outcomes for patients with mild HA, which excluded patients with moderate and severe HA. 16 Patients with more severe disease often require more intense therapy and medical attention. Because of the wide array of available treatment strategies and data sources, these costs can vary. The objective of this targeted literature review was to identify, review, and summarize the published literature on the costs of managing congenital HA and to show the variation in resource use and costs.
## (s17) DISCLOSURES
(p17.0) Drs Solari and Thornhill are employees of Spark Therapeutics and Roche Group Shareholders. Ms Chen and Drs Cheng and Sullivan are employees of Curta, Inc. Spark Therapeutics paid Curta, Inc., to conduct the literature search. This study was funded by Spark Therapeutics. Spark Therapeutics was involved in the study design, collection, analysis and interpretation of data, article review, and the decision to submit the report for publication. Medical writing support was provided by Ashfield MedComms, an Inizio company. cost, which excludes the confidential discount rates and rebates agreed between drug manufacturers and payers. However, pharmacy claims are often able to tease apart the average wholesale price, actual payment to the pharmacy (ie, the discounted price paid by the insurer but not accounting for rebates), and the patient's out-of-pocket cost for the medication. 32 Furthermore, a few studies did not report currency year and/or adjust for medical inflation. In cases where a currency year was not reported, we adjusted for inflation using the last year of the study's follow-up period. Together, these factors complicate the understanding of the economic burden of managing HA with emerging treatment options.
