# Overview of the Role of Spatial Factors in Indoor SARS-CoV-2

CorpusID: 252143778 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1c0a5402491b7f50b2b63f0e01ca24e7637b3997](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1c0a5402491b7f50b2b63f0e01ca24e7637b3997)

Fields: Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s8) Exposure and Infection
(p8.0) There are generally four ways of virus exposure as follows: (1) respiratory fluid exchange between facial membrane, (2) RDs deposition by direct splash on exposed facial membrane, (3) touching facial membrane with hands contaminated with RDs or virusbearing surfaces, and (4) inhalation of fine RDs and droplet nuclei.

(p8.1) The virus can cause infections in different organs of the body, but the relationship between the location of virus deposition and the mechanism of infection remains unclear. In the first three exposures, the viral particles can trigger an infection once they meet the facial membrane. For the fourth, inhaled particles can deposit on the surface of the respiratory tract and cause infection. The nose is reportedly more sensitive to SARS-CoV-2 than the mouth and eyes [54]. Larger particles >10 µm generally settle in the nasopharynx and particles smaller than 5µm can be directly inhaled into the alveoli [55]. The infective dose, i.e., the number of particles that lead to an infection, is highly dependent on virus biological data, which is generally difficult to obtain early in an epidemic. Karimzadeh et al. [56] estimated that the minimum infective dose of COVID-19 in humans is higher than 100 particles. Additional studies are needed to complement epidemiological data that provide insights into the dose-response relationship between received doses and disease outcomes for different exposures.
## (s19) . (S O -E A -V S ) Opening Design Determines Airflow Field Due to Natural Ventilation
(p19.0) Spatial openings generally refer to windows and doors, both of which are related to indoor-airflow organization caused by natural ventilation. The position of the window openings in the horizontal and vertical directions is the main factor affecting the airflow pattern, which is usually studied through field measurements and numerical simulations. Zhou et al. [91] investigated the influence of the position of the window opening on the effective ventilation of the room and found that ventilation rates reached the minimum when the window opening was located at the centre of the windward face. Vertically, the further the window is from the centre of the windward side, the greater the ventilation [91].
## (s32) Infection Risk Calculation Model
(p32.0) Calculating the risk of infection involves estimating the dosage received by an individual and then calculating the probability of infection under a given dose. The dose-response model allows for a more complete and accurate assessment of infection risk from the multi-route transmission, including droplet, airborne and contact transmission. When the distribution of the virus in the accessible medium follows the Poisson probability distribution, the dose-response model can be expressed as [122]:

(p32.1) where P I (%) represents the infection probability, k is the number of virus species ingested and surviving in the host, r is the probability of a virus surviving in the body and causing an infection and N is the intake dose. This dose-response equation becomes an exponential equation through the simplification of the summation series:

(p32.2) It reflects the interaction between the human body and the virus and the infectivity of the virus. When there are multiple transmission routes and the infectivity of the virus varies with the deposition site, the total infection risk through multi-route transmission can be calculated by Equation (3):
