# A Survey of AI-Based Anomaly Detection in IoT and Sensor Networks

CorpusID: 256320630 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e91621d106fdf03c4cfcf00b818c28d0cde1595b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e91621d106fdf03c4cfcf00b818c28d0cde1595b)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s8) Comparison of Performance
(p8.0) This survey focused on anomaly detection across multiple applications, methods, and approaches. However, the data-sets used in this survey were not all unique to each work. As such, there was some overlap in the AD methods surveyed and the data-sets they used. Here, we compare the performance of any AD approach that utilizes the same data-set.

(p8.1) Of all the works surveyed, eight papers used at least one data-set that was the same as at least one other paper. Table 3 breaks down the works surveyed and the similar data-sets between them. 

(p8.2) SWaT is the Secure Water Treatment data-set and is a water treatment data-set collected across 11 days, which simulates cyber attacks on a water treatment system in the last 4 days of running. WaDI is a water distribution data-set, which is an extension of SWaT. WaDI contains 16 days of data with 2 days of simulated attacks.

(p8.3) The work in [12,14] utilized both of these data-sets and provided their results using the precision, recall, and F1-score. The work in [12] utilized a graph deviation network (GDN) composed of an embedding function, graph structure learning relying on directed graphs to capture the dependencies between sensors, an attention mechanism to forecast future values of the sensors, and a deviation scoring mechanism. The work in [14] also leveraged a directed graph structure learning policy and did so using the Gumbel softmax sampling strategy inspired by the policy learning network used in some reinforcement learning methods. In addition, the work in [14] leveraged techniques from graph convolutional networks (GCNs) and a customized multi-branch attention Transformer to capture timerelated dependencies in the data.

(p8.4) The work in [14] reported multiple different versions of their metrics based on their best runs as defined by the recall (represented by *) and F1-score (represented by **). Metrics for each work for the SWaT data-set are reported in Table 4. Table 5 reports metrics for the WADI data-set. In [14], more weight was given to the recall and F1-score. Their justification was that, in a real-world scenario, the tolerance of false alarms is preferable if better performance in detecting real anomalies is shown. If we use this as the context for comparison, the work in [14] significantly outperformed [12] in both recall and F1-score. This indicates that the GTA method of [14] provided a significant improvement over the state-of-the-art. The work in [12] was referenced in [14] for comparison purposes against these two data-sets and performed second-best when compared to the other comparison methods used by [14].

(p8.5) SMAP is a soil moisture data-set generated by satellite imagery, and MSL is a sensor data-set from the Mars Rover. Both of these data-sets are provided by NASA and contain labeled anomalies.
## (s10) Research Directions and Opportunities
(p10.0) While this survey laid out the research being performed in anomaly detection, it also outlined gaps in the research. The availability of robust data-sets for sensor networks is hard to come by. Recent work on benchmarks such as Stanford's Open Graph Benchmark (OGB) (https://github.com/snap-stanford/ogb, (accessed on 24 January 2023)) [61] are assisting with this deficiency. A future direction in the area of data-set generation can focus on the collection of IoT sensor data similar to what was done with Chicago's Array of Things (https://arrayofthings.github.io/, (accessed on 24 January 2023)).
