# An Overview of IoT Solutions in Climate Smart Agriculture for Food Security in Sub Saharan Africa: Challenges and Prospects

CorpusID: 252230782 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54022dc7a1f686c81013f0a079d3673ac3c56ca4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54022dc7a1f686c81013f0a079d3673ac3c56ca4)

Fields: Computer Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s1) Food Insecurity Status in Sub Saharan Africa and Aggravating Factors
(p1.0) Food security as defined by the 1996 world food summit organized by the food and agriculture organization (FAO) of the United Nations (UN) is a situation where all people irrespective of time and geographic location have physical, social, and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious foods that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for a healthy life (3). Food security is composed of four components i.e. food availability, food access, utilization, and stability (4). Food availability deals with the availability of food in sufficient quantity and quality; food access is the ability of people to acquire appropriate foods in the context of nutritious diets through adequate resources within the community in which they live; food utilization deals with the ability to utilize food through adequate diet, clean water, sanitation, and health care to reach a state of nutritional well-being which meets all physiological needs; stability is when a population have access to adequate food at all times (4). For these four components to be fully satisfied, a lot of objectives must be met. The challenges associated with meeting the objectives that will guarantee food security varies from one region of the world to another owing to differences in weather, climatic conditions, and other natural factors. However, proper utilization of modern technologies such as IoT, broadband, cloud computing, Big Data Analytics and AI will go a long way to providing optimal solutions.

(p1.1) In this section of the paper, attention will be focused on sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) as a region where we will discuss the factors that have made it very challenging for SSA to meet all the four components of food security despite the abundance of arable lands and favorable climatic conditions as shown in Fig. 1(5), which shows that temperature changes in SSA have been minimal for almost 60 years; this failure has made SSA an "insecure global region" in terms of food insecurity as shown in Fig. 2(6) which shows that moderate and severe food insecurity is very prevalent. Numerous research articles have been published by agricultural scientists on the current status of food security in SSA; a common denominator to all research findings in literature is that the major persistent issues that have been exacerbating food insecurity in SSA include lack of access to modern technologies like Broadband, IoT, Cloud computing, Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Big Data Analytics (7).
## (s6) Application Programming Interface (API) -Oriented Architecture
(p6.0) The API architectures based on Representational State Transfer (REST)-based methods were developed as an alternative to SOA and remote method invocation (RMI) schemes, and their major requirements are network bandwidth, computational capacity, and storage capacity. This architecture is well-suited for building IoT applications that connect to physical systems and devices differently. Consider a typical scenario as shown in Fig.  6b (40) in which two different IoT objects with different protocols are connected to the same IoT service platform through the API architecture based on REST. The RESTbased API takes care of the different communication protocols from IoT objects making the job of the IoT service platform easier. As a result of this, the API architecture based on REST enables service providers to focus on the functionality and the performance of their products and services rather than presentation. This architecture also allows multitenancy because it offers efficient service monitoring and tools for pricing which are better than service-oriented approaches (37).
## (s32) Challenges, Solutions, and Open Issues in Application of IoT in Agriculture in SSA
(p32.0) In the application of IoT in agriculture in SSA, several challenges must be overcome if IoT is to become ubiquitous with universal penetration across the continent. These challenges include finance, illiteracy, technical skills, and local content.

(p32.1) Finance is a major determinant in the success of the application of IoT in agriculture because the cost of commercial IoT devices is on the high side for most lowincome countries, especially in SSA (110). As a result of this, any attempt by SSA countries to deploy IoT in agricultural programs may be impeded by finance.
