# Exploring mHealth applications for self-management of chronic low back pain: A survey of features and benefits

CorpusID: 258931224 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/63642d5da06142eeb9709088329e23e0095a2ae1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/63642d5da06142eeb9709088329e23e0095a2ae1)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s4) Methodology
(p4.0) We conducted our literature using a free-form method described in the following using the PRISMA [64] annotation. We did not keep a comprehensive records tally at each stage of the process, only the result.

(p4.1) We used Google Scholar as our records database and conducted manual searches using a combination of keywords in detail in Table 1. Each search included one keyword from each group, resulting in search strings like "medical experts viewpoint mHealth pain management chronic low back pain". We iterated this process systematically (picking keywords from each category) multiple times until saturation, i.e. no new papers surfaced in the search results. A researcher initially screened each result (title, abstract) and chose to be included or excluded. If an article was not available through open access or our university, it was also excluded. The included articles were then retrieved for further analysis. Table 1 Keywords and keyword groups used in our literature search process.

(p4.2) We conducted our literature using a free-form method described in the following using the PRISMA [64] annotation. We did not keep a comprehensive records tally at each stage of the process, only the result.

(p4.3) We used Google Scholar as our records database and conducted manual searches using a combination of keywords in detail in Table 1. Each search included one keyword from each group, resulting in search strings like "medical experts viewpoint mHealth pain management chronic low back pain". We iterated this process systematically (picking keywords from each category) multiple times until saturation, i.e. no new papers surfaced in the search results. A researcher initially screened each result (title, abstract) and chose to be included or excluded. If an article was not available through open access or our university, it was also excluded. The included articles were then retrieved for further analysis. Table 1 Keywords and keyword groups used in our literature search process.
## (s7) Health professionals' viewpoint
(p7.0) This section will provide an overview of the existing literature on health professionals' perceptions of using mHealth solutions to support people with CLBP in self-management. In the following paragraphs, we will summarize the key findings from these studies and discuss their implications for future research. Integrating digital self-management solutions into healthcare demand the involvement of healthcare professionals in adopting and using the solutions as part of the care pathway. Since people with CLBP usually self-manage, health professionals should help by providing them with skills and knowledge. Self-management does not mean that people are alone in managing their health conditions. On the contrary, it empowers people to know when they need advice for diagnostic assessment and symptom relief [81]. Therefore, health professionals are critical in supporting people with CLBP to self-manage their condition.
## (s21) The most significant features
(p21.0) Based on the benefit score and multiplicity of the features, "Physical activity" is a crucial feature for managing CLBP. Studies have shown that it is one of the most valuable treatments for improving disability and reducing pain in people with CLBP [101]. Therefore, CLBP application creators could include the "Physical activity" feature and make it more beneficial. Of course, if the feature is towards their aim and the application's purpose.

(p21.1) We also noticed a slogan in the description of one of the applications we reviewed: "TRACK IT BETTER, TREAT IT BETTER." This slogan highlights the importance of tracking one's health and wellness to manage pain. "Activity tracking" is a feature that nearly three-fourths of the applications in our dataset provided. The benefit score is also greater than the average. "Education/advice" is another essential feature, as gaining knowledge about one's pain and health can help individuals manage their condition. Many of the applications in our dataset offered educational resources, such as books, videos, and advice from health professionals, which can help people with CLBP learn more about their condition and how to manage it effectively.

(p21.2) Finally, "Personalization and customization" is a feature that has a good ratio between its frequency in the applications and its benefit score. People with CLBP often have different needs and preferences, and personalized and customizable treatment plans can help them manage their pain. This is why it is beneficial for mHealth applications for CLBP to offer features that allow users to tailor their treatment plans to their individual needs and preferences. Furthermore, mHealth application creators could provide people with CLBP information and advice (information about the nature of CLBP and encouragement to continue normal activities) tailored to their demands and abilities to help them self-manage their pain easier.

(p21.3) Based on the benefit score and multiplicity of the features, "Physical activity" is a crucial feature for managing CLBP. Studies have shown that it is one of the most valuable treatments for improving disability and reducing pain in people with CLBP [101]. Therefore, CLBP application creators could include the "Physical activity" feature and make it more beneficial. Of course, if the feature is towards their aim and the application's purpose.

(p21.4) We also noticed a slogan in the description of one of the applications we reviewed: "TRACK IT BETTER, TREAT IT BETTER." This slogan highlights the importance of tracking one's health and wellness to manage pain. "Activity tracking" is a feature that nearly three-fourths of the applications in our dataset provided. The benefit score is also greater than the average. "Education/advice" is another essential feature, as gaining knowledge about one's pain and health can help individuals manage their condition. Many of the applications in our dataset offered educational resources, such as books, videos, and advice from health professionals, which can help people with CLBP learn more about their condition and how to manage it effectively.

(p21.5) Finally, "Personalization and customization" is a feature that has a good ratio between its frequency in the applications and its benefit score. People with CLBP often have different needs and preferences, and personalized and customizable treatment plans can help them manage their pain. This is why it is beneficial for mHealth applications for CLBP to offer features that allow users to tailor their treatment plans to their individual needs and preferences. Furthermore, mHealth application creators could provide people with CLBP information and advice (information about the nature of CLBP and encouragement to continue normal activities) tailored to their demands and abilities to help them self-manage their pain easier.
## (s23) The least significant features
(p23.0) Few applications provide the "Artificial intelligence" feature, and its benefit score is also low. According to Esmaeilzadeh et al. [110], who studied how patients perceive the benefits, risks, and use of AI clinical applications for their healthcare, incompatibility with instrumental, technical, ethical, or regulatory values can be a reason for rejecting AI applications in healthcare. Thus, various risks are still associated with implementing AI applications in diagnostics and treatment recommendations for patients with both acute and chronic illnesses. Before the widespread roll-out of AI, more research is needed to identify the challenges that may raise concerns about implementing and using AI applications. Regulatory agencies should establish normative standards and evaluation guidelines for implementing AI in healthcare in cooperation with healthcare institutions.
## (s24) Examining clusters of features
(p24.0) The results of our analysis indicate that the most significant feature category is the "Personalized diary" cluster, which suggests that recording daily activities such as pain, sleep, and diet is beneficial for the self-management of CLBP. This is supported by the fact that the cluster contains the "Personalization and customization" feature, which shows that developers are aware of the need to customize and personalize the applications to meet the unique needs of individual users.

(p24.1) Another interesting finding is that the "Gamified tracking" cluster is the least significant, indicating a lack of attention from developers and researchers in this area -or that these methods are simply not found to be very beneficial. This is surprising, given that the cluster contains the "Gamification" feature, which has been shown to be effective in encouraging users to continue using the application and increasing adherence to treatment plans [116]. It is possible that the challenges of implementing gamification in mHealth applications for CLBP are too significant or that there is simply not enough interest in this area.

(p24.2) Overall, our analysis suggests that personalized and customized approaches are beneficial for integrating into mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Future research and development in this area could focus on developing and implementing personalized and customized features to improve the effectiveness of mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Additionally, further research is needed to understand the challenges and barriers to implementing "Gamification" in mHealth applications for CLBP and to determine how to overcome these challenges to improve their functionality.

(p24.3) The results of our analysis indicate that the most significant feature category is the "Personalized diary" cluster, which suggests that recording daily activities such as pain, sleep, and diet is beneficial for the self-management of CLBP. This is supported by the fact that the cluster contains the "Personalization and customization" feature, which shows that developers are aware of the need to customize and personalize the applications to meet the unique needs of individual users.

(p24.4) Another interesting finding is that the "Gamified tracking" cluster is the least significant, indicating a lack of attention from developers and researchers in this area -or that these methods are simply not found to be very beneficial. This is surprising, given that the cluster contains the "Gamification" feature, which has been shown to be effective in encouraging users to continue using the application and increasing adherence to treatment plans [116]. It is possible that the challenges of implementing gamification in mHealth applications for CLBP are too significant or that there is simply not enough interest in this area.

(p24.5) Overall, our analysis suggests that personalized and customized approaches are beneficial for integrating into mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Future research and development in this area could focus on developing and implementing personalized and customized features to improve the effectiveness of mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Additionally, further research is needed to understand the challenges and barriers to implementing "Gamification" in mHealth applications for CLBP and to determine how to overcome these challenges to improve their functionality.
## (s44) Methodology
(p44.0) We conducted our literature using a free-form method described in the following using the PRISMA [64] annotation. We did not keep a comprehensive records tally at each stage of the process, only the result.

(p44.1) We used Google Scholar as our records database and conducted manual searches using a combination of keywords in detail in Table 1. Each search included one keyword from each group, resulting in search strings like "medical experts viewpoint mHealth pain management chronic low back pain". We iterated this process systematically (picking keywords from each category) multiple times until saturation, i.e. no new papers surfaced in the search results. A researcher initially screened each result (title, abstract) and chose to be included or excluded. If an article was not available through open access or our university, it was also excluded. The included articles were then retrieved for further analysis. Table 1 Keywords and keyword groups used in our literature search process.

(p44.2) We conducted our literature using a free-form method described in the following using the PRISMA [64] annotation. We did not keep a comprehensive records tally at each stage of the process, only the result.

(p44.3) We used Google Scholar as our records database and conducted manual searches using a combination of keywords in detail in Table 1. Each search included one keyword from each group, resulting in search strings like "medical experts viewpoint mHealth pain management chronic low back pain". We iterated this process systematically (picking keywords from each category) multiple times until saturation, i.e. no new papers surfaced in the search results. A researcher initially screened each result (title, abstract) and chose to be included or excluded. If an article was not available through open access or our university, it was also excluded. The included articles were then retrieved for further analysis. Table 1 Keywords and keyword groups used in our literature search process.
## (s47) Health professionals' viewpoint
(p47.0) This section will provide an overview of the existing literature on health professionals' perceptions of using mHealth solutions to support people with CLBP in self-management. In the following paragraphs, we will summarize the key findings from these studies and discuss their implications for future research. Integrating digital self-management solutions into healthcare demand the involvement of healthcare professionals in adopting and using the solutions as part of the care pathway. Since people with CLBP usually self-manage, health professionals should help by providing them with skills and knowledge. Self-management does not mean that people are alone in managing their health conditions. On the contrary, it empowers people to know when they need advice for diagnostic assessment and symptom relief [81]. Therefore, health professionals are critical in supporting people with CLBP to self-manage their condition.
## (s61) The most significant features
(p61.0) Based on the benefit score and multiplicity of the features, "Physical activity" is a crucial feature for managing CLBP. Studies have shown that it is one of the most valuable treatments for improving disability and reducing pain in people with CLBP [101]. Therefore, CLBP application creators could include the "Physical activity" feature and make it more beneficial. Of course, if the feature is towards their aim and the application's purpose.

(p61.1) We also noticed a slogan in the description of one of the applications we reviewed: "TRACK IT BETTER, TREAT IT BETTER." This slogan highlights the importance of tracking one's health and wellness to manage pain. "Activity tracking" is a feature that nearly three-fourths of the applications in our dataset provided. The benefit score is also greater than the average. "Education/advice" is another essential feature, as gaining knowledge about one's pain and health can help individuals manage their condition. Many of the applications in our dataset offered educational resources, such as books, videos, and advice from health professionals, which can help people with CLBP learn more about their condition and how to manage it effectively.

(p61.2) Finally, "Personalization and customization" is a feature that has a good ratio between its frequency in the applications and its benefit score. People with CLBP often have different needs and preferences, and personalized and customizable treatment plans can help them manage their pain. This is why it is beneficial for mHealth applications for CLBP to offer features that allow users to tailor their treatment plans to their individual needs and preferences. Furthermore, mHealth application creators could provide people with CLBP information and advice (information about the nature of CLBP and encouragement to continue normal activities) tailored to their demands and abilities to help them self-manage their pain easier.

(p61.3) Based on the benefit score and multiplicity of the features, "Physical activity" is a crucial feature for managing CLBP. Studies have shown that it is one of the most valuable treatments for improving disability and reducing pain in people with CLBP [101]. Therefore, CLBP application creators could include the "Physical activity" feature and make it more beneficial. Of course, if the feature is towards their aim and the application's purpose.

(p61.4) We also noticed a slogan in the description of one of the applications we reviewed: "TRACK IT BETTER, TREAT IT BETTER." This slogan highlights the importance of tracking one's health and wellness to manage pain. "Activity tracking" is a feature that nearly three-fourths of the applications in our dataset provided. The benefit score is also greater than the average. "Education/advice" is another essential feature, as gaining knowledge about one's pain and health can help individuals manage their condition. Many of the applications in our dataset offered educational resources, such as books, videos, and advice from health professionals, which can help people with CLBP learn more about their condition and how to manage it effectively.

(p61.5) Finally, "Personalization and customization" is a feature that has a good ratio between its frequency in the applications and its benefit score. People with CLBP often have different needs and preferences, and personalized and customizable treatment plans can help them manage their pain. This is why it is beneficial for mHealth applications for CLBP to offer features that allow users to tailor their treatment plans to their individual needs and preferences. Furthermore, mHealth application creators could provide people with CLBP information and advice (information about the nature of CLBP and encouragement to continue normal activities) tailored to their demands and abilities to help them self-manage their pain easier.
## (s63) The least significant features
(p63.0) Few applications provide the "Artificial intelligence" feature, and its benefit score is also low. According to Esmaeilzadeh et al. [110], who studied how patients perceive the benefits, risks, and use of AI clinical applications for their healthcare, incompatibility with instrumental, technical, ethical, or regulatory values can be a reason for rejecting AI applications in healthcare. Thus, various risks are still associated with implementing AI applications in diagnostics and treatment recommendations for patients with both acute and chronic illnesses. Before the widespread roll-out of AI, more research is needed to identify the challenges that may raise concerns about implementing and using AI applications. Regulatory agencies should establish normative standards and evaluation guidelines for implementing AI in healthcare in cooperation with healthcare institutions.
## (s64) Examining clusters of features
(p64.0) The results of our analysis indicate that the most significant feature category is the "Personalized diary" cluster, which suggests that recording daily activities such as pain, sleep, and diet is beneficial for the self-management of CLBP. This is supported by the fact that the cluster contains the "Personalization and customization" feature, which shows that developers are aware of the need to customize and personalize the applications to meet the unique needs of individual users.

(p64.1) Another interesting finding is that the "Gamified tracking" cluster is the least significant, indicating a lack of attention from developers and researchers in this area -or that these methods are simply not found to be very beneficial. This is surprising, given that the cluster contains the "Gamification" feature, which has been shown to be effective in encouraging users to continue using the application and increasing adherence to treatment plans [116]. It is possible that the challenges of implementing gamification in mHealth applications for CLBP are too significant or that there is simply not enough interest in this area.

(p64.2) Overall, our analysis suggests that personalized and customized approaches are beneficial for integrating into mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Future research and development in this area could focus on developing and implementing personalized and customized features to improve the effectiveness of mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Additionally, further research is needed to understand the challenges and barriers to implementing "Gamification" in mHealth applications for CLBP and to determine how to overcome these challenges to improve their functionality.

(p64.3) The results of our analysis indicate that the most significant feature category is the "Personalized diary" cluster, which suggests that recording daily activities such as pain, sleep, and diet is beneficial for the self-management of CLBP. This is supported by the fact that the cluster contains the "Personalization and customization" feature, which shows that developers are aware of the need to customize and personalize the applications to meet the unique needs of individual users.

(p64.4) Another interesting finding is that the "Gamified tracking" cluster is the least significant, indicating a lack of attention from developers and researchers in this area -or that these methods are simply not found to be very beneficial. This is surprising, given that the cluster contains the "Gamification" feature, which has been shown to be effective in encouraging users to continue using the application and increasing adherence to treatment plans [116]. It is possible that the challenges of implementing gamification in mHealth applications for CLBP are too significant or that there is simply not enough interest in this area.

(p64.5) Overall, our analysis suggests that personalized and customized approaches are beneficial for integrating into mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Future research and development in this area could focus on developing and implementing personalized and customized features to improve the effectiveness of mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Additionally, further research is needed to understand the challenges and barriers to implementing "Gamification" in mHealth applications for CLBP and to determine how to overcome these challenges to improve their functionality.
