# THIRTY-TWO YEARS OF CORRECTIVE FEEDBACK IN LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LEARNING: A REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

CorpusID: 253028367 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/214643e007a323e288f63fbf07a90d905e74c280](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/214643e007a323e288f63fbf07a90d905e74c280)

Fields: Education, Linguistics

## (s7) Corrective feedback: From 2016 to 2022
(p7.0) As observed, corrective feedback has been one of the controversial topics in L2 teaching. More research is published each year to investigate CF. Although CF has a very long history (i.e., more than five decades), more research has been published. Still, the conclusions and results from previous research indicate that more investigations are needed to investigate CF from different theoretical lenses. Atmaca, (2016) investigated teachers' and students' perceptions towards WCF in an EFL context. The results showed no significant differences between the groups, but the results from the open-ended questions revealed some differences. Furthermore, the conclusions suggested that teachers should explain their expectations from the beginning of the classes not to make misunderstandings between the teachers and the students. Most published studies on WCF are about the effectiveness of WCF and its types. For example, Aghajanloo et al. (2016) conducted their study to examine how much teachers' CF is effective in focusing on some types (i.e., focused direct CF, unfocused direct CF, focused indirect CF, and unfocused indirect CF). The results showed that those participants who received the CF outperformed those who did not. Regarding the effective types of CF, the results illustrated that unfocused directive CF has to be the focused type and be used as an important learning tool.
