# A Survey on Federated Learning for the Healthcare Metaverse: Concepts, Applications, Challenges, and Future Directions

CorpusID: 257913812 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39d3ac2b003398e4c2876cb311fd98a9ce56f21f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39d3ac2b003398e4c2876cb311fd98a9ce56f21f)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s3) B. FL in Conventional Healthcare
(p3.0) As computer software and hardware technologies advance quickly, more and more healthcare data are becoming available from patients, healthcare organizations, the pharmaceutical industry, and insurance companies, among other sources. Data science technologies now have an improbable chance to get insights from data and raise the standard of healthcare services because of this access [29]. However, the acquisition of enormous, diversified, centrally stored healthcare datasets is almost impossible due to strict privacy laws and data ownership considerations. On the other hand, the AI model demands an increasing amount of healthcare data in order to provide better decisions. FL offers promising solutions to this issue, and the advantages of adapting FL over conventional methods are discussed below.

(p3.1) • Privacy: FL offers training without compromising privacy of healthcare data. FL has enormous potential for connecting disparate healthcare data sources while protecting privacy. FL uses a central server to train a common global model while preserving all the sensitive data at the local institutions where it belongs [30]. Thus, FL enables healthcare organisations to create reliable and trustworthy models by participating in collaborative training without disclosing data to third parties. As a result, it provides new opportunities for industry and research and enhances health care all around the world. FL can have positive impact on almost all stakeholders and the entire treatment cycle, better diagnostic tools for clinicians, including improved medical image analysis, collaborative and accelerated drug discovery, true precision medicine by assisting in the identification of similar patients, and which reduces cost and time-to-market for pharmaceutical companies [31].
## (s12) F. Improved Scalability
(p12.0) The healthcare Metaverse signifies an immersive and shared environment that spans a myriad of 3D virtual worlds of patients and healthcare providers. However, building a scalable Metaverse is quite challenging as it is almost impossible to use traditional servers [48]. The scalability issues in a healthcare Metaverse correspond to the multitude of users interacting in the virtual and real worlds, complexity of the scene with respect to its appearance and detailing, and the range of interactions between the users. The healthcare Metaverse architecture should be built in such a way that the system efficiency is not compromised and best personalized experience could be provided to the patients and the healthcare providers. FL techniques can help in solving the scalability issues in the healthcare Metaverse by providing a de-centralized system for various medical applications such as diagnosis and treatment. This de-centralized system allows an efficient and concurrent system usage for a wide variety of users in the Metaverse healthcare scenario.
## (s18) D. Infectious diseases/ Pandemic
(p18.0) The COVID-19 pandemic has set up a perfect stage for the Metaverse technology to take off. The pandemic has affected the economic and social stability of the nations to a great extent. Longer periods of isolation has even created a society with social anxiety [70]. However, the pandemic has made huge technological advancements in education, healthcare, and entertainment. The wide adoption of online classes, virtual meetings, telemedicine and OTT movie release are all a result of the pandemic [71]. Pandemic surveillance is an important aspect that helps to understand the pattern of the spread of the disease so that appropriate measures can be adopted to alleviate the spread [72]. The transparency and efficiency of the surveillance can be enhanced by building a platform that can integrate data from multiple domains such as transportation, retail and telecommunications. However, such an integration would be difficult to be accomplished in a real world even with the advanced technologies due to the risk of the spread of disease.
## (s19) E. Drug Discovery
(p19.0) Drug discovery is the technique through which potential novel therapeutic entities are identified, using an amalgamation of experimental, computational, clinical and translational models. Machine learning models play a major role here in improving the decision making for applications such as hit discoveries, target identification, hit to lead and lead optimization [75]. Computational growth algorithms are also used in De novo drug design (DNDD) to understand and design new chemical entities that fits in the defined constraint sets [76]. Enhanced experimental results can be obtained if researchers can collaborate in building the required models. However, conducting experiments for discovering new drugs is critical and requires a lot of human effort and expenses.
