# Revolutionizing Agrifood Systems with Artificial Intelligence: A Survey

CorpusID: 258461477 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44b7981a24787d87a713c5dc1467282a5b08d97c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44b7981a24787d87a713c5dc1467282a5b08d97c)

Fields: Computer Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Engineering

## (s13) Animal individual monitoring.
(p13.0) In addition to monitoring animal husbandry behavior at the group level using remote sensing images, modern animal husbandry also requires monitoring individual animals to ensure their health and growth and prevent the spread of disease.

(p13.1) Animal individual recognition: To conduct individual animal monitoring in animal husbandry, it is necessary to recognize and distinguish each animal on the farm. This recognition is achieved by identifying subtle differences between individuals, such as the length of a cow's face, the shape of a sheep's paw, or the patterns on a dairy cow's coat. Early methods for individual recognition [50] involve directly capturing images of the animals and using CNNs for recognition.
## (s18) CHALLENGES
(p18.0) Despite the great potential of AI technology in agrifood systems, challenges still exist. In this context, we summarize five challenges related to agricultural characteristics, external factors, data acquisition and processing, model design and maintenance, and ethical risks.

(p18.1) Agricultural characteristics Agricultural production has unique characteristics such as regionality and seasonality. These characteristics pose new challenges for the application of AI in agriculture. For example, AI models should consider the wide range of agrifood products produced in different regions, while the long growth cycle of crops can limit the real-time performance of technologies. Therefore, it is essential to consider the characteristics of agricultural activities when designing AI solutions.

(p18.2) External factors Agricultural activities are affected by multiple natural conditions, such as water resources, soil nutrients, terrains, and climates. Climate factors, including light and precipitation, are considered major impact factors on agrifood industries. However, developing AI models that are robust across different climates, especially in regions with extreme or unpredictable weather, can be challenging. Furthermore, some adverse conditions, such as weak network infrastructure in rural areas of developing countries, can limit the integration of AI, IoT, and agriculture.

(p18.3) Data acquisition and processing Agricultural practices are long and complex processes, and relying solely on a single data resource may not lead to effective judgments and expected outcomes. In the agrifood system, data is often heterogeneous as it is obtained from various sources and stored in multiple databases with diverse formats, following a series of preprocessing procedures. Attaining high efficiency in the acquisition, integration, and collaboration of multimodal data has emerged as a major challenge in the implementation of agricultural AI.

(p18.4) Model design and maintenance Designing algorithms with a large amount of data for complex agrifood systems is typically a time-consuming process. Additionally, the resulting AI models can be sophisticated and have high computational complexity, making deployment difficult for farmers. Furthermore, maintaining and updating these models is crucial to meet continuous new demands throughout the long growth cycle. This poses a new challenge for AI service providers.

(p18.5) Ethical risks In addition to accuracy, efficiency, and practicality, it is important to consider the ethical risks associated with adopting AI models. AI solutions are frequently employed in critical decision-making scenarios that involve access to private data. Improper use of such data can result in various legal issues, such as privacy breaches and malicious attacks. Lack of transparency can undermine the trust of farmers and consumers, leading to their reluctance to adopt AI solutions and hindering the development of AI technologies. Therefore, constructing trustworthy AI systems is an urgent and significant issue that demands immediate attention and resolution. Fig. 12. AI models enable reading agrifood product information. The results are obtained by DeepSolo [187] with ViTAEv2-S [204].
## (s21) 5.1.2
(p21.0) The collaboration of multiple sources data. Foundation models possess an important property that allows them to use multiple types of data jointly to achieve more accurate predictions [126]. Agrifood data comes from various sources, such as satellites, UAVs, and other sensors. However, current approaches typically rely on a single data type as input and overlook the complementary between diverse data sources. Foundation models have the potential to learn from these data jointly, which could improve prediction accuracy for tasks such as crop yield prediction or pasture monitoring. By using visual images from UAVs, RS images from satellites, and soil and climate conditions from sensors as inputs, foundation models can provide more accurate and comprehensive results.
## (s23) Cross-domain foundation models.
(p23.0) Except for the applications discussed in this paper, the large-scale foundation models can provide more opportunities for a better agrifood system. For example, large-scale models can be used to predict future climates and help farmers make better decisions regarding the harvesting and seeding time [127].
## (s26) Robust models.
(p26.0) Apart from the above opportunities, the robustness of the AI models is also an important topic in agrifood systems. Due to the influence of weather change or location variants, the captured data may have significantly different distributions from the data used in training. Making the models robust to data with different distributions can greatly simplify the deployment of AI technologies in agrifood systems and improve the reliability of the prediction results made by AI. Apart from algorithm development, hardware systems have also experienced rapid development. AIoT in the agrifood system can also present several key opportunities [201]. For example, the fog and cloud computational systems can provide timely feedback and analysis according to the data captured from edge devices. In this case, advanced IoT devices can help users to make more informed predictions. Besides, the advanced sensors can monitor the health of animals or agriculture in real-time, which can be used to further improve food security and contribute to the development of traceable AI in agrifood systems. Fig. 13 portrays a promising vision of integrating modern AI technologies, including large foundation models, into the IoT ecosystem. This involves utilizing the vast amount of agrifood data collected by edge devices to either pre-train foundation models or automatically label them using well-trained foundation models on cloud servers. Subsequently, the acquired knowledge of these large foundation models can be distilled and transferred to smaller models, thereby enabling their deployment on edge devices. This process creates a closed-loop evolution framework for the agrifood system.
