# Overview of the Use of Nanoparticles in Vaccine Development

CorpusID: 259261087 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff842733c8852fbd1c073776b2a4f8231a4a56c8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff842733c8852fbd1c073776b2a4f8231a4a56c8)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s3) New Vaccine Technologies
(p3.0) Over the years, conventional vaccines saved lives and prevented disease, eradicating smallpox and reducing the incidence of other diseases such as polio and measles. The next generation of vaccines focused on obtaining similar efficacy to conventional vaccines, but without their risks or limitations. This was achieved through improved knowledge in areas such as immunology, pathology, and microbiology, which helped to adopt more rational designs. These minimalist compositions provide improvements in safety and production costs, although they may lead to lower immunogenicity [27].
## (s17) Immune Stimulating Complexes
(p17.0) The immune stimulating complexes (ISCOMs) are vaccine delivery systems consisting of colloidal saponins (glycosides) together with phospholipids and cholesterol [85]. They are structured as geometrical arrangements of micelles containing the saponin and lipids, which are held together by hydrophobic interactions and stabilized through their negative surface charge. Several antigens were investigated with this system; for example, antigens derived from herpes simplex or influenza virus. These lipid-based nanoparticles already showed potential as adjuvants and vectors for certain antigens aiming at prophylactic and/or therapeutic vaccination through different ways of administration [85].
## (s18) Inorganic Nanoparticles
(p18.0) From an inorganic point of view, the most studied nanoparticles in the area of vaccine technology are gold, carbon, and silica NPs, and most of them focused on transporting different types of DNA plasmids expressing different antigens, such as influenza or hepatitis B [86,87].
## (s20) Nanoparticle Platforms as Vaccine Adjuvants
(p20.0) Adjuvants were conventionally described as those substances that in combination with a specific antigen can produce a more robust immune response than the antigen alone. Thus, nanoparticles can deliver either antigens or adjuvants to the targeted cells at predetermined rates and durations looking for optimal immune responses. Taking into account that nanoparticles can encapsulate antigens preventing their premature degradation and prolonging the antigen exposure, they can act as delivery platforms and adjuvants simultaneously. In fact, the different composition, size and morphology of nanoparticles allow them to selectively induce many different types of immune responses and/or release the transported antigens into specific sites, as it was commented above. Some typical adjuvants employed in vaccine technologies included both inorganic nanoparticles, such as aluminum, calcium phosphate, gold, and silica nanoparticles; and organic nanoparticles, such as chitosan or lipid-based nanoparticles [90].
## (s22) Success Case of Vaccines Based on Nanoparticles to Fight SARS-CoV-2
(p22.0) Nanoparticles constitute promising delivery vectors for effective and safe vaccin Among them, biologically derived nanoparticles, such as virus-like particles, extracellu vesicles, and protein nanocages, are able to mimic both the structure and function of l pathogens, being unable to replicate and, therefore, are not infectious. While a comp hensive review on this type of vaccines can be found somewhere else [94], we will foc the next section on the success of nanovaccines for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2.

(p22.1) The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic saw an extraordinary effort on vaccine developme which resulted in the extraordinary success of nucleic acid vaccines, mainly mRNA v cines. The use of these vaccines confirmed their usefulness against intracellular path gens, such as viruses with a high mutation rate, bacteria including Mycobacterium, or p asite protozoa which evade host antibodies by infecting and residing in host phagocy cells. In these cases, the cellular immune response, especially that of CD8 + cells, result in better and longer protection against these types of pathogens given that protection pr its from durability of cellular action as well as from extent of memory capability, wh contributes to contain reinfections [95].
## (s23) Success Case of Vaccines Based on Nanoparticles to Fight SARS-CoV-2
(p23.0) Nanoparticles constitute promising delivery vectors for effective and safe vaccines. Among them, biologically derived nanoparticles, such as virus-like particles, extracellular vesicles, and protein nanocages, are able to mimic both the structure and function of live pathogens, being unable to replicate and, therefore, are not infectious. While a comprehensive review on this type of vaccines can be found somewhere else [94], we will focus the next section on the success of nanovaccines for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2.

(p23.1) The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic saw an extraordinary effort on vaccine development which resulted in the extraordinary success of nucleic acid vaccines, mainly mRNA vaccines. The use of these vaccines confirmed their usefulness against intracellular pathogens, such as viruses with a high mutation rate, bacteria including Mycobacterium, or parasite protozoa which evade host antibodies by infecting and residing in host phagocytic cells. In these cases, the cellular immune response, especially that of CD8 + cells, resulted in better and longer protection against these types of pathogens given that protection profits from durability of cellular action as well as from extent of memory capability, which contributes to contain reinfections [95].
## (s24) Jonhson & Johnson/Jansen and Oxford/Astra Zeneca Vaccines
(p24.0) The development of these vaccines was based on using a known DNA technology, where an adenovirus vector was engineered to carry the DNA with the information to produce the surface spike protein of the COVID virus. Concretely, the Johnson & Johnson vaccine is based on an adenovirus type 26 modified to produce the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein. This adenovirus vaccine was designed to be employed as a single intramuscular injection-the first of this type available that comes in a single dose-and when it enters a cell, it produces the vaccine protein but cannot replicate inside the cell or cause illness. This vaccine was shown an average of 66% protection against moderate or severe COVID-19, but more importantly, this vaccine showed 85% protection against severe disease, with no differences across countries or age groups.

(p24.1) The Oxford/Astra Zeneca vaccine is also based on DNA transported by an adenovirus vector-a modified version of a chimpanzee adenovirus, known as ChAdOx1-to transport the genetic information to produce the surface spike protein of the virus. One of the benefits of this type of vaccines is that they are more rugged than the mRNA vaccines. This is because DNA is not as fragile as RNA, and the adenovirus's tough protein coat helps protect the genetic material inside. Consequently, the Oxford/Astra Zeneca vaccine does not have to be stored frozen. In fact, this vaccine was expected to last for at least six months when refrigerated at ca. 4 • C. In 2020, it was shown that the efficacy of the vaccine was ca. 76% at preventing COVID-19 following the first dose and ca. 81% after the second dose [118].
## (s25) Moderna and Pfizer Vaccines
(p25.0) The development of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines based on the use of messenger RNA technology encapsulated in lipid nanoparticles was a success case in the use of nanoparticles for vaccine manufacture [44]. Messenger RNA is the key intermediary in protein synthesis, but it is a very large and negatively charged molecule, so it cannot cross cell membranes on its own. Thus, messenger RNA needs a vehicle to cross these cellular barriers, and this is where LNPs played a major role.
