# LITERATURE REVIEW: EFFECTIVENESS OF STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT AND HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ON WORKPLACE SAFETY

CorpusID: 259616021 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5ec70d0e2ade57057350418c812363af9df5c4a9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5ec70d0e2ade57057350418c812363af9df5c4a9)

Fields: Business

## (s4) Effect Of Resource Strategy Management On Worker Safety
(p4.0) In the review imposed by (Alsaadat, 2019), that the human resources aspect contains the notion of work effort or services that can be provided in the production process. In other terms human resources reflect the quality of effort exerted by a person in a given time to produce a good or service. The second definition, human resources concerns people who are able to work to provide services or work efforts. Being able to work means being able to carry out activities that have economic activity, that is, that these activities produce goods or services to meet the needs or community.
## (s6) Data Analysis And Discussion Influence Of Human Resource Strategy Management On Worker Safety
(p6.0) In the review imposed by (Alsaadat, 2019), that the human resources aspect contains the notion of work effort or services that can be provided in the production process. In other terms human resources reflect the quality of effort exerted by a person in a given time to produce a good or service. The second definition, human resources concerns people who are able to work to provide services or work efforts. Being able to work means being able to carry out activities that have economic activity, that is, that these activities produce goods or services to meet the needs or community.
