# JITCE (Journal of Information Technology and Computer Engineering) Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International. Some rights reserved A review of Image Processing Technique for Monitoring the Growth and Health of Cows

CorpusID: 259572488 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ff65ffe491522c6b984dc88694ab385023d2a3c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ff65ffe491522c6b984dc88694ab385023d2a3c)

Fields: Computer Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s3) Image Acquisition
(p3.0) The initial phase of image processing is the process of capturing or scanning an analogue image or non-image object into a digital image. Common technologies used in this phase include digital cameras, webcams, scanners, thermal cameras, digital microscopes, ultrasonography, Computed tomography (CT scan), Computed Radiography, Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Mammogram or other sensors. From these devices, 2D information is produced which is often described as a 2D function f(x,y) that represents the width and height of the image, such as an RGB image with each coordinate (x,y) has an RGB value that determines the pixel value or depth of the image, for example if at point x,y has an RGB value of (255,255,255) which is declared as white or (0,0,0) which is declared as black then at that point is declared to have no information. The quality of the resulting image is highly dependent on the stability of the illumination, the distance between the device and the object and the resolution of the device. In addition to 2D information in the data acquisition process can also produce 3D information that can be done in 2 ways, namely active techniques and passive techniques. Active techniques are carried out with structured lighting, the devices used are 3D cameras, RGB-D, LiDar and others, while passive techniques are carried out by taking objects in various positions. 3D information is described by a function f(x,y,z) with width, height and depth information.

(p3.1) One of the uses of image processing in industry is the detection of product defects, which is often referred to as machine vision. The reliability of this machine lies in the excellent quality of lighting and image acquisition tools that fulfil the prerequisites in order to produce very high image quality as shown in Figure 1 [15].

(p3.2) It can be concluded that the utilization of the device for data acquisition depends on the object to be captured, the environmental conditions around the object, and the distance between the device and the object.  [15].
## (s12) Similarities
(p12.0) Image division based on the similarity of criteria, such as thresholding, region growing, region splitting, and region merging. Automatic evaluation of medical images is widely used for screening. The use of segmentation of extracted leucocyte sections from thin blood smear images using the CNN method with VGG-UNET architecture produces good performance with an accuracy rate of up to 97% [23].
