# UAV Traffic Management : A Survey On Communication Security

CorpusID: 253447399 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7931e5771beef1a7931c822480daae3bec610a5a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7931e5771beef1a7931c822480daae3bec610a5a)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s22) Eavesdropping : mitigation and countermeasures
(p22.0) Recording and analysing ambient signals is a passive task. It is impossible to detect if someone is listening on a wireless channel. An attacker will always be able to log the signals and try to extract information. The signals can however be protected.

(p22.1) In a multiple UAVs system, it is possible to use other nodes to send artificial noise, confusing the eavesdropper. Zhong, Yao and Xu presented a cooperating jamming approach [72] that uses a second UAV to mask the confidential information transmitted to the GCS. The solution assumes that the system knows the location of the GCS and estimates the eavesdropper's position. It then adjusts the UAV's trajectories overtime to facilitate the jamming. This solution is only viable when the eavesdropper's approximate position is known in advance, and requires the full control of a second UAV for the entire communication period.

(p22.2) The physical layer can be protected. Poor and Shaefer [48] present the research in the abilities of the wireless physical layer to provide security. The properties of radio channels such as diffusion and superposition can provide secrecy in wireless data transmission. This is an active field of research, and this solution is not often applied in operational context.

(p22.3) Data confidentiality is added with encryption. If correctly utilized it makes it impossible for the attacker to extract any information from the sniffing. This confidentiality needs to be sustained as the information remains sensitive even long after the flight. The commands and telemetry links can be encrypted using symmetric algorithms. The AES algorithm is however not recommended for constrained systems as it induces a lot of computation overhead. Lightweight algorithms have been developed to solve this problem (see Section 4.3).
## (s24) Communication channel jamming : description and operational impact
(p24.0) An attacker can interfere with a wireless signal by broadcasting a strong noise over the communication channel. This can cause the disruption of the communication between parties as the signals they want to transmit to the other will be drowned under the noise created by the jammer. The jamming strategy requires the ability of broadcasting signals that will be strong enough to disrupt the real communication upon reception. A jammer that simply broadcasts random noise over a single frequency is called a spot jammer. Jamming simultaneously a large bandwidth by changing frequency extremely rapidly is barrage jamming, but requires an immense power output to still be effective over the whole bandwidth. Some more advanced techniques exist, such as sweep jamming where the jammer jumps from one spot to another in order to disrupt a larger communication channel with similar power output to a spot jammer. The sweep jamming technique does not block the entire signal, and some data will get through. Sweep jammers rely on the fact that they sufficiently disrupt the communication to induce a Denial of Service (DOS). The jamming strategy works on many different communication links used by UAVs. Wi-Fi, LoRa, cellular networks, GNSS signals, Bluetooth and many more [46].

(p24.1) Jamming the different links in a UAS causes a DOS on the targeted service. This has various consequences depending on the link and the type of UAS. For autonomous UAVs, the temporary loss of the C2link and video link will compromise any in-flight input by the GCS, but the drone will pursue its mission. This causes a threat to flying objects in the vicinity for emergency cases. The detect and avoid systems should mitigate the risk, but a loss of C2link and video link is unacceptable for more than a few seconds for BVLOS flights. In the case of less autonomous UAVs the loss of the control links is a lot more critical.
## (s31) False data injection : mitigation and countermeasures
(p31.0) The IDS proposed in [54] is able to detect ADS-B attacks by cross-checking the ADS-B information with the location estimated with signal intensity and round trip time data. This IDS also verifies the coherence of environmental information with the other drones in the network, but this depends on the sufficient presence of legitimate users in the area. The IDS can raise an alarm and the UAS will deal with the compromised node.

(p31.1) These attacks can be countered by cryptographic methods (see Section 4) that ensure authentication and integrity. If the UAVs are trustworthy and the integrity of the signals is verified, the attack is no longer possible as an outside attacker will not be able to counterfeit authenticated data.
## (s36) Black hole and gray hole : mitigation and countermeasures
(p36.0) In [54], the IDS is able to detect black and gray hole attacks thanks to a trusted supervisor that monitors packet loss. The system raises an alarm when a node is failing to forward a number of packets superior to a threshold representing natural packet loss.
## (s53) Usual algorithms
(p53.0) The Chacha20 algorithm is the preferred current lightweight symmetric encryption algorithm for IoT [35]. It performs better than the AES standard in terms of energy cost, time cost and memory usage. Chacha20 is 2 to 3 times more efficient than any version of AES-128 for time and energy consumption, as well as using less memory for a shorter time. It uses 256 bits keys (or 128 bits keys that are expanded to 256) and are twice as secure as AES-128. However with the use of hardware acceleration, the computation time of AES can be greatly improved.

(p53.1) An improvement over the Chacha20 algorithm has been proposed [38] where the complexity of the bruteforce attack grows from 2 248 to 2 512 , while only reducing the performance by about 20 %. 512 bits of security is however not needed in any current application. This solution may be useful only for long-term secrets or if a technological jump allows for a great improvement in computation capabilities.
## (s55) Discussion
(p55.0) Symmetrical algorithms are the simplest way to maintain authenticated communication. They do not use considerably more bandwidth than the cleartext (AEAD algorithms can add a few bytes). Chacha20 is old enough to have been thoroughly investigated for faults, and is the more reliable option. If stronger security is required, [38] may be a better alternative. For systems with hardware acceleration for AES, AEGIS is also a good alternative. The key exchange will have to be adapted to the algorithm, as the level of security given to the session key needs to be as high as the symmetrical algorithm's.

(p55.1) If a secure way of transmitting (or storing) very long keys is found however, the OTP solution will be by far the fastest and most secure. It is however currently incompatible with the limits of the system.
