# SURVEY OF FEDERATED LEARNING MODELS FOR SPATIAL-TEMPORAL MOBILITY APPLICATIONS A PREPRINT

CorpusID: 258564828 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1bd8cb97f207dee598c54ea40fd65b3ab7c140d5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1bd8cb97f207dee598c54ea40fd65b3ab7c140d5)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s3) Applications
(p3.0) Mobility Prediction Mobility prediction can be defined as algorithms and techniques to estimate the future locations of users. Predicting the next location of users can help with a range of applications including networking (e.g., handover management), pandemic management (e.g., contact tracing), etc. This type of prediction is performed on individual users' traces where the historical trend of the user's visited locations can help in predicting the likelihood of their next location.

(p3.1) Transportation With the rising availability of transportation data collected from various sensors like road cameras, GPS probes, and IoT devices, there is an enormous opportunity for city planners to leverage these types of data to facilitate various tasks such as traffic flow prediction. Different from trajectory data that records a sequence of locations and time in each trip, crowd flow data only have the start and end locations of a trip, and how many people flow in and out of a particular region can be counted. Indeed, traffic flow prediction using spatial-temporal data has been one of the main focuses of the research community (See comprehensive survey [44]). In the context of transportation, this problem is often considered as forecasting which is to predict traffic speed or traffic flow of regions or road segments based on historical aggregated mobility data.
## (s8) Data sparsity and heterogeneity in trajectory prediction tasks
(p8.0) Mobility literature defines the highest potential accuracy of predictability of any individual, termed as "maximum predictability" (Π max ) [67]. Maximum predictability is defined by the entropy of information of a person's trajectory (frequency, sequence of location visits, etc.). We adopt this measure to compute the non-iid property of the mobility traces. We use Shannon's Entropy H(x) to get a sense of both the sparsity and non-iidness of several check-in datasets.
## (s12) Flow Prediction Approaches
(p12.0) Accurate Traffic Flow Prediction is an extremely useful to mitigate traffic congestion and as a result, air pollution, travel time, and driving experience. Approaches in predicting the traffic patterns range from classical approaches to time-series analysis (such as ARIMA) to more advanced models such as those based on Recurrent Neural Networks and Graph Neural Networks. For a comprehensive survey of deep learning models for traffic predictions in centralized settings refer to [44]. Given that this type of data in real world could be be collected by various entities and organizations, Cross Silo Federated Learning is a promising paradigm for ensuring that the records are not shared outside of each organization. Flow prediction approaches require slightly different settings in FL than trajectory prediction. Unlike individual predictive approaches where each client is assumed to correspond to an individual with their mobility traces as the non-iid data, in flow predictive approaches, the clients are often considered to be entities or organizations that are maintaining their flow data private. When different organizations use data collected by sensors to predict traffic flow, the collected dataoften cannot not be shared due to regulatory reasons. This cross-silo configuration of FL reduces some of non-iid problems but imposes challenges regarding vertical FL.

(p12.1) Current works in Federated Traffic Flow Prediction can be grouped into two groups of grid-based (such as recurrent neural networks, etc.) and graph-based approaches. We first review the metrics and datasets used for these tasks and then review the current literature.
