# Approximate Query Processing: What is New and Where to Go? A Survey on Approximate Query Processing

CorpusID: 256478111 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/da27323e1456ee41dbc198a14af3d37d45c29946](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/da27323e1456ee41dbc198a14af3d37d45c29946)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s11) Database Learning
(p11.0) In traditional database systems, previous query answers are not used to process future queries. If we can use previous query results to answer future queries, we can efficiently estimate an answer. Motivated by such assumption, a new AQP method called "Database Learning" (DBL) has been proposed [87].

(p11.1) DBL uses statistical features (e.g., computing the correlation parameters and covariances between all pairs of past queries snippets) of the dataset to train a model to represent underlying data distribution. When a sample is used to answer the queries, it is hard to know the distribution of the whole data. However, with the help of previous query answers, one can know more about the distribution and then infer answers of new queries based on trained statistical model. The more precise the model, the less need for actual data, the smaller the sample, and consequently, the faster the response time. By increasing previous queries, one can use smaller sample and the system will become smarter and faster to process queries.

(p11.2) Note that DBL is different from using pre-computed views to answer new queries or QCS-based offline synopses which generate summaries for visited query columns. Views aim to use pre-computed results to exactly or approximately answer new queries. For example, if we know the query result of the average profit of orders from the MA state in Fig. 1, we can exactly answer the average profit of orders from c 1 and c 4 and approximately answer the average profit of orders from males in MA. A QCS-based offline synopses shown in Case 3 is based on the assumption on query column sets. However, during the query process, DBL learns model from past observations of past queries results (i.e., training sets) and trains a model, and when a query comes, it uses the trained model to infer the query result. For example, if we know the results of past queries of the profit of orders from c 1 , c 2 , c 3 , c 4 in the MA state and NY state, we can use the results as training set to train a model of relation R. When we need to know the profit of orders from the WA state, we can sample tuples from O and use the trained model to compute the approximation result.

(p11.3) The limitation of DBL is that if the past query result is not accurate, then the quality of a training set of an online learning become worse. Thus, it will become worse and worse and finally it may mislead the approximate result.

(p11.4) In traditional database systems, previous query answers are not used to process future queries. If we can use previous query results to answer future queries, we can efficiently estimate an answer. Motivated by such assumption, a new AQP method called "Database Learning" (DBL) has been proposed [87].

(p11.5) DBL uses statistical features (e.g., computing the correlation parameters and covariances between all pairs of past queries snippets) of the dataset to train a model to represent underlying data distribution. When a sample is used to answer the queries, it is hard to know the distribution of the whole data. However, with the help of previous query answers, one can know more about the distribution and then infer answers of new queries based on trained statistical model. The more precise the model, the less need for actual data, the smaller the sample, and consequently, the faster the response time. By increasing previous queries, one can use smaller sample and the system will become smarter and faster to process queries.

(p11.6) Note that DBL is different from using pre-computed views to answer new queries or QCS-based offline synopses which generate summaries for visited query columns. Views aim to use pre-computed results to exactly or approximately answer new queries. For example, if we know the query result of the average profit of orders from the MA state in Fig. 1, we can exactly answer the average profit of orders from c 1 and c 4 and approximately answer the average profit of orders from males in MA. A QCS-based offline synopses shown in Case 3 is based on the assumption on query column sets. However, during the query process, DBL learns model from past observations of past queries results (i.e., training sets) and trains a model, and when a query comes, it uses the trained model to infer the query result. For example, if we know the results of past queries of the profit of orders from c 1 , c 2 , c 3 , c 4 in the MA state and NY state, we can use the results as training set to train a model of relation R. When we need to know the profit of orders from the WA state, we can sample tuples from O and use the trained model to compute the approximation result.

(p11.7) The limitation of DBL is that if the past query result is not accurate, then the quality of a training set of an online learning become worse. Thus, it will become worse and worse and finally it may mislead the approximate result.
## (s60) Database Learning
(p60.0) In traditional database systems, previous query answers are not used to process future queries. If we can use previous query results to answer future queries, we can efficiently estimate an answer. Motivated by such assumption, a new AQP method called "Database Learning" (DBL) has been proposed [87].

(p60.1) DBL uses statistical features (e.g., computing the correlation parameters and covariances between all pairs of past queries snippets) of the dataset to train a model to represent underlying data distribution. When a sample is used to answer the queries, it is hard to know the distribution of the whole data. However, with the help of previous query answers, one can know more about the distribution and then infer answers of new queries based on trained statistical model. The more precise the model, the less need for actual data, the smaller the sample, and consequently, the faster the response time. By increasing previous queries, one can use smaller sample and the system will become smarter and faster to process queries.

(p60.2) Note that DBL is different from using pre-computed views to answer new queries or QCS-based offline synopses which generate summaries for visited query columns. Views aim to use pre-computed results to exactly or approximately answer new queries. For example, if we know the query result of the average profit of orders from the MA state in Fig. 1, we can exactly answer the average profit of orders from c 1 and c 4 and approximately answer the average profit of orders from males in MA. A QCS-based offline synopses shown in Case 3 is based on the assumption on query column sets. However, during the query process, DBL learns model from past observations of past queries results (i.e., training sets) and trains a model, and when a query comes, it uses the trained model to infer the query result. For example, if we know the results of past queries of the profit of orders from c 1 , c 2 , c 3 , c 4 in the MA state and NY state, we can use the results as training set to train a model of relation R. When we need to know the profit of orders from the WA state, we can sample tuples from O and use the trained model to compute the approximation result.

(p60.3) The limitation of DBL is that if the past query result is not accurate, then the quality of a training set of an online learning become worse. Thus, it will become worse and worse and finally it may mislead the approximate result.

(p60.4) In traditional database systems, previous query answers are not used to process future queries. If we can use previous query results to answer future queries, we can efficiently estimate an answer. Motivated by such assumption, a new AQP method called "Database Learning" (DBL) has been proposed [87].

(p60.5) DBL uses statistical features (e.g., computing the correlation parameters and covariances between all pairs of past queries snippets) of the dataset to train a model to represent underlying data distribution. When a sample is used to answer the queries, it is hard to know the distribution of the whole data. However, with the help of previous query answers, one can know more about the distribution and then infer answers of new queries based on trained statistical model. The more precise the model, the less need for actual data, the smaller the sample, and consequently, the faster the response time. By increasing previous queries, one can use smaller sample and the system will become smarter and faster to process queries.

(p60.6) Note that DBL is different from using pre-computed views to answer new queries or QCS-based offline synopses which generate summaries for visited query columns. Views aim to use pre-computed results to exactly or approximately answer new queries. For example, if we know the query result of the average profit of orders from the MA state in Fig. 1, we can exactly answer the average profit of orders from c 1 and c 4 and approximately answer the average profit of orders from males in MA. A QCS-based offline synopses shown in Case 3 is based on the assumption on query column sets. However, during the query process, DBL learns model from past observations of past queries results (i.e., training sets) and trains a model, and when a query comes, it uses the trained model to infer the query result. For example, if we know the results of past queries of the profit of orders from c 1 , c 2 , c 3 , c 4 in the MA state and NY state, we can use the results as training set to train a model of relation R. When we need to know the profit of orders from the WA state, we can sample tuples from O and use the trained model to compute the approximation result.

(p60.7) The limitation of DBL is that if the past query result is not accurate, then the quality of a training set of an online learning become worse. Thus, it will become worse and worse and finally it may mislead the approximate result.
