# Comparative Study of Semiconductors for Terahertz Generation by Nonlinear Optical Process: An Overview Email address

CorpusID: 257482338 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83a3eae6640676ef854f136e2fbad04dc3ed7ab9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83a3eae6640676ef854f136e2fbad04dc3ed7ab9)

Fields: Physics, Engineering, Materials Science

## (s13) ZnTe
(p13.0) Valence electrons in Zinc Telluride with 2.26 eV direct band gap can be excited with minimum photon wavelength of 548.6 nm, in which we can effectively pump until 8PA with our chosen 3900 nm pump wavelength. Consequently, for pump wavelengths above 1.65 µm, the absorption edge is for 3PA, only 4PA and higher order MPA are effective.

(p13.1) But unfortunately, the MPA coefficient experimental measurement results for this material are only available until 4PA, which is 3.5 × 10 -4 cm 5 /GW 3 measured at 1750 nm. This value still corresponds to the same order of MPA with 2060 nm wavelength, so we also include it into data collection. For lower pump wavelength, ZnTe can be used in collinear alignment but with the higher MPA coefficient for 2PA makes the output efficiency would be small as the free-carrier absorption would be higher. The efficiency of THz generation in ZnTe could be increased by two orders of magnitude, from 3.1 × 10 −5 to as high as 0.7% [60]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for ZnTe are presented in table 2 below:  

(p13.2) Valence electrons in Zinc Telluride with 2.26 eV direct band gap can be excited with minimum photon wavelength of 548.6 nm, in which we can effectively pump until 8PA with our chosen 3900 nm pump wavelength. Consequently, for pump wavelengths above 1.65 µm, the absorption edge is for 3PA, only 4PA and higher order MPA are effective.

(p13.3) But unfortunately, the MPA coefficient experimental measurement results for this material are only available until 4PA, which is 3.5 × 10 -4 cm 5 /GW 3 measured at 1750 nm. This value still corresponds to the same order of MPA with 2060 nm wavelength, so we also include it into data collection. For lower pump wavelength, ZnTe can be used in collinear alignment but with the higher MPA coefficient for 2PA makes the output efficiency would be small as the free-carrier absorption would be higher. The efficiency of THz generation in ZnTe could be increased by two orders of magnitude, from 3.1 × 10 −5 to as high as 0.7% [60]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for ZnTe are presented in table 2 below:  
## (s22) Comparison
(p22.0) From the data that has been presented in this study, we can see that even though ZnTe and GaP is the most popular semiconductors for THz generation, there are several other materials that are more superior in several aspect. Small FOM of GaP and ZnSe are a major drawback to setup a highly efficient THz sources. Furthermore, the high absorption at higher THz frequency also gives another challenge to consider this material further for THz generation. However, both GaP and ZnTe has a nice velocity matching condition at lower pump wavelength and makes them suitable for collinear configuration.

(p22.1) Gallium arsenide inversion zone lies between 0.8 and 1.0 µm indicating a high absorption for this wavelength. For 800 nm pumping wavelength, more energy should be significantly added. Having a large wavelength range of MPA for each order, GaAs also have a high absorption at lower pump wavelength for THz generation with absorption edge at 4PA. Making GaAs only effective pumped at 5PA order or higher. GaAs also inhibit a large nonlinear coefficient, but a relatively small EO coefficient compared to the others. With its small required-tilting-angle and small absorption at 1 THz as well, we can expect GaAs as the good material for THz generations.

(p22.2) On the other hand, CdTe have surprisingly large EO coefficients due to its high degree of anisotropy amongst the other zincblende crystals and therefore, it has the highest detection response for small frequencies. This material also exhibits the highest FOM amongst the other zincblende materials presented in this study and calculated tilting angle below 25°. But as far as our knowledge, we are not aware of any reported use of this material for optical rectification. The reason is that CdSe is strongly absorbing at the 800 nm output of the Ti:sapphire laser, which is the most commonly used ultrashort pulse source. This behaviour of CdTe also limiting its potential to be an efficient crystal for THz generation.

(p22.3) Tellurium despite having huge nonlinear coefficient and low THz absorption at 1 THz (making it have large FOM), are strictly required long pump wavelength and large tilting angle (45°). Due to its narrow bandgap, the corresponding lower limit wavelength of MPA for Te is 2755 nm. The high MPA coefficient at 4PA (20 cm/GW) shows a high free-carrier absorption even on the long-wavelength range.

(p22.4) Selenium crystal have surprisingly huge EO coefficient and nonlinear coefficient as well. Combined with the big FOM values, this material looks very interesting to be considered as the best material candidate for THz generation by OR. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium, thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far for the other materials chosen here. The only major drawback of Se is the high required tilting angle value which can reach 35° for 1030 nm pump wavelength. Not to mention that ordinary ray of Se shows disparity of index at 3900 nm pump, even though the extraordinary ray shows a very good velocity matching with only 7° tilting. But despite this drawback, Selenium is still superior from a lot of aspect compared to the other materials chosen here. Some results [61] also showing a spectrally intense, broadband THz source can be built with this crystal.

(p22.5) From the data that has been presented in this study, we can see that even though ZnTe and GaP is the most popular semiconductors for THz generation, there are several other materials that are more superior in several aspect. Small FOM of GaP and ZnSe are a major drawback to setup a highly efficient THz sources. Furthermore, the high absorption at higher THz frequency also gives another challenge to consider this material further for THz generation. However, both GaP and ZnTe has a nice velocity matching condition at lower pump wavelength and makes them suitable for collinear configuration.

(p22.6) Gallium arsenide inversion zone lies between 0.8 and 1.0 µm indicating a high absorption for this wavelength. For 800 nm pumping wavelength, more energy should be significantly added. Having a large wavelength range of MPA for each order, GaAs also have a high absorption at lower pump wavelength for THz generation with absorption edge at 4PA. Making GaAs only effective pumped at 5PA order or higher. GaAs also inhibit a large nonlinear coefficient, but a relatively small EO coefficient compared to the others. With its small required-tilting-angle and small absorption at 1 THz as well, we can expect GaAs as the good material for THz generations.

(p22.7) On the other hand, CdTe have surprisingly large EO coefficients due to its high degree of anisotropy amongst the other zincblende crystals and therefore, it has the highest detection response for small frequencies. This material also exhibits the highest FOM amongst the other zincblende materials presented in this study and calculated tilting angle below 25°. But as far as our knowledge, we are not aware of any reported use of this material for optical rectification. The reason is that CdSe is strongly absorbing at the 800 nm output of the Ti:sapphire laser, which is the most commonly used ultrashort pulse source. This behaviour of CdTe also limiting its potential to be an efficient crystal for THz generation.

(p22.8) Tellurium despite having huge nonlinear coefficient and low THz absorption at 1 THz (making it have large FOM), are strictly required long pump wavelength and large tilting angle (45°). Due to its narrow bandgap, the corresponding lower limit wavelength of MPA for Te is 2755 nm. The high MPA coefficient at 4PA (20 cm/GW) shows a high free-carrier absorption even on the long-wavelength range.

(p22.9) Selenium crystal have surprisingly huge EO coefficient and nonlinear coefficient as well. Combined with the big FOM values, this material looks very interesting to be considered as the best material candidate for THz generation by OR. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium, thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far for the other materials chosen here. The only major drawback of Se is the high required tilting angle value which can reach 35° for 1030 nm pump wavelength. Not to mention that ordinary ray of Se shows disparity of index at 3900 nm pump, even though the extraordinary ray shows a very good velocity matching with only 7° tilting. But despite this drawback, Selenium is still superior from a lot of aspect compared to the other materials chosen here. Some results [61] also showing a spectrally intense, broadband THz source can be built with this crystal.
## (s51) ZnTe
(p51.0) Valence electrons in Zinc Telluride with 2.26 eV direct band gap can be excited with minimum photon wavelength of 548.6 nm, in which we can effectively pump until 8PA with our chosen 3900 nm pump wavelength. Consequently, for pump wavelengths above 1.65 µm, the absorption edge is for 3PA, only 4PA and higher order MPA are effective.

(p51.1) But unfortunately, the MPA coefficient experimental measurement results for this material are only available until 4PA, which is 3.5 × 10 -4 cm 5 /GW 3 measured at 1750 nm. This value still corresponds to the same order of MPA with 2060 nm wavelength, so we also include it into data collection. For lower pump wavelength, ZnTe can be used in collinear alignment but with the higher MPA coefficient for 2PA makes the output efficiency would be small as the free-carrier absorption would be higher. The efficiency of THz generation in ZnTe could be increased by two orders of magnitude, from 3.1 × 10 −5 to as high as 0.7% [60]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for ZnTe are presented in table 2 below:  

(p51.2) Valence electrons in Zinc Telluride with 2.26 eV direct band gap can be excited with minimum photon wavelength of 548.6 nm, in which we can effectively pump until 8PA with our chosen 3900 nm pump wavelength. Consequently, for pump wavelengths above 1.65 µm, the absorption edge is for 3PA, only 4PA and higher order MPA are effective.

(p51.3) But unfortunately, the MPA coefficient experimental measurement results for this material are only available until 4PA, which is 3.5 × 10 -4 cm 5 /GW 3 measured at 1750 nm. This value still corresponds to the same order of MPA with 2060 nm wavelength, so we also include it into data collection. For lower pump wavelength, ZnTe can be used in collinear alignment but with the higher MPA coefficient for 2PA makes the output efficiency would be small as the free-carrier absorption would be higher. The efficiency of THz generation in ZnTe could be increased by two orders of magnitude, from 3.1 × 10 −5 to as high as 0.7% [60]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for ZnTe are presented in table 2 below:  
## (s60) Comparison
(p60.0) From the data that has been presented in this study, we can see that even though ZnTe and GaP is the most popular semiconductors for THz generation, there are several other materials that are more superior in several aspect. Small FOM of GaP and ZnSe are a major drawback to setup a highly efficient THz sources. Furthermore, the high absorption at higher THz frequency also gives another challenge to consider this material further for THz generation. However, both GaP and ZnTe has a nice velocity matching condition at lower pump wavelength and makes them suitable for collinear configuration.

(p60.1) Gallium arsenide inversion zone lies between 0.8 and 1.0 µm indicating a high absorption for this wavelength. For 800 nm pumping wavelength, more energy should be significantly added. Having a large wavelength range of MPA for each order, GaAs also have a high absorption at lower pump wavelength for THz generation with absorption edge at 4PA. Making GaAs only effective pumped at 5PA order or higher. GaAs also inhibit a large nonlinear coefficient, but a relatively small EO coefficient compared to the others. With its small required-tilting-angle and small absorption at 1 THz as well, we can expect GaAs as the good material for THz generations.

(p60.2) On the other hand, CdTe have surprisingly large EO coefficients due to its high degree of anisotropy amongst the other zincblende crystals and therefore, it has the highest detection response for small frequencies. This material also exhibits the highest FOM amongst the other zincblende materials presented in this study and calculated tilting angle below 25°. But as far as our knowledge, we are not aware of any reported use of this material for optical rectification. The reason is that CdSe is strongly absorbing at the 800 nm output of the Ti:sapphire laser, which is the most commonly used ultrashort pulse source. This behaviour of CdTe also limiting its potential to be an efficient crystal for THz generation.

(p60.3) Tellurium despite having huge nonlinear coefficient and low THz absorption at 1 THz (making it have large FOM), are strictly required long pump wavelength and large tilting angle (45°). Due to its narrow bandgap, the corresponding lower limit wavelength of MPA for Te is 2755 nm. The high MPA coefficient at 4PA (20 cm/GW) shows a high free-carrier absorption even on the long-wavelength range.

(p60.4) Selenium crystal have surprisingly huge EO coefficient and nonlinear coefficient as well. Combined with the big FOM values, this material looks very interesting to be considered as the best material candidate for THz generation by OR. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium, thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far for the other materials chosen here. The only major drawback of Se is the high required tilting angle value which can reach 35° for 1030 nm pump wavelength. Not to mention that ordinary ray of Se shows disparity of index at 3900 nm pump, even though the extraordinary ray shows a very good velocity matching with only 7° tilting. But despite this drawback, Selenium is still superior from a lot of aspect compared to the other materials chosen here. Some results [61] also showing a spectrally intense, broadband THz source can be built with this crystal.

(p60.5) From the data that has been presented in this study, we can see that even though ZnTe and GaP is the most popular semiconductors for THz generation, there are several other materials that are more superior in several aspect. Small FOM of GaP and ZnSe are a major drawback to setup a highly efficient THz sources. Furthermore, the high absorption at higher THz frequency also gives another challenge to consider this material further for THz generation. However, both GaP and ZnTe has a nice velocity matching condition at lower pump wavelength and makes them suitable for collinear configuration.

(p60.6) Gallium arsenide inversion zone lies between 0.8 and 1.0 µm indicating a high absorption for this wavelength. For 800 nm pumping wavelength, more energy should be significantly added. Having a large wavelength range of MPA for each order, GaAs also have a high absorption at lower pump wavelength for THz generation with absorption edge at 4PA. Making GaAs only effective pumped at 5PA order or higher. GaAs also inhibit a large nonlinear coefficient, but a relatively small EO coefficient compared to the others. With its small required-tilting-angle and small absorption at 1 THz as well, we can expect GaAs as the good material for THz generations.

(p60.7) On the other hand, CdTe have surprisingly large EO coefficients due to its high degree of anisotropy amongst the other zincblende crystals and therefore, it has the highest detection response for small frequencies. This material also exhibits the highest FOM amongst the other zincblende materials presented in this study and calculated tilting angle below 25°. But as far as our knowledge, we are not aware of any reported use of this material for optical rectification. The reason is that CdSe is strongly absorbing at the 800 nm output of the Ti:sapphire laser, which is the most commonly used ultrashort pulse source. This behaviour of CdTe also limiting its potential to be an efficient crystal for THz generation.

(p60.8) Tellurium despite having huge nonlinear coefficient and low THz absorption at 1 THz (making it have large FOM), are strictly required long pump wavelength and large tilting angle (45°). Due to its narrow bandgap, the corresponding lower limit wavelength of MPA for Te is 2755 nm. The high MPA coefficient at 4PA (20 cm/GW) shows a high free-carrier absorption even on the long-wavelength range.

(p60.9) Selenium crystal have surprisingly huge EO coefficient and nonlinear coefficient as well. Combined with the big FOM values, this material looks very interesting to be considered as the best material candidate for THz generation by OR. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium, thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far for the other materials chosen here. The only major drawback of Se is the high required tilting angle value which can reach 35° for 1030 nm pump wavelength. Not to mention that ordinary ray of Se shows disparity of index at 3900 nm pump, even though the extraordinary ray shows a very good velocity matching with only 7° tilting. But despite this drawback, Selenium is still superior from a lot of aspect compared to the other materials chosen here. Some results [61] also showing a spectrally intense, broadband THz source can be built with this crystal.
