# R E V I E W Bacteriophages and food safety: An updated overview

CorpusID: 258519220 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/35488368c9aad06c91c3f2e4aa73a436e10be925](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/35488368c9aad06c91c3f2e4aa73a436e10be925)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s10) | Bacteriophage to control Shigella spp. contamination
(p10.0) Currently, the FDA has only authorized one food safety phage preparation that exclusively targets Shigella spp. It was awarded the GRAS certification in 2017 (GRN 672) for this five-phage cocktail after it remained exposed that the heights of Shigella were decreased through around 1 log in a variety of foods, including lettuce, yoghurt, smoked salmon, deli corned beef, melons and chicken breast meat.

(p10.1) In a different study, the same combination of Shigella specific bacteriophages was used to assess the efficacy of giving phages against pharmaceuticals to mice exposed to a Shigella sonnei strain (Soffer et al., 2017). The results of the above research showed that although the Shigella-specific phages concoction was similarly efficient as just a basic antimicrobial at lowering the amount of bacteria in mice, antimicrobial therapy substantially altered the uniqueness of the cursor bowel society, so although viral diagnosis was doing not. Retroviral management thus was much fairly mild consequence just on mice's regular gut bacteria than antibiotic therapy was doing. The researcher's observations show that the phage had no negative effects on the mice's weight, morbidity, mortality, or any other physiological characteristics. Both the mice's blood and urine contained the same elements as before (Mai et al., 2015).
