# R E V I E W A R T I C L E Open Forum Infectious Diseases Coronavirus Disease 2019 Treatment: A Review of Early and Emerging Options

CorpusID: 261234016 - [None](None)

Fields: 

## (s2) Nitazoxanide
(p2.0) Nitazoxanide has demonstrated potent in vitro activity against SARS CoV-2, with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 2.12 µM in Vero E6 cells [3]. This potent activity is consistent with EC 50 values for nitazoxanide and its active metabolite, tizoxanide, against MERS-CoV in LLC-MK2 cells in which EC 50 values of 0.92 and 0.83 µM, respectively, have been demonstrated [39]. Nitazoxanide displays broad-spectrum in vitro antiviral activity against influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, rotavirus, and norovirus among others in addition to coronaviruses [39]. This broad-spectrum antiviral activity is believed to be due to the fact that the mechanism of action is based on interference with host-regulated pathways involved in viral replication rather than virus-specific pathways [39].
## (s8) Oseltamivir and Baloxavir
(p8.0) Given their antiviral activity against influenza, considerable attention has been paid to oseltamivir, and to a lesser degree baloxavir, as potential treatment options for COVID-19. This was exacerbated by the initial report from Huang et al [1] in Wuhan where patients managed with COVID-19 received oseltamivir in addition to broad-spectrum antimicrobials. It is important to note that use of oseltamivir was not as targeted therapy of SARS-CoV-2 but rather driven by the lack of a knowledge of the causative pathogen at the time of treatment and the desire to empirically treat influenza. The authors do not suggest the use of oseltamivir for COVID-19 in that publication, and there are no data that suggest in vitro activity of oseltamivir against SARS-CoV-2. In fact, the only data assessing oseltamivir activity against coronaviruses demonstrated it to be ineffective at inhibiting SARS-CoV-1, even at a concentration of 10 000 µM/L [56]. Coronaviruses do not utilize neuraminidase, and thus there is no enzyme to be inhibited by oseltamivir. This would hold true for zanamivir, peramivir, or any other neuraminidase inhibitor agents. Similarly, neither a defined mechanism nor in vitro data have suggested that baloxavir would demonstrate activity against SARS-CoV-2 or other coronaviruses. Therefore, given the critical need for these agents in the management of influenza and concern for drug shortages with oseltamivir, these agents should be avoided in patients with COVID-19 once influenza has been ruled out. Table 2 lists agents that are being investigated and/or theoretically considered for the management of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. At this time, no recommendation can be made for any of these agents. In general, they should be avoided without additional supporting evidence.

(p8.1) Given their antiviral activity against influenza, considerable attention has been paid to oseltamivir, and to a lesser degree baloxavir, as potential treatment options for COVID-19. This was exacerbated by the initial report from Huang et al [1] in Wuhan where patients managed with COVID-19 received oseltamivir in addition to broad-spectrum antimicrobials. It is important to note that use of oseltamivir was not as targeted therapy of SARS-CoV-2 but rather driven by the lack of a knowledge of the causative pathogen at the time of treatment and the desire to empirically treat influenza. The authors do not suggest the use of oseltamivir for COVID-19 in that publication, and there are no data that suggest in vitro activity of oseltamivir against SARS-CoV-2. In fact, the only data assessing oseltamivir activity against coronaviruses demonstrated it to be ineffective at inhibiting SARS-CoV-1, even at a concentration of 10 000 µM/L [56]. Coronaviruses do not utilize neuraminidase, and thus there is no enzyme to be inhibited by oseltamivir. This would hold true for zanamivir, peramivir, or any other neuraminidase inhibitor agents. Similarly, neither a defined mechanism nor in vitro data have suggested that baloxavir would demonstrate activity against SARS-CoV-2 or other coronaviruses. Therefore, given the critical need for these agents in the management of influenza and concern for drug shortages with oseltamivir, these agents should be avoided in patients with COVID-19 once influenza has been ruled out. Table 2 lists agents that are being investigated and/or theoretically considered for the management of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. At this time, no recommendation can be made for any of these agents. In general, they should be avoided without additional supporting evidence.
## (s10) CONCLUSIONS
(p10.0) Appropriate management strategies for patients with COVID-19 are a rapidly evolving therapeutic challenge, and the optimal agents (if any) to treat infection or prevent progression to critical illness remain ill-defined. Although certain agents listed in this review are encouraging, and the potential benefit of therapy likely outweighs the relatively minor risk of adverse events from short-course therapy, the evidence remains inconclusive and changes almost daily.

(p10.1) Patient populations who warrant therapy and the timing of initiation of therapy need to be defined. Given that disease progression can occur rapidly in stable patients and that viral loads are highest early in the infection course, the authors of this review opine that rapid initiation of therapy in high-risk populations (patients who are hospitalized or outpatients who are at high risk of complications) is rational and should be considered, ideally in the context of a well-controlled, adequately powered trial. More important, however, this strategy is not without risk and needs to be weighed against potential adverse events (that remain poorly defined) and impending drug shortages with increases in use of these agents. To help address these concerns, careful consideration should be given to duration of therapy with many clinical trials and institutional protocols recommending 5-7 days for uncomplicated disease. Duration of therapy should be individualized to the patient and the progression of disease.

(p10.2) Clinicians must continually monitor and adapt as new literature becomes available. Caution should be applied because the bulk of the available clinical data are uncontrolled, not peer reviewed, or even unpublished. Given these  [59]. The safety and efficacy of convalescent plasma transfusion in SARS-CoV-2-infected patients has not been established, and no protocols exist currently in the United States. Protocols are reportedly being developed at The Johns Hopkins University Hospital.
## (s11) Disulfiram
(p11.0) Thiuram derivative that blocks alcohol oxidation. Demonstrated ability to competitively inhibit the papain-like proteases of SARS; however, no clinical data exist [60]. No in vitro or clinical data exist for COVID-19.

(p11.1) Thiuram derivative that blocks alcohol oxidation. Demonstrated ability to competitively inhibit the papain-like proteases of SARS; however, no clinical data exist [60]. No in vitro or clinical data exist for COVID-19.
## (s12) Eculizumab
(p12.0) Humanized, monoclonal IgG antibody that binds to complement protein C5 and prevents formation of membrane attack complex (MAC). Being evaluated in a clinical trial (NCT04288713) for COVID-19 to quell immune response, no data exist at this time to support use.

(p12.1) Favipiravir RNA-dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor with broad-spectrum antiviral activity; however, demonstrated high EC 50 (decreased potency) against SARS-CoV-2 but was effective in protecting mice against Ebola virus despite similarly high EC 50 values [3]. Currently being evaluated in Clinical Trial NCT04273763 for patients with COVID-19. This agent is not FDA approved or available in the United States.

(p12.2) Galidesivir (BCX4430) Nucleoside RNA polymerase inhibitor with reported wide spectrum of antiviral activity, currently in pipeline of Biocryst Pharma and previously evaluated for Ebola and other hemorrhagic fever virus infections.

(p12.3) Humanized, monoclonal IgG antibody that binds to complement protein C5 and prevents formation of membrane attack complex (MAC). Being evaluated in a clinical trial (NCT04288713) for COVID-19 to quell immune response, no data exist at this time to support use.

(p12.4) Favipiravir RNA-dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor with broad-spectrum antiviral activity; however, demonstrated high EC 50 (decreased potency) against SARS-CoV-2 but was effective in protecting mice against Ebola virus despite similarly high EC 50 values [3]. Currently being evaluated in Clinical Trial NCT04273763 for patients with COVID-19. This agent is not FDA approved or available in the United States.

(p12.5) Galidesivir (BCX4430) Nucleoside RNA polymerase inhibitor with reported wide spectrum of antiviral activity, currently in pipeline of Biocryst Pharma and previously evaluated for Ebola and other hemorrhagic fever virus infections.
## (s15) Niclosamide
(p15.0) Anthelminthic drug with in vitro efficacy against SARS-CoV-1; however, low absorption and oral bioavailability resulting in a wide range of serum concentrations in healthy volunteers after a single dose may limit utility as antiviral treatment [63].

(p15.1) Anthelminthic drug with in vitro efficacy against SARS-CoV-1; however, low absorption and oral bioavailability resulting in a wide range of serum concentrations in healthy volunteers after a single dose may limit utility as antiviral treatment [63].
## (s18) XueBiJing
(p18.0) Chinese herbal medicine extract infusion formulation given at 100 mL IV twice daily, suggested as a "may consider" treatment for severe and critical cases in the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China: the COVID-19 Diagnosis and Treatment Guide, 7th Edition. This previously demonstrated improved mortality in patients with severe community acquired pneumonia in China [65]. limitations, it is critical that institutions and clinicians report their experiences with the management and treatment of COVID-19 to the medical community so that we may further modify and optimize treatment recommendations and pathways.

(p18.1) Chinese herbal medicine extract infusion formulation given at 100 mL IV twice daily, suggested as a "may consider" treatment for severe and critical cases in the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China: the COVID-19 Diagnosis and Treatment Guide, 7th Edition. This previously demonstrated improved mortality in patients with severe community acquired pneumonia in China [65]. limitations, it is critical that institutions and clinicians report their experiences with the management and treatment of COVID-19 to the medical community so that we may further modify and optimize treatment recommendations and pathways.
## (s23) Nitazoxanide
(p23.0) Nitazoxanide has demonstrated potent in vitro activity against SARS CoV-2, with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 2.12 µM in Vero E6 cells [3]. This potent activity is consistent with EC 50 values for nitazoxanide and its active metabolite, tizoxanide, against MERS-CoV in LLC-MK2 cells in which EC 50 values of 0.92 and 0.83 µM, respectively, have been demonstrated [39]. Nitazoxanide displays broad-spectrum in vitro antiviral activity against influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, rotavirus, and norovirus among others in addition to coronaviruses [39]. This broad-spectrum antiviral activity is believed to be due to the fact that the mechanism of action is based on interference with host-regulated pathways involved in viral replication rather than virus-specific pathways [39].
## (s29) Oseltamivir and Baloxavir
(p29.0) Given their antiviral activity against influenza, considerable attention has been paid to oseltamivir, and to a lesser degree baloxavir, as potential treatment options for COVID-19. This was exacerbated by the initial report from Huang et al [1] in Wuhan where patients managed with COVID-19 received oseltamivir in addition to broad-spectrum antimicrobials. It is important to note that use of oseltamivir was not as targeted therapy of SARS-CoV-2 but rather driven by the lack of a knowledge of the causative pathogen at the time of treatment and the desire to empirically treat influenza. The authors do not suggest the use of oseltamivir for COVID-19 in that publication, and there are no data that suggest in vitro activity of oseltamivir against SARS-CoV-2. In fact, the only data assessing oseltamivir activity against coronaviruses demonstrated it to be ineffective at inhibiting SARS-CoV-1, even at a concentration of 10 000 µM/L [56]. Coronaviruses do not utilize neuraminidase, and thus there is no enzyme to be inhibited by oseltamivir. This would hold true for zanamivir, peramivir, or any other neuraminidase inhibitor agents. Similarly, neither a defined mechanism nor in vitro data have suggested that baloxavir would demonstrate activity against SARS-CoV-2 or other coronaviruses. Therefore, given the critical need for these agents in the management of influenza and concern for drug shortages with oseltamivir, these agents should be avoided in patients with COVID-19 once influenza has been ruled out. Table 2 lists agents that are being investigated and/or theoretically considered for the management of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. At this time, no recommendation can be made for any of these agents. In general, they should be avoided without additional supporting evidence.

(p29.1) Given their antiviral activity against influenza, considerable attention has been paid to oseltamivir, and to a lesser degree baloxavir, as potential treatment options for COVID-19. This was exacerbated by the initial report from Huang et al [1] in Wuhan where patients managed with COVID-19 received oseltamivir in addition to broad-spectrum antimicrobials. It is important to note that use of oseltamivir was not as targeted therapy of SARS-CoV-2 but rather driven by the lack of a knowledge of the causative pathogen at the time of treatment and the desire to empirically treat influenza. The authors do not suggest the use of oseltamivir for COVID-19 in that publication, and there are no data that suggest in vitro activity of oseltamivir against SARS-CoV-2. In fact, the only data assessing oseltamivir activity against coronaviruses demonstrated it to be ineffective at inhibiting SARS-CoV-1, even at a concentration of 10 000 µM/L [56]. Coronaviruses do not utilize neuraminidase, and thus there is no enzyme to be inhibited by oseltamivir. This would hold true for zanamivir, peramivir, or any other neuraminidase inhibitor agents. Similarly, neither a defined mechanism nor in vitro data have suggested that baloxavir would demonstrate activity against SARS-CoV-2 or other coronaviruses. Therefore, given the critical need for these agents in the management of influenza and concern for drug shortages with oseltamivir, these agents should be avoided in patients with COVID-19 once influenza has been ruled out. Table 2 lists agents that are being investigated and/or theoretically considered for the management of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. At this time, no recommendation can be made for any of these agents. In general, they should be avoided without additional supporting evidence.
## (s31) CONCLUSIONS
(p31.0) Appropriate management strategies for patients with COVID-19 are a rapidly evolving therapeutic challenge, and the optimal agents (if any) to treat infection or prevent progression to critical illness remain ill-defined. Although certain agents listed in this review are encouraging, and the potential benefit of therapy likely outweighs the relatively minor risk of adverse events from short-course therapy, the evidence remains inconclusive and changes almost daily.

(p31.1) Patient populations who warrant therapy and the timing of initiation of therapy need to be defined. Given that disease progression can occur rapidly in stable patients and that viral loads are highest early in the infection course, the authors of this review opine that rapid initiation of therapy in high-risk populations (patients who are hospitalized or outpatients who are at high risk of complications) is rational and should be considered, ideally in the context of a well-controlled, adequately powered trial. More important, however, this strategy is not without risk and needs to be weighed against potential adverse events (that remain poorly defined) and impending drug shortages with increases in use of these agents. To help address these concerns, careful consideration should be given to duration of therapy with many clinical trials and institutional protocols recommending 5-7 days for uncomplicated disease. Duration of therapy should be individualized to the patient and the progression of disease.

(p31.2) Clinicians must continually monitor and adapt as new literature becomes available. Caution should be applied because the bulk of the available clinical data are uncontrolled, not peer reviewed, or even unpublished. Given these  [59]. The safety and efficacy of convalescent plasma transfusion in SARS-CoV-2-infected patients has not been established, and no protocols exist currently in the United States. Protocols are reportedly being developed at The Johns Hopkins University Hospital.
## (s32) Disulfiram
(p32.0) Thiuram derivative that blocks alcohol oxidation. Demonstrated ability to competitively inhibit the papain-like proteases of SARS; however, no clinical data exist [60]. No in vitro or clinical data exist for COVID-19.

(p32.1) Thiuram derivative that blocks alcohol oxidation. Demonstrated ability to competitively inhibit the papain-like proteases of SARS; however, no clinical data exist [60]. No in vitro or clinical data exist for COVID-19.
## (s33) Eculizumab
(p33.0) Humanized, monoclonal IgG antibody that binds to complement protein C5 and prevents formation of membrane attack complex (MAC). Being evaluated in a clinical trial (NCT04288713) for COVID-19 to quell immune response, no data exist at this time to support use.

(p33.1) Favipiravir RNA-dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor with broad-spectrum antiviral activity; however, demonstrated high EC 50 (decreased potency) against SARS-CoV-2 but was effective in protecting mice against Ebola virus despite similarly high EC 50 values [3]. Currently being evaluated in Clinical Trial NCT04273763 for patients with COVID-19. This agent is not FDA approved or available in the United States.

(p33.2) Galidesivir (BCX4430) Nucleoside RNA polymerase inhibitor with reported wide spectrum of antiviral activity, currently in pipeline of Biocryst Pharma and previously evaluated for Ebola and other hemorrhagic fever virus infections.

(p33.3) Humanized, monoclonal IgG antibody that binds to complement protein C5 and prevents formation of membrane attack complex (MAC). Being evaluated in a clinical trial (NCT04288713) for COVID-19 to quell immune response, no data exist at this time to support use.

(p33.4) Favipiravir RNA-dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor with broad-spectrum antiviral activity; however, demonstrated high EC 50 (decreased potency) against SARS-CoV-2 but was effective in protecting mice against Ebola virus despite similarly high EC 50 values [3]. Currently being evaluated in Clinical Trial NCT04273763 for patients with COVID-19. This agent is not FDA approved or available in the United States.

(p33.5) Galidesivir (BCX4430) Nucleoside RNA polymerase inhibitor with reported wide spectrum of antiviral activity, currently in pipeline of Biocryst Pharma and previously evaluated for Ebola and other hemorrhagic fever virus infections.
## (s36) Niclosamide
(p36.0) Anthelminthic drug with in vitro efficacy against SARS-CoV-1; however, low absorption and oral bioavailability resulting in a wide range of serum concentrations in healthy volunteers after a single dose may limit utility as antiviral treatment [63].

(p36.1) Anthelminthic drug with in vitro efficacy against SARS-CoV-1; however, low absorption and oral bioavailability resulting in a wide range of serum concentrations in healthy volunteers after a single dose may limit utility as antiviral treatment [63].
## (s39) XueBiJing
(p39.0) Chinese herbal medicine extract infusion formulation given at 100 mL IV twice daily, suggested as a "may consider" treatment for severe and critical cases in the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China: the COVID-19 Diagnosis and Treatment Guide, 7th Edition. This previously demonstrated improved mortality in patients with severe community acquired pneumonia in China [65]. limitations, it is critical that institutions and clinicians report their experiences with the management and treatment of COVID-19 to the medical community so that we may further modify and optimize treatment recommendations and pathways.

(p39.1) Chinese herbal medicine extract infusion formulation given at 100 mL IV twice daily, suggested as a "may consider" treatment for severe and critical cases in the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China: the COVID-19 Diagnosis and Treatment Guide, 7th Edition. This previously demonstrated improved mortality in patients with severe community acquired pneumonia in China [65]. limitations, it is critical that institutions and clinicians report their experiences with the management and treatment of COVID-19 to the medical community so that we may further modify and optimize treatment recommendations and pathways.
