# A review of SARS-CoV-2 drug repurposing: databases and machine learning models

CorpusID: 260671013 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/08de4ebae463c00e3ab12c65a3b8ab5955f1aa0d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/08de4ebae463c00e3ab12c65a3b8ab5955f1aa0d)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) Databases for drug repurposing studies
(p1.0) There have been onerous efforts to collate, archive, and digitize life sciences research data worldwide, leading to a rise of hundreds of online databases providing various features for specific purposes. There are numerous repository classifications depending on the classifier perspective. Bagherian et al (2021) categorized the databases as drug-target interaction (DTI), drug/target-centered, drug-target binding affinity, and supporting databases. Wu et al (2022) classified the databases as drug combination databases and databases listed in the other related databases section. Tanoli et al (2021) grouped the databases as chemical, genomics, threedimensional protein structures, protein classifications and interactions, reaction pathways, molecular omics, DTI, and disease databases. Nevertheless, it is clear that various databases fit under multiple categories. Given these observations, most databases have different data types, therefore, they can be referred to as heterogeneous databases. In this section, 20 frequently used repositories in drug repurposing studies have been considered. An overview of the data types provided by each database is rendered in Table 1. Within these databases, some of them provide specific services considering relevant SARS-CoV-2 data and are jointly represented in Table 2, while being elaborated beneath each database section below.
## (s5) DrugBank
(p5.0) DrugBank (DB) (https://go.drugbank.com/) was released in 2006 by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) (Wishart et al, 2018). It is a compendium of detailed data about drugs/molecules along with their reported mechanism of action (MoA) to the annotated targets. The molecules in the database are grouped into six groups: approved, withdrawn, investigational, experimental, nutraceuticals, and illicit drugs. DB provides information about the drug properties, pharmacology, interactions, products that contain the active ingredient, chemical identifiers, and the clinical trial status of the selected drug. So far, the last statistical report reveals that the repository comprises 15,790 drugs, 19,395 drug-target associations, 4,937 unique targets, 5,770 drug-enzyme associations, and 467 unique enzymes. The database provides a section called COVID-19 Dashboard, which centralizes data on COVID-19 related information such as drugs, potential drug targets, and ongoing research initiatives including investigations into molecular mechanisms, and drug discovery repurposing efforts.
## (s6) DrugCentral
(p6.0) DrugCentral (https://drugcentral.org/) is a drug-centred database that was first released in 2016 to quantify the existing pharmaceutical drugs and their targets (Avram et al, 2021). The Division of Translational Informatics currently maintains it at the University of New Mexico (UNM) in collaboration with Illuminating the Druggable Genome (IDG) Consortium. This database provides information on active ingredients, general drugs, FDA-approved drugs, European Medicines Agency (EMA)-approved drugs, and Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency (PMDA)-approved drugs. Drug annotation includes drug dosage, absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity (ADMET), adverse events for both males and females, pharmacologic action, drug use, pharmaceutical products, bioactivity, and new drug applications. Also, this repository offers target search to allocate the drugs acting on them. DrugCentral compiles 4,927 active ingredients and 112,359 FDA drug labels. The last updated database release comprises 226 veterinary drugs along with 804 targets.   (Kanehisa et al, 2017). This resource provides numerous rich databases for multiple purposes. KEGG-Drugs database gathers information about approved drugs in Japan, the US, and Europe. Two additional databases are associated with the KEGG-Drug database, KEGG-pathway database, and KEGG-Medicus database. The former database provides information about the drug pathway, whilst the latter database delivers reported drug-target interaction. Furthermore, the known drug-target interaction pairs can be extracted from the KEGG-Brite database. KEGG-COMPOUND database collects the most relevant compounds in the biological system. The database is integrated with other KEGG databases and provides information about the chemical properties, reactions, pathways, modules, and enzymes associated with the compound of interest. Moreover, KEGG-Genes are a collection of gene and protein sequences of cellular organisms and viruses from public databases, mainly NCBI RefSeq and GenBank. As per 2023 statistics, 46,086,588 and 648,811 genes expressing proteins are appended for organisms and viruses, respectively. The counts for proteins are 312 for viruses and 4,125 for other organisms. The similarity among the sequences is generated through KEGG (Sequence Similarity DataBase) SSDB. Furthermore, the molecular function of functional orthologs in many biological pathways are provided in KEGG-KO database. Each functional ortholog is given a KO entry which is cross-referenced with experimental evidence. Additionally, the KEGG-Genome database collects detailed genomic information about many cellular organisms and viruses. Besides, there is the KEGG-Enzymes database that collects information about enzymatic reactions.
## (s22) Reactome
(p22.0) Given the challenges associated with gathering the required data from the abundant information present in publications, the Reactome database (https://reactome.org/) project was introduced in 2003 to facilitate researchers' access to data from literature published on human biological reaction pathways (Gillespie et al, 2022). This project is led by Lincoln Stein of Ontario Institute for Cancer Research (OICR), Peter D'Eustachio of NYU Langone Health, Henning Hermjakob of EMBL-EBI, and Guanming Wu of Oregon Health and Science University (OHSU). The repository provides detailed information for each entity involved in the reaction pathway. The data curation process is performed manually by experts in the designated fields of each molecular or cellular reaction pathway. All the information is extensively cross-referenced to more than 100 bioinformatics and cheminformatics resources. These resources include Ensembl, Uniprot, ChEBI, and PubMed databases. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Reactome has developed a specialized section called COVID-19 Disease

(p22.1) Pathways. It provides a detailed overview of the various biological pathways involved in the SARS-CoV-2 lifecycle and the subsequent host response, including viral entry, replication, and the host immune responses and potential pathological events. As of the latest version of this database released in 2023, the database contains 2,629 human pathways, 14,628 reactions, 11,396 proteins, 2,004 small molecules, and 1,114 drugs.
## (s27) PharmGKB
(p27.0) Curated knowledge about the genetic variation effect on drug metabolization in the human body is provided in Pharmacogenetics Knowledge Base (PharmGKB) database (https://www.pharmgkb.org/). Generally, it contains information about pharmacogenomics relationships between genes, drugs, and diseases. Specifically, it includes information about drug-centred pathways, pharmacogenetic summaries, and drug-dosing guidelines, and the labels collected from pharmacogenomics (PGx) studies. This project was initiated in 2000 and became available online in 2001 (Whirl-Carrillo et al, 2021). At the time of writing, 218 pathways, 68 potential pharmacogenes, 26,402 variant annotations, 762 annotated drugs, 428 FDA drug label annotations, and 201 clinical guideline annotations were deposited in the consortium. PharmaGKB has developed Therapeutic Resource for COVID-19, which focuses on COVID-19 related therapeutic aspects. It includes details on potential drug targets, therapeutic agents, clinical trials, drug interactions, and pharmacogenomic factors.
## (s29) TTD
(p29.0) Therapeutic target database (TTD) (https://db.idrblab.net/ ttd/) is one of the Pharmainformatics databases provided by the Bioinformatics and Drug Design Group (BIDD) launched in 2002 (Zhou et al, 2022). The group gathered almost all the known and explored therapeutic targets, targeted disease conditions, and the ligands/drugs reported to target these targets. The database provides a wide range of targets and drug classifications, in addition to drug resistance mutations and target expression profiles from the patients' data. Target annotations include successful targets, clinical trial targets, co-targets, non-binders, target regulators, and target interacting proteins. Drugs are annotated as approved drugs, multi-target agents, naturederived drugs, and prodrugs. The last statistics provided by the group in 2022 revealed that the database currently contains 3,578 targets and 38,760 drugs. The database added three services to help researchers in drug-based research studies. The services include the molecular interactions/regulations of the target, different human system profiles of the target, and cellbased expression variations of the target of interest. TTD also introduced a service called Target and Drug Data for Coronaviruses. As the name implies this section provides a comprehensive collection of information related to therapeutic targets and drugs that have been studied or proposed for the treatment of coronavirus infections, including SARS-CoV-2. The information includes target information, drug binding data, therapeutic agents, and clinical trial information.
## (s33) SIDER
(p33.0) Drug side effects are gaining research interest for the potential of relating them to the drug's chemical structure to predict both novel drug-target interactions and side effects for other drugs. Therefore, Kuhn et al (2016) announced SIDER (Side Effect Resource) database (http://sideeffects.embl.de/) in January 2010 to aggregate adverse drug reactions (ADR) of drugs to aid academics in their research. The detection of the indications was mined using natural language processing (NLP) from literature, electronic indication systems, animal studies, clinical trials, and package inserts. As of 2015 statistics, a collection of 140,064 drug-ADR pairs and 5,868 ADR for 1,430 commercial drugs are present in the repository.
## (s36) Machine learning models
(p36.0) Machine learning (ML) is a distinct division of artificial intelligence (AI) that gained attention in drug repurposing field for its appealing advantages. It was proven to have an efficient intervention to accelerate the prediction of potential SARS-CoV-2 inhibitors and to prioritize drugs for in vitro testing (Yang et al, 2022). A significant feature of ML models is their ability to learn and explore functional relationships in the given data set that humans could hardly investigate. Usually, ML workflow comprises four steps: 1) data curation and preprocessing, 2) feature extraction, 3) model fitting, and 4) interpretation (Angermueller et al, 2016). Upon the human intervention intensity in each step, the ML can be classified into conventional ML models and deep learning (DL) models. In the former models, significant human intervention is required compared to the latter models. Specifically, in DL models, the feature extraction step is automated, unlike in the conventional ML models where it is done manually (Sarker, 2021). Both models can be implemented for classification, regression, clustering, or pattern recognition problems (Carracedo-Reboredo et al, 2021).

(p36.1) This section covers two main areas: 1) deep learning models and 2) conventional machine learning models. The deep learning models section will be divided into two sections: 1) deep learning methodology and 2) application in drug repurposing. Likewise, the conventional machine learning model section will be divided into three sections: 1) ensemble learning model, 2) support vector machine model, and 3) Naïve Bayes model. Each section is subdivided into its methodology and its application in drug repurposing.
## (s46) Application in drug repurposing
(p46.0) Ivanov et al (2020) developed an SVM (radial kernel) model based on QSAR methodology to predict inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2 RdRp protein. The model screened three datasets, FDA-approved drugs dataset, molecules from the COVID-19 Antiviral dataset, and molecules from published research studies on SARS, MERS, and SARS-CoV-2. Among the total predictions, 92 FDA-approved drugs were suggested as RdRp inhibitors. Some of which are Thalomid, Grazoprevir, Sildenafil, Ruxolitinib, Duvelisib, Moxifloxacin, Acalabrutinib, and Telmisartan. Kowalewski and Ray (2020) aimed to mine potential drugs for COVID-19. Instead of considering a particular target, the authors gathered a compendium of 65 human proteins which were proven to interact with SARS-CoV-2 proteins as targets from bioassay data. Three RBF-SVM models for classification and regression were combined (ensemble model) and implemented for all the targets. For only one target, namely, EIF4H, regularized random forest (RRF) was aggregated along with the SVM ensemble model. After training, the ML models were utilized to predict inhibitors against the targets from a set of approved and registered drugs. Predictions were categorized and curated based on the estimated mammalian toxicity and vapor pressure. The team constructed a network of the predicted drugs and targets. The targets with few drug candidates were excluded. The multi-target drug predictions comprise Phenazopyridine, Abemaciclib, Promazine, Tyverb, Pirenzepine, and Ebastine. Rajput et al (2021b) implemented SVM to predict anti-SARS-CoV-2 drugs. The model predicted 12 drugs: Verteporfin, Argatroban, Reboxetine, Guanfacine, Telotristat ethyl, Betrixaban, Leuprolide, Trovafloxacin, Peramivir, Salmeterol, Oxybuprocaine, and Warfarin. These predictions were further validated by molecular docking to investigate the binding affinity of the drugs against the complex of spike protein and ACE2 receptor. The authors decided that the most potential candidates are those having binding affinities ranging from −9.5 kcal/mol to -8 kcal/mol. Accordingly, seven molecules were prioritized: Verteporfin, Alatrofloxacin, Metergoline, Rescinnamine, Goserelin, Leuprolide, and Telotristat ethyl.
