# CubeSat Communication Subsystems: A Review of On-Board Transceiver Architectures, Protocols, and Performance

CorpusID: 261011472 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0f93f1ae82e4e34ffd09510c6948d3546eeb9f97](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0f93f1ae82e4e34ffd09510c6948d3546eeb9f97)

Fields: Computer Science, Physics, Engineering

## (s9) B. PERFORMANCE OF CUSTOM SDR SYSTEMS
(p9.0) Although the PULSAR SDR has the lowest power consumption among all reviewed systems and the highest data rate among all custom SDR systems, it did not go through extensive testing stages to demonstrate its BER performance in the orbit environment. The FPGA-based design demonstrated very low power consumption of 1 W for a data rate of 10 Mbps but its performance in terms of BER has not been tested. However, given that the SDR utilizes various types of error correction schemes and NEN compatible packetization, it is expected that the system has acceptable communication quality. On the other hand, Maheshwarapp SDR has undergone extensive simulation, laboratory, and practical CubeSat communication testing stages. The system was tested as a ground transceiver using two different practical testbeds with both FUNcube-1 Cube-Sat and ESEO microsatellite and it successfully demonstrated reliable multi-CubeSat communication at a data rate of 19.2 kbps. Although the demonstrated data rate is very low with respect to the system's power consumption of 2.7 W, the SDR is not meant to provide high speed CubeSat downlink but to provide simultaneous multi-CubeSat signal reception capability. Consequently, the system has two separate communication chains working simultaneously over the S-band for inter-satellite link and over the VHF/UHF band for uplink/downlink. This justifies the high power consumption to the low data rate of this system.

(p9.1) Cai SDR has the highest power consumption among all custom SDR systems. Moreover, its demonstration was only limited to in-lab testing and did not undergo actual space testing. The most notable feature of this design is the improved algorithm of LDPC that was developed and implemented for the channel coding of this system resulting in very efficient utilization of the FPGA resources. Moreover, with this improved LDPC algorithm the achieved BER (10 −6 ) was much lower than other systems for the same number of decoding iterations (20) and for the same SNR (4.9 dB). Thus, Cai SDR has superior BER performance compared to most other systems. Although it is claimed that the SDR can achieve a data rate of up to 28 Mbps, this data rate has not been demonstrated in practical testing. Although UOW SDR was tested in-lab, the testing lacked several important criteria. Firstly, the SDR was tested either as a transmitter or as a receiver at a given time. Therefore, there was no complete communication chain testing of the developed SDR. As a result, the actual data rate that the system is capable of was not determined. Instead, only the maximum possible data rate limit (60 Mbps) allowed by the system's components is known. Although the actual data rate of this SDR was not determined, it is expected to be above 100 kbps based on the system's specifications and results from similar systems. Secondly, the testing was merely limited to verifying the functionality of the individual blocks, the overall functionality of the SDR, and the power consumption, rather than to test the practical performance of the system under realistic conditions. Thirdly, the testing was completely performed in-lab and no testing was performed using either existing CubeSats or UOW CubeSat itself.In contrast, AeroCube SDR, which had nearly the same power consumption as UOW SDR, was able to successfully implement FEC codes and even utilize ACM to change the modulation and channel coding schemes based on the channel conditions and in-orbit position. Moreover, AeroCube SDR demonstrated a data rate of around 1 Mbps based on in-orbit results. Although the exact BER performance of the system is not described, it is expected to have acceptable BER based on the successful results of the CubeSat.
