# Edinburgh Research Explorer a review of the tools used for marine monitoring in the UK Citation for published version

CorpusID: 28523414 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/71965057c5aa9e83d7700cf1ec734f29f0a22c31](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/71965057c5aa9e83d7700cf1ec734f29f0a22c31)

Fields: Political Science, Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s40) Integration of New Technology and Associated Challenges
(p40.0) The challenge of introducing new technologies is to ensure that (as appropriate) they are validated. Integration and validation can be a simple process, e.g., replacing and upgrading a camera system, or can require a complete reworking of equipment, sampling methodology, data analysis and finally interpretation of that data to meet policy requirements. The recent overview by Danovaro et al. (2016) demonstrates some of the ways this could be done, with specific emphasis on molecular and automated solutions. Incorporating new technology into long-running monitoring programme clearly has different implications to when doing so within a new or contemporary programme due to the interruption of well managed practices and loss of timeseries data i.e., preventing comparison between new and old data sets. Implementation of the total ecosystem model, as discussed above in Section Total Ecosystem Approach, would mitigate this challenge, allowing new sources of data to be directly integrated into a model of ecosystem health. However, where a status based monitoring approach is used then it is normal to validate new equipment by running old and new systems side-by-side until some form of comparison or calibration can be made-a time consuming and expensive endeavor, which should only be completed where long-term efficiency gains are probable. In a new monitoring programme, there is less issue with data continuity and greater potential to use innovative technology. However, this should not absolve responsibility to design and deploy a programme that will allow continuity when future changes become possible i.e., it is crucial to realize that although we are currently seeing a lot of change in automation, molecular capability, and large-scale data gathering, this is not the end of technological development. The implementation of any new objective should therefore be accompanied by a strategy for continual updating of our monitoring programme to take advantage of new technology, such as using modeling practices discussed earlier. However, translating data from models into policy-relevant information is possibly the biggest issue. This lies in understanding the true objective of what is trying to be achieved, i.e., is it the collection of data or is it, for example, to understand the function of an ecosystem. If the latter then, it should be possible to use any technology to answer the question.
