# A Literature Survey of the Quality Economics of Defect-Detection Techniques

CorpusID: 3083025 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8425a203851e4a7b4346f79adc2c033c16989497](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8425a203851e4a7b4346f79adc2c033c16989497)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering, Economics

## (s5) An Analytical Model
(p5.0) We give a short overview of an analytical model of defectdetection techniques and refer to [23] for details. The model relates the discussed cost factors and other technical factors with the aim to analyse the economics of defect-detection techniques. In particular, it can be used to plan the quality assurance in a development project. Later we use the model as a basis for reviewing the empirical literature and hence describe only briefly the assumptions and equations.
## (s9) Practical Model
(p9.0) The ideal model can be used for theoretical analyses but is too detailed for a practical application. Hence, a simplified version of this model is available that can be used to plan the quality assurance of a development project using historical project data. Details can be found in [23]. We only describe the additional assumptions and simplifications in the following.
## (s37) Further Research
(p37.0) We discussed an optimal inspection rate, i.e., the optimal effort per LOC regarding the efficiency of the inspection, and noted that it is not well understood how a deviation from this optimal rate has effects on other factors in defect detection. Hence, further studies and experiments on this would be needed to refine the economics model and improve the analysis and prediction of the optimal quality assurance.

(p37.1) The difficulty of detecting different defect types with different detection techniques should be investigated more thoroughly. The empirical knowledge is extremely limited there although this would allow an improved combination of diverse techniques.

(p37.2) The effect costs are a difficult part of the failure costs. They are a highly delicate issue for most companies. Nevertheless, empirical knowledge is also important there to be able to estimate the influence on the total quality costs.

(p37.3) The collected empirical knowledge on the input factors can be used to refine the sensitivity analysis of the model that was done in [23]. A sensitivity analysis can be used to identify the most important input factors and their contribution to the variation in the output. The mean value and knowledge on the distribution (if available) can be used to generate more accurate input data to the analysis.
