# Gastrointestinal Behçet's disease: A review

CorpusID: 37526038 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cda39b48395116ae740e3666bb307abcc7ebf312](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cda39b48395116ae740e3666bb307abcc7ebf312)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) DIAGNOSIS
(p8.0) Establishing the diagnosis of intestinal BD remains more specific for CD whereas retinal vasculitis is more commonly associated with BD [48] . Both diseases have an increased risk of deep venous thrombosis -however, CD is not associated with other vascular manifestations such as varices, Budd-Chiari Syndrome (BCS) or arterial vasculitis. Neurologic disease, an important complication in BD, is typically not associated with CD.
## (s18) CONCLUSION
(p18.0) Behçet's disease can present with a wide array of gastrointestinal manifestations. Although ileocecal involvement is classically associated with BD, any part of the GI tract from the mouth to the anus can be involved and there may be appreciable morbidity and mortality associated with gastrointestinal BD. Diagnosis remains a challenge with no universally accepted criteria. Management can be confusing and there are no unanimously accepted treatment algorithms. The goal of treatment is to keep patients in clinical remission, reduce relapses and prevent surgical intervention. Although endoscopic remission is a treatment goal in IBD, there is currently insufficient evidence in the literature to recommend mucosal healing as a treatment goal in BD [94] . Treatment requires cooperation across multiple specialties including the primary care physician, rheumatologist, gastroenterologist and possibly interventional radiologist and/or surgeon. Anti-TNF-α mAb therapy appears to be promising for more severe and/or refractory intestinal disease -more clinical trials are necessary to support their use. A certain subset of patients have a poor disease course and better methods to identify them early in the disease course will be an important area of study. It is unclear at this time which populations of BD patients may benefit from early aggressive therapy and whether this intervention will have an impact on the progression of disease.
