# Is literature search training for medical students and residents effective? a literature review

CorpusID: 38581510 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d6846801ed5086c7cff1079c31f2c2147068a3e5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d6846801ed5086c7cff1079c31f2c2147068a3e5)

Fields: Education, Medicine

## (s4) Validated instruments
(p4.0) Most instruments used to measure searching skills were created locally for the purpose of measuring the impact of a locally developed intervention. Therefore, most of the instruments described in this review were used only once, and few efforts were made to test the instruments' reliability or validity. Only one of the instruments included in this review, the Fresno test, was utilized in more than one study. It and four additional instruments or methods reported here included measurements of reliability and validity.

(p4.1) The University of Michigan MEDLINE Search Assessment (UMMSA) tool is a matrix that assigns points for the inclusion of various required search elements [6]. With UMMSA, points are assigned for elements such as identifying appropriate Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), exploding MeSH, adding subheadings, focusing one or more MeSH terms, and limiting properly. To establish reliability and validity, the authors ran several tests. One test established inter-rater reliability among multiple faculty search raters. Construct validity was established by verifying the expected significant differences in scores between novices and experienced searchers and the similarity between experienced searchers and experts. The tool was also analyzed to show internal consistency among the test items. Because this article focused only on validation of the tool and did not include results, it was excluded from the rest of the review.
## (s10) CONCLUSIONS
(p10.0) All of the studies in this review reported a significant increase in at least one measure of literature searching skills, regardless of the type of intervention provided. However, the differences between the studies make it difficult to draw meaningful conclusions or generalize the findings to other groups and populations. The studies varied considerably in study design, subjects, settings, timing, interventions, and measurements. The lack of articles demonstrating little or no improvement in skills after intervention may be attributable to the fact that studies with negative results are unlikely to be documented for publication.

(p10.1) Most of the studies that measured learning of literature searching skills tested students soon after the intervention, when retention would be highest. The few reported studies that measured the durability of literature searching skills learning over time reported less favorable results, and none of the studies had rigorous experimental design. The need to design literature searching skills interventions that demonstrate durable learning presents an opportunity for future research. Other research opportunities include the measurements of literature searching and use in physician practice, especially outside of academic medicine and the impact of literature searching and use on patient care outcomes.

(p10.2) Literature searching skills instruction appears to be moving away from stand-alone workshops that focus on specific MEDLINE interfaces and toward Just curriculum-integrated instruction that ties literature searching to evidence-based practice. The elements measured by the Fresno test reinforce the idea that literature searching is an important and integral part of a self-directed learning process that ultimately leads to better answers to clinical questions. A recent review of evidence-based practice instructional models and adult learning theories resulted in a proposed hierarchy of evidence-based teaching and learning [28]. Based on the findings of that review, the most effective EBM courses would be interactive and clinically integrated. If librarians want to be part of this type of instruction, we need to redouble our efforts to become embedded members of the clinical team to ensure that the use of information resources is a seamless part of providing clinical care.
