# Survey of Game Theory and Future Trends for Applications in Emerging Wireless Data Communication Networks

CorpusID: 43996751 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c994c9da3f0cd4101a00317fe2d4cd2819480085](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c994c9da3f0cd4101a00317fe2d4cd2819480085)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s16) Non-cooperative Games
(p16.0) The communications on the network edge requires mitigating the interference not only within a cell but also among cells. This interference mitigation is very important to optimize the usage of network resources. In [108] they study spectrum sharing for D2D communications in scenarios such as public safety and vehicular communications. The pool of shared spectrum is obtained from distinct mobile operators involved in a NC game that analyses possible negotiation strategies among them. The mobile operators submit proposals to each other in parallel until a consensus is found. The authors reach the following conclusions: i) the existence of a unique equilibrium point will occur when every mobile operator has a concave utility function on the box-constrained region and all eigenvalues of derivatives of iterative response process are less than unity. In the case a mobile operator does not fulfil the two above conditions then it cannot be accepted within the network since its participation could cause the existence of multiple equilibria which is undesirable; ii) the iterative algorithm based on the mobile operator's best response might not converge to the equilibrium point due to myopically overreacting to the response of the other mobile operators; iii) alternatively, when the Jacobi-play iterative algorithm for updating the mobile operators' strategies is used with a proper smoothing parameter, then all mobile operators experience performance gains compared with the scheme without spectrum sharing. The Jacobi-play strategy update assumes that all players adjust access probabilities in a specific direction, depending on the measured congestion level of the network, and towards the best-response strategy; iv) In this game asymmetric mobile operators could contribute with an unequal amount of resources to the spectrum pool; v) The authors also assume that the iteration converges much faster than any change detected in the channel.
