# Psychological Medicine Embracing polygenicity: a review of methods and tools for psychiatric genetics research

CorpusID: 4787226 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88eee8882255f0797b5427600fa9f17dacc3cfce](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88eee8882255f0797b5427600fa9f17dacc3cfce)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Psychology

## (s9) Fine-mapping and gene prioritisation
(p9.0) LD between SNPs is both a blessing and a curse for GWAS. On one hand, it makes it possible to probe only a subset of all genetic variants yet still detect associations for a much larger set, either through tagging of non-genotyped SNPs by genotyped SNPs or through LD-based imputation to sequenced reference samples. On the other hand, it means that a detected association does not necessarily imply a causal role for the associated SNPs. Fine-mapping attempts to identify which out of a number of associated SNPs in a LD region have a causal role, and which are merely associated because they are in LD with causal SNPs (Sekar et al. 2016).
## (s10) Identifying causal SNPs
(p10.0) A range of different approaches have been developed for the finemapping of SNPs. Most of them use information on functional annotation of the genome and LD between SNPs, in addition to SNP association statistics on one or more diseases. An algorithm (PICS) utilising all these kinds of information has recently been applied to 21 autoimmune disorders and identified many putative causal variants by integrating information from different types of functional annotations, including epigenetic marks and gene expression information (Farh et al. 2015).
## (s15) Examples of applications to psychiatric disorders
(p15.0) The BUHMBOX method was used to investigate the shared genetic basis between MDD and schizophrenia, and found no evidence that suggested that a subset of MDD cases was genetically more similar to schizophrenia cases, implying that the genetic correlation estimated between the disorders reflect pleiotropy (Han et al. 2016). Application of this method will become more interesting as sample sizes increase.
