# a section of the journal Frontiers in Microbiology Overview of Virus Metagenomic Classification Methods and Their Biological Applications

CorpusID: 5034390 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38b6634cd639fcb94166d9492b84bc9fef380f7e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38b6634cd639fcb94166d9492b84bc9fef380f7e)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s13) DISCUSSION
(p13.0) Based on available literature, 49 available virus metagenomics classification workflows were evaluated for their analysis methods and performance and guidelines are provided to select the proper workflow for particular purposes (Figures 5, 6). Only workflows that have been tested with viral data were included, thus leaving out a number of metagenomics workflows that had been tested only on bacterial data, which may be applicable to virus classification as well. Also note that our inclusion criteria leave out most phylogenetic analysis tools, which start from contigs or classifications. The variety in methods is striking. Although each workflow is designed to provide taxonomic classification, the strategies employed to achieve this differ from simple one-step tools to analyses with five or more steps and creative combinations of algorithms. Clearly, the field has not yet adopted a standard method to facilitate comparison of classification results. Usability varied from a few remarkably user-friendly workflows with easy access online to many command-line programs, which are generally more difficult to use. Comparison of the results of the validation experiments is precarious. Every test is different and if the reader has different study goals than the writers, assessing classification performance is complex.

(p13.1) Due to the variable benchmark tests with different workflows, the data we looked at is inherently limited and heterogeneous. This has left confounding factors in the data, such as test data, references used, algorithms and computing platforms. These factors are the result of the intended use of the workflow, e.g., Clinical PathoScope was developed for clinical use and was not intended or validated for biodiversity studies. Also, benchmarks usually only take one type of data to simulate a particular use case. Therefore, not all benchmark scores are directly comparable and it is impossible to significantly determine correlations and draw firm conclusions.

(p13.2) We do highlight some general findings. For instance, when high sensitivity is required filtering steps should be minimized, as these might accidentally remove viral reads. Furthermore, the choice of search algorithms has an impact on sensitivity. High sensitivity may be required in characterization of environmental biodiversity (Tangherlini et al., 2016) and virus discovery. Additionally, for identification of novel variant viruses and virus discovery de novo assembly of genomes is beneficial. Discoveries typically are confirmed by secondary methods, thus reducing the impact in case of lower specificity. For example, RIEMS showed high sensitivity and applies de novo assembly. MetLab FIGURE 2 | Different benchmark scores of virus classification workflows. Twenty-seven different workflows (Left) have been subjected to benchmarks, by the developers (Top) or by independent groups (Bottom), measuring sensitivity (Left column), specificity (Middle column) and precision (Right column) in different numbers of tests. Numbers between brackets (n = a, b, c) indicate number of sensitivity, specificity, and precision tests, respectively.
