# False Information on Web and Social Media: A Survey

CorpusID: 5058880 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1bb23fd4252a76b55ff77ed982fc78c3e06d1452](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1bb23fd4252a76b55ff77ed982fc78c3e06d1452)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s23) 5.2.5
(p23.0) Debunking characteristics. Once false information spreads, attempts are made to debunk it and limit its spread. Recent research has shown that there is a significant time delay between the spread and its debunking. Zubiaga et al. [121] found that true information tends to be resolved faster than false information, which tends to take about 14 hours to be debunked. Shao et al. [86] came to a similar conclusion-they found a delay of 10-20 hours between the start of a rumor and sharing of its fact-checking contents.
## (s27) 6.1.3
(p27.0) Detection with temporal modeling. This category includes algorithms that primarily using rating time information for identifying fake reviews. These approaches include a combination of feature engineering and modeling based on time series analysis, correlation, and co-clustering.

(p27.1) Ye et al. [115] considered the review data of each product as a stream of reviews, bucketed into temporal windows. For each temporal window, the authors consider a number of time series reflecting different properties: inter-rating time entropy, rating score entropy, average rating, review count, number of positive and negative reviews, and more. They created a LocalAR algorithm to identify anomalies in the time-series signal, which involves treating a single signal as the "lead" and using the rest of the signals as "supporting" ones. An abnormality score at a timestep in the lead signal is defined as the residual between an empirically observed value and the forecasted value based on a local autoregressive (AR) model from previous timesteps. AR models generally take the following form:

(p27.2) The authors keep track of the distribution D(S |T , P) of abnormality scores S over all timesteps T and products P, and define a threshold to flag abnormal timesteps, estimated as the percentage of expected anomalies using Cantelli's inequality. Upon finding anomalous points in the lead signal by this threshold, the algorithm turns to supporting signals for corroboration. For timesteps near only those flagged in the lead signal, the approach computes a local AR model on the supporting signals and calculates residual squared-error between estimates and empirically observed values at surrounding timesteps. If the residual error is above the abnormality threshold, the timestep is flagged as suspicious. These flags are integrated across the multiple signals using summary statistics like proportion of anomalies at a timestep. This LocalAR algorithm shows success on two case studies of bursty opinion spam on Flipkart data.
