# Acute care and emergency general surgery in patients with chronic liver disease: how can we optimize perioperative care? A review of the literature

CorpusID: 51704154 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b95065baddb53592d5701d8d45180c17076bce21](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b95065baddb53592d5701d8d45180c17076bce21)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Pathophysiology
(p1.0) Chronic hepatocyte injury is characterized by inflammation, fibrosis, and ultimately cirrhosis. Cirrhosis thus results from distortion of hepatic architecture and increased resistance to portal venous flow secondary to progressive fibrotic replacement of hepatocytes. Portal hypertension and loss of metabolic functions are the main factors that determine the clinical manifestations of cirrhosis.

(p1.1) The most important clinical manifestations of portal hypertension are varices and ascites. An increased pressure gradient from the post-hepatic venous system opens collateral portosystemic shunts in the esophagogastric and anorectal regions, umbilical vein, and retroperitoneum. As this process advances, visceral congestion increases, ascites accumulates, varices enlarge, and portal venous flow decelerates, or even reverses. Diminished delivery of hepatotrophic factors further impairs hepatic function via ongoing hepatocyte loss.

(p1.2) In surgical patient, hepatic dysfunction translates into an increased risk of infection, hemorrhage, thrombosis, and a prolonged half-life of numerous drugs (e.g., opioids and benzodiazepines). The associated imbalance of neuroendocrine mediators (e.g., vasopressin, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, and nitric oxide) also potentiates sodium and fluid retention, resulting in a background hyperdynamic circulation with splanchnic venous congestion and systemic vasodilation [5].

(p1.3) In emergency surgery, stress response to the underlying condition, anesthesia, and surgical trauma increase the risk of hepatic decompensation and associated multi-system failure. Changes in hepatic perfusion with shock and fluid shifts further compromise hepatocellular synthetic and excretory functions. In addition, endotoxemia from gram-negative sepsis potentiates platelet aggregation and creates a state of low-grade disseminated intravascular coagulation [6].
## (s9) Imaging exams
(p9.0) Morphologic findings of early cirrhosis include hepatomegaly, as well as widening of the porta hepatis, umbilical fissure, and pericholecystic space. As cirrhosis advances, hepatomegaly evolves into the typical nodular shrunken liver with atrophy of segment 4 and the right lobe, as well as hypertrophy of segments 2 and 3 and the caudate lobe. Bright and coarse nodular texture with surface nodularity (most commonly noticed on the undersurface of the liver) can be demonstrated on bedside ultrasonography [25]. Dysplastic and regenerative nodules are difficult to appreciate on CT due to their small size and isointensity. However, the identification of nodules, particularly if they are hyper-enhancing, on the arterial phase, should raise suspicion for an incidental hepatocellular carcinoma [26].
