# A Review and Introduction to New Aspects of Digital and Computational Approaches to Human and AI Ethics *

CorpusID: 57998150 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00e9137d55af005f6568665f4b5c3def2ed6a802](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00e9137d55af005f6568665f4b5c3def2ed6a802)

Fields: Computer Science, Philosophy

## (s3) Integrated Information
(p3.0) Along these lines, there is another interesting development connected to information theory as it relates to dynamical systems. This is the concept of integrated information, suggested to be related to consciousness. Indeed, Integrated Information Theory, as introduced by Tononi et al. [24], not only proposes an apparent objective measure of consciousness but also poses new ethical questions.

(p3.1) For example, the measure φ related to Integrated Information, suggests that consciousness is a property of systems and not only of livings beings, and it also suggests that it is graded over continuous values, meaning that there is no such thing as a medical or scientific answer but rather an arbitrary cutoff value that must be adopted in deciding whether a sentient being is conscious or not. It may, for example, open up a new debate related to abortion and the number of weeks after fertilisation when a fetus can be considered conscious, and it may even provide a numerical answer to the question of whether newborns attain the kind of consciousness that adults are endowed with, when they do attain consciousness. The stages from fetus to developed child include several cognitive milestones, such as the awareness of the body and of existence itself (which often causes pain when existence is grasped to be finite), with body awareness beginning early and progressing gradually [13] until maturity. The measure φ is a continuous real-value number that goes from 0 to some as yet unknown number representing the typical (average) adult level of consciousness. The same would apply to questions related to passive or active euthanasia for cognitive conditions and neurodegenerative diseases. With φ not only indicating that consciousness is a dynamic state of the mind but also that it may be low enough to be below an abortion threshold, it could also supply the wherewithal to answer ethical questions about euthanasia.

(p3.2) Integrated information's φ is an interesting measure that may capture a necessary condition, but it is unlikely to quantify a sufficient condition (another clearly necessary condition is embodiment, i.e. a system must actually be embodied and capable of interacting with its environment, closing input-output loops). So I am not endorsing any suggestion that φ alone actually quantifies either consciousness or other possible factors that may be either intrinsic or extrinsic (the value of a person to a family, to society, etc).

(p3.3) Being a measure of systems rather than beings also implies that there may be artificial systems with some degree of consciousness, even if not completely related to ours. And there is no reason under this framework to exempt machines from certain degrees of consciousness, perhaps even equal to or even greater than that of animals and the human being, which leads to all sorts of new ethical questions related to AI, and how to better approach ethics from computational perspectives, just as φ itself does.
