# Accuracy of mucocutaneous leishmaniasis diagnosis using polymerase chain reaction: systematic literature review and meta-analysis

CorpusID: 8440815 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de8c4eccce68c6ab2e24d545b4993c4b977c5d81](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de8c4eccce68c6ab2e24d545b4993c4b977c5d81)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) RESULTS
(p1.0) At the end of the selection process, 14 papers were included based on the above-mentioned criteria (Fig. 1 One of the main reasons for heterogeneity among the selected papers was the composite reference standard used to define cases of MCL and controls. The patients were selected based on the compilation of clinical, epidemiological and parasitological criteria in only three studies. A common error observed in six papers was the inclusion of a PCR test to determine the inclusion and allocation criteria. Of the remaining studies, three used parasitological criteria, one used clinical criteria and one did not report the diagnostic criteria used.

(p1.1) One paper clearly stated the calculation of a sample size  considering only the expected sensitivity of the tested diagnostic methods. Seven papers used a case-control design, whereas the other onehalf of the papers used a cross-sectional/cohort design for the recruitment and allocation (Table III).

(p1.2) With respect to the type of samples analysed, three used blood samples, one used urine samples, one used  lesion scrapings, one used lesion aspirates, one used nasal swabs and biopsies and seven used tissue samples collected by biopsy. The data on the positivity and characteristics of the tests are detailed in Tables II, IV. The studies that exhibited greater accuracy for MCL using PCR were performed using tissue samples (Deborggraeve et al. 2008.

(p1.3) With respect to the properties of the diagnostic tests, specificity tended to be the highest. Ten papers had a specificity of 100% and two reported a specificity of less than 90%. The level of sensitivity reported in most of the papers was between 60-90%. Two papers reported sensitivities below 50% and one paper reported a sensitivity of 100%.

(p1.4) Critical analysis of the selected papers -The analysis was performed using the QUADAS tool (Fig. 2) and indicated that the largest amount of data not reported in the papers (a "no" response) were related to the last two questions, which inquired about inconclusive results and records for the loss of patients in the studies. The cases in which the response was ''unclear'' were most frequently observed for questions 10, 11 and 12, thus indicating that the selected papers did not obviously report whether the examiner was blind to the reference standard during the application of the evaluated test and vice versa. This result additionally indicated that most of the papers did not explicitly detail whether the data evaluated in the present study were consistent with the data used in clinical practice.
## (s13) RESULTS
(p13.0) At the end of the selection process, 14 papers were included based on the above-mentioned criteria (Fig. 1 One of the main reasons for heterogeneity among the selected papers was the composite reference standard used to define cases of MCL and controls. The patients were selected based on the compilation of clinical, epidemiological and parasitological criteria in only three studies. A common error observed in six papers was the inclusion of a PCR test to determine the inclusion and allocation criteria. Of the remaining studies, three used parasitological criteria, one used clinical criteria and one did not report the diagnostic criteria used.

(p13.1) One paper clearly stated the calculation of a sample size  considering only the expected sensitivity of the tested diagnostic methods. Seven papers used a case-control design, whereas the other onehalf of the papers used a cross-sectional/cohort design for the recruitment and allocation (Table III).

(p13.2) With respect to the type of samples analysed, three used blood samples, one used urine samples, one used  lesion scrapings, one used lesion aspirates, one used nasal swabs and biopsies and seven used tissue samples collected by biopsy. The data on the positivity and characteristics of the tests are detailed in Tables II, IV. The studies that exhibited greater accuracy for MCL using PCR were performed using tissue samples (Deborggraeve et al. 2008.

(p13.3) With respect to the properties of the diagnostic tests, specificity tended to be the highest. Ten papers had a specificity of 100% and two reported a specificity of less than 90%. The level of sensitivity reported in most of the papers was between 60-90%. Two papers reported sensitivities below 50% and one paper reported a sensitivity of 100%.

(p13.4) Critical analysis of the selected papers -The analysis was performed using the QUADAS tool (Fig. 2) and indicated that the largest amount of data not reported in the papers (a "no" response) were related to the last two questions, which inquired about inconclusive results and records for the loss of patients in the studies. The cases in which the response was ''unclear'' were most frequently observed for questions 10, 11 and 12, thus indicating that the selected papers did not obviously report whether the examiner was blind to the reference standard during the application of the evaluated test and vice versa. This result additionally indicated that most of the papers did not explicitly detail whether the data evaluated in the present study were consistent with the data used in clinical practice.
## (s25) RESULTS
(p25.0) At the end of the selection process, 14 papers were included based on the above-mentioned criteria (Fig. 1 One of the main reasons for heterogeneity among the selected papers was the composite reference standard used to define cases of MCL and controls. The patients were selected based on the compilation of clinical, epidemiological and parasitological criteria in only three studies. A common error observed in six papers was the inclusion of a PCR test to determine the inclusion and allocation criteria. Of the remaining studies, three used parasitological criteria, one used clinical criteria and one did not report the diagnostic criteria used.

(p25.1) One paper clearly stated the calculation of a sample size  considering only the expected sensitivity of the tested diagnostic methods. Seven papers used a case-control design, whereas the other onehalf of the papers used a cross-sectional/cohort design for the recruitment and allocation (Table III).

(p25.2) With respect to the type of samples analysed, three used blood samples, one used urine samples, one used  lesion scrapings, one used lesion aspirates, one used nasal swabs and biopsies and seven used tissue samples collected by biopsy. The data on the positivity and characteristics of the tests are detailed in Tables II, IV. The studies that exhibited greater accuracy for MCL using PCR were performed using tissue samples (Deborggraeve et al. 2008.

(p25.3) With respect to the properties of the diagnostic tests, specificity tended to be the highest. Ten papers had a specificity of 100% and two reported a specificity of less than 90%. The level of sensitivity reported in most of the papers was between 60-90%. Two papers reported sensitivities below 50% and one paper reported a sensitivity of 100%.

(p25.4) Critical analysis of the selected papers -The analysis was performed using the QUADAS tool (Fig. 2) and indicated that the largest amount of data not reported in the papers (a "no" response) were related to the last two questions, which inquired about inconclusive results and records for the loss of patients in the studies. The cases in which the response was ''unclear'' were most frequently observed for questions 10, 11 and 12, thus indicating that the selected papers did not obviously report whether the examiner was blind to the reference standard during the application of the evaluated test and vice versa. This result additionally indicated that most of the papers did not explicitly detail whether the data evaluated in the present study were consistent with the data used in clinical practice.
