# A review of the effects of healthcare disparities on the experience and survival of ovarian cancer patients of different racial and ethnic backgrounds HHS Public Access

CorpusID: 85555804 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cc599e68c02ac4766c88a7600580709e2ecd3e92](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cc599e68c02ac4766c88a7600580709e2ecd3e92)

Fields: Medicine, Sociology

## (s6) CONCLUSION
(p6.0) Eliminating healthcare disparities is critical in order to ensure optimal outcomes in all patients with OC. Identifying what the healthcare disparities are is critical to their elimination. A paradigm shift, which leads to redistribution in the allocation of healthcare resources to create more equality across populations, will eliminate healthcare disparities.

(p6.1) Future research must focus upon the underlying genetic components that contribute to healthcare outcomes. Research that will elucidate tumor and population-specific molecular modifications to genes and proteins may positively impact the outcomes of patients with OC. The contribution of changes in dietary considerations (i.e., low sugar), language barriers, and geographic differences to the elimination of healthcare disparities requires additional research.

(p6.2) Physicians can impact the elimination of healthcare disparities through patient education (i.e., dietary practices), effective use of interpreters, and outreach to resource-poor communities with less access to high-quality healthcare. Population data demonstrate that the allocation of important equipment and resources (i.e., ultrasound machines, special genetic counselors) to support community primary care physicians, and the number of offers obstetric and gynecological specialists in the community will favor a lower incidence of latestage diagnosis of OC [19] . Patients hailing from lower SES and underserved communities may be at an additional disadvantage when they are excluded from promising investigational clinical trials. Hence, the concept of the mobile clinic may bring high-level care directly to communities obviating the need for patients to travel long distances to find high-quality healthcare [19] .
