# Analysis of Text Classification Algorithms: A Review

CorpusID: 86714171 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/69e120ae57787bcf0c7f87bbe3a2a34bbf607876](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/69e120ae57787bcf0c7f87bbe3a2a34bbf607876)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s1) TEXT PRE-PROCESSING
(p1.0) The pre-processing itself is made up of a sequence of steps. The first step in text-pre-processing is the morphological analyses. It is divided into three subcategories: tokenization, filtering and stemming [3]. A. TOKENIZATION: Text Mining requires the words and the endings of a document. Finding words and separating them is known as tokenization. B. FILTERING: The next step is filtering of important and relevant words from our list of words which were the output of tokenization. This is also called stop words removal. C. STEMMING: The third step is stemming. Stemming reduces words variants to its root form. Stemming of words increases the recall and precision of the information retrieval in Text Mining. The main idea is to improve recall by automatic handling of word endings by reducing the words to their word roots, at the time of indexing and searching. Stemming is usually done by removing any attached suffixes and prefixes (affixes) from index terms before the actual assignment of the term to the index.
## (s6) Neural Networks
(p6.0) Neural networks consist of many individual processing units called as neurons connected by links which have weights that allow neurons to activate other neurons. Different neural network approaches have been applied to document categorization problems. While some of them use the simplest form of neural networks, known as perceptions, which consist only of an input and an output layer, others build more sophisticated neural networks with a hidden layer between the two others. The advantage of neural networks is that they can handle noisy or contradictory data very well. The advantage of the high flexibility of neural networks entails the disadvantage of very high computing costs. Another disadvantage is that neural networks are extremely difficult to understand for an average user [4].
