# Neck Dissection Technique Commonality and Variance: A Survey on Neck Dissection Technique Preferences among Head and Neck Oncologic Surgeons in the American Head and Neck Society

CorpusID: 16771812 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b4210d52f52670f00c7a63f8beee1a81e2c0fd2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b4210d52f52670f00c7a63f8beee1a81e2c0fd2)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Discussion
(p7.0) This study represents the first attempt to define the commonality and variance of ND technique that is practiced by current surgeon members of the AHNS. We surveyed the AHNS surgeon members because we felt they best define surgeons with a high level of expertise and experience with performing the ND operation. This study provides a unique perspective of the varied elements of ND operative technique. Likely, an individual's preferences are a personal amalgamation of interpretations of various observations during training and from the surgeon's current institution specific preferences. The range of varied idiosyncratic preferences are not likely conveyed well in textbooks or verbal instruction. Thus, we felt that a survey study, such as contained in this report, could better communicate the current range of ND technique preferences to readers. Notwithstanding, the results of this report do not necessarily reflect the authors' opinions nor are intended to necessarily advocate that particular surgical preferences are more evidence-based than others. Given the constraints of an appropriate length of the survey, we allowed for only sparse information about rationale behind technique preferences.

(p7.1) One significant finding of this survey study was that respondents were almost evenly split between preservation and resection of the SMG. We were surprised by this finding, given the fact that most operative technique text books (usually by single authors) describe excising the SMG. 9 Those that stated that they never performed SMG preservation cited incomplete nodal removal as a main concern when performing the surgery among the others listed. A prospective  anatomical study conducted by Dhiwakar et al. specifically aimed to address this concern among Head and Neck Surgeons, demonstrated that it was technically possible to removal all lymph nodes in Level IB and perform SMG preservation. 8 However, even though SMG preservation may be possible with adequate lymph node removal, participants are valid in their concern with at least one study showing that greater preservation of structures during a ND may lead to a decrease in the amount of lymph tissue resected and poorer oncologic outcomes. 7,9 Another significant finding in this study was that respondents who performed more than 50 neck dissections a year also self-reported a statistically significant decreased amount of time to complete a ND of levels 1-3, 1-4, 2-4, or 1-5. Surgeons with greater volumes may self-report faster procedure times, increasing their ability to perform a greater number of procedures in a given time period. This leads to the macroscopic finding described by Kim et al that high volume hospitals performed a proportionally greater amount of NDs than their low volume hospital counterparts. 10 Notwithstanding, there may be a significant amount of recall bias and even self-promotion bias since this study asked surgeons to self-report their operative times.

(p7.2) This survey allowed precise documentation of instruments that surgeons use during different parts of the ND. As we expected, there was a significant amount of variation between respondents on their use of particular instruments for certain situations. Surgeons' preferences for particular instruments are important to consider as technology improves and as attention to cost containment grows. This information may be particularly valuable to surgical trainees who may observe inter-educator variability in the choice of instrument during a ND. Instrument choice may be made on safety, efficiency, blood loss, ease of use, cost, ergonomics, comfort, familiarity, and experience.

(p7.3) Variability in drain management and the placement of a drain with respect to the SCM are likely due to a paucity of evidence available to guide decision making. Drain removal has become more pertinent to the discussion of cost effective medical care as pressure increases to decrease hospital stay. It has been shown that the amount of intraoperative blood loss is one of the biggest predictors of postoperative drainage, however, no participants volunteered this as a criteria taken into account when removing a drain. 11 No guidelines currently exist regarding the policy of drain removal. The range of 20-50cc/24 hours with a downward trend, with the patient having oral intake and showing no chyle or new blood is possibly a good policy at this time, however, further investigation is necessary to clarify the best policy.

(p7.4) Respondents classified by this survey as belonging to an "expert" demographic group differed in opinion regarding level 5 lymph node resection and cervical sensory rootlet preservation. Surgeons older than 50 tended more often to report that they always resect level V lymph nodes for mSCC, while high volume surgeons were less likely to resect level 5 compared with low volume surgeons. This variability exists despite research that has shown that Level 5 lymph nodes may be preserved in a ND for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma with less than N2a staging in the neck. 12,13 Respondents over the age of 50 were also more likely to divide the cervical sensory rootlets while respondents with higher volume were more likely to preserve the cervical sensory rootlets during a ND. Previous studies have shown that division of the cervical sensory nerve rootlets leads to a larger area of anesthesia of the neck than if the roots were preserved. 14 These differences between two "expert" demographic groups may be explained by generational differences in instruction at the time of training and also a surgeon's personal experience influencing their preference on whether to preserve these rootlets or not. Each of the various policies of the sequence of primary site resection and ND have advantages and disadvantages. Performing a ND prior to a parotidectomy (25.5% of respondents preferred this sequence) has the potential advantages of exposing the inferior and deep aspects of the parotid and facial nerve more fully, ligating blood vessels to the parotid to decrease bleeding, and exposing the dissected facial nerve to less potential traction and drying injury. A potential disadvantage in performing the ND prior to parotidectomy is that the surgical team may be more fatigued and less focused for the facial nerve dissection or the exact pathology. Thus, the need for a ND may be reliant on intraoperative frozen section biopsies. Performing a ND prior to a thyroidectomy (32.7% preferred this sequence) has the potential advantages of exposing the ipsilateral thyroid lobe, parathyroid glands, and superior and recurrent laryngeal nerves more fully, ligating blood vessels to the thyroid, and exposing the vagus nerve for stimulation confirmation during nerve monitoring. A potential disadvantage is, again, that the surgical team may be more fatigued and less focused for the recurrent laryngeal nerve dissection. Performing a ND after transoral oral cavity (45.5% preferred this sequence), transcervical approaches to oropharynx tumor resection (14.9% preferred this sequence), and transcervical approaches to the larynx/hypopharynx tumor resection (17.8% preferred this sequence) has the potential advantages of time efficiency with reducing some wasted time when waiting for frozen section margins analysis by performing the ND during this time. Another advantage is creating less potential mucosal edema when a ND is performed first which could cut off lymphatic circulation from the primary site. A potential disadvantage is that the surgeon would be unable to ligate the lingual artery ahead of time if this was considered an important step. If done during the same operation, performing transoral oropharynx and larynx/hypopharynx resections prior to NDs (53.1% and 58.7%, respectively) offers the same potential benefits and drawbacks. If staged, performing NDs prior to transoral oropharynx or larynx/hypopharynx (46.9% and 41.3%, respectively) has the potential advantages of ligating the lingual artery ahead of time to decrease the bleeding risk during the primary resection and determining the presence or absence of extracapsular spread which may eliminate the need for a primary site resection.

(p7.5) We acknowledge that this study has several limitations. Although the response rate of 28% was in typical range of survey studies, this low response rate limits the variability and breadth of surgical techniques captured with this survey. However, we feel we were able to collect data from a wide array of surgeons in different demographic and geographical categories. Respondents were not asked to explain every response provided in the survey, which could have provided additional rationale on a surgeon's preference for a particular instrument or style of procedure. We wanted to maximize the breadth of information while maintaining a reasonable time needed to complete the survey to reduce the risk of survey fatigue. Recall bias could have limited the validity of the results. It is possible that operative time, the use of instruments, and the preservations of structures during a ND vary in reality from what surgeons responded in the survey. Another limitation of this study is that it captures technique preferences in one point of time and does not reveal trends of technique over time. It is possible that a repeated identical survey conducted several years from now could have fairly different results.

LLM judge: YES

