# Therapeutic Advances in Reproductive Health Laboratory and clinical management of leukocytospermia and hematospermia: a review

CorpusID: 219967396 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/038dc67fc99c3719ac4079eedc19d2ab435fe9e6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/038dc67fc99c3719ac4079eedc19d2ab435fe9e6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Leukocytospermia and infertility
(p2.0) Leukocytospermia is found more often in infertile men than in fertile men. 14 However, the Cryoprotectant-free journals.sagepub.com/home/reh 3 relationship between the condition and sperm quality remains controversial. Some studies have shown leukocytospermia to be a negative prognostic factor for fertility, 4 and the reasons are multifactorial. For example, leukocytospermia can impair spermatogenesis and sperm maturation. 15 Subclinical genital tract inflammation can lead to impairment of spermatogenesis by altering cytokine levels, which, in turn, impair Sertoli cell function. 11 Furthermore, polymorphonuclear neutrophils, the predominant type of leukocytes in semen, generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) that can impair sperm motility. 12,13 A significant correlation is detected between leukocytospermia and defects in the tail function of sperm. 11 In addition, teratoasthenozoospermia and necrozoospermia are more common in leukocytospermic men than in normospermic men. 13 However, a meta-analysis which evaluated the impact of leukocytospermia in men attending a fertility clinic found no association between the condition and reduced fertility after ART and with altered semen quality. 16 It has been demonstrated that leukocytospermia hinders the fertilization potential of spermatozoa by interfering with the acrosome reaction and the fusion of sperm and egg. 11,17,18 Due to this, the presence of WBCs in seminal plasma is considered a significant prognostic factor for failed in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer (IVF-ET). 19 Leukocytes in seminal fluid produce high concentrations of ROS and interferon-γ, which can inhibit sperm function and decrease the rate of IVF. 14 Moreover, high concentrations of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) in the plasma membrane of sperm increases their vulnerability to oxidative stress. 18,20 Lipid peroxidation of these membranes may result from sperm mitochondrial dysfunction as they make a significant contribution to the oxidative stress of the spermatozoa environment. 21,22 Furthermore, sperm DNA fragmentation has been implicated as an important factor in male infertility; however, the impact of leukocytes on sperm DNA fragmentation has been debated. Some studies have found leukocytes to induce DNA fragmentation, 23 while others have found that DNA damage is not related to different leukocyte subpopulations in the ejaculate. 24 Another possible mechanism of sperm function impairment by leukocytes is ROS-induced crossdamage, which may occur when sperm and leukocytes co-migrate from the seminiferous tubules to the epididymis. 11

LLM judge: YES

## (s4) Laboratory methods of separating WBCs in semen samples
(p4.0) Based on studies showing the negative impact of leukocytospermia on IVF and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) outcomes, 4 some laboratory protocols may include removal of WBCs from semen prior to freezing sperm or using sperm in ART procedures. There are a variety of methods for removing WBCs from semen. The oldest method is swim-up from a washed pellet. 37 The benefit of this technique is that it results in a specimen with a very high percentage of motile sperm (90%), an increased percentage of morphologically normal sperm and a significantly decreased number of nonsperm cells such as WBCs. The disadvantages of this technique are that it results in a decreased percentage of normally chromatincondensed sperm and increased sperm damage by ROS in patients with elevated ROS in the ejaculate or with genital tract inflammation. Because of these disadvantages, the conventional swim-up technique may not be optimal for removing WBCs from leukocytospermic specimens. 37,38 Glass wool filtration has also been used to separate WBCs from semen. In this method, motile sperm cells are separated from nonsperm cells, including WBCs, by means of densely packed glass wool fibers. 39 The advantages of this method include isolation of sperm from ejaculates with very low sperm concentrations and significant reduction of leukocytes and ROS. The disadvantages are that it is more expensive than the swimup method, the filtrate is not clean, and remnants of debris are still present. 37 Mechanical filtration using physical filters such as micropore filters can also be used with leukocytospermic samples to separate sperm cells, but the filters readily clog due to the high number of journals.sagepub.com/home/reh 5

(p4.1) WBCs and from various possible tissues in the sample. 40 Density gradient centrifugation is another method of separating WBCs from semen. It consists of filtering sperm cells by centrifugal force through either one or multiple layers of increasingly concentrated silane-coated silica particles. In this method, highly motile sperm cells move actively in the direction of the sedimentation gradient, and thus highly motile sperm cells are enriched in the soft pellet at the bottom. 37 The advantages of this technique include isolation of sperm from ejaculates with very low sperm concentrations, significant reduction of WBCs, and significant reduction of ROS. The disadvantages of this technique are that it is more time-consuming and expensive than the swim-up technique. 37 Microfluidics has the potential to separate sperm cells from other cells/cellular debris. This method uses inertial microfluidic technology to separate sperm cells from WBCs by directing the flow of these two cell types into different channels within a spiral chamber. The method does not require labeling cells or applying external forces. Using this approach, it is possible to recover not only motile sperm but also viable less-motile and nonmotile sperm cells while at the same time reducing the concentration of WBCs. 41 Ultimately, the choice of method for removing WBCs from semen will depend upon the resources of the laboratory and the overall characteristics of the semen specimen.

LLM judge: YES

## (s5) Hematospermia
(p5.0) Hematospermia (also termed hemospermia or bloody ejaculate), is defined as the presence of blood in the ejaculate. 7,8 Although the common age range of men afflicted with hematospermia is between 30 and 40 years (mean, 37 years), it can be seen in men over 40 years. The prevalence of hematospermia is about 1.0-1.5% of all urological referrals; however, the exact incidence is unclear. 8,42,43 It may occur as a single episode or persist chronically 44 with an average duration of 1-24 months. 42 Although a variety of pathophysiological mechanisms are reported for hematospermia, approximately 30-70% of cases are idiopathic.

(p5.1) Disorders of the testis, accessory glands or their ducts, bladder, or urethra can lead to hematospermia. 7 Such disorders may include inflammation, infections, mechanical or chemical agents, ductal obstruction and cysts, tumors and vascular abnormalities, systemic factors, lithiasis, deviant sexual practices, or excessive sexual intercourse/masturbation. Iatrogenic factors are the most common etiologies of hematospermia caused by prostate biopsy, radiation therapy, brachytherapy of prostate cancer, and other urological interventions. 8,42,44,45 Also, surgical sperm retrieval from the testis or epididymis of infertile men commonly results in a specimen contaminated with numerous RBCs. 46 An overview of clinical and laboratory management of hematospermia can be seen in Figure 2.

LLM judge: YES

## (s6) Hematospermia and infertility
(p6.0) Hematospermia may clinically present with infertility. 45,47 A 2015 study conducted by a large andrology department on a select group of patients found erythrocytes in the ejaculate of 13.8% of the patients, whose semen had been analyzed generally because of infertility. 9 Toxic substances of RBCs may affect the fertilization potential of spermatozoa, particularly if these samples are to be cryopreserved. 46 In a canine model, blood added to semen (4% v/v) prior to cryopreservation resulted in impaired sperm motility, impaired sperm membrane integrity, and impaired acrosomal status in the thawed specimens. The detrimental effects were attributed in part to the high amount of hemoglobin originating from RBC hemolysis observed after the process of freezing and thawing. 46

LLM judge: YES

## (s9) Sperm cryopreservation methods for samples with RBCs and WBCs
(p9.0) Sperm cryopreservation is often recommended to preserve fertility in men who have medical conditions that may impair future fertility. However, ROS production in samples cryopreserved while containing WBCs and RBCs may negatively impact the quality of the specimens. 2,46 No clear clinical strategies exist for how to manage the cryopreservation of samples with leukocytospermia or hematospermia. Therefore, using appropriate strategies to eliminate WBCs and RBCs and minimize ROS production in semen samples can increase the efficiency of sperm cryopreservation. Following WBC and RBS elimination, slow freezing, rapid freezing, and ultra-rapid freezing are the main cryopreservation methods used for these patients. 65 Slow freezing is a manual or automated method in which sperm cryopreservation is performed by adding cryoprotectant to the semen specimen and then gradually lowering the temperature of the specimen over a 1-to 2-h period. Without the addition of a cryoprotectant, high concentrations of electrolytes inside the sperm cells can lead to the formation of ice crystals and physical-chemical injury. Control of the cooling rate is an important factor to minimize osmotic injury during the process of slow freezing. 2,65,66 However, even with these precautions (addition of cryoprotectant and a slow rate of cooling), the slow freezing method can lead to changes in the structure and function of sperm. Furthermore, this method is laborious and time-consuming. 1,[67][68][69] In the rapid freezing method, a cryoprotectant agent is mixed with the semen sample, which is then placed into a cryovial or cryo-straw and exposed to liquid nitrogen vapor before being plunged into liquid nitrogen. 66 One benefit of the rapid freezing method is the prevention of ice crystal formation. 70 As classical vitrification requires a high percentage of permeable cryoprotectants leading to possible lethal osmotic effects and chemical changes, it appears that this approach is not suitable for sperm vitrification. 71 In kinetic vitrification as an ultra-rapid method, spermatozoa are frozen without the permeable cryoprotectants. In this method, the sperm suspension is directly immersed into liquid nitrogen in an ultra-rapid cooling procedure. 71 The above-mentioned methods for sperm cryopreservation are not perfect methods to cryopreserve low numbers of sperm retrieved from the epididymis and testicles. Therefore, newer techniques using various "carriers" to gather small quantities of sperm have been used for cryopreservation of testicular and epididymal spermatozoa. The ideal carrier would allow the freezing of multiple tiny aliquots of sperm or even individually isolated sperm in small numbers (i.e. 5-10 sperm per carrier), thus conserving the very small supply of motile sperm in these specimens. This would prevent repeated freezing/thawing of the original specimen and allow multiple IVF attempts.

(p9.1) AbdelHafez and colleagues 72 reviewed various carriers. Biological carriers have been used for this purpose, such as an empty zona pellucida. In this method, individually selected spermatozoa are stored inside an animal or human zona pellucida which has been evacuated of its cytoplasmic contents using micromanipulation tools. The zonae are then frozen in liquid nitrogen. Another biological carrier that has been used to cryopreserve small quantities of sperm are spheres of Volvox Globator algae. Colonies of this alga consist of 1500-20,000 cells held tightly in a spherelike structure. Spheres are injected with motile sperm using an ICSI needle. The spheres, which may also contain a cryoprotectant, are then frozen in straws. In addition, nonbiological carriers have been used to store small quantities of sperm, including mini straws, microdroplets, cryoloops, ICSI pipettes, calcium alginate beads, and agarose gel microspheres. The review concluded that there was insufficient evidence to recommend any particular carrier method. 72 Several studies have compared various methods of sperm cryopreservation. According to these studies, slow freezing provides higher post-thaw sperm quality than vitrification. 73,74 Hammadeh and colleagues 75 have reported that higher chromatin damage occurs in the rapid freezing method when compared with the slow freezing method, while Vutyavanich and colleagues 76 showed that motility and viability of sperm in the rapid freezing method were higher than those in the slow freezing method. Sperm cryopreservation decreased sperm DNA integrity, morphology, and motility following both the ultra-rapid freezing and the slow freezing methods. Nevertheless, sperm motility decreased more by ultra-rapid freezing. 77 Births of healthy babies have been reported following ICSI using the permeable cryoprotectant-free sperm vitrification. 71 Findings from a recent study have shown that the permeable cryoprotectant-free vitrification can present significantly higher sperm quality parameters than slow freezing. 67 In addition, DNA fragmentation and acrosome damage are decreased in vitrified samples. 67 With kinetic vitrification, the additional step of centrifugation is reduced using sperm-free seminal plasma for cryopreservation. Thus, it has been suggested that kinetic vitrification is the most appropriate option for use in clinical trials. 78,79 Conclusion

(p9.2) The presence of WBCs and RBCs can significantly affect semen quality and fertility. ROS production is the most prominent issue and is further exacerbated when these specimens containing WBCs or RBCs are cryopreserved. Proper diagnostic methods should be utilized, and underlying etiologies should be ruled out using more extensive urological workups in recurrent and high-risk cases. Treatment options for these conditions have proven controversial as studies have demonstrated conflicting results. Currently, no clear clinical strategies exist for how to manage the cryopreservation of samples with leukocytospermia or hematospermia. However, appropriate strategies to eliminate WBCs and RBCs in semen samples can improve outcomes for cryopreservation and ART.

LLM judge: YES

