# A Survey of Agent-Based Modelling and Simulation Tools for Educational Purpose

CorpusID: 225685367 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1fa7239dd26372eb0fb78a8b8d39b81d7606a087](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1fa7239dd26372eb0fb78a8b8d39b81d7606a087)

Fields: Computer Science, Education

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) The rapid development of information and communication technology (ICT) in the last few decades gave the opportunity to a wider scientific and professional community to approach the problems in previously unimaginable ways. Many natural, social and technical phenomena and systems are difficult to access or are completely inaccessible. They can be dangerous for observation and exploration or abstract and invisible to the human eye. By applying modern computing technologies, it is possible to model and simulate such phenomena and systems and manipulate them so that the system can be analysed and strategies for its functioning evaluated. Elements of these systems can be implemented as software entities which can percept their environment and autonomously react to the stimulation. This description largely coincides with the standard definition of an intelligent agent. Therefore, this paper deals with agentbased modelling and simulation (ABMS) tools.

(p0.1) This approach can significantly contribute to the understanding of complex phenomena from different areas of life. In doing so, different groups of users emphasize the different aspects of used software tools. Social scientists, without programming experience, want a simple-to-use tool with an intuitive interface. On the other hand, computer scientists are concerned with the type of license and the code openness that will enable them to manipulate the tool. Teachers, who use modelling and simulation tools in teaching, want easy-to-learn packages that enable students to transfer knowledge and experience to realworld situations [32].

(p0.2) Over the years, many different tools have been developed for different purposes and areas of application. The primary purpose of this paper is to provide a comprehensive overview of the segment of these software tools that can be successfully applied in teaching. This paper begins by defining the concepts in the field of modelling and simulation in Section 2. In Section 3, we continue with pointing out the possibility and good practice of applying simulation in the teaching process. After that, in Section 4 we brought the basic facts of the agent paradigm. Section 5 reports some related past surveys while in Section 6 we give an overview of the state-of-theart in ABMS simulation tools for educational purpose.

LLM judge: YES

## (s3) INTELLIGENT AGENTS AND MULTI-AGENT SYSTEMS
(p3.0) An agent is a physical and/or virtual system that perceives its environment by various sensors and acts on it through its actuators. Agents work in their environment, and can include people, robots, computer programs, but also some simple gadgets.

(p3.1) The software agent is a persistent, goal-oriented computer program that responds to its environment, works without continuous direct surveillance and performs certain functions for the end user or other computer programs in a particular environment. Such independent action implies the power to choose a suitable action in a particular situation if it exists. The agent is inhibited by other processes and agents, but also can be able to learn from its experience of working in the environment over a long period.

(p3.2) Software agents can be independent or work in collaboration with other agents or humans. In interaction with humans, software agents can have qualities characteristic for humans, such as the understanding of natural language and speech, personality, or humanoid embodiment.

(p3.3) Software agents represent an evolutionary step in comparison to conventional computer programs. They can be self-activated and run and they do not require input or interaction with a human user. Software agents can also start, monitor, and shut down other programs or agents.

(p3.4) All agents are computer programs, but not all programs are agents. Key features that differentiate agents from arbitrary programs are, according to Franklin & Graesser [26], reaction to the environment, autonomy, goal-orientation and persistence.

(p3.5) Related and derived terms are: -intelligent agents who express a certain aspect of artificial intelligence, e.g. learning or concluding, -autonomous agents who can modify the way they achieve their goals, -distributed agents that run on physically different computers, -multi-agent systems, i.e. the group of distributed agents working together to achieve the goal that an individual acting agent alone cannot achieve. Thus, an agent is an entity that we can define through its perception of the environment in which it is located, by the built-in sensors, and acting in such an environment and on that environment through actuators.

(p3.6) The agent's perception sequence is a complete history of everything that an agent ever perceives. The agent's choice of action at any time may depend only on the last perception or on entire perception sequence so far. In mathematical terms, we can say that agent behaviour is described by an agent function that maps every perception into the corresponding action.

LLM judge: YES

