# Periodontal Inflammation and Systemic Diseases: An Overview

CorpusID: 239890800 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bf2ee4b8f3c073ea90ea836694617998f0aabe3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bf2ee4b8f3c073ea90ea836694617998f0aabe3)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Periodontal disease (PD) is a general term encompassing a group of inflammatory pathologies that mainly include gingivitis and periodontitis. It is particularly pervasive in adults (Bui et al., 2019;de Molon et al., 2019), though, is not uncommon in children (Alrayyes and Hart, 2011;Reis et al., 2021). Indeed, PD is an often all-encompassing-term used to refer to any of the wide spectrum of inflammatory diseases able to affect the periodontium. The periodontium being itself an umbrella term, that comprises a number of different structures supporting the teeth: gingiva, cementum, periodontal ligament, and alveolar bone (Kinane et al., 2017). PD is often initiated by an uncontrolled inflammatory response to a slow and constant bacterial colonization of the tooth surface and soft gingival tissues-Gingivitis (Graves, 2008), but it is the host inflammatory response to the microbial challenge that is responsible for the degradation of the periodontium-i.e., Periodontitis (Balta et al., 2017).

LLM judge: YES

## (s12) IL-23
(p12.0) Is a member of the IL-12 family, secreted by myeloid antigen presenting cells exposed to P. gingivalis and the IL-17 receptor (Noack and Miossec, 2014;Bostanci et al., 2019). Cell biology studies have shown that IL-17 producing cells-including Th17 and NK cells, among others-grow and accumulate more often on mucosal surfaces such as the oral cavity, the gastrointestinal tract, as well as the lung, vagina, and skin epithelia (Bunte and Beikler, 2019). This fact is relevant in view that IL-17 signaling is able to regulate protective immunity against extracellular pathogens by sustaining barrier integrity, promoting the release of antimicrobial factors, as well as activating granulopoiesis (Duka et al., 2019). Along with IL-17, the Th17-produced IL-22 is able to enhance IL-17 protective functions by improving antimicrobial peptides synthesis and neutrophil uptake (Hajishengallis, 2020). Hence, any processes, resulting in inhibition of IL-17 production or signaling may enhance susceptibility to bacterial and fungal infections (Bunte and Beikler, 2019). A number of actual mechanistic explanations have been advanced, for instance, Bostanci and collaborators analyzed-via an experimental model of periodontitis-the role of TREM-1 (Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 1, 

LLM judge: YES

## (s14) IL-2 Is implicated in T-cell growth factor, in the effect on Treg cells as well as in the promotion of T lymphocytes, is associated with the activation of NK cells, B cells, cytotoxic T cells, and macrophages
(p14.0) In connection with the role of Th17 cells and immune responses at the tissular scale, it has been argued that since Th17 cells are commonly anchored in the gingival tissues, they may play a role in protecting the oral barrier. The potential mechanisms are not yet understood, however, in an animal model, IL-17R-mice have been shown to be more prone to P. gingivalis-induced bone loss (Yoshihara-Hirata et al., 2018). This suggests that IL-17 may play a protective role at the tissular level, in particular in bone remodeling and homeostasis. Interestingly, a number of clinical studies in humans have shown that excessive production of IL-17 is associated with periodontitis. Similar protective roles have been shown in the case of FICZ (tryptophan photooxidation product 6-formylindolo[3,2b]carbazole, a physiological ligand for the mammalian aryl hydrocarbon receptor to which it binds inducing expression of cytochrome P450) and molecules in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor axis in relation to alveolar bone loss and inflammation in experimental (murine) periodontitis (Huang et al., 2019).

LLM judge: YES

## (s15) The Genetics of Periodontal Inflammation
(p15.0) Genetic factors associated with the susceptibility, severity and the evolution of periodontitis have pointed out to a number of variants in genes of interest (Haworth et al., 2021;Shaddox et al., 2021). Relevant associations have been found, for instance, in genetic polymorphisms in genes such as IL1B, IL1RN, Fcγ RIIIb, VDR, and TLR4 in connection to susceptibility to aggressive periodontitis; and in IL1B, IL1RN, IL6, IL10, VDR, CD14, TLR4, and MMP-1 related to chronic periodontitis (Laine et al., 2012). Heritability of susceptibility to periodontal disease has also been discussed. A study in monozygotic and dizygotic twin pairs has estimated a heritability as high as 50% after adjusting for behavioral and environmental features. Interestingly, no evidence of heritability has been found in gingivitis (considered a precursor condition for periodontitis, see Figure 1B) after adjusting for these environmental covariates (Michalowicz et al., 2000).

(p15.1) Genome wide association studies (GWAS) have also provided with important clues on the genetics of periodontal disease, including aspects related to heritability dependencies, showing that for related conditions such as dental caries heritability is enriched in conserved genomic regions (Shungin et al., 2019). Most of the loci associated with PD in GWAS however, correspond to non-coding genomic regions and are hence, thought to be involved in modulating gene expression via regulatory interactions. As in most GWAS approaches, identifying the causal variants behind these associations remains challenging; this in turn makes difficult to elucidate the molecular mechanisms, useful for diagnostics and therapeutics and ultimately linked to a deeper understanding of how these variants contribute to phenotype establishment and clinical traits (Schaefer, 2018). In the case of genomic regions with known genetic factors in PD, a systematic review and meta-analysis with more than 70,000 participants describes genetic variants in genes such as IL-1A, IL-1B, IL-6, IL-10, MMP-3, and MMP-9 were significantly associated with the risk of developing periodontitis (da Silva et al., 2017).

(p15.2) Some additional insight has been found in studies in which PD is analyzed in combination with other conditions, such as cardiovascular diseases. It has been hypothesized that, since PD and coronary artery disease (CAD) are both characterized by overaggressive inflammatory responses to stimuli, they may share some genetic background. By analyzing joint conditions, association studies have found that genes like ANRIL/CDKN2B-AS1, PLG, CAMTA1/VAMP3 are involved in the pathogenesis of PD and CAD, a fact that suggests functional features and helps to account for some of the missing heritability of PD (Aarabi et al., 2017).

(p15.3) Combined genetic and functional studies point to immunogenetic blueprints in which immune fitness is disturbed, which has led to the proposal of a signature of more than 65 genes, involving inflammatory features and (again) association with cardiovascular diseases. In particular, four genetic loci have been revealed: CDKN2B-AS1(ANRIL), a conserved noncoding element within CAMTA1 upstream of VAMP3, PLG, and a haplotype block at the VAMP8 locus (Loos and Van Dyke, 2020). GWAS of aggressive PD have in turn revealed the role of variants in other genes such as GLT6D1, DEFA1A3, and SIGLEC5, also clearly associated with host immune responses (Masumoto et al., 2019).

(p15.4) Genes associated with bone morphogenetic and developmental processes have also been associated with PD. In particular, in the case of persistent apical periodontitis, Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the BMP2, BMP4, SMAD6, and RUNX2 genes were significantly associated and suggested epistatic interactions, in particular SNP-SNP interactions leading to important increased risk (odds ratios up to 4.36 in the high risk genotypes) (Küchler et al., 2021).

(p15.5) Aside from localized polymorphisms such as SNPs, larger genetic variants have been linked to PD. For instance, long runs of homozygosity (LROH) were associated with different stages of PD; in particular LROH spanning as long as 33 genes are significantly associated with an increased severity of periodontitis (Mezzavilla et al., 2021). Some of these genes have been previously related to granulocyte and platelet developmental processes.

(p15.6) The relation between microbial infections and hosts is complex, even more so in the case of chronic infections such as the ones responsible for PD and especially CP. A myriad of complex molecular mechanisms are often involved in triggering and maintaining infection-associated inflammation (Ari et al., 2016). For instance, Leukocyte adhesion deficiency-1 (LAD1) is a genetic immunodeficiency caused by a mutation leading to defective neutrophil adhesion and tissue transmigration. LAD1 produces recurrent skin infections, as well as oral ulcers, severe periodontal inflammation, and bone loss (Shaddox et al., 2017). Severe PD in LAD1 patients had been traditionally attributed to deficient neutrophil surveillance in gingival and periodontal tissues. However, recent evidence that enhanced inflammatory response mediated by IL-17, either due to genetic origins-such as eQTL enhancing-or signaling unbalance of infectious or immune origins, is also closely involved (Bunte and Beikler, 2019). Genetic variants in the chemokine receptor CXCR2 have been associated, for instance, with susceptibility to prolonged periodontal bacteremia leading to chronic periodontitis (Kavrikova et al., 2019).

(p15.7) Methods of genetic analysis have also revealed intriguing aspects of periodontitis and its comorbidities. In a landmark study, Czesnikiewicz-Guzik et al. (2019) were able to found a causal association between periodontitis and hypertension by resorting to both, Mendelian randomization and a randomized controlled trial of non-surgical periodontal therapy. There have been other efforts to analyze the relationship between PD and hypertension (Pietropaoli et al., 2020). Two large surveys were analyzed in this regard by Leira et al. (2020b). Unsurprisingly, the authors found that systemic inflammatory states were at the center connecting the two conditions.

LLM judge: YES

## (s16) The Epigenetics of Periodontal Inflammation
(p16.0) These mechanisms also include epigenetic pathways driven by upstream regulations, as well as other processes that may be traced back to its genetic and epigenetic origins (Ari et al., 2016). Epigenetic modifications, in particular, include chemical modifications of DNA and proteins, changes affecting chromatin remodeling which may result in the activation or inactivation of transcription cascades thus deregulating gene expression (Shaddox et al., 2017). The crucial role of DNA and histone modifications, two of the major epigenetic regulatory processes, have been documented to occur in the development of periodontitis (Diomede et al., 2017). Host-pathogen interactions are often mediated by molecules such as LPS. LPS-associated responses trigger a cascade of chronic inflammatory events and are able to modulate host responses at the cellular and tissular levels (Diomede et al., 2017). These responses produce alterations in DNA methylation patterns, thus modifying the expression programs of immune-related genes leading to inflammatory disease progression (Palioto et al., 2019). DNA methylation and histone acetylation are the major epigenetic modifications induced by diseases and environmental factors. DNA (cytokine-5) methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) are the key regulators of DNA methylation and histone acetylation, respectively, and are known to be shaped by the action of pathogens such as P. gingivalis (Diomede et al., 2017).

(p16.1) It has been reported that histone acetylation promotes the transcription of inflammatory genes such as p300/CBP histone acetyltransferase, NF-κB and other pro-inflammatory cytokines in PD (Ramadan et al., 2020). The extent to which this happens during PD progression, however, remains unclear. NF-κB signaling is thought to be involved via the sustained regulation of histone modifications accelerating disease progression. NF-κB plays a central role by activating innate immunity pathways driving osteoclast differentiation and inducing bone resorption (Fine et al., 2020). DNA methylation is regulated here by two different types of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs): de novo methyltransferases DNMT3a and DNMT3b, active during early development; as well as maintenance methyltransferase (DNMT1), which keeps methylated and unmethylated CpG sites in the cells (Diomede et al., 2017).

(p16.2) Epigenetic regulation of inflammation has been studied in the context of periodontitis by Jurdziński et al. (2020). These authors argue that a deeper understanding of these epigenetic regulatory mechanisms will provide clues about functions at the cellular level with potential therapeutic impact. Other functional epigenomic regulation phenomena in PD are mediated by noncoding RNAs, in this regard, Jin et al. (2020) have identified a group of novel PD-associated lncRNAs by performing a weighted gene co-expression network analysis.

LLM judge: YES

## (s17) MEDICAL ASPECTS OF PERIODONTAL INFLAMMATION
(p17.0) PD and CP are implicated in a multitude of pathogenic processes (see Figure 3), for this reason their prevention is essential for public health (Fujita et al., 2018). As previously discussed, it has been argued whether specific periodontal pathogens are able to stimulate and trigger for the development of systemic inflammatory disease, or if it is actually systemic disease the one leading to microbiome dysbiosis causing an abnormal abundance of periodontal pathogens. If, as is often the case, these same oral pathogens are able to induce non-oral diseases, they may become targets for therapeutic intervention, perhaps via drug repurposing schemes. In any case, the presence of periodontal pathogens may at least be used as a diagnostic marker to predict susceptibility to non-oral disease (Bui et al., 2019).

LLM judge: YES

## (s18) Periodontal Inflammation: Its Relation With Chronic Diseases
(p18.0) In recent years, several research and clinical studies have reported associations between periodontitis and a number of systemic inflammatory conditions, including arthritis, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and atherosclerosis (de Molon et al., 2019). The infectious, molecular and physiological origins of these associations have been discussed in the previous sections. Now, we will proceed to discuss their consequences in the onset and development of a broad range of diseases, including cardiovascular disease, gastrointestinal and colorectal cancer, diabetes and insulin resistance, Alzheimer's disease, as well as respiratory tract infection and adverse pregnancy outcomes among many others (Bui et al., 2019;Khumaedi et al., 2019).

(p18.1) The relationship between CP and other systemic chronic inflammatory diseases will gain relevance since a number of therapeutic interventions such as cytokine-based treatment strategies with the potential to improve both CP and systemic health exists (Cardoso et al., 2018). Immune markers linking CP and diabetes have also been reported in relation to glycation dynamics and TNF-α, which have been argued to constitute reliable biomarkers of inflammation in gingival crevicular fluid and serum (Singhal et al., 2016). Glycemic status has been associated with periodontitis via mechanisms of systemic inflammation (Torrungruang et al., 2018). Bone marrow stem cells co-cultured with macrophages obtained from diabetic periodontitis patients have shown an interplay between local inflammation and innate immune responses  further highlighting the relationship between these two conditions. On the other hand, there is indeed evidence which supports the fact that periodontal treatment alleviates systemic inflammation in type 2 diabetes (Preshaw et al., 2020).

(p18.2) A recent experimental (mouse) model, for instance, showed how periodontitis is able to induce systemic inflammation leading to atherosclerotic exacerbation via a mechanism that drives endothelial-mesenchymal transitions (Suh et al., 2019;Schenkein et al., 2020). Similar mechanisms have also been discussed in the context of the clinical care of human patients with lacunar infarct (Leira et al., 2019b).

LLM judge: YES

## (s19) Cancer
(p19.0) Another set of complex diseases for which increased risks have been associated with CP is cancer (Galvão-Moreira and da Cruz, 2016). It is known that compared to individuals with no PD, fatal cancer is positively associated with periodontitis, with lung cancer being strongly associated-though the actual relationship is still debated- (Hujoel et al., 2003), while oral and esophageal carcinomas resulted more consistently correlated (Fitzpatrick and Katz, 2010;Shin et al., 2019).

LLM judge: YES

## (s20) Disease Pathophysiology
(p20.0) Cancer Abnormally high signaling levels of TNF-α, IL-1, and IL-6 in CP promote oncological diseases. inflammation is able to profoundly affect all phases of cancer ( Table 3). Inflammatory and immune mediation processes are well known hallmarks of cancer, starting from the onset at the single-cell level, all the way up to early tumor growth, progression, and dissemination of neoplasms. Another emerging concept, in this regard, is that cancer, much like other complex diseases, is actually the consequence of systemic, rather than local conditions. Systemic inflammation is in itself quite a complex phenomenon involving the interplay of functional relationships with the deregulation of energetic metabolism and immune signals, that together with genetic instability, predispose individuals to develop cancer and regulate the abnormal states that sustain neoplastic disease (Cardoso et al., 2018). A meta-analysis including 3,183 subjects demonstrated that patients with PD present increased susceptibility to oral cancer. More recent studies have actually discovered a positive correlation between PD and pancreatic, head and neck, and lung cancers (Galvão-Moreira and da Cruz, 2016). Another study examined one million randomly selected insurance cases in Taiwan, and found that patients in one periodontitis cohort had an elevated risk of developing cancer as compared with the one of those in a comparable gingivitis cohort (Bui et al., 2019). Furthermore, the periodontal pathogen P. gingivaliswhich has been strongly associated with the development of both, PD and CP-was found to be highly abundant in OSCC and esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) patients (Bui et al., 2019). Further studies have also advanced clues in this direction. For instance, the potential role that periodontal pathogens, such as P. gingivalis and others may be playing in the onset and development of oral cancers, was inferred from an animal model for oral-specific chemical/microbial carcinogenesis. Porphyromonas gingivalis and Fusobacterium nucleatum were shown to stimulate tumorigenesis through a mechanism involving direct interaction with oral epithelial cells. This mechanism is mediated via the host innate immune system (Fine et al., 2020).

(p20.1) Periodontitis has also been associated with cancer mortality in a 10-year follow up study of a cohort with 68,273 adults. In particular, it has been suggested that low grade chronic inflammation linked to PD may influence carcinogenesis (Heikkilä et al., 2018). PD-associated cancer mortality may be indeed related to immune responses. In breast cancer, for instance, it has been argued that periodontal inflammation favors recruitment of distant metastatic breast cancer cells by increasing myeloid-derived suppressor cells in an experimental model (Cheng et al., 2020).

(p20.2) Regarding OSCC, P. gingivalis was able to promote invasion and metastasis of oral squamous cells by induction of MMP-9 expression. It was also demonstrated that long, repetitive exposure to P. gingivalis enhances the aggressiveness of oral cancer cells by inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transformations in the cells and that F. nucleatum triggers a pro-inflammatory microenvironment, thus enhancing tumor progression in colorectal adenoma-carcinoma (Bui et al., 2019). Since the elevated presence of P. gingivalis and F. nucleatum positively correlates with the onset of oral cancer, it has been proposed that they could be used as early-stage biomarkers for the oncological disease, or even more as targets for prevention of (some) oral cancers in humans (Bui et al., 2019).

LLM judge: YES

## (s21) Metabolic Diseases
(p21.0) Aside from neoplastic conditions, PD and chronic inflammatory processes are known to be closely related comorbidities with metabolic diseases. For instance, there has been documented that CP and diabetes are associated conditions. This association is actually believed to have causal components and indeed it has been described as a bidirectional association: Diabetes is a known modifying factor for chronic CP. CP on the other hand, is a common complication of diabetes (Chi et al., 2010;Cardoso et al., 2018). Some mechanistic hints have already been disclosed: the physiological processes involved in the onset of disease have been related to chronic hyperglycemia unleashing cascades of decreased macrophage and neutrophil function, accumulation of advanced glycosylation, and inflammation (Torrungruang et al., 2018). Concomitant presence of periodontitis is on its part, known to impair glycemic control in diabetics, hence increasing the risk for diabetes complications and comorbidities. From the signaling perspective: Pro-inflammatory mediators, like TNF-α, IL-1, and IL-6 that are upregulated in both diseases, a fact that may point to common molecular origins (Table 3). Furthermore, interindividual variability in both diseases may be influenced by sharing genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors (Cardoso et al., 2018).

(p21.1) Prolonged infection during periodontitis can drive exacerbated and dysregulated inflammatory responses. These, in turn, may contribute to poor metabolic control of blood sugar and increased insulin requirements . It has been shown that individuals with acute bacterial and viral infection present severe and long-lasting insulin resistance (Singhal et al., 2016). This phenomenon was further confirmed in a study with 124 middle-aged men, concluding that high titers for enteroviruses and Chlamydia pneumoniae correlated strongly with insulin resistance, quite likely due to chronic LGI resulting from these infections. In the case of P. gingivalis, a decrease in gingival vascular function and increased insulin resistance was observed in a murine diabetes model (Bui et al., 2019).

LLM judge: YES

## (s22) Cardiovascular Disease
(p22.0) As is the case with other previously mentioned inflammationrelated health conditions, consistent epidemiologic evidence has been found linking periodontitis with increased risk for cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) (Cardoso et al., 2018;Carrizales-Sepúlveda et al., 2018). Since vascular diseases are characterized by strong local and systemic inflammation, this is indeed unsurprising. In atherosclerosis, for instance, along with cholesterol debris accumulation on the artery walls, immune reactions via mediators such as cytokines are implicated in the pathogenesis of the disease (Cardoso et al., 2018). Inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-1, and IL-6, among others, are secreted by infiltrating leukocytes or even by foam cells. The relevance of chronic infections in the atherosclerotic process, namely by inducing a systemic inflammatory state and autoimmunity, is also well established ( Table 3).

(p22.1) Persistent microbial infections in the vessel wall are able to promote a pro-inflammatory environment. Infection can drive autoimmunity to vascular cells, thus initiating the atherosclerotic process (Hamilton et al., 2017). In this context, CP due to its sustained inflammatory nature correlates with an increased risk for cardiovascular disease. Bacteremia and systemic inflammation typical of CP are relevant factors leading to the onset of endothelial lesions, but also to the potentiation of inflammatory processes in the vascular wall (Leira et al., 2019b). Vascular inflammation is, in turn, modulated by proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-1, and IL-6, both in CP and in CVDs. It has even shown that a decrease in systemic inflammatory biomarkers secondary to periodontal treatment leads to beneficial features contributing to the reduction of cardiovascular risk (Preshaw et al., 2020). However, even if periodontal interventions result in a reduction of systemic inflammation and endothelial dysfunction in the short term, there is no significant evidence that these treatments actually prevent atherosclerotic vascular disease or are able to modify its outcomes (Cardoso et al., 2018).

LLM judge: YES

## (s25) Inflammatory and Autoimmune Diseases
(p25.0) The comorbidity spectrum of periodontal disease is, as we have seen, quite broad. A number of conditions, related to the presence and migration of infectious periodontal pathogens, to the underlying immune response to these, and to the acute and chronic inflammatory processes unleashed by these events are able to affect the organisms in a plethora of (often disparate) manners (Berlin-Broner et al., 2017;Hickey et al., 2020). Let us consider some of these additional disease conditions. Particularly relevant is the case of autoimmune conditions. We have already discussed the interplay between innate and adaptive immunity (see Figure 2). Any process disturbing this delicate balance, for instance, chronic infections, may bring important consequences. In particular, it may trigger autoimmune responses. Such responses are known to be major underlying factors in the onset and progression of the most common immune-mediated inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and inflammatory bowel diseases (Piras et al., 2017;Bunte and Beikler, 2019).

(p25.1) In the case of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), it has been shown that RA patients present higher bacterial loads, concomitant with an increased abundance of pathogenic species, and a diversified and dysbiotic oral microbiota, following patterns similar to those associated with PD (Table 3) with an increased CAL (de Molon et al., 2019). Peptide citrullination mediated by peptidylarginine deiminase is considered a central player in RA. Porphyromonas gingivalis has been shown to express peptidylarginine deiminase, a molecular clue that can represent a direct biological common factor between PD and RA. In agreement to this, recent studies have strengthened the hypothesis that PD is a risk factor for RA development: correlates show that greater severity of RA (swollen joints), increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and CRP typical of RA, can be associated with severe instances of periodontal bone resorption (de Molon et al., 2019;Bartold and Lopez-Oliva, 2020).

(p25.2) Synovitis, the inflammation of the synovial membrane in joints, is actually able to induce the clinical signs and symptoms of RA. In synovitis, a complex signaling network comprising immune cells and cytokines is at play. By the action of these intertwined cascades, immune cell recruitment and infiltration occurs causing the synovial membrane to vascularize and become infiltrated with fibroblasts, macrophages, T-and Bcells, plasma cells, mast cells, dendritic cells, and neutrophils. Mixed signals include increased TNF in the synovial fluid, able to trigger IL-1 production, unleashing B and T cell activation and a pro-inflammatory cascade mediated by Th-17 as well as dendritic cell induction destroying the cartilage and the articular bone. Crosstalk of IL-1 and IL-17 with TNF drives T cell and immature dendritic cell chemotaxis, as well as stimulation of fibroblasts and epithelial cells to secrete IL-6, IL-8, PGE2 (prostaglandin E2), and neutrophil chemoattractants, further increasing inflammation (Ceccarelli et al., 2019;Schulz et al., 2019). The links between synovitis and CP are further established by the fact that an IL-22 associated mechanism increased synovial inflammation in RA joints and clinical attachment loss in CP patients, mimicking IL-22 proinflammatory function in psoriasis (Ancuta et al., 2017;Bunte and Beikler, 2019).

LLM judge: YES

## (s26) Obstetric Complications
(p26.0) Pathogen migration and systemic inflammation associated with CP, has been documented to be also relevant in the context of obstetric complications: Along pregnancy, vascular permeability in the gingival tissues is increased, triggered by hormonal changes (Bartold and Van Dyke, 2019). Enhanced permeability then eases the diffusion of pathogenic microorganisms and their products into the bloodstream, even reaching the placenta. Once these pathogenic agents are there, they may drive immune and inflammatory responses inducing augmented secretion of proinflammatory cytokines potentially affecting the fetal tissues (Zi et al., 2015). Fetal inflammation can in turn lead to the premature rupture of membranes, causing uterine contractions, augmenting the risk of miscarriage or premature delivery (Ye et al., 2020). Complications during pregnancy have also been documented to be associated with CP and inflammation: Mohr et al. (2019) reported on the influence of systemic inflammation and preterm prelabor rupture of membranes in pregnant women with PD. Similar effects have indeed been traced back to periodontal bacterial infections (Ye et al., 2020).

(p26.1) The presence of periodontal pathogenic microorganisms in the amniotic fluid in women with periodontitis has been also associated with the severity of periodontitis related to the risk of preterm birth (Cardoso et al., 2018). Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, E. corrodens, P. gingivalis, and T. denticola have been associated with gestational hypertensive disorders. Likewise, Bergeyella sp., Capnocytophaga spp., E. corrodens, Parvimonas micra, P. gingivalis, T. forsythia, and T. denticola have been detected in certain women with low birth weight ( Table 3; Bobetsis et al., 2020).

(p26.2) In this regard, at least two mechanisms have been proposed relating periodontal health status and adverse pregnancy outcomes. The first one argues that oral periodontal pathogens are able to translocate from infectious oral cavities all the way down to the placenta, potentially reaching the intra-amniotic fluid and fetal circulation. The second hypothesis states that the PD-driven systemic endotoxin or inflammatory mediator dissemination is able to modify fetal development even leading to spontaneous miscarriage. A recent study states that F. nucleatum is the most common among the periodontal pathogens found in placental and fetal tissues (Bobetsis et al., 2020;Ye et al., 2020). This has led to hypothesize that F. nucleatum is able to translocate from the maternal mouth to the uterus, due to immune response weakening of infectious origins (Bui et al., 2019).

(p26.3) Additionally, research in animal models has shown that P. gingivalis can have a negative impact on pregnancy. It was observed that LPS from P. gingivalis leads to placental and fetal growth restriction and resorption in rats. Anti-P. gingivalis antibodies were also able to induce fetal loss when passively administered to mice. There is still scarce evidence regarding the role of innate immune receptors during pregnancy. While it has been reported that the placenta can express TLRs during normal pregnancy. PD or even abundance of periodontal pathogens such as T. denticola and P. gingivalis have been associated with an increase in the expression of TLRs, thus suggesting enhanced innate immune responses (Bui et al., 2019). The role that hormones will be playing in these phenomena is still not understood. However, the significant associations of periodontal inflammation, systemic inflammation and duration of menopausal years in postmenopausal women indicate that hormone regulation and unresolved inflammation in CP may be related (Sharma et al., 2018).

LLM judge: YES

## (s28) COVID-19, Inflammation, and Periodontitis
(p28.0) The recent, still ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has significantly altered many of our notions and perceptions of chronic and inflammatory conditions. This is also the case with periodontal inflammation. As we have discussed extensively, the roots of the pathophysiology of CP lie, to a large proportion, on a disproportionate cytokine response. As it is the case, the so-called cytokine storms also contribute to a large extent in COVID-19 related complications and mortality Hu et al., 2021). COVID-19 and CP share similar cytokine storm profiles, characterized by elevated levels of IL-1β, IL-7, IL-10, IL-17, IL-2, IL-8, IL-9, IFN-γ , TGF-β, as well as some metalloproteinases . As previously presented, CP often involves Th17 inflammatory responses that are, indeed, one of the determinant drivers of cytokine storming (Bunte and Beikler, 2019).

LLM judge: YES

## (s29) Periodontal Inflammation: Biomarkers and Diagnostics
(p29.0) Genetic markers have been associated with different outcomes and conditions related to PD, CP and their comorbidities. For instance, regarding the susceptibility to develop nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, Akinkugbe et al. (2017) have documented to be associated with a number of genetic markers of inflammation. The presence and abundance of certain microorganisms have also been used as biomarkers for the severity of the inflammatory periodontal condition (Bui et al., 2019).

(p29.1) Immune markers have been associated with the effects of PD and systemic inflammation in type 2 diabetes (Singhal et al., 2016). Adiponectin levels have been recently discussed to correlate with periodontal inflammation and diabetes , while resistin has been argued to be a potential CP biomarker (Akram et al., 2017) and chemerin levels in gingival crevicular fluid and tears are potential biomarkers of inflammation in chronic periodontitis and type-2 diabetes mellitus (Patnaik et al., 2017).

(p29.2) Tan and collaborators recently reported that an increase in serum and salivary neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin is positively correlated with periodontal inflammation (Tan et al., 2020) though further independent validation trials are currently being carried out. Levels of MMP-12 and of the damageassociated molecular pattern (DAMP) molecule S100s in saliva have been found to be effective markers of PD progression (Holmström et al., 2019). MMP-8 has been also mentioned as a potential point-of-care test biomarker for progression of periodontal inflammation (Lorenz et al., 2017). A similar association has been reported in connection with increased serum calcitonin-related peptides in PD patients suffering migraines (Leira et al., 2019a).

(p29.3) Exosomal nucleic acids have been extensively studied recently in search of reliable biomarkers. High throughput assays, though still in the early stages, are becoming promising techniques to find specific biomarkers in PD, such is the case of proteomics studies (Bostanci and Bao, 2017). Genetic assays are also under development. By using these techniques it was possible to find out that exosomal PD-L1 RNA in saliva may constitute an effective early biomarker of PD (Yu et al., 2019).

LLM judge: YES

## (s30) Periodontal Inflammation: Drugs and Therapeutics
(p30.0) Given the fact that sustained, unresolved inflammation is one of the key elements involved in periodontitis-associated morbidity, it is not surprising that many of the therapeutic approaches to treat the conditions are related to controlling such extended inflammation. Such is the case of statins, for instance. Petit et al. (2019) recently summarized a number of pharmacological applications of statins to treat chronic periodontitis. Oleuropein, a drug derived as a natural product, has been shown to have important therapeutic effects on alveolar bone loss, inflammation, and apoptosis in experimental periodontitis assays (Taskan et al., 2019). The use of inflammation resolvers rather than inflammation inhibitors has started to gain acceptance as a relevant design in therapeutic approaches to treat PD (Sima and Van Dyke, 2016;Van Dyke, 2020). Resolvin, for instance, has been used as a coadjuvant therapy to treat atherosclerosis in PD patients (Hamilton et al., 2017). The use of colchicine, has also shown to have important effects vs. gingival inflammation, apoptosis, and alveolar bone loss (Aral et al., 2018). A similar finding was found for 5-lipoxygenase therapy in polymicrobial apical periodontitis (Paula- Silva et al., 2020), and in an experimental model for rosuvastatin therapy (Kırzıoglu et al., 2017). Along similar lines, the inhibitory effects of panduratin A were documented on periodontitis-induced inflammation and osteoclastogenesis via in vitro inhibition of MAPK (intracellular enzymes involved in the response to stimuli such as inflammatory cytokines) pathways (Zhang and Li, 2015;Kim et al., 2018).

(p30.1) Reducing chronic inflammation is the first line of treatment for patients with CP and related ailments. To this end, Hong and collaborators developed a randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled, multicenter study to assess the effects of fixeddose combinations of vitamin C, vitamin E, lysozyme, and carbazochrome on gingival inflammation in patients with CP (Hong et al., 2019). Host modulation therapies (Bartold and Van Dyke, 2017;Hajishengallis et al., 2020) combining antiinflammatory and antioxidant agents have shown promising effects to treat PD in clinical trials (Sulijaya et al., 2019). Other biologics used as novel therapeutic strategies involve molecules able to trigger myeloid cell receptors (Rudick et al., 2017) since these cells are known players in pathogenic inflammation (Peddis et al., 2019). The novel anti-inflammatory drug tetramethylpyrazine has been recently found to reduce inflammation levels as well as LPS-mediated apoptosis in human periodontal ligament cells by a mechanism involving the downregulation of the small non-coding RNA miR-302b (Duan et al., 2020).

(p30.2) Aside from the effects of pharmacological therapy in CP and related conditions, it is important to consider the potential effects of drugs used to treat other diseases (and even of polypharmacy) on the inflammation and immune responses in PD. Gusman et al. (2019), for instance, have found that certain antineoplastic agents are able to exacerbate periodontal inflammation and aggravate periodontitis in experimental models.

LLM judge: YES

