# A Survey of Text Mining in Social Media: Facebook and Twitter Perspectives Establish algorithm for to determine an authorized PW error View project Further Investigations on Developing an Arabic Sentiment Lexicon View project Said Salloum British University in Dubai 3 PUBLICATIONS 2 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE

CorpusID: 65219850 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/94d255e0b2a729e918a320ab99e503cfc04e1fc8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/94d255e0b2a729e918a320ab99e503cfc04e1fc8)

Fields: Computer Science, Linguistics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) As we know that there are various social networking sites available, Facebook and Twitter are considered as the most crowded ones [1], [2]. These networking sites have made it easy to communicate with friends and family members without making any much effort [3], [4]. People related to different values come closer to each other by sharing their ideas, interests, and knowledge [5]. These days, it becomes very easy for anyone to meet the people of their interests for learning and sharing precious information [6], [7].

LLM judge: YES

## (s1) Background
(p1.0) Businesses have identified data-driven approaches as the ideal blueprint for their growth. It is easier to understand this theory. After all, wouldn't it benefit a company to get an idea about the perception of its products in the market without having to consult individual reviews from everyone? Wouldn't it be better if they could gauge which political candidate is ideal for their public image without having to analyze them all individually? This is why market study and research are some of the most highly invested fields in the world right now. Social networking sites like Twitter and Facebook are ideal for this purpose. Posts or messages shared by people on these platforms with their friends remain freely accessible or are kept confidential. They give businesses the chance to scoop up public sentiments [20], [21] about topics that they are interested to share by a large group of people.

(p1.1) The processing of surveys and public impressions using specially designed computational systems is a shared objective of inter-connected fields like subjectivity analysis, opinion mining [22], and sentiment analysis. Creating problem-solving techniques or methods to define the structure and precedence or for summarizing opinionated messages for particular topics [23], occasions or products is another target of the survey. For example, these methods could be used for gauging support for particular occasions or items, or determining thumbs down or thumbs up votes for specific movies based on their reviews.

LLM judge: YES

## (s7) Text mining in Twitter
(p7.0) A significant size of research has been occupied by the Twitter data analysis over the last couple of years [54]. Large spectrums of domains are using this data, some of which are using it for academic research and others for applications [55]. New improvements regarding twitter data are presented by this section. The document collection from various resources triggers the "Text Mining" process. A particular document would be retrieved by Text mining tool and this document is pre-processed by checking the character sets and format [56]. Subsequently, a text analysis phase would monitor the document. Semantic analysis is used to derive high-quality information from text; this is referred to "Text analysis". The market has a lot of text analysis techniques. Professionals can use combinations of techniques subject to the goal of the organization. Researchers tend to repeat the text analysis techniques till the time information is acquired. A management information system is capable of incorporating the resulting information, and as a result, significant knowledge is produced for the user of that information system [57]. A key issue in text mining is intricacy of natural language. The ambiguity problem is much dense in the natural language. There are multiple meanings of a single word and multiple words can possess same meaning. Ambiguity is referred to as the understanding of a word which has more than one possible meaning. Noise has emerged in extracted information as a result of this ambiguity. Since usability and flexibility are the main parts of ambiguity, it cannot be removed from the natural language. One phrase or sentence can have multiple understandings, so there is a chance we can obtain a number of meanings. The work is still undeveloped and a particular domain is correlated with the suggested approach while the experts have attempted to resolve the ambiguity problem by performing a number of research studies. As there is uncertainty/vagueness in the semantic meanings of many discovered words, so it is very difficult to answer the requirements of the user.

(p7.1) Scholars of [58] developed and formulated an automatic classification technique through which potentially abuseindicating user posts could be identified and evaluating the likelihood of social media usage as a source for automatic monitoring of drug medication abuse. In this regard, Twitter user posts (tweets) were collected and these were linked with three commonly abused medications (Oxycodone, Adderall, and Quetiapine). Besides interpreting a control medication (metformin), which is not the subject of abuse due to its process, nearly 6400 tweets were manually annotated, where these three medications were pointed out. The annotated data was qualitatively and quantitatively analyzed to determine as to whether or not signals of drug medication abuse are presented in Twitter posts. To sum up, Twitter's value was assessed in exploring the patterns of abuse over time and an automatic supervised classification technique was also designed, in which the purpose was to observe and separate the posts containing signals of medication abuse from those that do not. According to the findings of investigations, Twitter posts have yielded clear signals of medication abuse. As compared to the proportion for the control medication (i.e., metformin: 0.3 %), there is a very high ratio of tweets containing abuse signals for the three case medications (Adderall: 23 %, oxycodone: 12 %, quetiapine: 5.0 %). In addition, almost 82 % accuracy (medication abuse class recall: 0.51, precision: 0.41, F-measure: 0.46) has been achieved through the automatic classification approach. The Study demonstrated how the abuse patterns over time can be analyzed by using the classification data and its goal is to illustrate the effectiveness of automatic classification. As a result, it is found that abuse-related information for medications can be significantly acquired from social media, and the research indicates that natural language processing and supervised classification are the automatic approaches that have potentials for future monitoring and intervention assignments. With respect to supervised learning, the lack of sufficient training data is believed to be the largest shortcoming of the study. Both annotation and automatic classification are hindered by the lack of context and ambiguity in tweets. During the course of annotations, many ambiguous tweets were found and services of pharmacology expert were hired to address these issues. As a result of these ambiguities, the undefined situation is observed in the binary classification process and this inadequacy will continue until the time fine-tuned annotation rules could be specified by the future annotation rules.

(p7.2) A study by [59] applied the text mining approach on a large dataset of tweets. The complete Twitter timelines of 10 academic libraries were used to collect the dataset for this research. Nearly 23,707 tweets formed the total dataset, where there were 7625 hashtags, 17,848 mentions, and 5974 retweets. Inconsistency among academic libraries is found in the distribution of tweets. "Open" was the most repeated word that was used by the academic libraries in different perspectives. It was observed that "special collections" was the most frequent bigram (two-word sequence) in the aggregated tweets. While "save the date" was the most recurrent tri-gram (three-word sequence). In the semantic analysis, words such as "insight, knowledge, and information about cultural and personal relations" were the most frequent word categories. Moreover, "Resources" was the most widespread category of the tweets among all the selected academic libraries. The significance of data and text-mining approaches are reported within the study and their purpose is to gain an insight with the aggregate social data of academic libraries so that the process of decision-making and strategic planning could become facilitated for marketing of services and patron outreach. The 10 academic libraries from top global universities have undergone the text mining approach. The study aimed to illustrate their Twitter usage and to examine their tweet content.

LLM judge: YES

## (s8) Conclusion and Future work
(p8.0) The method of communication with each other has now completely changed due to the progress in the field of social media. Nowadays, modernization can be seen everywhere and based on that; the information production is touching the altitudes. Currently, the new companies are moving forward to take an active part in transforming the communication method [65]. The keywords and phrases' particularization can become helpful to different companies in order to shape their future. In the present study, we have highlighted the state-of-the-art research work regarding the implementation of text mining in the most dominant social media (Facebook and Twitter). From the point of view of several scholars, Text mining was explained through various models. Moreover, different authentic references are also provided to support the research work. As a result, text mining can be classified into text clustering, text categorization, association rule extraction and trend analysis according to applications. With the passage of time, text mining is going to be progressed well.

LLM judge: YES

