# Allelopathy in bryophytes -a review

CorpusID: 90027297 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/558fdeebb76d1e03a7cd8bc69cc18f84bf07ccb8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/558fdeebb76d1e03a7cd8bc69cc18f84bf07ccb8)

Fields: Biology, Environmental Science

## (s7) Discussion
(p7.0) The impact of allelopathy on ecosystems is important to understand when assessing species distribution and competitive interactions. Despite this, there is still much work to be done on understanding to what extent allelopathic chemicals in bryophytes exert a relevant impact in the field. Although there are many other factors that influence the competitive ability of a plant species, it does not take long to find studies where the impact of allelopathic chemicals is neglected. For example, Rydin (1997) used morphological traits such as shoot size, shoot density and branching type to explain how different Sphagnum species became dominant under various environmental conditions. In the light of findings such as those of Watson (1981) about allelopathic interactions upon moss recruitment or those of Ingerpuu and Vellak (2013) about interspecific impact on morphology in peat mosses, it seems possible that elements of interference competitions through allelopathy is equally important as the more apparent and experimentally tractable effects of exploitation competition. Vice versa, the ignoring of certain factors in laboratory experiments decreases the use of the findings in the field. For example Michel et al. (2011) claim to be able to relate their results from the laboratory to field conditions, however they did not take into account the mechanical and physical obstructions that bryophyte-cushions can represent for vascular plant seedlings, such as the effects of temperature demonstrated by Soudzilovskaia et al. (2010).

LLM judge: YES

