# Simulation-based research in management accounting and control: an illustrative overview

CorpusID: 106414756 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d06edddf3ad62c688302fafba368984de72eec8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d06edddf3ad62c688302fafba368984de72eec8)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Business

## (s2) Management accounting systems
(p2.0) The application of simulation approaches to concerns of management accounting systems primarily focuses on costing systems and procedures (e.g., activity-based costing systems, traditional cost accounting procedures). This section aims at giving an overview of selected influential papers that are placed within this domain and employ simulation methodologies. The first part of this section is concerned with costing systems, their robustness to errors, and their ability to provide accurate product costs. The second part of this section focuses on the question, which type of management accounting system (e.g., activity-based costing systems, traditional costing systems, throughput accounting systems) to implement for specific environmental circumstances so that accurate costing information is produced which is, then, further utilized for decision-making purposes.

(p2.1) In particular, there is a body of literature that focuses on the effect of errors in costing systems and procedures on the quality of provided information. Christensen and Demski (1997) investigate the case of a multiproduct setting and the ability to define (or estimate) separable cost functions. In particular, they ground the ability to define separable cost functions on a particular nested technology (e.g., production function specifications) and test the ability of activity-based costing procedures to produce relatively accurate estimates of marginal costs. In order to do so, they employ stochastic simulation and investigate various characterizations of the accounting procedure for different scenarios. They find that accuracy varies with technology specifications and products. Moreover, the authors draw attention to the question for which products to tolerate relatively large errors in order keep errors small for other products. In their seminal paper, Labro and Vanhoucke (2007) investigate the effect of (measurement, aggregation, and specification) errors on the accuracy of costing information in a two-stage activity-based cost allocation procedure. They employ a stochastic simulation approach. Their main findings can be summarized as follows:
## (s3) Organizational structure and decision-making
(p3.0) Management accounting systems provide information, which, according to the widely accepted distinction of Demski (1998), can perform two roles for decision-making: decision-facilitating information aims at reducing decision-maker's pre-decision uncertainty and, thereby, increase the probability to make better decisions with respect to the desired objectives; decision-influencing information is intended to affect the behavior of (other) persons unfolding its effects via monitoring of behavior, measurement and evaluation of performance and rewarding or penalizing performance (cf. also Wall and Greiling 2011). Hence, management accounting information is embedded into a set of formal organizational design elements (e.g., delegation of decisional competencies, performance evaluation and reward systems), and, in this respect, we subsequently seek to provide an overview of simulation-based research efforts which particularly focus on the interrelation between information, organizational structure and decision-making. Among the various simulation-based research efforts in the domain of organizational design (see Footnote 7 for further references) we put particular emphasis on the relatively new field of agent-based simulation models: In this context, agents are autonomous decision-making entities which pursue certain objectives (e.g. Bonabeau 2002;Safarzyńska and van den Bergh 2010;Tesfatsion 2006). Agents may represent individuals (e.g., business unit managers or board members of a firm) or a group of individuals. Particularly, the possibility to "aggregate" agents is particularly interesting in managerial science since, for example, it allows to map hierarchical structures of heterogeneous decision-making agents in terms of business units, departments and individual managers (Chang and Harrington 2006;Anderson 1999).

(p3.1) In this sense, Dosi et al. (2003), building on the framework of NK-fitness landscapes, focus on the decomposition of organizational decision problems into partial problems in terms of a "division of cognitive labour" (p. 413). The way of how the overall problem is segmented is assumed to affect how search for new solutions in the organization is configured, while the allocation of decisional rights determines the way solutions are selected. The main concern of Dosi et al.'s study is the relation between decomposition on the one hand and incentives (related to individual, team or firm performance), and the power to veto the decisions of other decision-makers as selection mechanisms on the other hand. It turns out to be of crucial relevance whether the segmentation and delegation "cuts" interactions among decisions, i.e., whether or not the organizational segmentation (perfectly) reflects partitions in the decision problem. If decomposition and delegation do not perfectly follow the interactions between decisions, according to Dosi et al. (2003) the rewards based on performance information could induce sub-units to mutually perturb each other's search processes. In this case, solely the reward structure does not lead to a sufficient coordination with respect to overall performance, and hierarchical or lateral veto power turns out to be useful in preventing endless perturbations.
