# Asia Pacific allergy Current Review Pharmacotherapy in the management of asthma in the elderly: a review of clinical studies

CorpusID: 10266875 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4a20cdecb42450b78f7b0138824429933c717447](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4a20cdecb42450b78f7b0138824429933c717447)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) INHALED BETA-2 ADRENERGICS
(p3.0) Since the clinical study by Graeser and Rowe [28], inhalation treatment with adrenergic agonists (previously epinephrine) for asthmatic bronchoconstriction has long been applied in clinical practice. Beta-2 adrenergic receptor has been later found to be more specific in dilatation of bronchial smooth muscle cells, and thus its specific agonists have been developed successfully. Now several different types of inhaled beta-2 adrenergic agonists are available in clinical practice; short-acting beta-2 agonists (SABA) like salbutamol, LABA like salmeterol or formoterol, and ultra-LABA like indacaterol.

(p3.1) At present, LABA is recommended as add-on to ICS as asthma controller, particularly as a single combination inhaler [29]. Combination of ICS plus LABA exerts better efficacy than double-dose ICS or ICS plus LTRA [30,31]. These 2 drugs may exert synergistic effects for each other; ICS increases the gene transcription of beta-2 receptors and protects the down regulation of the receptor in response to prolonged usage of LABA, whereas LABA could also enhance anti-inflammatory actions of ICS [32].

(p3.2) LABA as monotherapy has been related to risks of asthmarelated morbidity and mortality, and thus is not recommended alone. In previous clinical trial comparing salmeterol with placebo added to usual therapy, salmeterol group had a higher rate of asthma-related deaths (odds ratio, 4.37) [33]. However, in post hoc analyses of the intention-to-treat population, the increased risks of deaths were observed only among the subjects who did not use concomitant ICS at baseline. In recent Cochrane group metaanalyses of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing regular ICS+LABA (either salmeterol or formoterol) vs. same-dose ICS groups, no significant differences were found in fatal or nonfatal serious adverse events between two groups [34,35].

(p3.3) SABA is now indicated only for a rapid relief of bronchoconstriction (onset 5 to 10 minutes), but never recommended as a daily regular medication now. Regular use of SABA as monotherapy, particularly fenoterol, was previously found to have significant relationships with poor asthma control, compared to as-needed use of SABA [36]. In addition, regular use of fenoterol was strongly related to asthmarelated mortality in a dose-dependent manner [37].

(p3.4) Data are scarce in relation to the efficacy in the elderly. In a retrospective observational study using a health claims database of elderly patients in United States (US), the subjects who received fluticasone-salmeterol combination had significantly reduced risks of inpatient hospitalization (32%) and Emergency Department/inpatient hospitalization (22%) than those who received ICS [38]. However, there is a concern that bronchodilator response to beta-2 adrenergic receptor stimulation may decrease with age [39] whereas the response to ipratropium may not [40]. With regard to safety, a particular concern is necessary if the subjects have cardiovascular or metabolic comorbidities. Nebulized beta2-agonist might increase the risk of dysrhythmia or hypokalemia among patients at risks (such as previous history myocardial infarction, or taking diuretics or insulin therapy) [41]. However, in a 1-year retrospective analysis of elderly asthma patients in Japan, the usual dose of budesonide/formoterol (320/9 mg twice per day) did not show significant adverse effects on serum potassium levels or pulse rate [42].
## (s4) ANTICHOLINERGICS
(p4.0) Airway hyperresponsiveness to cholinergic stimulation is a hallmark of asthma, and thus the blockade of muscarinic receptor should be a potential therapeutic option. However, it has been just recently that this drug started to be considered as clinically important in asthma. Despite a long history of using plant alkaloids in relieving asthma attack [43], previous shortacting anticholinergics, including ipratropium bromide, failed to show significant efficacy. This lack of efficacy is supposed to be due to their lack of selectivity in antagonism, as simultaneous stimulation of different muscarinic subtypes could result in the decrease in bronchodilator effects [44]. However, now anticholinergics finally started to show promise, along with recent advances in characterization of muscarinic receptor subtypes, particularly M3 [44] and development of M3 selective antagonists [45]. M3 receptor has been identified as to have more important roles in the cholinergic bronchoconstriction pathway than other subtypes, and is considered to be the main target for bronchodilation in the asthmatic airways [46].
## (s7) ANTI-IgE MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY
(p7.0) IgE is a key mediator in several allergic reactions involving type I hypersensitivity mechanism. Thus, the invention of omalizumab, a recombinant humanized monoclonal IgG antibody [81], has provided a breakthrough in clinical practice for IgE-mediated diseases including allergic asthma. In RCTs of adult patients with moderate or severe allergic asthma, omalizumab add-on therapy significantly improved asthma outcomes such as exacerbation and hospitalization rates, compared to placebo [82]. However, elderly asthma patients are frequently nonatopic (also called as "intrinsic asthma") [2]; thus, the efficacy of omalizumab may be questioned in these patients.
## (s8) ISSUES SURROUNDING PHARMACOLOGICAL TREATMENT
(p8.0) Choosing inhaler device Inhalation is the major route of drug administration for asthma, including corticosteroids, beta2-agonists or anticholinergics. However, cognitive dysfunction and decreased dexterity pose difficult problems with using inhalers in the elderly. As reported in an earlier study by Allen and Ragab [93], the competence of using asthma inhaler, metered dose inhaler (MDI) here, is significantly related to intellectual function in the elderly. MDI requires multiple stages for inhalation, and thus the technique learning is also hindered by dementia, cognitive impairment or dyspraxia [94]. Dry powder inhaler (DPI) has less steps (less requiring coordination) and may be easier to use; however, it requires sufficient inspiratory flow to aerosolize the power [95].

(p8.1) In an elderly asthma cohort study in US, 52.6% had correct DPI technique, whereas 37.6% had proper MDI technique [96]. Thus jet nebulizer may need to be considered as an alternative route of delivery in cases necessary, although it is not portable [95]. Using MDI with spacer could also be an alternative way [95]. Whether using a single type of inhaler for both of controller and relieve could bring better clinical outcomes [97], compared to using mixed types of devices, needs to be examined in the elderly. Collectively, physicians should always discuss with elderly patients on difficulties in using inhalers, and also prescribe the device that individual patients can use effectively.
## (s11) Anti-IgE monoclonal antibody
(p11.0) In trials of adult patients, efficacy of omalizumab was not restricted to "atopic" patients [84,85]. In trials of older adult patients with severe "allergic" asthma, omalizumab had significant clinical benefits [89][90][91].

(p11.1) No specific issues were raised in the elderly. was significantly associated with erroneous "no symptoms, no asthma" belief. Besides, poor adherence to controller medication was related to low level of health literacy [96].
## (s12) Polypharmacy and drug interactions
(p12.0) Comorbidity is a major consideration in the pharmacological management of asthma in the elderly, as multiple comorbidity is frequent [2]. Comorbidity leads to polypharmacy and polypharmacy could in turn lead to more drug interaction issues. Polypharmacy could also influence adherence. Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and drug interactions could be complex in the elderly; however, there is a still lack of relevant information.
## (s13) CONCLUSION
(p13.0) In this review, we tried to identify clinical evidence on pharmacological therapy in elderly asthma patients. However, only a few literatures were retrieved ( Table 2). We believe that general rules of pharmacotherapy hold true across various age groups; however, external validity of current guideline recommendations needs to be proven in the elderly population. Also efficacy and safety issues, which could arise from agingrelated comorbidities and physical dysfunction, warrant direct investigation in the elderly.

(p13.1) We are now in the rapid transition of our population age structure and also perspective of asthma pathophysiology. "Old age" has been the frequent exclusion criteria (38.5%) in previous RCTs for various medical conditions published in major medical journals [100]. It is time to move on to make clinical evidence which could be generalized to older patients. Also further clinical studies need to address elderly specific issues in efficacy, safety, or indication.
