# Perforator-based flaps for the treatment of burn scar contractures: a review

CorpusID: 10787080 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d60688eff17b7a1fe784512197ed9497ea6a1a2e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d60688eff17b7a1fe784512197ed9497ea6a1a2e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) Today, most patients will survive severe burn injuries, but they will not escape the burden of severe scarring. The functional limitations of scarring mainly result from contraction of the scarred tissue that will leave contractures at joints. Surgical treatment is often indicated for those burn scar contractures. If the contractures are small and linear, the contraction bands can be treated with local transposition flaps like the Z-plasty. Broader, more diffuse contractures are more challenging to the reconstructive surgeon and require a different surgical approach. First, the tension of the contracted scar has to be released, which results in a considerable defect. Subsequently, this defect needs to be reconstructed.

(p0.1) Closure of this defect can be obtained by split-skin and full-thickness skin grafts, but skin grafts have the disadvantages of an uncertain ingrowth in the recipient area and a certain recurrence of contraction [1,2]. For these reasons, flaps should be preferred because they provide healthy skin and subcutaneous tissue that serves as a gliding plane. Moreover, flaps maintain their original blood supply. Although blood supply is essential for the survival of flaps, flaps can be raised without the knowledge of its feeding vessels, the so-called random flaps. These flaps have limitations in width and length because of their random blood supply. Preferably, skin flaps should therefore be designed according to their specific blood supply. If the vascularization is improved, larger flaps can be raised with larger arcs of rotation.

(p0.2) The discovery and better utilization of the feeding vessels of the skin, the perforators, therefore caused a breakthrough in battle between blood supply and survival of the flap. Taylor et al. performed much basic research on these vessels and their role in vascularization of the skin [3]. Because of the knowledge on perforators, we can harvest many types of skin flaps as long as it incorporates a perforator bundle of an artery and vein. The introduction of these so-called perforator flaps was therefore a milestone in reconstructive surgery and has significantly enlarged the possibilities for all sorts of oncological and traumatic defects both as free and local flaps. Perforator-based flaps are considered to be a breakthrough for burn scar reconstruction as well.

(p0.3) Perforators are vessels that perforate the fascia underneath the subcutis and run almost in a straight line through the subcutis to the skin. So if the location and course of perforators are considered in the flap design, the safety of the flap might be improved. The body contains a few hundred of such perforating vessels with a diameter of more than 0.5 mm [3]. Studies were published on the use of a perforator to increase the flap versatility and viability. Niranjan et al. performed a lot of clinically related research on the usage of perforators for indications such as large defects following excision of malignant skin lesions and selected trauma cases [4], but perforator-based flaps are also useful in reconstructive surgery as local flaps: the group of Hyakusoku and Ogawa has been working on the propeller flap techniques since 1991 [5,6].
## (s13) Main description of studies
(p13.0) One RCT was identified [8]. This trial compared the effectiveness of perforator-based interposition flaps versus full-thickness skin grafts (FTSGs) for the treatment of burn scar contractures (this paper was "in press" at the moment that the manuscript was prepared but it was not excluded from the analysis). The other ten papers were cohort studies with a pre-postoperative design: patients were measured before surgery and at a defined time period postoperatively. Most studies described a single procedure [9][10][11][12][13][14][15], one study described the outcomes of different adaptations of one flap [16], and one study compared the outcome of different flaps [17]. The range of follow-up periods varied from 2 months [18] to 8 years [11]. Overall, the sample size studied in the different papers was small ranging from 15 to 42.
## (s14) Outcome measures
(p14.0) The two most used outcome measures in the included studies were ROM [15,17,19] and surface area measurements of the flaps [8,12,14]. Range of motion was measured in degrees in the area of interest, which was either the neck or shoulder in most studies. Some authors measured the ROM preoperatively and compared this to the ROM postoperatively [8,9]. Others compared the postoperative ROM to the normal or "ideal" ROM [10,17]. Four studies only provided a narrative description of the long-term outcome, without presenting data [11,13,16,18]. Flap area measurement was performed by measuring the width of the flaps [8,12,14] or the surface area [8,14].
## (s16) Quality assessment
(p16.0) The results on the quality assessment are summarized in Table 2. The quality of most of the included studies was low; especially outcome parameters for long-term followup were insufficiently described. Only the RCT scored maximal on the items selection, comparability, and outcome [8]. Because only one RCT was included, the same quality assessment scale (the Newcastle-Ottawa quality assessment scale) was used for all the included studies and the results were presented together in Table 2.
## (s18) Discussion
(p18.0) This review aimed to provide more scientific deepening to our knowledge of the outcome of perforator-based procedures for burn scar contractures. The raw conclusion of this review is that a sound scientific underpinning of the perforator-based procedures for burn contracture reconstructions is lacking so far. The total number of clinically interesting publications contrasts  sharply with those few publications that convey a clear scientific approach on this topic. A scientist, not being an expert in the field, might easily conclude that adequate data to warrant the use of perforator-based reconstructions are too scarce, but every expert in the field of reconstructive surgery who has experience with perforator-based flaps would almost certainly contradict this conclusion. So, the real significance of this review might therefore not be in the answers obtained but in the question that remained: "how can we start improving the scientific foundation to choose the best treatment strategies." There is certainly a need for high-quality studies to warrant the use of new (and old) treatment strategies. This would certainly improve our decisionmaking as well as the quality of treatment algorithms. How do we interpret the findings in the included studies?

(p18.1) In this review, only eleven studies finally qualified following the search strategy that we presented. It has to be emphasized that we deliberately used low thresholds to consider studies for inclusion because of the anticipated low numbers of eligible studies. Lowering the threshold, any further would certainly lead to more inclusions but not to better founded conclusions.

(p18.2) However, despite our concerns on the level of evidence in general, the available studies are certainly not without meaning: firstly, perforator-based procedures appear to be as safe as free and local flaps, although only a few studies accurately measured the percentage of necrosis [8,14]. The outcome of other studies, which were mostly retrospective and descriptive of nature, coincides with this conclusion. A practical issue of local flaps is the limited length-to-width ratio. Moreover, the availability is limited in extensively burned patients. For free flaps, more donor sites can be considered such as the anterolateral thigh perforator flaps, tensor fascia lata perforator flaps, and the thoracodorsal artery perforator flap [17,20]. But local flaps procedures are generally considered less technical demand and require less operation time. They are also considered to be safer than free flaps. Nevertheless, Tsai et al. showed in their study that the application of free flaps for burn scar contracture could be safe. They described that all flaps healed well (only two re-explorations were necessary, which were successful).

(p18.3) The other 10 studies focused on local flaps. Generally, local perforator-based flaps are designed as island flaps, also known as propeller flaps, where the flap is released completely except for its vascular bundle with its cuff. After the inset, the skin pedicle looks like an island of skin. This concept was popularized by Hyakosuku since 1991 [6]. Cutting the entire skin base indeed provides large degrees of freedom to rotate the flap. However, in many cases, the flap only has to be rotated over a small angle (approximately 90°). In these cases, the flap is easily rotated with an intact base. These types of flaps are less surgically challenging, but theoretically, they also leave fewer scars, require less operation time, and are potentially safer. Mehrotra presented this idea as the perforator-plus design in 2007 [21]. In this approach seemingly, a conventional fasciocutaneous flap was created but the perforators were included at the base of the flap. This concept was considered to offer dual blood supply to the flap from the dissected perforator plus the flap base. In case series, it was found to be a valuable and safe technique [13,21]. Our group developed an algorithm in which flaps were only converted into island flaps on indication such as significant kinking, compromised tissue perfusion, and dog-ear formation at the flap base [14]. The design of the flap was tailored according to the localization of an ad hoc perforator and the anticipated defect. The skin base was left intact until the flap rotation could be tested intraoperatively. This algorithm was versatile and practical because it allowed for tailoring intraoperatively.

(p18.4) Although we were convinced that local flaps are superior to skin grafting procedures for burn scar contracture treatment, we initiated an RCT comparing these perforator-based interposition flaps to full-thickness grafting [8]. The superiority of perforator-based flaps was indeed confirmed: with regard to the safety of the perforator-based interposition flaps, we found a relatively low percentage of necrosis compared to FTSGs (6% versus 17%). In all cases, a perforator was found adjacent to the contracture. In this RCT, we were able to demonstrate an even larger increase in surface area after 3-and 12-month follow-up. The flaps showed a 23% increase of the original surface area after 3 months and 42% after 1 year. On the other hand, a substantial contraction of the surface area was found for FTSGs after 3 months (−13%) and after 1 year (−8%). This is not only a statistically significant finding but also relevant for clinical decision-making. Although it was the first time that this difference in adaptation between a flap and FTSGs was demonstrated in a controlled study, it was not the first study where the increase of the flap size in time was observed. Tsai et al. and Rashid et al. objectified the increase of the flap width [12,17]. In addition, Verhaegen et al. measured an increase in the flap surface area [14]. Waterston et al. did not perform geometry on flaps, but they observed and described this phenomenon in their case study [18].

(p18.5) This feature of flaps to stretch after interpositioning in an area of a released contracted burn scar is obviously a valuable practical advantage of perforator-based flaps in burn scar reconstruction. In flaps (local or free flaps), the quality of the tissue remains almost optimal after surgery probably because its vascularization remains intact instead of skin grafts, which are literally cut from their blood supply for days. Skin grafts can tolerate an ischemic period without being subject to necrosis; however, this is not favorable for the quality of the grafted skin [1].

(p18.6) In flaps, not only the vascularization is maintained but also the subdermal fat tissue and subdermal plexus. An important property of the subdermal fat tissue is to provide a functional sliding layer. The additional subcutaneous sliding layer of a flap prevents the skin from being attached to the underlying wound bed and allows the skin of the flap to stretch in time.
