# A Literature Review of Cost-Benefit Analyses for the Treatment of Alcohol Dependence

CorpusID: 10623266 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6e8673ed16ea027ccabc5828d620cc9124ae9c4d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6e8673ed16ea027ccabc5828d620cc9124ae9c4d)

Fields: Psychology, Economics, Medicine

## (s6) Pharmacotherapy Studies
(p6.0) In a study [26] involving 448 alcoholic patients in Belgium, 12-month treatment with acamprosate and 12-month follow-up resulted in net cost savings of 21,301 BEF (528 €) per patient over a 24-month period for acamprosate treatment compared to placebo (Figure 2), due to a fewer acute hospitalizations for detoxification, less liver complications and less institutionalized rehabilitation.
## (s8) Conclusions
(p8.0) Treatment of alcoholism is associated with a decrease in total health care utilization [29,30] and thus, produces marked economic benefits for most of the treatment options. A present analysis of studies, concerning cost-benefit attributable to AD treatment, revealed that most of the treatment options produce marked economic benefits with the benefit-cost ratio ranging from 1.89 to 39.00. The highest benefit-cost ratios were observed in brief intervention studies [21,22].

(p8.1) All studies involving psychotherapy treatments have reported that major cost-benefits have been achieved in the first six months. The benefits to the healthcare system as well as the society as a whole, of course, continue to increase with time. While in most of the studies, individual counselling and behavioural therapy are quite effective and accrue significant economic benefits, some treatment procedures like interactional couples therapy have resulted in negative benefit-cost ratios due to the high cost of treatment. In addition, it has to be noted that the participants in brief intervention studies included in this analysis [21][22][23][24] might not all be alcohol dependent but rather exhibit alcohol abuse.

(p8.2) Although there are relatively more cost-benefit studies on psychotherapy treatments of AD, only two studies were identified that had included a CBA of pharmacotherapy for the treatment of AD. These two cost-benefit studies on pharmacotherapy of AD were related to acamprosate; there were no cost benefit study involving oral or injectable naltrexone, disulfiram or any other drug. Nonetheless, it is important to note from these few available studies that pharmacotherapy treatment of AD accrues economic benefits to the healthcare system as well as to society.

(p8.3) It is important to note that the considerations for benefit-calculations have been different in the reviewed studies. While in some cases, the societal benefits included benefits to the health care system and the legal system; some other studies included savings in other indirect societal costs such as productivity losses.

(p8.4) Reduction of binge drinking/heavy drinking occasions (both regular and irregular) and its associated problems is of overriding importance. A dichotomous criterion of abstinence does not differentiate sufficiently, and is unrealistic, as many have a drink/relapse at one time or another. The reduction of heavy drinking occasions is a key for (a) health outcomes, and also for (b) criminality outcomes. The highest benefit in classical cost-benefit studies will, of course, be achieved if both dimensions are combined, and disability is included in the health outcomes.
