# Introduction/overview Clinical and preclinical translation of cell-based therapies using adipose tissue-derived cells R E V I E W

CorpusID: 10560276 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ed517e19445445f90bd602760b58fb268b0aa54](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ed517e19445445f90bd602760b58fb268b0aa54)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s2) Soft tissue cosmetic and reconstructive surgery
(p2.0) Soft tissue repair is a logical application -and, theoretically, the simplest application -for adipose-derived cell therapies since the isolated cells presumably do not need to display any transdiff erentiation potential. Both ASCs and SVF cells have been approved and employed in clinical trials involving soft tissue defects (summarized along with other published clinical studies in Table 2). Breast reconstruc tion or augmentation trials have enrolled the greatest number of patients. Plastic surgeons at the University of Tokyo have reported pioneering results using SVF cells in combination with intact lipoaspirate tissues. Yoshimura and colleagues have combined SVF cells with lipo aspi rates from equal volumes of tissue to augment breast volume [9][10][11]. In their clinical population of >70 subjects, these authors note improved fat grafting in the presence of the SVF cells with retention of volume for >1 year without evidence of fi brosis or adhesions. Complica tions such as cyst formation or microcalcifi cations occur in less than 2 to 3% of patients. Clinical trial reports in abstract form conducted by surgeons in Spain, South Korea, and elsewhere suggest similar outcomes [12].
## (s5) Future directions and challenges
(p5.0) Peripheral vascular disease provides a promising target for adipose-derived cell therapies. Pioneering preclinical studies simultaneously published independently by groups in Indianapolis, Toulouse, and Frankfurt -and later confi rmed by others in Japan and Korea -have demonstrated the protective eff ects of both SVF cells and ASCs against acute vascular injuries [35][36][37][38][39][40][41]. Using rodent hind-limb ischemia models, these investigators unequivocally demonstrated that intravenous infusion or intramuscular injection of adipose-derived cells accelerated recovery of blood supply to the damaged tissues and prevented necrosis over a 1-week period. Th e investigators concluded that production of the angiogenic/ vasculogenic cytokines hepatocyte growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor accounted, in part, for the mechanism underlying the ASC and/or SVF cell actions [37,40]. Th ese preclinical studies suggest that ASCs and SVF cells could be used to treat claudication and chronic vascular insuffi ciency in the lower extremities, such as that seen in patients with diabetes and related small-vessel diseases. Consequently, doctors at academic medical centers have begun to submit protocols to their national regulatory authorities for translational clinical trials; however, to date, no phase I safety or effi cacy results have been published.
## (s7) Chronic diseases
(p7.0) Th eoretically, acute diseases present situations where rapid intervention can most effi ciently prevent the develop ment of long-term pathologies. In contrast, chronic diseases may be less amenable to cell-based therapies. Preclinical animal models suggest that adult stem cells of bone marrow origin can be used to treat type 1 diabetes mellitus, chronic heart failure, and neurodegenerative diseases due to inborn errors of metabolism (Krabbe's disease, among others). Since these chronic diseases account for the majority of healthcare costs in most national economies, there is interest in using ASCs and SVF cells for their treatment.

(p7.1) Th ere is particular interest in the use of ASCs and adipose transplantation therapy for lipodystrophy and associated metabolic disorders such as diabetes [48]. A single group in India has reported improved insulin sensitivity in group of fi ve diabetic patients co-infused with ASCs and unfractionated cultured bone marrow cells [49]; however, the majority of studies have been limited to animal models. For example, our group has begun to explore the use of ASC therapy in murine and nonhuman primate models of Krabbe's disease (BA Bunnell and JM Gimble, unpublished data). After such small and large preclinical animal model data supporting the safety and effi cacy of these approaches are reviewed, it will be possible to begin testing adipose-derived cells in these important human conditions. A positive outcome in a single disease alone could have substantial economic and public health benefi ts.
## (s8) Conclusions: opportunities or roadblocks?
(p8.0) Th e application of ASCs and SVF cells is still in its infancy and the fi eld has made progressive advances towards clinical applications. In general, the clinical investi gators who have published their fi ndings have taken pains to address the important regulatory questions before advancing from animal models to patients. Th ese researchers are to be applauded for treating the regulatory guidelines not as roadblocks but as oppor tunities for documenting the safety of their cell-based products. Still, there have not been many published safety studies address ing the legitimate concerns of regulatory authorities that include the following questions.

(p8.1) Can human ASCs and SVF cell implants cause tumors either directly through transformation or indirectly by promoting the growth of endogenous tumor cells? At least one manuscript has reported that human ASCs expanded long term in vitro will cause sarcomas when implanted in vivo in an immunodefi cient mouse [50].

(p8.2) Has a current good manufacturing practice scheme of manufacture been developed for the cell products? While this information must be available to support existing clinical trials, details of standard operating protocols have not been made public. International standardization of ASCs and SVF cells would signifi cantly advance clinical translation. Published defi nition of the cell identity with a panel of surface antigens and establishment of universally applied quality assurance/ quality control testing criteria would benefi t the fl edgling adipose stem cell community.

(p8.3) As discussed above, there is no shortage of diseasesboth acute and chronic -where adipose-derived cell therapies could have a potential clinical impact. Th e next steps will include documenting the reproducibility of the current preclinical and clinical fi ndings, and controlled testing of the safety and effi cacy of ASCs and SVF cells in a range of human conditions. In another decade, we postulate that the cells will prove benefi cial to some, but not all, of the disease models tested. We expect initial successes to come in applications relating to acute disorders; however, we are hopeful that chronic diseases amenable to SVF cell therapy or ASC therapy will also be identifi ed.
