# IBUPROFEN AND ITS DIFFERENT ANALYTICAL AND MANUFACTURING METHODS: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 102629014 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b86e983192cd88d2d13ec58c60111253513b7a61](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b86e983192cd88d2d13ec58c60111253513b7a61)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s2) Pharmacology
(p2.0) Ibuprofen has the analgesic and antipyretic properties. Pharmacologically, it has similar action to those of other prototypical NSAIDs. Ibuprofen is a propionic acid derived and NSAID with antiinflammatory, analgesic, and antipyretic effects and also has the cardioprotective effect of aspirin [7].

(p2.1) Ibuprofen having propionic acid derivatives [8] inhibits the activity of cyclooxygenase I and II that decrease the formation of precursors of prostaglandins and thromboxanes. This leads to decreased prostaglandin synthesis, by prostaglandin synthase, the main physiologic effect of the drug. Ibuprofen also causes a decrease in the formation of thromboxane A2 synthesis, by thromboxane synthase, thereby inhibiting platelet aggregation.

(p2.2) The absorption of the drug is rapid and complete when given orally. Ibuprofen is eliminated following biotransformation to glucuronide conjugate metabolites that are excreted in urine, with little of the drug being eliminated unchanged [9]. The excretion of conjugates may be tied to renal function, and the accumulation of conjugates occurs in end-stage renal disease. Hepatic disease and cystic fibrosis can alter the disposition kinetics of the drug. Ibuprofen is not excreted in substantial concentrations in breast milk. Significant drug interactions have been demonstrated for aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid), cholestyramine, and methotrexate.
## (s5) Contraindications
(p5.0) Hypersensitivity to ibuprofen is a contraindication. In addition, ibuprofen should not be used in the following conditions. • Active peptic ulcer. • Aspirin. • Breastfeeding. • Gastrointestinal bleeding. • Hypersensitivity.

(p5.1) • Neonates with congenital heart disease. • A study of pregnant women suggests that those taking any type or amount of NSAIDs (including ibuprofen, diclofenac, and naproxen) were 2.4 times more likely to miscarry than those not taking the drugs [10].
## (s9) Studies and specifications
(p9.0) Many studies have revealed different cases of the ibuprofen effect on various human cells as well as other living microbes and also other components showing similar activity to ibuprofen. Beauchamp et al. found oil from the olive plant showing similar ibuprofen activity due to the presence of oleocanthal [17]. Studies showed that inflammation and plaque pathology is suppressed by ibuprofen in mouse for Alzheimer disease [18]. In 1993, Hasson et al. were able to study the ibuprofen effect on the muscle soreness, damage, and performance where they found that prophylactic damage of ibuprofen does not prevent creatine kinase release from the muscle but decrease the soreness of muscle and help in restoring the muscle function for certain period of time [19]. Similarly, in 2002, Trappe et al. also studied the effect of two analgesics ibuprofen (IBU: 1,200 mg/day) and acetaminophen (ACET: 4,000 mg/day) on muscle protein and soreness. They found an active influence of ibuprofen in the muscle protein [20]. With the advancement in research, in 2004, Schnitzer et al. were able to study and compare lumiracoxib with ibuprofen. They found that lumiracoxib was able to decrease the ulcer complication by two to three folds than the NSAID [21]. Bernard et al. studied the effect of ibuprofen on the physiology and survival of patients with Sepsis where they concluded that ibuprofen helps in reducing levels of prostacyclin and thromboxane with a decrease in consumption, tachycardia, fever, oxygen, and lactic acidosis but does not prevent the development of shock or the acute respiratory Bashyal distress syndrome [22]. Studies also reveal that ibuprofen possess the antifungal activities [23].

(p9.1) Each drug after a design requires the clinical trial process where several types of animals are used. After successful trials on animals, human trials are performed. Some of the animals trialed during the testing of ibuprofen and their effects toward the given drug are given in Table 1.
