# The Construction and Validation of the Heat Vulnerability Index, a Review

CorpusID: 10910482 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0f7baa1d0f09b350e511934f3ec1f2ab10d8c49f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0f7baa1d0f09b350e511934f3ec1f2ab10d8c49f)

Fields: Medicine, Geography, Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) It is well known that the global climate will become warmer in the future, and many researchers have estimated that the occurrence of heat waves and their adverse effects will be exacerbated by this increase in global temperature [1,2]. Heat waves can result in high numbers of heat-related illnesses and deaths. In 1980, a heat wave killed approximately 10,000 people across the United States [3]. In July of 1995, a heat wave also killed more than 700 people in Chicago [4], and in August of 2003, a heat wave killed more than 70,000 people in Europe [5]. Furthermore, extreme heat has been found to be the deadliest weather-related hazard in some locations [6,7]. People with respiratory or cardio-vascular diseases, diabetes, chronic mental disorders or other pre-existing medical conditions are at greatest risk of being negatively affected by heat waves [8,9]. Individuals who are elderly, are socially isolated, have a low income, are uneducated, or live in low-income housing are also at greater risk [10,11].

(p0.1) The adverse health effects that result from extreme heat can be prevented. Some cities that implement hot weather response measures during heat waves have experienced decreases in the morbidity and mortality of heat-related illnesses [12,13]. A review of emergency response plans found that half of the studied cities had specific plans for extreme heat events but that few cities had interventions to reach the at-risk populations [14,15]. To more effectively prevent heat hazards, it is important to determine both the regions and those people within the regions who are at an increased risk of being negatively affected by heat waves [16][17][18].
## (s3) Heat Vulnerability Determinants
(p3.0) Romero-Lankao et al. [41] utilized a meta-analysis and meta-knowledge approach to study the urban vulnerability to temperature-related hazards and found that this relationship had mostly been examined using 13 factors: hazard magnitude (i.e., temperature level), population density, age, gender, pre-existing medical conditions, education, income, poverty, minority status (African American, Non-African American minorities, and non-white, these terms only make sense in the U.S.), acclimatization, and access to home amenities such as air conditioning and swimming pools. These drivers accounted for 66% of the total tallies of vulnerability determinants. Based on the levels of evidence and agreement, they studied these determinants (Table 2).

(p3.1) Using the Generalized Linear and Mixed Model, Uejio et al. [42] derived the relative importance of heat exposure, socioeconomic vulnerability, and neighborhood stability from locations where people suffered from heat distress or mortality. They studied US two locations, Philadelphia (PA) and Phoenix (AZ). They found that in Philadelphia, the final influencing factors were as follows: African-American, the year the house was built, vacant households, and total population. In Phoenix, the final influencing factors were night-time surface temperature, impervious surface, housing density, households renting, population aged 65 and older, people living alone, linguistically isolated households, Hispanic, Asian ethnicity, vacant households, imperviousness surface x housing density, and total population. Table 2. Determinants of heat vulnerability, levels of evidence and agreement [41]. 
## (s4) Thermal Characteristics
(p4.0) Romero-Lankao et al. [41] found that hazard magnitude (i.e., temperature level) was the only determinant that had been extensively studied (i.e., has a large amount of evidence) and showed a high level of agreement in its effects across different studies in the field of urban vulnerability to temperature-related hazards ( Table 2).
