# A review of levosimendan in the treatment of heart failure

CorpusID: 10419254 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7a8cdf3828096c401a9f05661e4dfb813ce64777](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7a8cdf3828096c401a9f05661e4dfb813ce64777)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Anti-inflammatory effect
(p3.0) It has been reported that elevated circulatory levels of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β) increase the apoptosis of cardiac myocytes and endothelial cells by increasing oxidative stress and lead to the suppression of myocardial contractility, and that they have a role in the clinical and hemodynamic deterioration of heart failure (Seta et al 1996;Sasayama et al 1999). Elevated levels of TNF-α and IL-6 have been associated with increased morbidity and mortality in patients with advanced heart failures (Levine et al 1990;Torre-Amione et al 1996;Tsutamoto 1998;Plenz et al 2001). Recent studies show that therapies that decrease cytokine levels may improve the clinical picture and ventricular functions in patients with congestive heart failure (Gullestad et al 2001;Skudicky et al 2001).

(p3.1) Some other studies indicate that levosimendan exerts anti-apoptotic and anti-inflammatory effects by decreasing the circulatory pro-inflammatory cytokines and soluble Levosimendan in heart failure apoptosis mediators (Parissis et al 2004;Avgeropoulou et al 2005;Kyrzopoulos et al 2005).
## (s4) Effects on matrix metalloproteinase
(p4.0) It has been concluded that levosimendan decreases the levels of matrix metalloproteinases, which regulate extracellular matrix metabolism, and play an important role in the left ventricular remodeling in chronic heart failure (McMurray and Pfeffer 2002;Tziakas et al 2005). Therefore, it is suggested that levosimendan may show pleiotropic effects that may affect myocardial remodeling (Tziakas et al 2005).
## (s6) Effects on coronary circulation
(p6.0) It has been determined that administration of intravenous levosimendan has a direct vasodilator effect on conductance and resistance of coronary arteries (Gruhn et al 1998). It has been suggested that levosimendan exerts this effect by opening ATP-sensitive K channels in vascular smooth muscles (Gruhn et al 1998;. It has been demonstrated that coronary artery flow was increased and coronary artery resistance was reduced during levosimendan infusion (Michaels et al 2005).
## (s8) Hemodynamic effects/influence on systolic function/influence on diastolic function
(p8.0) Although levosimendan causes vasodilatation by opening ATP-dependent K channels in vascular smooth muscle cells, this does not only result in a reduction of preload and afterload but it also creates a positive inotropic effect (Harkin et al 1995). It was determined in multicenter large scale studies conducted on patients with heart failure that levosimendan reduced pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP), right atrial, pulmonary arterial and mean arterial pressures, and peripheral vascular resistance (PVR), whereas it increased cardiac index (Nieminen et al 2000;Slawsky et al 2000;Follath et al 2002).

(p8.1) As is the case with other drugs having potent vasodilator activity, levosimendan increases intrapulmonary shunting. However, in contrast to these drugs, it does not reduce arterial oxygen saturation (Lilleberg et al 1998).

(p8.2) In a study by Sonntag et al (2004) with patients undergoing percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty due to acute coronary syndrome, levosimendan infusion after 10 minutes following successful intervention reduced the number of hypokinetic segments. As an indicator of improved systolic functions, increase of ejection fraction, and decrease of end diastolic volume, single-beat elastance, and upward/leftward shift of the systolic part of the pressurevolume loop have been observed.

(p8.3) One of the most important indicators of improved contractile functions with levosimendan infusion is the increase in exercise capacity. In a tissue Doppler echocardiography study conducted by Kasikcioglu et al (2005), there was a significant increase in the exercise capacity assessed by 6 minute walking test parallel to the increase of systolic myocardial velocity for mitral annulus as an indicator of the increase in contractile functions.

(p8.4) Calcium-sensitizing agents may not have negative effects on diastolic functions although they improve systolic function by increasing the affinity of troponin C to calcium both in systole and diastole (Haikala and Linden 1995). Sensitization is calcium-concentration dependent; sensitization of contractile apparatus is done in systole but not in diastole. This leads to an inotropic effect without impairing diastolic relaxation (Hasenfuss 1998;Haikala and Pollesello 2000;Cleland et al 2004;Sonntag et al 2004). Indeed, unlike the effects of other calcium sensitizers, the effect of levosimendan is dependent on intracellular calcium levels, and it does not worsen diastolic functions even though there are studies showing its positive effects on diastolic functions (Haikala et al 1995;Sonntag et al 2004;Kasikcioglu et al 2005;Parissis et al 2005). Also, levosimendan decreases the index of diastolic relaxation, indicating that levosimendan seems to improve the systolic performance of stunned myocardium without impairing diastolic function (Hasenfuss 1998;Haikala and Pollesello 2000;Sonntag et al 2004;De Luca et al 2006) Anti-arrhythmic effect Another study, in which the patients with normal cardiac functions were examined, showed that levosimendan shortened atrial, atrioventricular node, and ventricular effective refractory period (Toivonen et al 2000). On patients with atrial fibrillation, it is reported that levosimendan may not only increase ventricular rate by accelerating atrioventricular conduction but it may also induce an increase in heart rate by shortening the sinus node recovery time (Toivonen et al 2000). Although it has no influence on the uncorrected QT interval it is reported that it may prolong corrected QT interval in doses higher than the therapeutic levels (Singh et al 1999).
## (s10) Combinations with other drugs
(p10.0) It was demonstrated that the combination of levosimendan and dobutamine is relatively safe and effective on patients with severe heart failure (Nanas et al 2004(Nanas et al , 2005. It can be combined with norepinephrine in patients with initially low systolic blood pressure to maintain adequate organ and tissue perfusion (Delle Karth et al 2003; Lehmann et al 2004). Although beta blocker use decreases the inotropic and vasodilator effects in patients taking dobutamine, no reduction in levosimendan level was reported (Follath et al 2002). It is reported that concomitant use of levosimendan with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and nitrates may increase the hypotension and tachycardia effects of levosimendan (Antila et al 1996;Sundberg et al 2000) Clinical studies
## (s12) Dose recommendations
(p12.0) If rapid onset of action is desired, 6-24 µg kg -1 min -1 is administered in 10-20 minutes according to the clinical picture of the patient. In patients with systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg, a loading dose should be avoided. An optimum maintenance dose of 0.05-0.2 µg kg -1 min -1 is recommended. In doses above 0.2 µg kg -1 min -1 , adverse events may be seen more frequently (Moiseyev et al 2002). Since the half-life of its metabolites is longer, it was shown that the accumulation of metabolites during prolonged infusions enhances the adverse events. Therefore, infusions longer than 24 hours are not recommended (Kivikko et al 2003).
