# ScienceDirect Proposals of beam column joint reinforcement in reinforced concrete moment resisting frame : A literature review study

CorpusID: 113823271 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b80f86e0a1cc0f9c231f27a3c01cfdfec4a967ec](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b80f86e0a1cc0f9c231f27a3c01cfdfec4a967ec)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s3) Diagonal cross bracing bars joint shear reinforcement
(p3.0) In the development of joint reinforcement, diagonal cross bracing bars have been used to increase the shear strength. As shown in Fig. 3(a), Lu et al. [7] added a reinforcement bars with an overlap approximately 400 mm towards the column's end from the top longitudinal bars in the beam. The test specimen has lower strength when compared to the specimen without additional diagonal bars. The cracks initially developed diagonally, but at higher loading the cracks propagated towards the geometric direction of the diagonal additional bar. Obviously, these joint types are not acceptable in practice both for seismic loading and for gravity loading design. Another design has diagonal additional reinforcement bars fixed along the beam instead of the column, as shown in Fig. 3(b). Cracks had diagonal patterns but were centralized at the beams and the joint core region. There were minor cracks at the intersection between the beam and column but were of extreme distance away from the joint region. This showed that the additional diagonal bars added sufficient strength to the beam closer to the joint region, which reasonably protected the beam-column-joint interface. This test-specimen has greater strength than the specimen without additional diagonal bars, but the curves are not closer to each other than the previous specimen. Thus at this stage, this specimen is weaker than the rest, as explained above.

(p3.1) The next design has additional straight deformed bars of 12 mm in diameter fixed at the central vertical reinforcement bars of the column on opposite faces. The additional straight deformed bars overlap about 400 mm away from the joint region towards the column ends, as shown in Fig. 3(c).

(p3.2) The crack propagated in the beam was centralized at a distance away from the joint. The joint region happened to have minor obvious cracks. From the cracks observed, this proposed new design was the best. However, additional diagonal bars prevented cracks at the edges of the joint interface between the column and beam. Furthermore, these joints have been proven to behave in a ductile manner as beams undergo plastic hinging earlier than the columns. The strength capability showed by this arrangement happened to be higher, but too slightly.

(p3.3) Different to that Lu et al. [7], Asha and Sundararajan [8] performed tests on specimens with square-spiral confinement in the joint region and additional inclined bars from column to beam (SS2), as shown in Fig. 4. From the lateral load-displacement hysteresis loops of specimens, it is observed that SS2 possessed spindle shaped curves without pinching showing. SS2 is the specimen with the highest load carrying capacity of 15.6 kN. SS2 experienced hairline 'X' shaped cracks in the joint region and full depth cracks in beam region approximately at a distance of 1.5D from the face of column. This confirmed that plastic hinge formed in the beam approximately at the location where the additional inclined bars were curtailed.

(p3.4) Apart from Lu [7], Rajagopal and Prabavaty [9] recommended the use of hair-clips (U-bars) and X-cross bars in combination with T-type mechanical anchorage for the joint details, as shown in Fig. 5. The detail offers a better moment carrying capacity, thereby improving the seismic performance without compromising the ductility and stiffness. Specimen A1 with T-type mechanical anchorage (ACI-352, mechanical anchorage) in combination with hair clips (U-bars) and additional X-cross bars shows lesser cracks and much better control of crack capacity with an improvement in seismic performance compared to other specimens.  Fig. 4. Typical layout joint shear reinforcement with square spiral confinement and types of anchoring beam bars [8] 
