# Molecular Signatures of Natural Selection for Polymorphic Genes of the Human Dopaminergic and Serotonergic Systems: A Review. Molecular Signatures of Natural Selection for Polymorphic Genes of the Human Dopaminergic and Serotonergic Systems: A Review

CorpusID: 11989608 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/366642d57032ebe4bc77bd48b4f93859373238f8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/366642d57032ebe4bc77bd48b4f93859373238f8)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s2) Balancing Selection
(p2.0) It has frequently been suggested that balancing selection has been an important component of the processes that have produced variation in human neurotransmitter genes. Balancing selection can include a number of distinct processes in which natural selection acts to promote and maintain polymorphism ( Table 2), including heterozygote advantage, negative frequency-dependent selection, and heterogeneity in selective advantage across time or Overdominance refers to a situation in which heterozygotes have a greater fitness than either homozygote, therefore maintaining both alleles in the population Gosso et al., 2008;Crespi, 2009;Costas et al., 2011 Negative frequency dependent selection

(p2.1) In negative frequency dependent selection, phenotypes (and associated genotypes) are favored by virtue of being rare. Rare alleles therefore tend to increase in frequency, maintaining genetic variation Ding et al., 2002 Environmental heterogeneity balancing selection Selection favors different phenotypes/genotypes in different circumstances, thereby preserving more than one genetic variant Ding et al., 2002;Grady et al., 2003;Wang et al., 2004;Crespi et al., 2007;Crespi, 2009;Garcia et al., 2010;Costas et al., 2011 Differential susceptibility (basic) Different environments favor individuals whose behavioral development is more or less responsive to their social environment Homberg and Lesch, 2011;Sulik et al., 2015 Differential susceptibility (w bet-hedging) As with basic differential susceptibility, but producing children with different levels of environmental susceptibility is viewed as a parental bet-hedging strategy Ellis et al., 2011;Belsky et al., 2015 Positive selection
## (s3) Ancestral Susceptibility
(p3.0) Major changes in human behavior, diet, etc. have led to changes in selective regimes. Ancestral alleles that were formerly favored are associated in the new selective regimes with dysfunction, and are now being selected against Ding et al., 2002;Arcos-Burgos and Acosta, 2007;Guo et al., 2007;Carrera et al., 2009;Crespi, 2009 The authors cited proposed the hypothesis in question for a specific neurotransmitter polymorphism or polymorphisms, but may not have specifically endorsed that hypothesis vs. alternative hypotheses.

(p3.1) space (Charlesworth, 2006;Hedrick, 2012;Connallon and Clark, 2013). A few studies have found suggestions of advantageous phenotypes for heterozygotes for neurotransmitter polymorphisms. For example, Costas et al. (2011) found a small protective effect against schizophrenia for heterozygotes of the COMT val158met polymorphism (rs4680) in a European and West Asian sample. Gosso et al. (2008) found for this same polymorphism that Val/Met heterozygotes had superior performance in working memory tasks than either Val/Val or Met/Met homozygotes.
## (s5) Non-selective Processes Generating Variation
(p5.0) In addition to the various forms of natural selection, nonselective evolutionary processes (i.e., mutation, genetic drift) contribute to genetic variation in populations, including for neurotransmitter genes and other genes affecting human behavior and susceptibility to psychiatric disorders (Keller and Miller, 2006;Dudley et al., 2012;Verweij et al., 2012). In practice, these selectively-neutral processes are often used as a null hypothesis in tests to identify traces of selection in population genetic sequence data. Observed patterns of genetic variation in a gene or chromosome region (such as linkage disequilibrium or patterns in the allele frequency spectra) are regarded as indicating selection when these patterns appear unlikely to have resulted from neutral processes alone (Oleksyk et al., 2010;Vitti et al., 2013).
## (s7) Footprints of Positive and Balancing Selection
(p7.0) Episodes of natural selection acting on a genetic variant leave characteristic footprints in the DNA sequences within the population in which selection has occurred. Positive selection increases not only the frequency of the particular genetic variant under selection (for example a nucleotide substitution that causes a favorable change in the amino acid sequence of a protein) but also the frequency of whatever nearby, genetically-linked variants happen to be present on the individual chromosome in which the favorable new mutation first appeared (Vitti et al., 2013). This effect of a selective event on the genomic neighborhood of the favored variant is manifested by discernable signatures, including, for positive selection, patterns of strong linkage disequilibrium among variants in the selected region, and by effects on the spectrum of frequencies of the various genetic variants present in a population. A wide variety of statistical procedures has been developed to detect these signals of selection (Oleksyk et al., 2010;Vitti et al., 2013). Conversely, balancing selection leads to a population retaining multiple genetic variants for longer periods of time than would be expected under strictly neutral processes. This leaves footprints of balancing selection that can be distinct both from positive selection and from neutral processes: deep coalescence times for gene genealogies, characteristic allele frequency spectra, with alleles maintained at intermediate frequencies, or even polymorphisms shared among species that predate their speciation (Key et al., 2014;Fijarczyk and Babik, 2015;Gao et al., 2015). These characteristic signatures of balancing selection are not expected to be evident until a gene has been undergoing balancing selection for a considerable period of time, at least 2N e generations, with N e the effective population size. Effective population sizes may be considerably less than the current census population, particularly in species that have undergone severe bottlenecks in their history (Charlesworth, 2006;Connallon and Clark, 2013). For the human species as a whole, N e is typically estimated at a bit in excess of 10,000 (Tishkoff and Verrelli, 2003;Wall, 2003;Charlesworth, 2009). Assuming an average generation time of 25 years, this suggests for humans that the distinctive footprints of balancing selection will only be expected for polymorphisms that have been balanced for more than 500,000 years.

(p7.1) The footprints of more recently-initiated balancing selection may instead closely resemble those of positive selection (Andrés et al., 2009;Hedrick, 2012). Initially, a novel mutant allele that is subject to balancing selection will be below its balanced equilibrium frequency, and will increase in frequency due to selection, at the expense of the established allele, just as with positive selection.

(p7.2) For this reason, molecular evidence of apparent recent positive selection that has resulted in a polymorphism may possibly indicate the early stages of balancing selection. Below we review molecular evidence for neurotransmitter genes of both longterm balancing selection, and for positive selection associated with polymorphisms. We do not consider cases of selection on human neurotransmitter genes that have resulted in fixation of a new allele in the human species, for example the observation by Andrés et al. (2004) of a fixed difference in the amino acid sequence of MAOA between chimpanzees and humans.
## (s10) Balancing Selection
(p10.0) Several genome scans studies have focused on detecting signals of balancing selection in human evolution (e.g., Andrés et al., 2009;Leffler et al., 2013;DeGiorgio et al., 2014). Leffler et al. (2013) looked for evidence of very long-term balancing selection through polymorphisms shared in both humans and common chimpanzees. Only two of the polymorphic SNPs they identified were associated with human neurotransmitter genes, both with the upstream (promoter) region of the serotonin receptor HTR2A. However, both of these polymorphisms (rs6311 and rs36213156) are C/T polymorphisms associated with CpG dinucleotides, that is sites with a C and a G nucleotide adjacent in a DNA strand. Such sites are associated with a particularly high rate of mutation, particularly transitions such as a change of the cytosine residue to a thymine (Nachman and Crowell, 2000). This increases the likelihood that the observed polymorphisms are shared between humans and chimpanzees due to recurrent mutation, rather than by balancing selection that has been maintained since prior to speciation (Leffler et al., 2013).

(p10.1) DeGiorgio et al. (2014) applied a novel gene-genealogy approach to scan for balancing selection across the human genome. They identified a number of regions of the genome with apparent signs of balancing selection. These regions included many genes associated with immune function, as well as with cell membranes, cell adhesion and cell junctions. None of the candidate regions of balancing selection were associated with neurotransmitter genes. Andrés et al. (2009), starting with a set of 13,400 human genes, examined in detail the 4,877 genes that contained either polymorphisms or fixed differences between humans and chimpanzees. They identified 60 candidate genes with signals of balancing selection. As with DeGiorgio et al. (2014) a high proportion of the associated genes were associated with immune function, but none were associated with neurotransmitter function.
## (s11) Positive Selection
(p11.0) The strongest evidence for positive selection in a human neurotransmitter gene is for the serotonin transporter SLC6A4. Claw et al. (2010) found that the population genetics of one haplotype of this gene, which they termed "S/12/G, " had a set of distinctive features. For a common haplotype (36% in their global sample), there was a significantly low degree of SNP variation compared to other haplotypes of the SLC6A4 gene. The 36% global frequency also appears quite high (in absence of positive selection) for a haplotype with an estimated most recent common ancestor at 19 kya (Claw et al., 2010). Coalescent simulations further suggest that the patterns of SNP diversity, haplotype frequency and geographic variation in haplotype frequencies across populations could not be explained by a combination of neutral and demographic processes (Claw et al., 2010). Crespi et al. (2007) examined 76 genes putatively associated with schizophrenia risk for evidence of positive selection. They queried the Haplotter database, representing analyses using an extended-haplotype based test (iHS) in one sample each representing African, Asian and European populations (Voight et al., 2006). Genes examined included COMT, DRD2, DRD3, DRD4, MAOA, SLC6A4, and TPH1. SLC6A4 was in a region with a signal of positive selection for both the European and Asian samples. In all, 14 of the 76 genes examined showed signals of positive selection, but SLC6A4 was the only one of our genes of interest to do so. Murdoch et al. (2013) also identified a signal of selection in the region of SLC6A4 in the Haplotter data, although they argued that selection may have actual been for a nearby, linked gene.
## (s12) GENERAL DISCUSSION
(p12.0) As of now, SLC6A4 is the only gene of the dopaminergic and serotonergic systems for which multiple studies have unambiguously supported the operation of natural selection. Currently, there is very limited information available about either the precise phenotypic/behavioral traits that may have been selected for, or the biochemical/physiological aspects of function that may have been altered in alleles of this gene that have been under selection.

(p12.1) The S/12/G haplotype that appears to have been positively selected does not affect the structure of the resulting serotonin transporter protein, and any effects of this allele are presumably mediated through control of gene expression (Claw et al., 2010). However, it is not clear what effects on expression to anticipate with this haplotype. This haplotype includes the short (S) variant of the promoter-region VNTR, which a number of studies have found to be associated with decreased transcription and decreased serotonin reuptake activity (Iurescia et al., 2015). However, the haplotype also includes the 12-repeat variant of the Intron 2 VNTR, which has been associated with increased gene expression (Murdoch et al., 2013). Prediction of the level of gene expression associated with this haplotype is further complicated by studies suggested that transcription is also strongly affected by several SNPs (Iurescia et al., 2015) that were not genotyped in the Claw et al. (2010) study. In addition, Ali et al. (2010) found that expression of a gene construct combining variants in different portions of SLC6A4 could not be predicted from the expression of each variant individually.

(p12.2) Reported associations of particular molecular variants in SLC6A4 with behavioral and psychiatric phenotypes are also subject to some uncertainty. Studies have often genotyped only a single polymorphic site within the gene. However, there is substantial linkage disequilibrium among the variant sites, and reported associations of particular variants with behaviors may therefore have misidentified the polymorphisms that are functionally responsible for the behavioral effects (Claw et al., 2010;Murdoch et al., 2013). In addition, phenotypic effects of variation in SLC6A4 may depend on interactions with other genes in the serotonergic system (Claw et al., 2010). Better understanding of the implications of the various polymorphisms in SLC6A4 both for gene expression and for behavioral phenotypes will therefore be important steps in discovering which variants have been under selection, and elucidating the adaptive significance of the selective processes that have been occurring.

(p12.3) The signal that has been identified for SLC6A4 is of positive selection, rather than balancing selection. It may be that what is seen with SLC6A4 is the early stages of evolution of a balanced polymorphism. Nonetheless, in spite of a great deal of speculation about possible balancing selection in human neurotransmitter genes ( Table 2) there are no cases in which molecular evidence strongly supports the operation of balancing selection for these genes (though genes with equivocal evidence such as DRD2 and HTR2A may be worth further exploration).

(p12.4) That molecular evidence for selection has not been detected in a gene (or is detected by only a single study, while not found in others) does not, of course, definitively demonstrate that there has been no selection. There is a host of reasons why genuine episodes of selection may be missed in these studies. Selection may, for example, have been weak, or have been obscured by demographic history (Scheinfeldt and Tishkoff, 2013). However, in spite of these potential difficulties which face any study examining selection for any gene, population genomics studies have proven able to identify clear episodes of selection. For balancing selection, the MHC complex is consistently highlighted by genome scans, as are genes for a variety of cell surface proteins (Andrés et al., 2009;DeGiorgio et al., 2014). Scans for positive selection tend to detect classic cases of selection acting on genes such as LCT, SLC24A5, and EDAR (Liu et al., 2013;Scheinfeldt and Tishkoff, 2013). If we cannot definitely say that there has not been recent selection on the various neurotransmitter genes that have attracted the most interest (Table 1), it seems to say based on current evidence that these genes (with the possible exception of SLC6A4) are not among the more compelling known cases of either positive or balancing selection.

(p12.5) The lack of clear signals of balancing selection in human neurotransmitter genes is broadly consistent with arguments that polygenic variation for human behavioral/mental health traits has largely not involved balancing selection. Verweij et al. (2012) found that only a small proportion of genetic variation in human personality traits was associated with polymorphic loci of the type we have been considering in this paper. Most variation instead appeared to be associated with rare genetic variants at a large number of loci. They suggested that this polygenic variation was likely due largely to selection-mutation balance, rather than balancing selection. Keller and Miller (2006) similarly considered the possibility of balancing selection for susceptibility to mental disorders, but concluded that polygenic mutationselection balance was likely to most responsible for observed genetic susceptibility.
