# Instantaneous measurements of nonlocal variables in relativistic quantum theory (a review)

CorpusID: 118466167 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/544d7740db00fac09550214b9da00a202c3b3609](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/544d7740db00fac09550214b9da00a202c3b3609)

Fields: Mathematics, Physics

## (s4) IV. FIFTY YEARS LATER, A BREAKTHROUGH -"YES"
(p4.0) A. "Yes -at least in some cases" - Aharonov and Albert (1981) For simplicity Aharonov and Albert considered the two part system discussed in the previous section as an example of how to perform a measurement of a nonlocal variable without violating causality. They designed an experiment to measureσ z , the z-component of the total spin of one of the maximally entangled Bell states, |Ψ + or |Ψ − , without measuring eitherσ

(p4.1) individually. They referred to this as a nondemolition experiment, as it left the nonlocal state intact and did not trigger the reduction of the state vector, which would involve the loss on the nonlocal property. The general idea was to get the nonlocal variable of the entangled system to couple to local variables at different parts of the measuring apparatus. The results of these local measurements could then be combined via classical information transfer to reveal the value of the nonlocal property without violating causality or causing state vector reduction. Aharonov and Albert first considered a piece of apparatus designed to measure the z-component of the spin of a single particle, sayσ
## (s8) VI. FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS (AND MORE QUESTIONS)
(p8.0) A. This procedure is very specific, can we find general restrictions which apply to any measurement of a nonlocal variable? "Yes" - Popescu and Vaidman (1994) Popescu and Vaidman considered the following general scheme for a bipartite system,
