# Mg-Based Hydrogen Absorbing Materials for Thermal Energy Storage-A Review

CorpusID: 116544173 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd5ce3615ddd49176f4d7d019585c489aad9ef90](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd5ce3615ddd49176f4d7d019585c489aad9ef90)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s2) Chemical Fundamentals
(p2.0) For the TES system, there are mainly three potential technologies used to store thermal energy: Sensible storage, latent storage, and chemical storage. In the sensible storage system, the energy density is equal to the product of temperature change by the specific heat of this material. The thermal energy is stored when the temperature of the material increases and released when its temperature decreases. In our daily life, hot water storage, underground thermal energy storage, and rock filled storage are typical applications of sensible heat storage [15]. When a solid/liquid state material transforms into a liquid/gas state, it would absorb energy to overcome the intermolecular force. Under this circumstance, it would release thermal energy during the process of gas/liquid state transforming into liquid/solid state. The thermal energy related to the phase change of material is named latent heat. In the time of absorbing or releasing heat, the temperature of the system would not change and equal to the melting or boiling point. In total, there are more than 150 phase change materials listed by Zalba et al. [16]. Compared with sensible heat, latent heat materials are able to store more than 5-14 times heat due to the much higher phase-transition enthalpy [20]. Nevertheless, both sensible heat and latent heat storage are physical thermal energy storage system, in which thermal energy will fade out as time goes by, and they are not reliable for long-term thermal energy storage. There are many publications studying the TES by sensible and latent heat storage [1,15,16,20,21]. Chemical storage is the technology of storing heat by utilizing reversible chemical reactions [22].

(p2.1) In this reversible chemical reaction, the thermal energy transforms into chemical energy. In the forward reaction, thermal energy serves as the power source to drive the chemical reaction and it is able to store heat by breaking the chemical bonds in the AB molecules, dissociating AB into A and B. Obviously, it is an endothermic process. In the reverse reaction, since the intrinsic property of exothermic reaction, the A and B molecules bind together and produce AB compounds, transforming the chemical energy back to thermal energy and releasing a large amount of heat. During the process of thermal energy storage and release, the most important thing is that the heat is stored in chemical form without any thermal waste and the energy in the chemicals do not fade in a long time. Compared with sensible and latent heat storage (Table 2), chemical heat may show much higher energy storage density due to the strength of the chemical bond being considerably larger than the intermolecular force. In this regard, it needs much more energy to break the chemical bonds than overcome the intermolecular force. However, it is noteworthy that two significant issues must be fulfilled in the chemical heat storage technology-the high reaction ∆H for a certain reversible chemical reaction and the completely reversible chemical reaction in a temperature range of heat source.
## (s3) Different Types of Mg-Based Materials for Thermal Energy Storage
(p3.0) As mentioned above, chemical heat storage technology is a promising alternative to apply for the solar thermal energy storage due to its high energy density and long storage duration at ambient temperature [1]. Table 3 presents some typical chemical storage materials and reactions that have been demonstrated to be used in the chemical heat storage application. From Tables 2 and 3, it is found that metal hydrides [29] possessing an energy density of 4 GJ/m 3 , are larger than that of most other materials, which indicates that metal hydrides are the potential materials for chemical heat storage. Indeed, metal hydrides are typical materials for the heterogeneous vaporization reactions, well fulfilling the criteria required for the reversible chemical reaction.

(p3.1) MH n + ∆H M + n/2 H 2 (4) M = metal, metal alloy, intermetallic compound. From Equation (4), in the forward direction, it is a process of heat absorption, in other words, the thermal energy is transformed into chemical energy at the moment of dissociating MH n into M and H 2 and completing heat storage. In the reverse reaction, a great many metals, metal alloys, and intermetallic compounds contact with gaseous hydrogen and have a chemical reaction under certain conditions, with heat evolution and realization of the heat recovery process. In a metal hydride-based heat storage system, the hydrogen liberated from the heat storage process is confined in a closed system, which serves as the non-consumable and could be utilized for a huge number of heat storage cycles. This is completely different from hydrogen storage in metal hydrides, in that case, hydrogen released from metal hydrides is presented in a relatively open system, which needs to be added frequently like fuels and is burnt or reacted into water irreversibly finally.
## (s7) Mg/MgH 2 System
(p7.0) Theoretically, the pure Mg/MgH 2 system could possess a thermal energy density as high as 2814 kJ/kg [41]. Compared with one of the largest solar thermal power plants in Granada, Spain, which contains about 28,000 tons of 60% NaNO 3 + 40% KNO 3 to store concentrated thermal energy, while only 1100 tons of Mg metal will be enough to the same size of heat storage [19]. The particle size of Mg should be controlled in the range of 25-100 µm in order to complete a full conversion to MgH 2 and get a faster reaction kinetics at a minimum temperature of 350 • C under normal pressure [41]. With the temperature increases, the Mg metal particles are going to agglomerate and fuse with each other after a certain cycle time, resulting in bad reaction kinetics and an incomplete reaction between Mg particles and hydrogen. It is noted that the high vapor pressure (0.133 bar at 500 • C) of Mg particles and comparatively low melting point (Tm = 650 • C) lead to the poor cycle stability [41]. Indeed, it is of fundamental significance to know the function of H 2 dissociation equilibrium pressure against operation temperature for the better controlling of the Mg/MgH 2 heat storage system. Figure 2 indicates the clear relationship between hydrogen dissociation pressure and temperature. At a given hydrogen pressure, we could get the lowest temperature for H 2 liberation and the highest temperature for the heat release. In other words, based on Figure 2, the direction of the chemical reaction could be adjusted by altering the H 2 pressure. On the other hand, it is also feasible to adjust the temperature range to regulate the progress of the irreversible chemical reaction under a certain H 2 pressure.
## (s13) The NaMgH 3 System
(p13.0) NaMgH 3 is a perovskite-type hydride and which could decompose via a two-step process [69] NaMgH 3 → NaH + Mg + H 2 (4.0 wt % H 2 ) (5)

(p13.1) Theoretically, there is 6.0 wt % H 2 release in total in the two reactions. As a result, NaMgH 3 has been considered as a potential hydrogen storage material in recent years. On the other hand, it demonstrated a high thermal stability, a lower hydrogen dissociation pressure, and comparatively low price, which urged this material to be a promising candidate for TES. NaMgH 3 was prepared by milling NaH and MgH 2 in a 1:1 molar ratio performed cryogenically (77 K) with subsequent annealing under 50 bar of H 2 atmosphere at 300 • C [70].

(p13.2) Researchers are always willing to investigate the thermodynamic properties of materials, especially in the area of hydrogen storage and thermal energy storage. There are several publications [70][71][72][73][74] which studied the enthalpy of NaMgH 3 for the first decomposition step with the method of pressure-composition-isotherms (PCI). Among them, Ikeda et al. [71] gave an enthalpy value of 93.9 kJ/mol firstly, Komiya et al. [72] reported a close value of 94 kJ/mol and Pottmailer et al. [74] also gave a similar enthalpy value of 92 kJ/mol. Differently, Drew et al. [70] reported a value of 86.6 ± 1.0 kJ/mol in their work. In Drew et al.'s work [70], hydrogen desorption PCI curves for NaMgH 3 → NaH + Mg + H 2 (Figure 7a) at different temperatures showed 3.29 wt % hydrogen storage capacity experimentally at 398.3 • C. In the subsequent high-temperature measurements, the hydrogen capacity slightly decreased due to the possibly incomplete rehydrogenation. Point A in Figure 7a,b was the equilibrium state of full desorption and the kinetics was slowed down when approached this equilibrium state such that more than 3 h was needed to reach that at the temperature of 418.8 • C. From the van't Hoff plots (Figure 7c), they calculated the desorption enthalpy for the first step's decomposition and showed a slightly lower value of 86.6 ± 1.0 kJ/mol H 2 at 418.6 • C. They also measured the absorption kinetics after the sample was fully decomposed to Na (l) and Mg. They found that the absorption kinetics were remarkably slowed down after 75% rehydrogenation. However, the absorption kinetics did not start to decrease to 90% rehydrogenation during measuring the hydrogen absorption performance of NaH and Mg. It was probably some problems related to agglomeration of liquid Na metal which led to the slow kinetics in overall decomposition case [74]. A potential solution was utilization of the first step of decomposition to minimize the kinetic and capacity degradation. What is more, the hydrogen dissociation pressure of NaMgH 3 was favorable for the thermal energy storage (11 bar at 500 • C) compared to the higher hydrogen dissociation pressure at a high temperature in Mg/MgH 2 (92 bar at 500 • C) and Mg 2 FeH 6 (66 bar at 500 • C) systems. Overall, the high enthalpy, low dissociation pressure at high temperature and the wide, flat plateau make NaMgH 3 as suitable TES material.
## (s14) Kinetics and Thermal Conductivity Properties
(p14.0) For a specific chemical reaction applied for TES, the progress of the chemical reaction is much faster than the rate of thermal conductivity, as a result, the rate-limiting step of this chemical heat storage system is the rate of thermal conductivity [19]. Besides the heat transfer ability of the storage tank and internal heat exchanger, the most significant issue is the thermal conductivity of materials. 
## (s16) Conclusions and Perspective
(p16.0) Thermal energy from solar radiation is a potential candidate to serve as an energy reserve. Compared with sensible heat and latent heat storage, chemical heat storage demonstrates to be an advantageous technology for TES due to its high energy density in a wide temperature range and long storage duration without heat loss. In recent decades, a great number of scientists devoted themselves to the research of reversible chemical heat storage [1][2][3]15,19,62,84,85]. There were various materials proposed already and fabricated for TES in theoretical and experimental cases. Mg-based materials are known for hydrogen storage area due to the abundant reserves, low cost, high hydrogen capacity, and light weight, but the related thermodynamic problems (high dehydrogenation enthalpy) limit their further application. In the research of TES, the drawback of high reaction enthalpy becomes the core advantage of those materials for Mg-based materials. In the Ni-doped Mg/MgH 2 system, which even exhibited an energy density as high as 2147 kJ/kg [41]. Different types of Mg-based materials for thermal storage are reviewed and materials like Mg-Fe/Mg 2 FeH 6 and NaMgH 3 with low hydrogen dissociation pressure and good thermal stability are more favorable for TES. Based on the current development of chemical heat storage, the thermodynamic and kinetic properties dominate the heat storage properties of reversible chemical reaction. Different from the thermodynamic problems in hydrogen storage, the high reaction enthalpy and fast reaction kinetics help to improve the efficiency of the TES system and make the reaction release more thermal energy and to do so quickly. Evaluated from energy density, Mg-based materials are suitable for TES. However, the low hydrogen absorption pressure and thermal stability become the limitation. The introduction of different metal hydrides to form a composite might be a good choice. The enhancement of thermal conductivity is necessary to the TES system, how to get a good heat transfer ability on the basis of fast hydrogen absorption kinetics still need further investigation. The additives or catalysts can optimize the kinetics but whether they will maintain stable during numerous cycles at high temperature needs to be confirmed. The design of a proper reactor for the chemical reaction and chemical stability of the reversible reaction also remains challenging.  
