# AN OVERVIEW OF L 1 OPTIMAL TRANSPORTATION ON METRIC MEASURE SPACES

CorpusID: 119266179 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ceed288bcdcaf0b61072e23f7e39912b92d1766](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ceed288bcdcaf0b61072e23f7e39912b92d1766)

Fields: Mathematics

## (s6) Transport set
(p6.0) The following setting is fixed once for all: (X, d, m) is a fixed metric measure space with m(X) = 1 such that the ambient metric space (X, d) is geodesic and proper (hence complete and separable).

(p6.1) Let ϕ : X → R be any 1-Lipschitz function. Here we present some useful results (all of them already presented in [11]) concerning the d-cyclically monotone set associated with ϕ:

(p6.2) that can be seen as the set of couples moved by ϕ with maximal slope. Recall that a set Λ ⊂ X × X is said to be d-cyclically monotone if for any finite set of points (
## (s11) Balanced transportation.
(p11.0) Here we want underline that the disintegration (or one-dimensional localization) of m induced by the L 1 -Optimal Transportation problem between µ 0 and µ 1 is actually a localization of the Monge problem. We will present this fact considering a function f :

(p11.1) and considering µ 0 := f + m and µ 1 := f − m, where f ± denotes the positive and the negative part of f . We can also assume µ 0 , µ 1 ∈ P(X) and study the Monge minimization problem between µ 0 and µ 1 . This setting is equivalent to study the general Monge problem assuming both µ 0 , µ 1 ≪ m; note indeed that µ 0 and µ 1 can always be assumed to be concentrated on disjoint sets (see [11] for details).
## (s17) Applications
(p17.0) Here we will collect some applications of the results proved so far, in particular of Proposition 5.2 and Theorem 5.11 6.1. Solution of the Monge problem. Here we review how regularity of conditional probabilities of the one-dimensional disintegration studied so far permits to construct a solution to the Monge problem. In particular we will see how Proposition 5.2 allows to construct an optimal map T . As the plan is to use the one-dimensional reduction, first we recall the one dimensional result for the Monge problem [56]. maps µ 0 to µ 1 . Moreover any other non decreasing map T ′ such that T ′ ♯ µ 0 = µ 1 coincides with T on the support of µ 0 up to a countable set.

(p17.1) (2) If φ : [0, +∞] → R is non decreasing and convex, then T is an optimal transport relative to the cost c(s, t) = φ(|s − t|). Moreover T is the unique optimal transference map if φ is strictly convex.

(p17.2) Theorem 6.2 (Theorem 6.2 of [11]). Let (X, d, m) be a non-branching metric measure space and consider µ 0 , µ 1 ∈ P(X) with finite first moment. Assume the existence of a Kantorovich potential ϕ such that the associated transport set T verifies (A.1). Assume µ 0 ≪ m. Then there exists a Borel map T : X → X such that X d(x, T (X)) µ 0 (dx) = min π∈Π(µ0,µ1)ˆX ×X d(x, y) π(dxdy).
