# Algorithms for the minimum sum coloring problem: a review

CorpusID: 11108095 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e2fab745ea92881901ca62a71a04cbcd270270bd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e2fab745ea92881901ca62a71a04cbcd270270bd)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s1) Definitions and formulation of MSCP
(p1.0) Let G = (V, E) be a simple undirected graph with vertex set V = {v 1 , . . . , v n } and edge set E ⊂ V × V . A proper k-coloring c of G is a mapping c : V → {1, . . . , k} such that c(v i ) = c(v j ), ∀{v i , v j } ∈ E. Equivalently, a proper k-coloring can be defined as a partition of V into k mutually disjoint independent sets (or color classes) V 1 , . . . ,V k such that ∀u, v ∈ V i (i = 1, . . . , k), {u, v} / ∈ E. The objective of MSCP is to find a proper k-coloring c with a minimum sum of the colors that are assigned to the vertices of V . The minimum sum of colors for MSCP is called the chromatic sum of G, and is denoted by ∑(G). The strength s(G) of a graph G is the smallest number of colors over all optimal sum colorings of G. Obviously, the chromatic number χ(G) of G from the classical vertex coloring problem is a lower bound of s(G), i.e., χ(G) ≤ s(G). Let C (G) be the set of all proper k-coloring of G and the minimization objective f (c) (c ∈ C (G)) of MSCP is given by Eq. (1).
## (s6) Single neighborhood search
(p6.0) The tabu search (TS) algorithm proposed in [8] adapts the tabu algorithm designed for the classic vertex coloring problem [13,20]. It starts with a random coloring and visits both proper and improper colorings with the neighborhood N One−move induced by the One-move operator. If there exist conflicting vertices, TS chooses a best move (according to its evaluation function f p ) to change the color of a conflicting vertex. Otherwise, TS picks a (non-conflicting) vertex and change its color at random. The above steps are repeated until a stopping criterion is satisfied. This algorithm relies simply on the tabu list for its diversification and does not call for other perturbation mechanism. This algorithm only showed limited computational results.

(p6.1) The breakout local search (BLS) algorithm described in [4] jointly uses two descent methods and an adaptive multi-perturbation strategy to escape local optima. The basic idea of BLS is to use descent-based local search to discover local optima and employ adaptive perturbations to continually visit different search regions in the search space. BLS explores both feasible and infeasible solutions with the help of the One-move operator. At each iteration, if the current solution c is a feasible coloring, BLS applies a first descent search procedure to attain a local optimum in terms of the objective function f . If c is an infeasible coloring (i.e., with conflicting vertices), BLS applies another descent search procedure guided by an augmented evaluation function which takes into account both the objective function f and the conflicting vertices. BLS is characterized by its adaptive perturbation strategy which, upon the discover of a local optimum, triggers dedicated perturbation operations to escape the local optimum trap. Based on the information on the search state, the perturbation strategy of BLS introduces a varying degree of diversification by dynamically determining the number of perturbation moves to be applied and by adaptively selecting the suitable moves (random or directed perturbations).
## (s7) Multi-neighborhood search
(p7.0) The MDS(5)+LS algorithm [19] applies an iterated multi-neighborhood search and also explores feasible and infeasible regions of the search space. It first employs the Swap operator until no further improvement exists in terms of its augmented evaluation function. Note that the obtained solution is not necessarily a proper coloring. If this is the case, MDS(5)+LS switches then to the One-move operator to repair the solution. Additional colors can be used to guarantee that the final coloring is proper at the end of this search phase. Finally, it assigns all the vertices with their smallest legal color and changes the color labels according to the sorted cardinality of the color classes V l (|V 1 | ≥ . . . ≥ |V k |). Afterward, a random perturbation operator is applied which consists in moving some vertices from their current color class to another color class at random. This perturbed solution is then used as the starting point of the next round of the search procedure.
## (s13) Benchmark
(p13.0) There exists a set of 94 frequently used benchmark instances often used for performance evaluation of MSCP algorithms. 58 instances are part of the COLOR 2002-2004 competitions 5 while the remaining 36 instances come from the second DIMACS challenge 6 . Compared to the well-known DIMACS instances, the COLOR 2002-2004 instances are relatively easy except the four large "wap" graphs. These instances refer to various topologies and densities, which can be classified into the 13 following types:
## (s15) Perspectives and conclusion
(p15.0) This review is dedicated to recent approximation algorithms and practical solution algorithms designed for the minimum sum coloring problem which attracted increasing attention in recent years. MSCP is a strongly constrained combinatorial optimization problem which is theoretically important and computationally difficult. In addition to its relevance as a typical model to formulate a number of practical problems, MSCP can be used as a benchmark problem to test constraint satisfaction algorithms and solvers. Based on this review, we discuss some perspective research directions.

(p15.1) • Evaluation function and search space: as introduced in Section 2, the aim of MSCP is twofold: (1) find a proper k-coloring c of a graph and (2) ensure that the sum of the colors assigned to the vertices is minimized. An evaluation function combining these two objectives has been proposed in [19]:

(p15.2) where E(V l ) is the set of conflicting edges in V l and M > 0 is a sufficiently large natural number. Since the evaluation function is used to guide the heuristic search process, it would be interesting to design other effective evaluation function based on a better recombination of the two parts of f ′ .
