# Familial Malignant Melanoma -Overview

CorpusID: 11529427 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/35cead1700a57ad3d6e743f921ec55c895290fd8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/35cead1700a57ad3d6e743f921ec55c895290fd8)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) G Ge en ne et ti ic c f fa ac ct to or rs s
(p0.0) It has been long stated in many different reviews that genetic susceptibility is another major MM risk factor. Recent epidemiological studies confirm these suggestions. Evaluation of over eight thousand Swedish probands with primary MM revealed that the familial risk for offspring of affected parents is about 2.57, and even higher (4.22) when a parent has been diagnosed at an age <50 years [10]. Similar results were obtained during the evaluation of 1505 MM probands recorded in Utah (USA) when the familial risk for first-degree relatives (both offspring and siblings) was 2.1, and as high as 6.52 when MM cases were diagnosed under 50 years [11]. Hemminki et al reported that the familial MM risk showed a clear age dependence and higher risk in in situ melanoma than in its invasive counterpart [12].

(p0.1) Familial clustering of MM has also been studied in twins. A population-based study of cancer risk in twins performed by Swerdlow et al indicated an increased risk of the occurrence of MM in opposite-sex co-twins, however studies performed by Hemminki and Milan did not confirm these results [13,14,15].

(p0.2) Familial aggregations of malignancy may be due to either genetic factors, environmental factors shared by family members, or both. In a recent study Czene et al assessed the genetic and environmental components in the main types of cancer by statistical analyses of family pairs. The importance of genetic effects was indicated by a higher correlation among relatives that were more closely related to each other genetically. Structural equation modelling was used to derive estimates of the importance of environmental and genetic effects. A statistically significant proportion of susceptibility to cancer accounted for by genetic effects was obtained for almost all malignancies, including MM. It was estimated that in the case of MM genetic factors constitute 21% of susceptibility, similarly to other neoplasms, such as cancers of breast, colon or stomach [16]. There are two distinct ways of defining familial melanoma: 1) occurrence of melanoma in at least two first-degree relatives; or 2) families with at least two melanomas irrespective of the degree of relationship.
## (s1) A AR RF F
(p1.0) In 1995 two independent groups discovered that CDKN2A shares exons 2 with another gene, ARF [48,49]. The transcript, p14 ARF is involved in the regulation of the cell cycle and apoptosis [50]. It has also been implicated in the pathogenesis of MM. The first exon of ARF is unique, whereas its second exon is derived from exon 2 of CDKN2A using a different reading frame of the sequence. Up to now mutations in ARF are reported to be present only in a few families worldwide and are characterized by an aggregation of MM and brain tumours [51]. Hewitt et al described a germline mutation of ARF in patients affected with melanoma or breast cancer from a family with multiple melanomas and breast cancers [52], in an independent study performed in our center no constitutional ARF alterations in cases with familial aggregation of MM and breast cancer were detected [40].
## (s2) C CD DK K4 4
(p2.0) In 1996 Zuo et al identified the CDK4 gene (12q13, OMIM 123829) as a third MM susceptibility gene [48]. CDK4 is an oncogene that codes the cyclin-dependent kinase 4 protein. Alterations in this gene are responsible for the occurrence of very small proportions of familial MM. Up to now germline CDK4 mutations have been found in 3 families world-wide [36,53,54].
## (s4) M ML LH H1 1, , M MS SH H2 2
(p4.0) Germline mutations in the MLH1 (3p21, OMIM 120436) and MSH2 (2p22, OMIM 120435) genes can lead to Muire-Torre syndrome, a variant of hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer syndrome with an increased frequency of occurrence of skin malignancies, including MM. Both genes participate in mismatch repair system of DNA. There is a report of biallelic somatic inactivation of the MLH1 gene in a primary skin melanoma [65]. It seems that a small proportion of MLH1/MSH2 carriers could be at risk of developing MM. No germline MLH1/MSH2 mutations have been found in familial skin MM to date.

(p4.1) X XP P--g ge en ne es s MM, as well as a large number of basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell cancer of the skin, is a characteristic feature of xeroderma pigmentosum syndrome (XP). XP is a group of disorders characterized by high sensitivity to sunlight with the development of skin malignancies at an early age. There are several variants of XP caused by different XP susceptibility genes, all of these genes are involved in UV-damaged DNA repair. Three most common forms of XP variants are: XPA (OMIM 278700), XPC (OMIM 278720) and XPD (OMIM 278730). Recently an increased risk of cutaneous melanoma in carriers of XPD polymorphisms has been reported [66,67].
