# Association of DNA repair genes polymorphisms and mutations with increased risk of head and neck cancer: a review

CorpusID: 11101581 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/78127fcce031cd816e66607b3b24847a666b4342](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/78127fcce031cd816e66607b3b24847a666b4342)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Role of DNA repair in carcinogenesis and therapy
(p1.0) Unfortunately, the current treatment does not provide sufficient results compared to the resulting side effects, which have a negative impact on patient's quality of life (QOL). Nowadays, cancer therapeutics can be a major challenge, when it comes to seeking personalized targeted medicine that is both effective and selective to the malignancy [26]. Characteristic feature of a cancer cells is genomic instability which is associated with a greater tendency to accumulation of a DNA damage. Chemotherapy or radiation therapy leads to the DNA lesions of a cancer cells, thus causing their death [27]. However, a part of them is able to survive in genotoxic stress afforded by therapy due to increased DNA repair [28]. They have an impaired DDR pathway so they can only depend on a sole backup pathway for their survival. The use of inhibitors directed against the essential components of this process could be a promising strategy to eradicate cancer cells. Aberrant epigenetic changes in DNA damage repair genes may also serve as therapeutic targets [29,30]. Numerous studies are currently performed in order to relate the activation of a DNA repair genes in cancer cells to the low effectiveness of therapy.
## (s2) Mutations and polymorphisms of DNA repair genes in HNC
(p2.0) DNA repair systems play an important role in protection against carcinogenic agents. Sequence variation in genes regulating these mechanisms may impair their functions and consequently, result in increased cancer susceptibility. Multiple studies have assessed the correlation of HNC increased risk with polymorphism in the DNA repair genes.

(p2.1) Single-strand damage repair: genes polymorphisms BER genes play have been considered as a good candidate causing increased susceptibility for HNC, because of their important role in DNA repair; that is, removal of a lesions caused by ROS and other electrophiles, which are most common types of damage [31]. Mahjabeen et al. [32] demonstrated that APEX1 (apurinic/apyrimidinic endodeoxyribonuclease 1) mutations are associated with increased risk of HNC in the Pakistani population. They studied 50 cases of HNSCC among smokers and non-smokers. At the transcript level, three novel mutations (13T>G, Ser129Arg and Val-131Gly) of APEX1 were observed. The homozygous and heterozygous genotypes of variants mentioned above seem to be significantly involved in the development of HNC. Moreover, increased expression of APEX1 correlated with tumor size, clinical stage, and positive lymph node metastasis [32]. However, sequence variations in XRCC1 (X-ray repair cross-complementing 1) gene appear to be correlated with HNSCC susceptibility depending on population. Arg194Trp and Arg399Gln polymorphisms were studied in 55 cases of HNSCC in Turkish population, as well as Arg194Trp, Arg280His, and Arg399Gln variations were analyzed in 6719 Chinese patients [33,34]. In both studies, mutations of XRCC1 gene are not related to HNC development. However, Choudhury's [35] findings suggest that interaction of tobacco and polymorphisms of XRCC1 and XRCC2 (X-ray repair cross-complementing 2) genes increase the risk of HNSCC. Furthermore, cross talk between these two DNA repair genes might modulate susceptibility toward HNSCC. He investigated the intercommunication of different variants of XRCC1 (Arg399Gln) and XRCC2 (Arg188His) as well as tobacco exposure in the progression of HNSCC in northeast Indian population. The population-based case-control study included 110 HNSCC patients [35]. Other studies analyzed the SNPs XPC A499 V, XPD K751Q, XRCC1 R399Q, and XRCC3 (X-ray repair cross-complementing 3) T241 M among Caucasian population. The aim was to determine if these changes are potential risk factors and indicators of survival. Following results were obtained: (1) XPC A499 V was associated with increased risk of HNSCC, especially laryngeal carcinoma; (2) XPD K751Q was correlated with higher risk of oral SCC among women; (3) wild-type individuals of XRCC3 T241M exhibited an earlier age of onset; (4) XRCC1 R399Q homozygous mutant genotype determined HPV positivity. Moreover, XPD homozygous mutant subjects showed the shortest survival time, which has raised after full-dose radiotherapy. Furthermore, variations of putative risk alleles seemed to act synergistically, raising the risk of HNSCC. Results described above indicate that SNPs of the DNA repair genes (XPC, XPD, XRCC1, and XRCC3) may affect risk and survival of HNSCC [36]. Other studies present similar findings. XPD Asp312Asn and APEX1 Asp148Glu polymorphisms increase the risk for HNC in association with smoking and/or tobacco chewing in a population of northeast India. Das et al. (2015) investigated the effect of the following DNA repair gene variations: XPD Asp312Asn (G>A), APEX1 Asp148Glu (T>G), and MUTYH (mutY DNA glycosylase) Tyr165Cys (G>A). The study included 80 HNC patients and 92 healthy controls. Genotyping with the use of amplification refractory mutation system-PCR (ARMS-PCR) was performed to analyze XPD Asp312Asn (G>A) alteration and PCR using confronting two-pair primers (PCR-CTPP) for APEX1 Asp-148Glu (T>G) and MUTYH Tyr165Cys (G>A) mutations. The XPD Asp/Asn genotype increased the risk for HNC by twofold. Interaction between APEX1 Asp/Asp and XPD Asp/Asn as well as MUTYH Tyr/Tyr and XPD Asp/Asn genotypes further increased the risk by 2.9-folds. The risk was further increased in heavy smokers with the XPD Asp/ Asn genotype and heavy tobacco chewers with XPD Asn/ Asn genotype by 7.7-fold and 10-fold [37].

(p2.2) Abnormalities involving MMR genes occur in microsatellite instability and the accumulation of mutations in proto-oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. These factors may result in cancer development. Furthermore, it has been observed that decreased expression of MSH2 gene leads to increased frequency of microsatellite instability [38,39]. Pereira et al. [40] investigated the expression of the MSH2 DNA repair protein in HNSCC collected from 55 cases in Brazil. Patients with locoregional metastatic malignance and lower MSH2 protein levels presented worse survival. It contributes to a higher clinic aggressiveness of HNSCC [40]. Moreover, there is a study showing that inherited MLH1 (mutL homolog 1) c.-93G>A, MSH2 c.211 + 9C>G, MSH3 c.3133G>A, and EXO1 c.1765G>A anomalies of DNA MMR pathway are essential determinants and important patient outcomes' predictors of HNSCC, notably among smokers [41]. Alternate studies also point that single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in hMLH1 promoter is combined with increased risk of tobacco-related oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) in Asian Indians. 242 patients with tobacco-related cancer and 205 healthy controls were genotyped in order to analyze -93 A>G (rs 1800734) variation in hMLH1 promoter. The number of AA genotype was substantially lower in patients comparing to the controls (21.49 vs. 47.8%). In contrast, the frequency of GG genotype was much higher in patients as compared to the healthy controls (41.32 vs. 13.66%). These results indicate that variant G allele is associated with increased risk of OSCC in comparison with the wild-type A allele [42].
