# Metabolic and infectious pathologies in Brazilian medical literature: a review

CorpusID: 11307525 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a94ef59a4551f39981f78d2890a20a9265359a3f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a94ef59a4551f39981f78d2890a20a9265359a3f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Original research on infectious diseases
(p2.0) As might be expected, the pandemic of HIV/AIDS is the most frequently studied pathology in this chapter. Articles fall into various categories, with some articles falling into more than one category.

(p2.1) Epidemiology. Bassichetto et al. 47 estimated the incidence of HIV-1 in the city of Sã o Paulo from November 2000 to April 2001, comparing epidemiological and sociobehavioral data of recently infected individuals with those individuals with long-standing infection. A less sensitive than standard ELISA was employed to identify recent infection. The overall incidence of HIV-1 infection was 0.53%/year, whereas overall HIV-1 prevalence was 3.2% higher among males vs females. Recent infections accounted for 15% of the total infected population and correlated with being younger and male. Szwarcwald et al. 48 described a methodological proposal based on secondary data and the main results of the HIV-Sentinel Study among childbearing women, which was carried out in Brazil during 2006. A probabilistic sample of childbearing women was selected in two stages. In the first stage, 150 health establishments were selected, stratified by municipality size, whereas in the second stage, 100-120 women were selected systematically. Significant differences were found according to race, educational level, and municipality size. The proposed methodology is described as low-cost and easy to apply and permits the identification of problems in routine service provision in addition to monitoring compliance with Ministry of Health recommendations for pre-natal care. Almeida et al. 49 evaluated genotyping and subtyping in antiretroviral-naïve and experienced children and used this information to analyze drug resistance profiles, concluding that rates of primary resistance in antiretroviral-naïve children are low, whereas they are high in children who fail antiretroviral treatment, which is compatible with its use in these patients. Olajubu et al. 50 described the seroprevalence of HIV among blood donors, antenatal women, and other patients in a tertiary hospital in Nigeria and found that though there is a high prevalence rate among in-and out-patients, many of these patients were screened based on manifestations of clinical symptoms. The prevalence of comorbidities is discussed several papers: Diehl et al. 39 discussed the simultaneous occurrence of lipodistrophy; Bachur et al. 51 and Neto et al. 52 described enteric parasitism relating to highly active antiretroviral therapy; Carvalho et al. 53 evaluated factors related to the development of tuberculosis in HIV-infected patients in Fortaleza, Ceara, Brazil and discussed strategies to improve the control of tuberculosis in HIV-infected patients; and Cavasin et al. 54 described the incidence of xerostomia, dental caries, and periodontal disease in HIV+ patients.

(p2.2) Risk factors. Two papers cover this subject. Hofer et al. 55 described factors from the neonatal period associated with long-term non-progression of HIV in a Brazilian cohort of vertically infected children; Mercon et al. 56 examined a cross section of HIV-infected patients in Rio de Janeiro and found that risk-based assessment does not distinguish between recent and chronic HIV-1 infection.

(p2.3) Comorbidities are an important aspect of HIV, and we have reports of HIV in association with tuberculosis (Carvalho et al, 53 with enteric parasites (Bachur et al, and Neto et al), 51,52 with lipodistrophy (Monnerast et al), 57 and cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (Russomano et al). 58 Perception of HIV by patients is discussed by Silva et al., 59 who researched the perception of female vulnerability to infection among university students in Rio de Janeiro and found that the interviewed women recognize vulnerability factors in other women and realize the risk that others face of acquiring HIV but do not consider themselves to be at risk. Almeida et al. 60 evaluated the knowledge of HIV/AIDS patients concerning antiretroviral drugs and found a lack of general information among users of antiretroviral drugs, and at the same time a need for a better understanding of the problems. They emphasize the need for all health care professionals involved with patients to supply information on prescribed drugs as an ethical component of the treatment that favors and fosters adherence.

(p2.4) As might be expected, the pandemic of HIV/AIDS is the most frequently studied pathology in this chapter. Articles fall into various categories, with some articles falling into more than one category.

(p2.5) Epidemiology. Bassichetto et al. 47 estimated the incidence of HIV-1 in the city of Sã o Paulo from November 2000 to April 2001, comparing epidemiological and sociobehavioral data of recently infected individuals with those individuals with long-standing infection. A less sensitive than standard ELISA was employed to identify recent infection. The overall incidence of HIV-1 infection was 0.53%/year, whereas overall HIV-1 prevalence was 3.2% higher among males vs females. Recent infections accounted for 15% of the total infected population and correlated with being younger and male. Szwarcwald et al. 48 described a methodological proposal based on secondary data and the main results of the HIV-Sentinel Study among childbearing women, which was carried out in Brazil during 2006. A probabilistic sample of childbearing women was selected in two stages. In the first stage, 150 health establishments were selected, stratified by municipality size, whereas in the second stage, 100-120 women were selected systematically. Significant differences were found according to race, educational level, and municipality size. The proposed methodology is described as low-cost and easy to apply and permits the identification of problems in routine service provision in addition to monitoring compliance with Ministry of Health recommendations for pre-natal care. Almeida et al. 49 evaluated genotyping and subtyping in antiretroviral-naïve and experienced children and used this information to analyze drug resistance profiles, concluding that rates of primary resistance in antiretroviral-naïve children are low, whereas they are high in children who fail antiretroviral treatment, which is compatible with its use in these patients. Olajubu et al. 50 described the seroprevalence of HIV among blood donors, antenatal women, and other patients in a tertiary hospital in Nigeria and found that though there is a high prevalence rate among in-and out-patients, many of these patients were screened based on manifestations of clinical symptoms. The prevalence of comorbidities is discussed several papers: Diehl et al. 39 discussed the simultaneous occurrence of lipodistrophy; Bachur et al. 51 and Neto et al. 52 described enteric parasitism relating to highly active antiretroviral therapy; Carvalho et al. 53 evaluated factors related to the development of tuberculosis in HIV-infected patients in Fortaleza, Ceara, Brazil and discussed strategies to improve the control of tuberculosis in HIV-infected patients; and Cavasin et al. 54 described the incidence of xerostomia, dental caries, and periodontal disease in HIV+ patients.

(p2.6) Risk factors. Two papers cover this subject. Hofer et al. 55 described factors from the neonatal period associated with long-term non-progression of HIV in a Brazilian cohort of vertically infected children; Mercon et al. 56 examined a cross section of HIV-infected patients in Rio de Janeiro and found that risk-based assessment does not distinguish between recent and chronic HIV-1 infection.

(p2.7) Comorbidities are an important aspect of HIV, and we have reports of HIV in association with tuberculosis (Carvalho et al, 53 with enteric parasites (Bachur et al, and Neto et al), 51,52 with lipodistrophy (Monnerast et al), 57 and cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (Russomano et al). 58 Perception of HIV by patients is discussed by Silva et al., 59 who researched the perception of female vulnerability to infection among university students in Rio de Janeiro and found that the interviewed women recognize vulnerability factors in other women and realize the risk that others face of acquiring HIV but do not consider themselves to be at risk. Almeida et al. 60 evaluated the knowledge of HIV/AIDS patients concerning antiretroviral drugs and found a lack of general information among users of antiretroviral drugs, and at the same time a need for a better understanding of the problems. They emphasize the need for all health care professionals involved with patients to supply information on prescribed drugs as an ethical component of the treatment that favors and fosters adherence.
## (s6) Original research on infectious diseases
(p6.0) As might be expected, the pandemic of HIV/AIDS is the most frequently studied pathology in this chapter. Articles fall into various categories, with some articles falling into more than one category.

(p6.1) Epidemiology. Bassichetto et al. 47 estimated the incidence of HIV-1 in the city of Sã o Paulo from November 2000 to April 2001, comparing epidemiological and sociobehavioral data of recently infected individuals with those individuals with long-standing infection. A less sensitive than standard ELISA was employed to identify recent infection. The overall incidence of HIV-1 infection was 0.53%/year, whereas overall HIV-1 prevalence was 3.2% higher among males vs females. Recent infections accounted for 15% of the total infected population and correlated with being younger and male. Szwarcwald et al. 48 described a methodological proposal based on secondary data and the main results of the HIV-Sentinel Study among childbearing women, which was carried out in Brazil during 2006. A probabilistic sample of childbearing women was selected in two stages. In the first stage, 150 health establishments were selected, stratified by municipality size, whereas in the second stage, 100-120 women were selected systematically. Significant differences were found according to race, educational level, and municipality size. The proposed methodology is described as low-cost and easy to apply and permits the identification of problems in routine service provision in addition to monitoring compliance with Ministry of Health recommendations for pre-natal care. Almeida et al. 49 evaluated genotyping and subtyping in antiretroviral-naïve and experienced children and used this information to analyze drug resistance profiles, concluding that rates of primary resistance in antiretroviral-naïve children are low, whereas they are high in children who fail antiretroviral treatment, which is compatible with its use in these patients. Olajubu et al. 50 described the seroprevalence of HIV among blood donors, antenatal women, and other patients in a tertiary hospital in Nigeria and found that though there is a high prevalence rate among in-and out-patients, many of these patients were screened based on manifestations of clinical symptoms. The prevalence of comorbidities is discussed several papers: Diehl et al. 39 discussed the simultaneous occurrence of lipodistrophy; Bachur et al. 51 and Neto et al. 52 described enteric parasitism relating to highly active antiretroviral therapy; Carvalho et al. 53 evaluated factors related to the development of tuberculosis in HIV-infected patients in Fortaleza, Ceara, Brazil and discussed strategies to improve the control of tuberculosis in HIV-infected patients; and Cavasin et al. 54 described the incidence of xerostomia, dental caries, and periodontal disease in HIV+ patients.

(p6.2) Risk factors. Two papers cover this subject. Hofer et al. 55 described factors from the neonatal period associated with long-term non-progression of HIV in a Brazilian cohort of vertically infected children; Mercon et al. 56 examined a cross section of HIV-infected patients in Rio de Janeiro and found that risk-based assessment does not distinguish between recent and chronic HIV-1 infection.

(p6.3) Comorbidities are an important aspect of HIV, and we have reports of HIV in association with tuberculosis (Carvalho et al, 53 with enteric parasites (Bachur et al, and Neto et al), 51,52 with lipodistrophy (Monnerast et al), 57 and cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (Russomano et al). 58 Perception of HIV by patients is discussed by Silva et al., 59 who researched the perception of female vulnerability to infection among university students in Rio de Janeiro and found that the interviewed women recognize vulnerability factors in other women and realize the risk that others face of acquiring HIV but do not consider themselves to be at risk. Almeida et al. 60 evaluated the knowledge of HIV/AIDS patients concerning antiretroviral drugs and found a lack of general information among users of antiretroviral drugs, and at the same time a need for a better understanding of the problems. They emphasize the need for all health care professionals involved with patients to supply information on prescribed drugs as an ethical component of the treatment that favors and fosters adherence.

(p6.4) As might be expected, the pandemic of HIV/AIDS is the most frequently studied pathology in this chapter. Articles fall into various categories, with some articles falling into more than one category.

(p6.5) Epidemiology. Bassichetto et al. 47 estimated the incidence of HIV-1 in the city of Sã o Paulo from November 2000 to April 2001, comparing epidemiological and sociobehavioral data of recently infected individuals with those individuals with long-standing infection. A less sensitive than standard ELISA was employed to identify recent infection. The overall incidence of HIV-1 infection was 0.53%/year, whereas overall HIV-1 prevalence was 3.2% higher among males vs females. Recent infections accounted for 15% of the total infected population and correlated with being younger and male. Szwarcwald et al. 48 described a methodological proposal based on secondary data and the main results of the HIV-Sentinel Study among childbearing women, which was carried out in Brazil during 2006. A probabilistic sample of childbearing women was selected in two stages. In the first stage, 150 health establishments were selected, stratified by municipality size, whereas in the second stage, 100-120 women were selected systematically. Significant differences were found according to race, educational level, and municipality size. The proposed methodology is described as low-cost and easy to apply and permits the identification of problems in routine service provision in addition to monitoring compliance with Ministry of Health recommendations for pre-natal care. Almeida et al. 49 evaluated genotyping and subtyping in antiretroviral-naïve and experienced children and used this information to analyze drug resistance profiles, concluding that rates of primary resistance in antiretroviral-naïve children are low, whereas they are high in children who fail antiretroviral treatment, which is compatible with its use in these patients. Olajubu et al. 50 described the seroprevalence of HIV among blood donors, antenatal women, and other patients in a tertiary hospital in Nigeria and found that though there is a high prevalence rate among in-and out-patients, many of these patients were screened based on manifestations of clinical symptoms. The prevalence of comorbidities is discussed several papers: Diehl et al. 39 discussed the simultaneous occurrence of lipodistrophy; Bachur et al. 51 and Neto et al. 52 described enteric parasitism relating to highly active antiretroviral therapy; Carvalho et al. 53 evaluated factors related to the development of tuberculosis in HIV-infected patients in Fortaleza, Ceara, Brazil and discussed strategies to improve the control of tuberculosis in HIV-infected patients; and Cavasin et al. 54 described the incidence of xerostomia, dental caries, and periodontal disease in HIV+ patients.

(p6.6) Risk factors. Two papers cover this subject. Hofer et al. 55 described factors from the neonatal period associated with long-term non-progression of HIV in a Brazilian cohort of vertically infected children; Mercon et al. 56 examined a cross section of HIV-infected patients in Rio de Janeiro and found that risk-based assessment does not distinguish between recent and chronic HIV-1 infection.

(p6.7) Comorbidities are an important aspect of HIV, and we have reports of HIV in association with tuberculosis (Carvalho et al, 53 with enteric parasites (Bachur et al, and Neto et al), 51,52 with lipodistrophy (Monnerast et al), 57 and cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (Russomano et al). 58 Perception of HIV by patients is discussed by Silva et al., 59 who researched the perception of female vulnerability to infection among university students in Rio de Janeiro and found that the interviewed women recognize vulnerability factors in other women and realize the risk that others face of acquiring HIV but do not consider themselves to be at risk. Almeida et al. 60 evaluated the knowledge of HIV/AIDS patients concerning antiretroviral drugs and found a lack of general information among users of antiretroviral drugs, and at the same time a need for a better understanding of the problems. They emphasize the need for all health care professionals involved with patients to supply information on prescribed drugs as an ethical component of the treatment that favors and fosters adherence.
