# Molecular Sciences Pathophysiological, Molecular and Therapeutic Issues of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease: An Overview

CorpusID: 128359346 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f11076ff4a97f43b6b9bf4fdbb6d9f11b0400c06](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f11076ff4a97f43b6b9bf4fdbb6d9f11b0400c06)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Pathophysiological Features
(p5.0) The pathogenesis of NAFLD is multifactorial. Genetic factors cooperate with metabolic and environmental factors to promote the accumulation of fat in hepatocytes. In the last decade of the 20th century, the most corroborated theory was the "two hit pathogenesis". It stated that insulin resistance leads to TG deposition in the liver, thus steatosis, rendering it more susceptible to the action of second hits, such as oxidative stress, ATP depletion and endotoxins, finally leading to inflammation, fibrosis and cancer. Nowadays, this theory has been replaced by the "multiple hit pathogenesis". This states that multiple etiopathogenic factors act in a parallel or sequential and somehow synergic way on a genetically predisposed subject, to cause NAFLD and thus defining the spectrum of the disease phenotype ( Figure 1) [110]. Particularly, some patients will develop NAFL and consequently NASH, but others will directly present inflammation and fibrosis, probably because of the influence of genetic and epigenetic factors.  [86,110,111]. Genetic factors cooperate with metabolic and environmental factors to promote the accumulation of fat in hepatocytes and successively cause inflammation, cellular death and fibrosis. Anatomically, besides the liver, the main factors are insulin sensitive organs such as adipose tissue and muscle, which respectively produce adipokines and myokines, and also promote inflammation and oxidative stress in the liver. The gut microbiota releasing PAMPs, the bile acid system and the presence of iron deposits contribute to liver damage. Finally, all these mechanisms are modulated by the brain, particularly by circadian rhythm.
## (s6) Genetic Factors
(p6.0) Interethnic variations and familial aggregation, associated with the fact that NAFLD is not always sufficiently supported by the presence of environmental and metabolic factors, convinced the scientific community that genetic factors may play a key role in liver steatosis. Genome-wide association and gene expression profiling studies have associated several genes to the development and progression of NAFLD. These sequences play a central role in different pathways: lipogenesis, FA oxidation, lipoprotein transport, glucose homeostasis, detoxification and inflammation. Since the pathogenesis of NAFLD is multifactorial, the interaction with the environment is still crucial [118,121].

(p6.1) Palatin-like phospholipase domain containing 3 (PNPLA3) variant allele (rs738409). In 2008, Romeo et al. conducted the first genome-wide association study of nonsynonymous sequence variations in patients with NAFLD [122]. They found a strong association between fatty liver and the PNPLA3 variant rs738409 C>G p.I148M, which causes a loss of function that is statistically more prevalent in the Hispanic population, thus justifying the major incidence of NAFLD reported in this population. Interestingly, even though the I148M variant predisposes patients to liver steatosis, it seems to not influence insulin sensitivity. The presence of this variant also implies a major risk of progression of liver damage, independently from the presence of age, gender or other metabolic risk factors such as insulin sensitivity and BMI, not only in NAFLD but also in alcoholic and viral liver disease [107,[123][124][125][126]. PNPLA3 is alternatively known as calcium-independent phospholipase A2 epsilon (iPLA2-ε) or adiponutrin and it is the member of a lipid metabolizing enzyme family. It owes its name to the strong analogy of sequence with patatin, a major protein of potato tubers with nonspecific lipid acyl hydrolase activity. PNPLA3 is involved in triglyceride hydrolysis in hepatocytes and it stimulates retinyl ester release from HSC. Its levels notably increase during the postprandial phase under stimulation of insulin through SREBP-1c and ChREBP [125]. This mechanism has been proposed to explain the association between liver steatosis and PNPLA3 variants: an interaction between different allele variants of PNPLA3 (E434K/434E/148I/148M) may determine liver damage, probably influencing TG release from lipid droplets [127]. Moreover, Bruschi et al. recently demonstrated that the PNPLA3 I148M variant modulates HSC activity, leading to a pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrogenetic phenotype [128]. On the other hand, the presence of the 453I variant of PNPLA3 was associated with a lower hepatic fat content. It seems reasonable that a loss of function of this gene causes a reduction in hepatic TG outflow, favoring hepatic steatosis.

(p6.2) Transmembrane 6 superfamily member 2 (TM6SF2) is involved in VLDL secretion [129], and a loss of function due to a single nucleotide polymorphism (rs58542926) has been linked to liver steatosis, inflammation and fibrosis [130][131][132]. It is noteworthy that this mutation seems to confer cardiovascular protection, questioning the relationship between NAFLD and cardiovascular disease. This is probably due not only to the reduction of circulating apolipoprotein B lipoproteins, but also to a complex anti-inflammatory effect [133,134].

(p6.3) Glucokinase regulator (GCKR) is a modulator of hepatic glucokinase, and the rs1260326-T variant leads to an uncontrolled glucose uptake by hepatocytes, with increased glycolysis, decreased beta-oxidation and hepatic lipid accumulation [135,136].

(p6.4) Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) is involved in reverse cholesterol transport, particularly in cholesterol esters and the TG exchange between HDL and ApoB-containing lipoproteins. It is primarily derived from Kupffer cells [137]. The variant rs1800777 of this gene has recently been associated with liver steatosis and lobular inflammation in patients with biopsy proven NAFLD [138].

(p6.5) Sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c), as mentioned above, is the main inducer of hepatic DNL under insulin stimulation. Musso et al. demonstrated that a single nucleotide polymorphism of this gene (rs11868035 A/G) is associated with NAFLD development, along with insulin resistance and atherogenic dyslipidemia [139].

(p6.6) Membrane bound O-acyltransferase domain-containing 7 (MBOAT7) gene variant rs641738 C>T has been associated with liver steatosis development and severity, but not with insulin resistance [140]. A study conducted by Krawczyk et al., on the other hand, demonstrated an association between this variant and liver fibrosis but not with liver steatosis [141]. Finally, Umano et al. recently reported that the rs626283 variant may predispose obese Caucasian adolescents and children to NAFLD and insulin resistance [141]. MBOAT7 is a lysophosphatidylinositol acyltransferase involved in arachidonic acid metabolism [142].

(p6.7) Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTTP) acts as a chaperon involved in apolipoprotein B (ApoB) lipoprotein assembly [143]. The 493 G/T polymorphism has been associated with NAFLD development and metabolic syndrome [144].

(p6.8) Besides the above-mentioned genes, many others have been studied, including Superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2), Glutathione S-transferase (GST), TNF-α, Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α (PPARA), Apolipoprotein C-III (APOC3), and Interleukin-6 (IL6) [86].
## (s8) Does Insulin Resistance Cause NAFLD?
(p8.0) Insulin signaling stimulates glucose utilization and favors lipid accumulation by acting on insulin sensitive organs such as muscle, adipose tissue and liver. If insulin resistance develops, hormone-sensitive lipase is not suppressed and consequently the adipose tissue releases a great amount of NEFA into the bloodstream, leading to ectopic deposition of fat in organs such as the liver and pancreas. Several NEFA-specific transporters have been described, not only in hepatocytes, but generally in hepatic cells, including macrophages. These transporters, e.g., fatty acid transport protein (FATP5), could be a potential target of therapy aiming at reducing hepatic NEFA intake and consequently NAFLD [149].
## (s9) Does NAFLD Cause Insulin Resistance?
(p9.0) The fatty acid deposits in the liver worsen hepatic insulin sensitivity, probably inducing the protein kinase C-ε (PKCε) to phosphorylate and inactivate the insulin receptor [157]. On the other hand, several studies demonstrate that metabolites such as ceramides may play a central role in mediating FA-induced insulin resistance, by acting at different levels of insulin signaling [158]. It is, however, important to recognize that even though PKCε and ceramides partly explain the bidirectional link between NAFLD and metabolic syndrome, others, such as the role of hepatokines, probably close the loop [41].
## (s10) Other Metabolic Factors: The Role of Notch and The Skeletal Muscle
(p10.0) Notch signaling has been shown to influence virtually every metabolic organ, thus being involved in liver steatosis and fibrosis [159]. Notch signaling is an evolutionally highly conserved mechanism composed of ligands, receptors and intracellular proteins, regulated at different levels [160]. This pathway is a key mediator of cellular proliferation, differentiation and intercellular communication, especially during embryogenesis. During adulthood, it plays a role in organ regeneration and cancer [161,162]. Bi, in a recent review, analyzed the different influence of Notch signaling in metabolic organs: liver, adipose tissue, muscle, including central nervous system and the interaction with the immune system and angiogenesis [159]. Particularly, Notch signaling endorses gluconeogenesis and DNL, having a key role in hepatic insulin resistance. Notch signaling stimulates white adipose tissue differentiation, which is the main factor responsible for energy storage during hypercaloric diet. Moreover, it maintains cellular quiescence in the central nervous system and in the muscle, preserving stem cells but limiting tissue regeneration, and it favors the differentiation of an M1 macrophage phenotype, which is the main factor responsible for systemic inflammation, thus exacerbating peripheral insulin resistance. Finally, Notch signaling has been found to regulate angiogenesis, with a possible role in favoring atherosclerosis. All these mechanisms explain the concrete role of Notch signaling in NAFLD development, which is fundamentally mediated by the promotion of an insulin resistant phenotype. Confirming this concept, several animal studies show that Notch inhibition leads to an increased insulin sensitivity and novel drugs targeting Notch signaling are currently under evaluation with extremely promising results [163][164][165][166]. However, further studies are still needed to better understand Notch signaling and to definitely confirm the efficacy and safety of novel drugs targeting this pathway.

(p10.1) There is increasing interest in the role of sarcopenia in liver disease. The skeletal muscle plays a central role in insulin sensitivity, since it is one of the main factors responsible for insulin-induced glucose uptake [167]. Moreover, it sequesters NEFA from the blood and therefore blunts the burden of lipids reaching the liver. It seems therefore reasonable to hypothesize a role of muscle depletion in NAFLD development [168]. Accordingly, an association has recently been found between sarcopenia, steatosis and fibrosis in NAFLD [169]. In particular, recent reports are focusing on signaling molecules and hormones called 'myokines'. They are molecules produced by the muscle, which is, indeed, not only a mere energy consumer, but is an active endocrine organ, capable of partly contrasting the inflammatory effect of adipokines [170]. Notably, this mechanism could partly explain the beneficial role of physical exercise on metabolic diseases [170]. The most studied myokine is irisin, which seems to stimulate brown adipose tissue differentiation and thermogenesis, with a protective function from metabolic syndrome, though clinical studies have shown contrasting data regarding its role in NAFLD patients [171].
## (s12) Overweight and Obesity
(p12.0) As mentioned above, obesity is strictly related to NAFLD. Adipose tissue is a very active endocrine organ that produces hormones and cytokines known as adipokines or adipocytokines. It mediates endocrine, inflammatory and immune interactions, protecting or favoring insulin resistance and liver steatosis [179].

(p12.1) Adiponectin is the major adipose-specific adipokine and it has powerful anti-inflammatory and insulin sensitizer effects. Several studies demonstrated an inverse correlation between adiponectin levels and hepatic steatosis, TG and LDL levels [86,[180][181][182]. Leptin has protective effects on the liver since it stimulates beta-oxidation and suppresses lipogenesis, besides favoring gluconeogenesis [183]. One of the most used models of NAFLD is the leptin-deficient ob/ob mouse, which is a model of hyperphagia and severe obesity with insulin resistance. Another widely studied adipokine is resistin, which is a hormone involved in glucose and lipidic homeostasis, contributing to the development of NAFLD, insulin resistance and inflammation [120,184,185]. Apart from adipokines, adipose tissue is also responsible for the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), which has been demonstrated to be elevated in NASH compared to simple steatosis, and IL-6, that may favor HCC development by inhibiting apoptosis and activating pro-oncogenic patterns [86,186]. Adiposity also enhances the effect of genetic variants and possibly triggers the development of NAFLD [121].
## (s16) Circadian Clock
(p16.0) Many metabolic pathways typically exhibit a circadian rhythm, principally driven by sleeping/waking and fasting/feeding cycles. Bile acid synthesis is influenced by these mechanisms too, as are the immune system and inflammatory responses [210]. All these mechanisms underlie NAFLD; it is therefore legitimate to suppose a role of the circadian clock in this disease, with the central nervous system coordinating all of these factors [211,212]. Kettner et al. recently demonstrated in animal models that chronic jet lag is sufficient to induce liver steatosis and successively HCC, probably through neuroendocrine dysfunction and pro-inflammatory effects that ultimately lead to gene deregulation [213]. Moreover, other experimental models confirmed that gene mutations involved in the circadian clock system regulation predispose to NAFLD [213,214]. However, further studies are needed to better characterize the clinical and therapeutic implications of circadian rhythm regulation.
## (s22) Drugs Acting on Bile Acids System
(p22.0) Obeticholic acid, a potent activator of the above-mentioned FXR already registered for the treatment of primary biliary cholangitis, has been tested for use in NASH patients in the FLINT (Farnesoid X Receptor Ligand Obeticholic Acid in NASH Treatment) trial. This study has been stopped for superiority, since the drug significantly improved necro-inflammation, reducing lipogenesis, increasing VLDL clearance but also through direct anti-inflammatory effects [267,268]. In a phase 2 RCT in NAFLD diabetic patients, obeticholic acid not only reduced markers of liver inflammation and fibrosis, but it also reduced insulin resistance [269]. Two phase 3 studies evaluating the role of obeticholic acid in non-cirrhotic NASH with liver fibrosis (REGENERATE ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02548351) and in compensated cirrhosis due to NASH (REVERSE ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT03439254) are now ongoing. The adverse events of this drug are pruritus and increased LDL cholesterol. On the contrary, ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), a natural bile acid, did not prove to be superior to placebo in reducing steatosis, inflammation or fibrosis [270], even though it reduced serum transaminase levels and improved liver histology when used in combination with vitamin E [271].
