# Robotic quantification of upper extremity loss of independent joint control or flexion synergy in individuals with hemiparetic stroke: a review of paradigms addressing the effects of shoulder abduction loading

CorpusID: 12028298 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4392e70b86a67a6ec3bafd61f19b5a3013c194b4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4392e70b86a67a6ec3bafd61f19b5a3013c194b4)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s1) Context
(p1.0) Residual motor system impairments limit the activities conducted in daily life and restrict participation in life roles in individuals with moderate to severe chronic stroke. Two primary motor system impairments characterizing classic hemiparesis are muscle weakness and abnormal stereotypical movements/synergies. Contemporary clinical tools attempt to evaluate these motor impairments however are limited by subjective/nominal scoring descriptors and/or observational methods and are confounded by the interdependency of these phenomena. For example, following stroke there is a relative weakness on the paretic side in that the production of joint torque at a single joint is less that on the nonparetic side. However, when the individual is required to first produce shoulder abduction torque, abnormal co-activation with elbow flexors occurs with greater abduction torque production [2], resulting in a task dependent weakness of elbow extension [3,4]. This abnormal co-activation of shoulder abductors with distal limb flexors [2] was described observationally as stereotypical movements and labeled flexion synergy [5,6] in the mid 20th century. Early quantitative dynamic movement studies of hemiparetic reaching demonstrated the same phenomena showing that outward reaching magnitude is dramatically reduced when required to support the arm against gravity as compared to when supported on a frictionless table [7] and is not predicted by muscle weakness [8]. These studies demonstrated that two fundamental motor system impairments could be independently and quantitatively evaluated but required more sophisticated equipment than available in clinical practice. The application of robotics, as presented in this manuscript, offers a means to account for the presence of weakness/paresis and systematically quantify the impact of flexion synergy on reaching function through kinetic/kinematic measurement.
## (s2) Definition of loss of independent joint control
(p2.0) Individuals with moderate to severe hemiparetic stroke exhibit compromised upper extremity function due in part to a loss of independent joint control. Neuromechanistically, this phenomena is thought to be due to an increased reliance on contralesional corticoreticulospinal motor pathways (see [9] for review). Early quantitative movement analysis studies described the phenomena as disturbed limb dynamics [10] and disrupted interjoint coordination [11] that was observed during reaching movements. Of specific relevance to the evaluation with rehabilitation robotics is that the abnormal co-activation of distal limb flexors with proximal shoulder abductors is task-dependent [3,12,13] and dynamic [7,14,15], meaning that the more one attempts to drive the limb, the greater the activation of the flexion pattern and the lessor the ability to move outside of this pattern such as during a reach against gravity. A device with the capability of progressively manipulating proximal joint requirements is needed to fully describe the effects of loss of independent joint control on reaching and hand function in hemiparesis [14].
## (s3) Conventional assessment
(p3.0) Conventional standardized clinical measures such as the Fugl-Meyer Motor Assessment [16] and Chedoke-McMaster Stroke Assessment [17] attempt to quantify movement impairments resultant from abnormal flexion synergy through observational analysis. Furthermore, observational analysis is then scored via nominal or ordinal scales. These evaluation tools have adequate psychometric properties, granted the clinician is properly trained in administration. However, they lack quantitative control and measurement with ratio-level data that arguably offers more meaningful and higher resolution information. Robotic methods of movement analysis can provide the much-need higher resolution measurements of the impact of loss of independent joint control on reaching performance [14] and hand function. Such methods offer both the researcher and clinician more powerful information for investigating and diagnosing movement problems, their underlying mechanisms, and response to intervention. The following section discusses a series of robotic methods for measuring the effect of loss of independent joint control on reaching and hand function.
## (s6) Experimental protocol
(p6.0) Multiple repetitions of maximum shoulder abduction are completed until 3 values are obtained that are within 10 % of each other without the last repetition being the greatest [12]. During the measurement, joint torque is measured and displayed in real-time in the form of a rising bar graph while the participant attempts to maximize shoulder abduction torque. Following each repetition, the maximum value is marked and the participant is encouraged to exceed it on the next attempt. Additionally, the gain of the feedback display is reduced by 10 % without the participant's knowledge in order to maximize repeated efforts. Data collection for each trial is 5 s and peak shoulder abduction torque is displayed to the experimenter following each trial.

(p6.1) Reaching work areaa comprehensive and validated robotic measure of reaching workspace as a function of increasing abduction loading Work area is a quantitative measurement of motor impairment (combined shoulder-elbow active range of motion) performed in a functional context (multiple abduction loads). It is administrated in a standardized fashion and utilizes 3D kinematic and kinetic analyses as opposed to subjective interpretations of movement and therefore, leaves little room for experimenter or clinician bias [15]. The quantitative measurement has been cross-validated with qualitative clinical assessments of impairment, activity and participation limitation and has been shown to augment conventional clinical evaluation of upper extremity function by specifically identifying the impact of loss of independent joint control on functional reaching [14]. Work area has been successfully implemented as a primary outcome measure in previous work attempting to demonstrate the amelioration of reaching function through the reduction of loss of independent joint control impairment [24,25].
## (s16) Experimental setup
(p16.0) The participant is setup in the ACT 3D as described in the experimental setup paragraph of the maximum abduction torque method above with the addition of a custom cylindrical force sensor and 3D motion analysis markers for measuring hand opening and closing respectively (Fig. 6). The hand mount and forearm orthosis Fig. 6 Hand mounted to the cylindrical force mat with motion analysis markers in place. Forearm is securely mounted to the ACT 3D for the manipulation of abduction loading during reaching movement are rigidly attached to the ACT 3D . The pressure sensor mat (Pressure Profile System Inc., Los Angeles, CA, USA) allows real-time pressure measurement under the digits during hand grasping. Infrared light-emitting diode markers allow kinematic data to be collected using two Optotrak camera systems (Optotrak 3020 and Certus, Northern Digital Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) from all digits during hand opening. Alternatively, assessment of hand kinematics may also be measured using inertial and magnetic sensors [33].
## (s18) Recommendations for measurement of the loss of independent joint control
(p18.0) Both the scientist and the clinician desire an accurate quantitative evaluation of the loss of independent joint control. Choosing the appropriate measure for quantifying the effect of loss of independent joint control on reaching and hand function is dependent upon pragmatic constraints. For example, in the clinical environment, scheduling and the patient's medical state/tolerance both limit the time that may be spent in evaluation. The expedited methods of MRAL near/far or maximum hand opening will be the measurement of choice for proximal shoulder/ elbow or hand loss of independent joint control respectively for the clinical environment. In contrast, in the research laboratory a more detailed investigation of loss of independent joint control may be required. In that case, recruitment would need to select for participants that can tolerate a longer evaluation. With a remaining need for experimental efficiency, the measure of reaching distance at several abduction loads may be ideal. Overall, the most critical requirement of all of the paradigms is that reaching movement and hand function must be measured under controlled abduction loading conditions. Fig. 7 Hand pentagon area is calculated by measuring the area obtained by connecting the tips of all digits from kinematic data (left). Grasping force heat map obtained from the custom force mat (right) Measurement under abduction loading conditions allows for the direct quantification of loss of independent joint control and defines with great resolution how the motor system impairment impacts natural arm and hand function. Furthermore, the inclusion of abduction loads that go beyond limb weight will reflect the full functional impact of loading that occurs in real-world arm use such as when transporting an object [14].
## (s19) Conclusions
(p19.0) Clinicians and scientists will greatly benefit from employing paradigms described in this review of robotic methods for quantifying the loss of independent joint control. In the clinic, the high-resolution measurements will afford the ability to better target the impairment and track recovery [24,25,34]. In the laboratory, high resolution measurements will facilitate the elucidation of underlying neural mechanisms of the loss of independent joint control [15] and subsequently catalyze the development of novel impairment-based therapies designed to directly target this cardinal motor impairment of stroke [28]. 
