# Epidemiology and Management of Hypertension in the Hispanic Population A Review of the Available Literature

CorpusID: 12366298 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66a5c93b707cb25addc6a69af4947adc08a54945](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66a5c93b707cb25addc6a69af4947adc08a54945)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Lifestyle Factors
(p3.0) In the general patient population, Hispanics tend to have poorer BP control than non-Hispanics; [2,7] however, based on the results of controlled clinical trials, it is unlikely that the differences in BP control rates between Hispanics and non-Hispanics are a result of biologic differences. In controlled clinical trial settings, where external factors are equal and all patients have the same access to medical care and no-cost medication, it has been observed that BP control rates among Hispanics can be equal to or better than those of non-Hispanic Whites. [29][30][31] Thus, in many cases, lifestyle, economic, and cultural factors likely contribute to Hispanic Americans' overall level of risk for uncontrolled hypertension. Effective patient education strategies are necessary to increase awareness of risk factors associated with hypertension and to help patients learn to modify unhealthy behaviors.

(p3.1) As an example, according to NHANES data from 2001 to 2006, about one-third of Mexican Americans reported no participation in leisure-time physical activity. [7] This rate was twice as high as that reported in non-Hispanic Whites and 15% higher than that reported in non-Hispanic Blacks. [7] Results from the Racial and Ethnic Approaches to Community Health Across the US 2009 risk factor survey [32] showed that fruit and vegetable consumption was lower in Hispanic communities than in other ethnic minority communities throughout the USA, including non-Hispanic Black, Asian Pacific Islander, and American Indian communities. In this study, [32] Hispanics also had the lowest rates of cholesterol screenings and management of high BP with antihypertensive therapy. Acculturation and language barriers may also negatively affect access to health care and treatment in Hispanic communities. In a study of 131 277 patients in Kaiser Permanente's Northern California Diabetes Registry, Traylor and colleagues [33] found that Hispanic patients were less likely than non-Hispanic Whites to adhere to their cardiovascular medications (49% vs 58%; p < 0.001); equally, Spanish-speaking patients were less likely to adhere to their cardiovascular medications compared with English-speaking patients (51% vs 57%; p < 0.001). Eamranond and colleagues [34] observed that Hispanics with low levels of acculturation to American language, values, beliefs, and ways of life have higher rates of diabetes and hypertension, and are more likely to have poorly controlled hypercholesterolemia.

(p3.2) Patient trust is higher when healthcare providers are of the same ethnicity as the patient and when physicians can communicate in the patient's native language. [35] As of 2001, only 3.3% of internal medicine physicians and 3.8% of cardiologists in the USA were Hispanic, [36] suggesting that most Hispanic Americans do not have access to physicians of the same ethnicity and may choose to rely on the advice of trusted family and friends instead of healthcare professionals. Hispanics have also been shown to have a strong sense of fatalism, believing that the course of their cardiovascular disease is out of their control and making them less motivated to adopt healthy lifestyle changes, seek medical care, or adhere to treatment. [37] Physician access may also be limited by the cost of care, lack of health insurance, and limited access to regular health care. [38] According to US Census Bureau data, in 2009, per capita income for Hispanics was approximately half that of non-Hispanic Whites (US$15 063 vs US$30 941, respectively), the poverty rate among Hispanics was 25.3%, and 32.4% of Hispanics did not have health insurance compared with 12.0% of non-Hispanic Whites. [39] 3. Efficacy of Antihypertensive Agents in Hispanics:
## (s6) Benefits of Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitor Therapy
(p6.0) RAAS inhibitors may be more beneficial than other classes of antihypertensive therapy in reducing complications related to obesity, diabetes, and metabolic syndrome, which as discussed previously are significant concerns for many Hispanic patients. [60] Over-activation of the RAAS results in increased vasoconstriction, increased sodium reabsorption, and increased aldosterone secretion, all of which elevate BP. In addition, increased RAAS activity can contribute to the pathophysiology of diabetes and metabolic syndrome. Increased aldosterone production has been shown to impair insulin signaling and increase insulin resistance, and angiotensin II-mediated oxidative stress can damage pancreatic islet cells. [60,61] Excess food intake has also been linked to increased angiotensin II formation in adipocytes, and body mass index is positively correlated with plasma aldosterone and plasma renin activity levels, suggesting a pathophysiologic association between RAAS activation and obesity. [60] Therefore, in addition to lowering BP, antihypertensive therapy with RAAS inhibitors may also improve glucose metabolism and delay or prevent the onset of diabetes. [60,61] RAAS inhibitors have also been shown to reduce tissue injury and microvascular damage in patients with hypertension and hyperglycemia. [62] For these reasons, RAAS inhibitors are an appropriate component of first-line therapy in hypertensive patients at risk for obesity, diabetes, and or metabolic syndrome. [60] 
## (s8) Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers (ARBs)
(p8.0) Several studies were identified that reported the efficacy of ARB monotherapy or combination therapy in Hispanic patients. These studies indicate that substantial proportions of Hispanic patients treated with ARBs as part of their treatment regimen can achieve BP goals. The largest, TRINITY (NCT00654745; complete results posted on ClinicalTrials.gov), [64] included a prespecified subgroup analysis of 369 Hispanic Latino and 2122 non-Hispanic non-Latino hypertensive patients that has Reprinted from Cooper-DeHoff et al. [29] , with permission from Elsevier. MI = myocardial infarction.
## (s10) Considerations for Treating the Hypertensive Hispanic Patient
(p10.0) For most patients, regardless of ethnicity, multiple antihypertensive agents are needed to attain BP goal. [59] For example, current guidelines from the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure [10] state that two or more antihypertensive medications are usually required to achieve BP goals in patients with diabetes and chronic kidney disease, and for patients whose BP is more than 20 mmHg above the systolic BP goal or more than 10 mmHg above the diastolic BP goal. For these patients, current guidelines recommend initiation of therapy with two agents, one of which is usually a thiazide diuretic. The choice of a thiazide diuretic as part of an initial treatment regimen is based on the well established observations that drugs in this class are generally well tolerated, can prevent cardiovascular complications associated with hypertension, and are usually cost effective. [10] The combination of a diuretic with a RAAS inhibitor is often recommended as first-line therapy in patients with stage 2 hypertension, given that the RAAS is the central mediator of the majority of hypertension-related complications and that the RAAS is activated in response to pressure-related target-organ damage. [10,11] Compelling indications for RAAS-inhibitorbased combination treatment regimens in the general population include co-morbid cardiovascular disease, diabetes, chronic kidney disease, stroke prevention, heart failure, and coronary artery disease risk. [10] Although data evaluating the efficacy of RAAS-inhibitor-based therapy in Hispanics are limited, the high prevalence of obesity, diabetes, and metabolic syndrome in this population provides rationale for the use of this class of antihypertensive drugs.

(p10.1) When treating hypertension in the Hispanic patient, physicians should be aware of the typical cardiovascular clustering that is common in this ethnic group and the treatment challenges that this creates. Results from the INVEST study suggest that combination therapy is necessary for the majority of hypertensive Hispanic patients with coronary artery disease to achieve target BP goals and that achieving these BP goals is associated with significantly lower risks of adverse cardiovascular events. [29] 
