# Idiopathic dilatation of pulmonary artery: A review

CorpusID: 12337759 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8ee00e3766e9feb88143354799b2150f7f18dc59](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8ee00e3766e9feb88143354799b2150f7f18dc59)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Chest X-ray
(p7.0) In idiopathic dilatation of pulmonary artery, lung parenchyma and its vascularity are normal with normal cardiothoracic ratio and dilated pulmonary artery. The characteristic picture of pulmonary stenosis e.g. enlarged main pulmonary artery with diminished vascularity is absent in this condition (Fig. 1). 22 The hyperemic lungs fields with hilar dance, common in large left to right shunts, are also absent. It is interesting that the pattern of dilatation is the same as in uncomplicated pulmonary stenosis (localization is restricted to the trunk or occasionally to one of the main branches of the pulmonary artery, but no dilatation of the peripheral branches is present).
## (s9) Cardiac computed tomography (CT)
(p9.0) Cardiac computed tomography is very helpful in assessing the size of pulmonary artery and excluding other causes of dilated pulmonary artery. Owing to its high spatial resolution, contrast enhanced computed tomography is considered to be the primary technique for diagnosing pulmonary artery dilation as it offers a unique opportunity to evaluate the presence, size, shape, exact location of the aneurysm, and concomitant cardiovascular abnormalities (Fig. 3). The upper limit of the normal diameter of the main pulmonary artery on computed tomography is 29 mm and of the right interlobar artery is 17 mm. 27 CT angiography is excellent modality because it readily identifies mural thrombus, dissection or any other abnormalities. Multiplanar reconstruction can help plan surgical intervention. There are no specific criteria on CT imaging developed for diagnosing IDPA.
## (s13) Prognosis and natural history
(p13.0) Prognostic evaluation of idiopathic dilatation of pulmonary artery is limited by the number of clinically studied cases and lack of adequate follow up but it is believed to be a benign anomaly. Most of the reported cases have survived into sixth or seventh decade. The increase in size of the main pulmonary artery can be progressive. The appearance of exertional dyspnea and a restrictive impairment of ventilatory capacity may be due to left ventricular strain and space-occupying compressive effect of the expanding pulmonary arteries. Periodical follow up is advisable to check for formation of aneurysm or regurgitation. Fang and Tsai suggested that prognosis of IDPA is better than other causes of pulmonary artery dilatation. 31 Ring et al., 32 stressed upon the fact that a long period of observation should be considered to be a further criterion for diagnosis, as in some patients who appear to have this condition, an underlying pathology will become apparent.
