# A REVIEW: COMPARISON OF LINE CLIPPING ALGORITHMS IN 3D SPACE

CorpusID: 126283811 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7648fb4826da00045025f9ee20afefcfb5409b83](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7648fb4826da00045025f9ee20afefcfb5409b83)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s0) …………………………………………………………………………………………………….... Introduction:-
(p0.0) In context of computer graphics, it is very essential to clip an area or a volume of interest which is to be displayed on the computer monitor. This division of interest is normally a rectangle or a general polygon in 2-Dimension and known as the clipping window. When it comes to 3-Dimensional clipping, a volume is used to extract a part from a 3-Dimensional scenario. Broadly the lines are clipped by clipping volume and it is known as polyhedron. And these Cuboids are extensively used as the clipping volume. 3-Dimensional clipping is one of the most essential processes such as video games, medical applications, computer aided design and many various applications. Occasionally it is important to dispose the data that is not within the visible range to avert the overflow of the internal registers of the display device.

(p0.1) Moreover, less memory consumption can be acquired by loading only a certain part o f a scenario to the memory by clipping unnecessary parts. Therefore, bettering the performance of the clipping algorithm has a better impact on performance of the comprehensive graphics system.

(p0.2) Cohen-Sutherland line clipping algorithm, Liang-Barsky line clipping algorithm, Cyrus-Beck line clipping algorithm and Nicholl-Lee-Nicholl line clipping algorithm are the traditional line clipping algorithms. The Cohen-Sutherland and the Liang-Barsky algorithms can be continued to 3-Dimensional clipping. Nicholl-Lee-Nicholl algorithm achieves lesser comparisons and divisions which makes it faster than others. Nevertheless, it is difficult to expand for 3-Dimensional clipping. [1] Cohen-Sutherland Line Clipping Algorithm in 3D Space:-Cohen-Sutherland algorithm is one of the elementary and widely used clipping algorithms in computer graphics. This algorithm works very quickly in situations like the line segment is completely inside or outside of the clipping window. When the line segment is not lies inside or outside, this algorithm becomes ineffective due to repeated calculations. This algorithm can be easily extended to 3-Dimensional clipping, but space is required to divide into 27 mutually exclusive volumes, when the clipping volume is a cube or a cuboids. Again each volume is assigned a region code. Throughout the clipping process those region codes should be reserved in the memory. So in terms of Corresponding Author:-Nisha. As in the 2D case, the line may be trivially accepted (both outcodes=000000), or trivially rejected ((code 1 AND code 2) not 000000). Otherwise line subdivision is used again. The points of intersection with the clipping edges are found using a parametric representation of the line being clipped. Consider the general line from P0 (x0, y0, z0) to P1 (x1, y1, z1). Its parametric representation is:
