# A Review of OpenStreetMap Data

CorpusID: 135382379 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f650bcb5a45d0553dc6a5a9bc8871a719b230dcf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f650bcb5a45d0553dc6a5a9bc8871a719b230dcf)

Fields: Computer Science, Geography

## (s1) How Does One Contribute to OSM?
(p1.0) The OSM data model is very straightforward to understand. There are three primitive data types or objects: nodes, ways (polygons and polylines) and relations (logical collections of ways and nodes). A way is made up of at least two nodes (for polylines) or three nodes (for closed polygons). A node represents a geographic point feature and its coordinate is usually expressed as latitude and longitude. Within OSM, every object must have at least one attribute or tag (a key/value pair) assigned to it to describe its characteristics. There are many guides and tutorial documents on how one begins to map with OSM; recently the company Mapbox provided an updated set of documentation for this 1 . The OSM Map Features pages on the OSM wiki (OpenStreetMap, 2016) represent the reference document describing the officially adopted OSM tags. These tags have been agreed upon over the years and there are wiki pages written to describe the likely usage and use case scenarios of each tag. OSM follows a folksonomy approach to tagging, and, in theory, any tag can be associated with any object (Ballatore and Mooney, 2015). Contributors are free to create their own tags. As several authors have shown (Ballatore and Mooney, 2015;Ballatore and Zipf, 2015), this can lead to disagreements amongst contributors or confusion on how to use specific tags in certain geographic scenarios (for example tagging an object representing an unpaved pedestrian footpath). Services such as taginfo 2 allow exploration and visualisation of the most frequently used tags and their keys for the entire OSM database. The taginfo service is particularly useful for understanding the style or structure of tags used on specific object types, conceptualising the very wide range of values some keys are assigned in tags and the spatial distribution of tags. Taginfo is constantly updated in near real-time and stores the tags from every object in the global OSM database. There is no theoretical limit on the number of tags that can be assigned to any object. Nodes that have a tag with a key name are usually called Points of Interest (POI) and usually represent the position of some object or structure of general interest. Keys in OSM can be internationalised to accommodate languages other than English, which, due to OSM's origins, has established itself as the lingua franca of the project (Ballatore and Mooney, 2015).

(p1.1) There are many software tools available to automate the process of contributing data or editing existing data. The most widely used and popular is the JOSM (Java for OSM) tool 3 , followed by the Web-based iD editor 4 ; JOSM is acknowledged as being a software tool more suited to more experienced OSM contributors while the iD editor is very straightforward to use and is integrated into the OSM map homepage. New data submitted to OSM or existing data edited within the OSM database are available for access almost immediately, and the OSM map on the OSM homepage will render changes quickly (within 30 minutes). As we shall discuss in Section 2, there are many ways in which one can access and download OSM data for other uses. On a more technical level, every object within the OSM database (nodes, ways or relations) has several data attributes including: a globally unique ID; a version number, which indicates how many times the object has been edited; a timestamp of the most recent edit; and the user ID and the username of the contributor who created (or last edited) the object.

(p1.2) Anyone can sign up and register for free as a contributor to OSM. In July 2016, there were over 2.7M registered contributors, as outlined on the OSM wiki 5 ; upon sign-up, a contributor can begin contributing or mapping new data in OSM or editing existing data stored in the OSM spatial database. However, it is not easy to automatically access attribute or demographic information about these user contributors from the OSM database or associated services. Several researchers  and references therein) have attempted to classify and understand who the contributors are to OSM through analysis of their editing and contribution patterns over a long period of time.
## (s12) Quality Assurance for OSM
(p12.0) The quality of OSM data is under constant scrutiny by the scientific community. The quality of data in OSM is one of the major concerns that industry and authoritative agencies such as National Mapping Agencies (NMAs), Land and Cadastral Agencies and other types of government agencies have about OSM (Olteanu-Raimond et al., 2017b). In practice, there is no single set of metrics or criteria against which OSM can be measured that will satisfy all users for the myriad of possible end applications. The quality of the OSM data and suitability for a particular application, purpose or use case is very much dependent on the characteristics of the problem being tackled. The OSM community recognises the importance of data quality, and a very wide range of tools and applications have been developed to tackle this issue. In this section, we provide some introduction to a small number of these. A comprehensive list is maintained on the OSM wiki 76 .

(p12.1) BBBike and Geofabrik deliver the OSM Map Compare tool 77 , which allows visual comparison of OSM map layers with other popular mapping systems such as Google, Bing, HERE, ESRI, etc. The web map interface allows users to visually compare any region in OSM with the corresponding mapping in the other popular systems. IGN France (French National Institute of Geographic and Forest Information) provides a very similar system to Map Compare with their Ma Visionneuse 78 application, which allows OSM to be compared with IGN layers, amongst others; this is particularly useful for comparison between French web map layers. The OSM Inspector 79 , also by Geofabrik, provides an overlay of potential errors or data quality problems onto an OSM map. These problems include: very long ways (polylines); self-intersecting ways, polygons or polylines, which are represented by only one node; and polygons or polylines that have duplicate nodes contained within them.

(p12.2) Taginfo 2 is a very popular Web-based application that displays up-to-date statistics about the tags used in the OSM database, e.g. which tags are used, how many times they are used, where a certain tag occurs, etc. Taginfo is particularly useful for finding problems with the keys or values in tags, the popularity of tags, where specific tags are used and which other tags are used in combination with them. The use of taginfo to find problems with tagging relates to its very comprehensive listing of the ranking of popularity/application of values to specific keys in tags. This can quickly allow an OSM expert to identify instances of an incorrect assignment of values in tags that has an overall effect on tag data quality. Taginfo does not provide any information on errors relating to geometry or topology. Osmose 80 , an acronym for OpenStreetMap Oversight Search Engine, is a quality assurance tool available to detect issues in OSM data; it is also useful for integrating third-party datasets. It tries to detect anomalies in the data and then display them on an OSM map, from which contributors can fix or update them. Keep Right 81 is one of the oldest quality assurance tools in OSM. It displays automatically detected errors on the OSM map or in a list format, and it detects a very wide set of error types, including geometry errors, topological errors, attribution errors and other general OSM errors.

(p12.3) MapRoulette 82 is a Web-based application that proposes challenges to fix errors in OSM. Each challenge represents a set of tasks, and OSM contributors can fix the errors by performing edits in OSM in the usual way. The challenges vary in difficulty, allowing contributors to choose the types of errors that they feel confident about fixing. The fixing is very heavily focused on the contributors' interpretation of information from aerial imagery. DeepOSM 83 attempts to detect problems in OSM road networks using neural networks. The system downloads satellite imagery and the corresponding OSM data that show roads/ features for that area. This allows DeepOSM to generate training and evaluation data for the neural networks, which then calculate predictions of misregistered roads in OSM.

(p12.4) The Grass&Green project (Ali et al., 2016) asks OSM contributors to correct tagging or classification of land use features involving grass or green areas. This application provides a two-screen interface, where an OSM feature is highlighted on the standard OSM web-map layer and in aerial imagery. The user (who needs to have an OSM account) must then provide an appropriate classification for this entity by choosing what he/she believes is correct from the list of classifications: grass, park, garden, forest and meadow. The JOSM Validator 84 'is a core feature of JOSM which checks and fixes invalid data' that have been contributed to OSM or are being contributed for the first time. The validator checks and fixes a wide variety of problems, including topological errors, unclosed polygons and overlapping areas.

(p12.5) Academic research has produced a wide range of quality assessment and comparison tools for OSM (Ostermann and Granell, 2017). One of the most recently published is that of Brovelli et al. (2017): this open source software tool provides an automated comparison of street network data in OSM with that in an authoritative dataset. Users of the tool must provide the authoritative dataset for comparison.
## (s14) Conclusions and Discussion
(p14.0) In this chapter, we have provided an overview of the OSM project. As mentioned in the introduction, OSM is probably the most famous example of VGI on the Internet today. Even at the time of writing (during the summer of 2016), the project continued to grow and expand, with over 2.7M registered contributors/users and almost 3.4B nodes of data, which made up almost 350M polygons and polylines. Around 37,000 contributors are active in OSM during a typical month. OSM can certainly claim to be the largest freely and openly accessible database of geographic data in the world. Indeed its rate of growth in terms of geographic data and frequency of contributions and editing brings OSM into the realm of geographic big data (Leonelli, 2014). When one considers the extended OSM ecosystem of open source software, data download services, data visualisation services, wiki help systems, mailing lists and forums, OSM serves as a very suitable starting point for any discussion on VGI. Indeed one could speculate on how VGI would have developed if OSM had been absent from this space. This chapter has attempted to give the reader who is new to OSM an introduction to the OSM ecosystem while providing the reader familiar with OSM an overview of where OSM currently stands in the world of VGI.
## (s15) The Future of OSM
(p15.0) OSM's greatest strength will always be its huge pool of contributors. Thousands of these contributors have collected and generated some of the world's best street and topographic data without expensive teams of professional surveyors or world-class equipment. As the world and the urban and natural environment change every day, OSM contributors have the ability to depict this changing world in a map and a database that belong to them. OSM may not yet have the advanced types of features that Google Maps has -street-view images, multimodal navigation, social recommendations, etc. -but it may soon have. Mapillary 96,97 , which is a service for crowdsourcing street-level photographs using smartphones and computer vision, has almost 70 million geotagged street-level photographs at the time of writing. Mapillary shares the open data ethos of OSM and they can work well together (Juhász and Hochmair, 2016). Very similarly, efforts are in place to link OSM elements with their corresponding Wikipedia pages and Wikidata items. As an example, the WTOSM 98 (Wikipedia To OSM) service developed by the Italian OSM community automatically identifies Wikipedia pages that can be linked (by means of tags) to OSM elements. Mature services such as OpenRouteService provide navigation services based wholly on OSM's database. One of the factors in the evolution of OSM over the past decade or so has been the ability of the project to adapt and expand in the face of technological advancements in other areas of ICT and Open Source Software. Web service access to the OSM database or its mirrors has improved and is very stable, allowing developers to build an array of applications using the data directly from the database.

(p15.1) There are some challenges for OSM going forward. These challenges are a mixture of factors based on the social and technological aspects of VGI (Mooney, 2015). Contributors can make edits to the OSM global database without any real controls or moderation at the point of contribution. Despite the fact that there are many applications available for an a posteriori quality check (see Section 2.7), as long as edits can be made without initial controls the issue of OSM data quality will remain a contentious one. Relatively unknown contributors from an unknown crowd supplying geospatial data is a concern to end users and stakeholders such as NMAs, government agencies and commercial companies. There have been many instances in the past where large amounts of OSM data have been deleted by new or inexperienced contributors. Some authors have considered the problem of automated detection of instances of vandalism and of the purposeful deletion of data in OSM (Neis et al., 2012). Many local OSM communities have long debated the wish and need to implement tools for checking and approving contributions (e.g. by more experienced contributors or by the community itself). However, such an implementation would be clearly against the very same nature of the OSM project, and no formal actions are yet in place in this regard.
