# Curr Trends Fashion Technol Textile Eng Natural Fibre Reinforced Polymer Composites: A Review on Dynamic Mechanical Properties

CorpusID: 139788482 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aa6834dd39ffd9b1a7b3d98ad9e29b9cdc77a55d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aa6834dd39ffd9b1a7b3d98ad9e29b9cdc77a55d)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s1) Dynamic mechanical analysis
(p1.0) DMA technique is useful in characterising the NFRPCs in terms of morphology, viscoelastic behaviour, cross linking density, dynamic fragility, storage modulus, loss modulus, glass transition temperature, stress relaxation modulus and effective constant of reinforcement. In addition, DMA is also useful to characterize an important parameter damping as a function of frequency, temperature, time, stress, atmosphere or a combination of these parameters. Moreover, DMA is also very useful in civil infrastructure systems because dynamic loading conditions are frequently stumbling due to sound, earthquakes, winds, ocean waves and live loads. Vibration damping parameters shows prime importance for structural applications in order to enhance the reliability, performance, buildings comfort and in the alleviation of bridges hazards [18].

(p1.1) DMA characterize the mechanical responses of a material by monitoring dynamic property changes as a function of frequency, temperature or time. In DMA, an oscillating force is applied on sample and the sinusoidal stress and strain curves are recorded as a function of time. A typical such response is shown in Figure  1.

(p1.2) The modulus from DMA is not exactly same as the Young's modulus from stress-strain diagram. The slope of initial linear region of stress-strain diagram is Young's modulus but in DMA, Complex modulus ( ) 
## (s2) Storage modulus
(p2.0) It is a real part of complex modulus; defined as amount of the maximum energy stored by material during one cycle of oscillation [19][20]. It also gives an estimate of temperaturedependant stiffness behaviour and load-bearing capability of the polymer composites.
## (s3) Loss modulus
(p3.0) The imaginary part of complex modulus is named as loss modulus; defined as amount of energy dissipated in form of heat by materials during one cycle of sinusoidal load [19,20]. It represents the viscous response of the polymer composites. The peak of loss modulus curve for polymer composites is known as dynamic glass transition temperature.
## (s4) Damping
(p4.0) The damping property of the polymer materials is the ratio of loss modulus and storage modulus. It is related to degree of molecular mobility in polymer composites [19,20]. The higher value of Tan δ is characterized by high non-elastic behaviour while the low value of Tan δ exhibit a high elastic behaviour of the material.
