# A STUDY ON DIFFERENT PELLET FORMATION TECHNIQUES AND ITS EVALUATION PARAMETERS-A REVIEW

CorpusID: 139187827 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d40b09e3d281613bbb2ea5af8868701383b35c0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d40b09e3d281613bbb2ea5af8868701383b35c0)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION Pellets
(p0.0) In the pharmaceutical industry, pellets are simple small free-flowing spherical particles formed by agglomeration of fine powder or granules, which can be given in the form of tablets and capsules for various disease conditions, although tablets are more convenient than capsules. The size range of pellet size is of 0.5-2.0 mm [1].
## (s1) Flexibility of pellets in development of dosage form [2]
(p1.0) History of pellets [3] In the 1950's, pellets came into existence in the field of "Pharmaceutical Industry" with an impact of sustain release dosage form. In terms of formulation, processing methods and equipment used were faster, cheaper and more efficient. It can also be used for sustained release of active constituents.
## (s18) Pelletization technique [10]
(p18.0) Agitation [10] Agitation involves the conversion of finely divided particles into spheroidal particles by the addition of required liquid by a continuous rolling or tumbling motion. The liquid can be added at the beginning of the process, or during the agitation process. Pans, discs, drums or mixers may be used to produce pellets by the balling process. It is the oldest and less efficient technique for production of pellets.
## (s28) Extrusion-spheronization [10]
(p28.0) The extrusion Spheronization is a common technique and widely used method for uniform size pellet production with multiple steps. This process was first devised by Reynolds in the year 1970 and also Conine Hadley gave his contribution to the technique.

(p28.1) It is multiple process of wet mass extrusion which further pursued by spheronization step to produce matrix pellets or beads of spheroids, and mainly used for the production of multiple particle for oral sustained drug delivery system. The extrusion operation densifies the material to saturation point while spheronization is only a shaping process and drying operation finalizes the textural characteristics of the product by densifying the medium through induced shrinkage [4].
## (s32) Shaping the wet mass into cylinders (Extrusion)
(p32.0) The prepared plastic mass undergoes the extrusion process in which pressure is applied to a mass of particles until it flows out through an orifice to produce the extrudates. The extrudate length might vary from each other, depending on the physical characteristics of the materials extruded. Extrusion is performed using five main classes of extruders: screw, sieve and basket, roll, and ram extruders. Details for all types of the extruder are given in table 1 [10].  Roll extruder Roll extruders operate by feeding material between a roller and a perforated plate or ring die Type 1: A ring rotates around one or more rollers installed inside the cylindrical die chamber, each of which rotates on its stationary axis. Type 2: The roller or rollers are mounted on the outside of the ring die and material is fed from a hopper occasionally with a screw, into the region between the roller and the die. Type 3: Rollers are positioned above and roll along the surface of a flat, stationary die plate.
## (s35) Ram extruder
(p35.0) Spheronization [12] In this process, the extruded cylindrically shaped particles are uniformly broken into a particular length which gradually leads to the formation of spherical shapes, thus shaping process is due to plastic deformation. Extrudates are first broken into nearly uniform lengths, all three dimensions of agglomerate shape are determined and spheres with uniform diameter are obtained. In spheronization process, different stages can be distinguished depending on the shape of the particles, i.e., starting from a cylinder over a cylinder with rounded edges, dumbbell shape and elliptical particles to eventually perfect spheres.
## (s42) Micrometric properties
(p42.0) • The angle of repose [17]: Angle of repose is used to know the pellet flow property by using a fixed funnel method. The radius (r) of the pellet pile formed and height of the pellet pile (h) is determined. The angle of repose for the pellet sample is calculated using the formula:
## (s43) Evaluation of pellets
(p43.0) • Percentage yield [17]: Percentage yield determination is carried out to know the preparation procedure chosen for pellet formation is effective or not, and also to know the importance of the procedure used regarding safety and efficacy with lesser effort and greater benefit. Hence the quantity or the amount of active pharmaceutical ingredients, polymers, binding agent, anti-frictional agents, starch paste and other process parameters are the factors which play a major role in deciding the yield of the pellets during pelletization process.
