# Opportunities for Cellulose Nanomaterials in Packaging Films: A Review and Future Trends

CorpusID: 137963648 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a33f3991a0e99164721f33ae7309e20374ca602a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a33f3991a0e99164721f33ae7309e20374ca602a)

Fields: Materials Science

## (s3) Material
(p3.0) Water Vapor Transmission Rate (WVTR) Oxygen permeability (g*μm/(m 2 *day)) (cm 3 *μm/(m 2 *day*kPa)) non-cellulosic materials can also decrease WVTR. For example, adding 25% clay to CNF films decreased WVTR from 299 g/m 2 /day to 197 g/m 2 /day, although this did somewhat negatively impact film transparency [25]. Compared with common barrier films, the WVTR of CNF films is much higher due to the hydrophilic nature of the CNFs ( Table 2, Table 3). Generally, CNF films exhibit oxygen transmission rates favorable for packaging films. The low porosity of CNF films results in oxygen diffusion rather than transport, and at a sufficient thickness the pores are not interconnected, which contributes to the impermeability [27]. The OTR of CNF films can be a function of treatment, production method, film thickness, and test conditions (Table 4). For example, OTR decreases as CNF film thickness increases and as relative humidity decreases [28]. Further reducing void volume through the addition of glycerol as a plasticizer decreases oxygen diffusivity [27]. However the permeability of oxygen through CNF films dramatically increases with relative humidity due to their hydrophilic nature [19,21,28]. In one study, the OTR of a CNF film increased from 0.0006 (cm 3 *μm)/(m 2 *day*kPa) to 0.85 (cm 3 *μm)/ (m 2 *day*kPa) when the relative humidity increased from 0% to 50%. In this study the OTR remained low until approximately 70% relative humidity, at which point there was a sharp increase in OTR [28]. At 100% relative humidity the OTR of a CNF film was reported Table 4 Reported oxygen permeability for select cellulose nanofibril (CNF) films (adapted from [28]).
## (s4) Material
(p4.0) Oxygen less brittle than CNC films. Additionally, CNF films were also recently found to act as better oxygen vapor barriers than neat CNC films despite similarities in water permeability [30]. This suggests that the entanglements of the long flexible nanoparticles and lower porosity of the CNF films compared with CNC films result in barrier domains and increased tortuosity of the diffusion pathway. CNF films are also more thermally stable than CNC films [31]. One area where CNC films can provide benefit is as coatings on other polymeric films. One study reported the OTR of PLA to be 18.65 (cm 3 *μm)/(m 2 *day*kPa). Coating the PLA with CNCs resulted in tremendous improvements in OTR, decreasing it to 0.029 (cm 3 *μm)/(m 2 *day*kPa) [32].
## (s6) Matrices
(p6.0) The processing temperature of CNs is limited to about 200 °C, which limits the polymeric matrices that they can be incorporated into [33]. Petroleum-based, nonbiodegradable polymers, such as polyethylene (PE) and polypropylene (PP), are the most common commodity plastics used for packaging films, and are non-biodegradable. They are inexpensive, widely available, and easy to process, and have been investigated as potential matrices for CNs. Polycaprolactone (PCL) is a petroleum-based biodegradable polymer that has also been investigated as a potential matrix for use with CNs.

(p6.1) There is a movement toward replacing petroleumbased polymers currently used in packaging films with polymers derived from renewable resources. However, compared with petroleum-based polymers many of these biobased polymers are more expensive, more brittle, and have poor barrier properties. Awareness is also increasing regarding the environmental impact of packaging waste. Therefore there is an increased demand for biodegradable packaging. Biobased polymers include polylactic acid (PLA), polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), Bio-PE and Bio-PP and starch-based plastics.

(p6.2) Due to its attractive mechanical properties and relatively low cost, PLA derived from renewable resources is the most widely available commercial biopolymer [40]. The melting temperature of PLA can vary between 180 °C and 230 °C [41], which makes it appropriate for processing with CNs. It is of interest for use in packaging applications due to its good transparency, high modulus, reasonable strength, thermal plasticity, excellent aroma and flavor barrier capacity, good heat sealability, processability, and degradation in biological environments [42]. The crystallinity of PLA can vary depending upon the monomers used during synthesis, and the final polymer may be highly crystalline, semicrystalline, or completely amorphous. The mechanical properties of crystalline PLA surpass those of amorphous PLA. In packaging applications, commercial use of PLA has been limited as it is more expensive, more brittle, and more difficult to process than traditional petroleum-based polymers [43]. PLA also has lower impact resistance, lower thermal stability, and the same or lower barrier properties than many petroleum-derived polymers [34,42]. These disadvantages may be overcome with the inclusion of CNs.

(p6.3) Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are a family of biopolyesters which are totally synthesized by microorganisms. Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) and poly(hydroxybutyrate-cohydroxyvalerate) (PHBV) are the most well known and studied of these polymers. PHAs have a very narrow processing window and can experience rapid reduction in molecular weight during processing [41]. These polymers are not widely available commercially, but efforts are underway to improve performance and commercialize the manufacturing process.

(p6.4) Recently, there have been efforts to synthesize typical petroleum-based polymers from renewable resources. Bio-PE and Bio-PP have both been synthesized using feedstocks such as starchy crops, sugar crops, and other lignocellulosics [41]. The properties of these materials are similar to petroleum-based PE and PP.

(p6.5) Starch-based polymers are polysaccharides, and can be difficult to process. Under normal circumstances the softening temperature is higher than the degradation temperature. However, the use of plasticizers and the correct processing temperatures can result in a thermoplastic-like material [41]. Thermoplastic starch (TPS) has low mechanical properties and poor barrier properties, which could be improved for packaging applications by incorporating CNs [44].
## (s7) Composite Films Containing Cellulose Nanofibers (CNFs)
(p7.0) There has been a limited amount of work incorporating CNFs into petroleum-based matrices. In one early effort, incorporating 5% CNFs into PP and PE did not significantly increase mechanical properties. This was due to poor dispersion [45]. The most common matrix evaluated for use with CNFs appropriate for packaging films is PLA. One advantage of adding CNFs to PLA is that they act as nucleating agents and alter the crystallization of PLA [46]. In one study, the addition of 10% CNFs as nucleating agents for PLA reduced by half the annealing time needed to crystalize the neat PLA without changing mechanical properties [47]. In some cases, partially crystallized PLA-CNF composites can replace fully crystallized PLA [48]. However, other nucleating agents, such as phenylphosphonic acid zinc, have been more effective at accelerating crystallization of PLA than CNFs [48].
## (s8) Composite Films Containing Cellulose Nanocrystals (CNCs)
(p8.0) The dispersion of CNCs into nonpolar matrices is challenging owing to high surface energy, large specific surface area, and hydrophilic nature, resulting in a tendency to aggregate. There has been an investigation of CNCs as a reinforcing agent for petroleum-based packaging films. Incorporating 2% to 15% CNCs into a PP matrix using twin-screw extrusion did not improve tensile strength of the neat PP, however flexural strength slightly improved and crystallinity increased [64]. Using a coupling agent did little to further enhance mechanical properties or crystallinity [64]. The lack of improvement in mechanical properties was likely due to poor dispersion; therefore others have investigated alternative melt-blending techniques to improve dispersion. In one effort, the dispersion of 1% to 10% CNCs into a PP matrix was improved when the composites were melt-blended two times before injection molding [65]. Better dispersion of CNCs in PP and PE was found using solid-state shear pulverization (Table 7) [66]. This technique exposes polymers to larger shear and compressive forces than found during typical melt-processing [66]. Modification of CNCs by grafting with organic aliphatic acid chains with different lengths in an esterification reaction resulted in a more homogeneous mixture when incorporated into PE when sufficiently long chains were grafted [67]. Raman spectroscopy was successfully used to determine the dispersion of CNCs in PP composites extruded filaments [68]. This could be a useful technique in studying dispersion in polymer films.
## (s10) TRENDS
(p10.0) One trend of food packaging films is the development of bioactive packaging, and there have been efforts to produce bioactive packaging films containing CNs. Bioctive packaging used with foods or pharmaceuticals includes packaging that functions beyond passive containment of the product. For example, bioactive packaging may control oxidation of the product, prevent the formation of off-flavors and undesirable textures of food, and provide antimicrobial properties. Packaging that incorporates bioactive agents which are released from the packaging film into the food surface in a controlled way is one application being investigated [3]. In this case, the migration into the food by the bioactive agent is purposeful and intended [83]. Bioactive packaging also includes packaging where the bioactive agents do not migrate, but provide antimicrobial and antifungal activities on the packaging surface [3]. For example, chitosan has been found to be nontoxic, biodegradable, and has antimicrobial and antifungal activities [3]. This could be incorporated into CNF films. Another approach could be to incorporate active compounds into the packaging films or encapsulation of the active compounds into a polymeric matrix [91]. In one effort, antimicrobial PLA-CNC films containing oregano essential oil were prepared by solvent casting. Addition of oregano oil did not affect the water vapor permeability, but had a plasticizing effect. The PLA-CNC composite containing oregano oil also revealed a strong antimicrobial potential, suggesting oregano oil shows promise as a bioactive packaging material to preserve fresh food products against foodborne pathogens [92]. In another approach, titanium dioxide nanoparticles and CNCs were incorporated into wheat gluten films. In this case, the titanium dioxide nanoparticles contributed to antimicrobial activity while the CNCs decreased water vapor transmission [93]. In an effort to manufacture packaging that provided protection against fatty food, three films were studied, including PLA, PLA and an antioxidant package, and PLA, CNF, and an antioxidant package. The study demonstrated that the release rate of the antioxidant was slower in the presence of CNFs, which would potentially increase the oxidative stability of fatty foods [94]. Another packaging trend is the development of smart or intelligent packaging. Smart or intelligent packaging includes the ability to track and trace packages through their lifetime through printed sensors on the package to monitor package conditions. Food manufacturers can use smart packaging to track individual packages of perishable goods to ensure quality upon arrival, provide real-time status of food freshness, eliminate inaccurate expiration dates, detect spoilagerelated changes, pathogens, and chemical contaminants [95]. These nanosensors could reduce the time for pathogen detection from days to hours or minutes [44]. Opportunities for CNs include flexible electronics printed on CNF films.

(p10.1) Multilayer films, films consisting of one or more dissimilar layer, are common for packaging products. Individual layers may include gas barrier properties, anti-fog properties, super hydrophobicity, antimicrobial surfaces, or bioactive delivery [12]. Trends include the development of a multilayer structure where one or more layer contains active compounds through film co-extrusion, layer-by-layer assembly, and deposition of CNs onto polymer substrates. One interesting idea is to coat polymeric films with CNCs. In one case, when PLA was coated with CNCs there was a reported 700-fold decrease in oxygen permeability [32]. It has been suggested that coating polymers such as PET and PP with CNCs results in excellent transparency, anti-fog properties, and a 99% decrease in oxygen permeability [12]. There could also be potential to orient CNCs in a layer to provide superior mechanical properties. This has been demonstrated with polyvinyl alcohol in a solvent-cast film with good results [96].

(p10.2) As CNs make inroads into packaging applications, it is expected new modifications will be developed to allow for improved compatibility and higher barrier properties. There may be an emphasis on environmentally friendly modifications and an increased understanding of the mechanism of reactions occurring at the CN-plastic matrix interface [4]. There will also be a continued interest in the use of biopolymers and advances in processing technologies that will meet the challenge of producing CNs at an industrial scale.
