# metals Corrosion, Erosion and Wear Behavior of Complex Concentrated Alloys: A Review

CorpusID: 139438036 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a46757cea4259eaac45a12ae1ede0ad021896b8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a46757cea4259eaac45a12ae1ede0ad021896b8)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s6) Corrosion Behavior of Complex Concentrated Alloys
(p6.0) Majority of the complex concentrated alloys studied so far for their corrosion behavior are based on the CoCrFeNi equimolar system. The observed corrosion behavior in these alloys may be broadly classified based on their composition and the resulting surface passivation layers, microstructural heterogeneity, phase segregation and associated galvanic corrosion, and finally, the test environment. CoCrFeNi-Cu x (where "x" indicates varying proportions) was one of the earliest developed alloys, where the effect of increasing copper content on the microstructure and corrosion properties was reported [29]. Immersion and potentiodynamic polarization tests were conducted in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution. The as-cast CoCrFeNi-Cu x alloys showed face centered cubic (FCC) phase mixture having distinct dendritic (copper lean) and inter-dendritic (copper rich) phases. In this alloy, the bright inter-dendritic regions were Cu rich as shown in Figure 2a. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) results show a single set of FCC peaks for several of these compositions, although the microstructure shows segregation between dendrites. This may be due to the very close d-spacing of the two phases that could not be resolved in XRD. The corrosion behavior of these alloys was comparable to SS304 stainless steel, with the copper free composition showing highest resistance to pitting (Figure 2b). The x = 0.5 alloy showed higher corrosion current density and pitting density, as shown in Figure 2c. This was attributed to higher galvanic action prompted from the Cu segregated in the inter-dendritic regions. Galvanic coupling results in initiation and propagation of localized corrosion pits causing rapid dissolution of the more anodic phase (in this case the bright Cu rich phase).  
## (s7) Corrosion Behavior of Complex Concentrated Alloys
(p7.0) Majority of the complex concentrated alloys studied so far for their corrosion behavior are based on the CoCrFeNi equimolar system. The observed corrosion behavior in these alloys may be broadly classified based on their composition and the resulting surface passivation layers, microstructural heterogeneity, phase segregation and associated galvanic corrosion, and finally, the test environment. CoCrFeNi-Cux (where "x" indicates varying proportions) was one of the earliest developed alloys, where the effect of increasing copper content on the microstructure and corrosion properties was reported [29]. Immersion and potentiodynamic polarization tests were conducted in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution. The as-cast CoCrFeNi-Cux alloys showed face centered cubic (FCC) phase mixture having distinct dendritic (copper lean) and inter-dendritic (copper rich) phases. In this alloy, the bright inter-dendritic regions were Cu rich as shown in Figure 2a. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) results show a single set of FCC peaks for several of these compositions, although the microstructure shows segregation between dendrites. This may be due to the very close d-spacing of the two phases that could not be resolved in XRD. The corrosion behavior of these alloys was comparable to SS304 stainless steel, with the copper free composition showing highest resistance to pitting (Figure 2b). The x = 0.5 alloy showed higher corrosion current density and pitting density, as shown in Figure 2c. This was attributed to higher galvanic action prompted from the Cu segregated in the inter-dendritic regions. Galvanic coupling results in initiation and propagation of localized corrosion pits causing rapid dissolution of the more anodic phase (in this case the bright Cu rich phase).  The copper rich interdendritic regions appear white, while the dendrites are darker; and, (b) Potentiodynamic polarization plots of the alloys in 3.5% NaCl. The Cu free CoCrFeNi alloy showed highest resistance compared to other two complex concentrated alloys (CCAs) and SS304L; (c) Microstructure after corrosion tests showing that Cu rich inter-dendritic regions corroded faster as compared to the dendritic regions lean in Cu. This may be due to the galvanic effect arising from the difference in composition [29] (reprinted with permission from Elsevier).
## (s8) wt% NaCl Polarization
(p8.0) Ti addition improved corrosion resistance of the alloy; Through the re-melting process, the distribution of elements in the alloy improved, improving the corrosion resistance AlCrCuFeMnNi [63] Complex Microstructure: BCC dendritic phase, interdendritic area with two phases-a eutectic type and FCC solid solution phase
## (s10) Erosion and Erosion Corrosion of CCAs
(p10.0) There are very limited number of studies on the erosion behavior of CCAs/HEAs. The two alloy systems that have been studied the most are Al x CoCrFeNi and Al x CoCrCuFeNi. Slurry-erosion behavior of Al 3 CrCoFeNi laser cladded CCA was compared with conventionally used 17-7 precipitation hardened (PH) stainless steel. The Al 3 CrCoFeNi CCA coating showed excellent erosion resistance when compared to 17-7 PH stainless steel with seven times higher resistance at 15 • impingement angle [71]. Maximum erosion rate for both CCA and 17-7 PH steel were observed at 45 • impingement angle. Thereafter, the erosion rates were more or less constant with a further increase in impingement angle. Higher erosion resistance of the Al 3 CrCoFeNi CCA was due to high hardness (~750 HV) of the BCC phase and severe lattice strains. Significant lattice distortion was attributed to the high mole fraction of large sized Al atom. The effect of heat treatment on erosion behavior of Al 3 CrCoFeNi CCA coating was also investigated. Increased erosion resistance (~15% compared to untreated HEA) was seen with increase in annealing temperature with maximum corresponding to the 950 • C heat-treated sample. Authors attributed the enhanced erosion resistance of the CCA coating treated at 950 • C to increased hardness (765 HV), resulting from Cr 3 Ni 2 precipitation and reduced roughness.

(p10.1) In Al x CoCrFeNi alloy system, decrease in Al content results in transition from pure BCC to BCC + FCC and finally to pure FCC structure [72]. Al 0.1 CoCrFeNi alloy shows a single-phase solid solution of face centered cubic (FCC) structure with good thermal stability. Slurry erosion behavior of Al 0.1 CrCoFeNi CCA was evaluated at different impingement angles (30 • to 90 • ) and a constant impact velocity (20 m/s). Despite the low hardness of 150 HV, the cast Al 0.1 CrCoFeNi alloy displayed erosion resistance that is comparable to or better than mild steel (of hardness 205 HV) at acute angles (Figure 19a). At normal impingement, Al 0.1 CrCoFeNi showed much better erosion resistance when compared to mild steel, which was attributed to the significant work hardening ability of the alloy. Continuous impact of abrasive particles during the erosion test results in significant work hardening of the HEA due to its low stacking fault energy and nano-twin formation [73]. The stacking fault energy (SFE) for Al 0.1 CrCoFeNi high entropy alloy is reported to be about 30 mJ/m 2 [74]. However, Al 0.1 CoCrFeNi alloy showed lower erosion resistance when compared to stainless steel SS316L due to higher hardness and strength of the later. Correlation with different mechanical properties showed that the ultimate strength and ultimate resilience significantly affected the erosion behavior in these multi-component metallic systems.

(p10.2) The slurry erosion-corrosion behavior of AlCrCoCuFeNi CCA after annealing at different temperatures (600 • C and 1000 • C) was studied [27]. Both untreated and heat-treated AlCrCoCuFeNi alloy showed high erosion resistance compared to SS304 stainless steel. Untreated AlCrCoCuFeNi alloy also showed higher corrosion resistance compared to SS304 stainless steel. However, sample annealed at 600 • C showed significantly reduced corrosion resistance, which was attributed to precipitation of intermediate phases. Further increase in annealing temperature improved corrosion resistance from the resulting microstructural homogeneity. In contrast to corrosion studies, the combined erosion-corrosion test showed distinctly different behavior for the sample annealed at 600 • C, exhibiting the lowest mass loss. The improvement in erosion-corrosion resistance was predominantly due to increased hardness (~500 HV) due to the formation of ordered B 2 or disordered A 2 structures from the annealing process. Addition of higher Al fraction in the AlCrCoCuFeNi system was observed to increase hardness due to the formation of BCC/B 2 structure and improved erosion-corrosion resistance. However, lowering the Al content improved the corrosion behavior [34]. The Al 0.1 CrCoFeNi HEA showed high slurry erosion-corrosion resistance (~1.8 times higher) as compared to SS316L stainless steel with significant negative synergy, as shown in Figure 19b. The negative synergy for Al 0.1 CrCoFeNi CCA indicates the positive contribution of corrosion in lowering the mass loss during the erosion-corrosion test. The Al 0.1 CrCoFeNi CCA also showed high pitting and protection potentials as compared to SS316L steel, indicating the formation of stable passive layer. Stability of the passive layer was partly attributed to the high mixing entropy resulting in high activation energy for diffusion.

(p10.3) Ti addition was found to enhance the corrosion and cavitation erosion resistance of complex concentrated alloys [28]. Cavitation erosion-corrosion behavior of laser cladded AlCrCoFeNiTi x CCA (x = 0.5 to 2) was evaluated. Maximum cavitation erosion resistance was observed for AlCrCoFeNiTi 2 HEA. However, the trend reversed completely for the cavitation erosion-corrosion test, with AlCrCoFeNiTi 2 CCA showing the least resistance. This trend reversal was explained by the formation of Ti 2 Ni and NiAl intermetallic compounds. These intermetallics significantly enhanced the hardness and reduced erosion rates due to increased resistance to plastic deformation. At the same time, formation of intermetallic compounds degraded the corrosion resistance due to the formation of localized galvanic cells and unstable passive layer.

(p10.4) The cavitation erosion-corrosion performance of AlCrCoFeNi laser cladded CCA was compared with 304 stainless steel [50]. The AlCrCoFeNi coating showed 7.6 times better cavitation erosion-corrosion resistance compared to 304 stainless steel. The better performance of the CCA was attributed to combined effect of high hardness and corrosion resistance. The high hardness resulted from the BCC solid solution and corrosion resistance from the homogeneous microstructure without any intermetallic phases. When compared to E pit of 96 mV observed for SS304 steel, AlCrCoFeNi laser cladded CCA showed significantly high pitting potential of 257 mV indicating higher passive layer stability of the later. Ti addition was found to enhance the corrosion and cavitation erosion resistance of complex concentrated alloys [28]. Cavitation erosion-corrosion behavior of laser cladded AlCrCoFeNiTix CCA (x = 0.5 to 2) was evaluated. Maximum cavitation erosion resistance was observed for AlCrCoFeNiTi2 HEA. However, the trend reversed completely for the cavitation erosion-corrosion test, with AlCrCoFeNiTi2 CCA showing the least resistance. This trend reversal was explained by the formation of Ti2Ni and NiAl intermetallic compounds. These intermetallics significantly enhanced the hardness and reduced erosion rates due to increased resistance to plastic deformation. At the same time, formation of intermetallic compounds degraded the corrosion resistance due to the formation of localized galvanic cells and unstable passive layer.

(p10.5) The cavitation erosion-corrosion performance of AlCrCoFeNi laser cladded CCA was compared with 304 stainless steel [50]. The AlCrCoFeNi coating showed 7.6 times better cavitation erosioncorrosion resistance compared to 304 stainless steel. The better performance of the CCA was attributed to combined effect of high hardness and corrosion resistance. The high hardness resulted from the BCC solid solution and corrosion resistance from the homogeneous microstructure without any intermetallic phases. When compared to Epit of 96 mV observed for SS304 steel, AlCrCoFeNi laser cladded CCA showed significantly high pitting potential of 257 mV indicating higher passive layer stability of the later. Al0.1CrCoFeNi alloy showed remarkable resistance to cavitation erosion and erosion-corrosion compared to 316L stainless steel as shown in Figure 19c [76]. Additionally, the alloy showed a much longer incubation period of 6.5 h as compared to 2.5 h for 316L stainless steel. This was attributed to comparatively greater degree of work hardening and superior corrosion resistance of Al0.1CrCoFeNi alloy. The strain hardening exponent for Al0.1CrCoFeNi (n = 0.77) was more the two times that of the 316L stainless steel (n = 0.3). Higher strain hardening increased the incubation period and lowered the erosion rates by effectively increasing the flow stresses. Superior erosion-corrosion resistance of the alloy may also be explained by its higher pitting potential (Epit = 490 mV) and protection potential (Epp = 184 mV) when compared to SS316L (Epit = 359.8 mV; Epp = −10.58 mV).
## (s11) Wear Behavior of CCAs
(p11.0) All of the complex concentrated (high entropy) alloy systems that have been studied so far for their wear behavior are summarized in Figure 24. They are broadly classified based on the alloy chemistry and processing. In addition to wear behavior, the hardening response, phase stability, and hot hardness was reported for some alloys. The copper containing alloys were typically single phase or mixture of two simple phases. The copper free alloys were based on AlCoCrFeNi system and modified with Ti or Mo. The copper free alloys showed higher wear resistance when compared to the copper containing alloys. In addition, wear behavior of alloys that are composed of purely refractory elements have also been reported. Surface modification was done for some conventional steels and Ti alloys by LASER cladding, tungsten inert gas (TIG), and sputtering to enhance the wear properties.   Figure 23. Comparison of high entropy alloys with conventional structural materials for erosion and erosion-corrosion resistance. "Conventional materials" in the figure refers to a broad range of materials developed for erosion/corrosion applications such as SS304 [28,50], SS304L, mild steel, Bainitic Steel [86] and Copper Alloys [87]. "Coatings" refer to coatings on AA6061 [88] for erosion mitigation.
## (s12) Wear Behavior of CCAs
(p12.0) All of the complex concentrated (high entropy) alloy systems that have been studied so far for their wear behavior are summarized in Figure 24. They are broadly classified based on the alloy chemistry and processing. In addition to wear behavior, the hardening response, phase stability, and hot hardness was reported for some alloys. The copper containing alloys were typically single phase or mixture of two simple phases. The copper free alloys were based on AlCoCrFeNi system and modified with Ti or Mo. The copper free alloys showed higher wear resistance when compared to the copper containing alloys. In addition, wear behavior of alloys that are composed of purely refractory elements have also been reported. Surface modification was done for some conventional steels and Ti alloys by LASER cladding, tungsten inert gas (TIG), and sputtering to enhance the wear properties. Comparison of high entropy alloys with conventional structural materials for erosion and erosion-corrosion resistance. "Conventional materials" in the figure refers to a broad range of materials developed for erosion/corrosion applications such as SS304 [28,50], SS304L, mild steel, Bainitic Steel [86] and Copper Alloys [87]. "Coatings" refer to coatings on AA6061 [88] for erosion mitigation.
## (s13) Wear Behavior of CCAs
(p13.0) All of the complex concentrated (high entropy) alloy systems that have been studied so far for their wear behavior are summarized in Figure 24. They are broadly classified based on the alloy chemistry and processing. In addition to wear behavior, the hardening response, phase stability, and hot hardness was reported for some alloys. The copper containing alloys were typically single phase or mixture of two simple phases. The copper free alloys were based on AlCoCrFeNi system and modified with Ti or Mo. The copper free alloys showed higher wear resistance when compared to the copper containing alloys. In addition, wear behavior of alloys that are composed of purely refractory elements have also been reported. Surface modification was done for some conventional steels and Ti alloys by LASER cladding, tungsten inert gas (TIG), and sputtering to enhance the wear properties.  The wear behavior of Al x CoCrCuFeNi [89] alloy system has been systematically investigated by varying the Al content from x = 0.5 to x = 2. In the Al x CoCrCuFeNi cast alloys, there was Cu segregation in the inter-dendritic region, while other elements enriched the dendrites. At x = 0.5, the dendritic and inter-dendritic phases were both FCC, which changed with increasing Al content. Increasing Al content stabilized BCC phases and resulted in hardness increase by several times The Archard's wear relation was found to hold true in the case of Al x CoCrCuFeNi alloy system with improving wear resistance from the increased hardness.

(p13.1) The softer composition in Al x CoCrCuFeNi system with x = 0.5 showed ductile deformation, grooving, and disc-like wear debris, as shown in Figure 25, all of which are in line with ductile character of the FCC-rich alloy. On the other hand, the BCC-rich alloys showed smoother surface deformation, finer wear debris that were enriched with oxygen, indicating oxidative wear. The steady state friction value was the lowest for Al 0.2 CoCrCuFeNi, which is in line with the surface oxidation and high hardness that protected the alloy from tribo-degradation. Based on variation in hardness, ductile deformation, and steady state friction values in Al x CoCrCuFeNi alloy system, the Al 0.5 CoCrCuFeNi composition was chosen for further modification. Addition of V to Al 0.5 CoCrCuFeNi alloy resulted in a phase mixture consisting of FCC, BCC, and sigma phase [90]. Fixing aluminum content at 0.5 and gradually increasing V content increased the BCC phase fraction. The change in microstructure with increasing V mole fraction is shown in Figure 26. Increasing the vanadium concentration increased BCC phase fraction and hardness of the alloy, but this did not translate into improved wear resistance. There was marginal increase in wear resistance even though the hardness increased from 200 HV to a peak hardness of 650 HV. The optimum composition range for enhanced mechanical and tribological properties was in the range of 1.0 to 1.2 mole fraction of Vanadium. Therefore, multiple competing factors affected the wear behavior, including complex microstructure, elemental segregation, BCC phase fraction, and morphology. The wear behavior of AlxCoCrCuFeNi [89] alloy system has been systematically investigated by varying the Al content from x = 0.5 to x = 2. In the AlxCoCrCuFeNi cast alloys, there was Cu segregation in the inter-dendritic region, while other elements enriched the dendrites. At x = 0.5, the dendritic and inter-dendritic phases were both FCC, which changed with increasing Al content. Increasing Al content stabilized BCC phases and resulted in hardness increase by several times The Archard's wear relation was found to hold true in the case of AlxCoCrCuFeNi alloy system with improving wear resistance from the increased hardness.

(p13.2) The softer composition in AlxCoCrCuFeNi system with x = 0.5 showed ductile deformation, grooving, and disc-like wear debris, as shown in Figure 25, all of which are in line with ductile character of the FCC-rich alloy. On the other hand, the BCC-rich alloys showed smoother surface deformation, finer wear debris that were enriched with oxygen, indicating oxidative wear. The steady state friction value was the lowest for Al0.2CoCrCuFeNi, which is in line with the surface oxidation and high hardness that protected the alloy from tribo-degradation. Based on variation in hardness, ductile deformation, and steady state friction values in AlxCoCrCuFeNi alloy system, the Al0.5CoCrCuFeNi composition was chosen for further modification. Addition of V to Al0.5CoCrCuFeNi alloy resulted in a phase mixture consisting of FCC, BCC, and sigma phase [90]. Fixing aluminum content at 0.5 and gradually increasing V content increased the BCC phase fraction. The change in microstructure with increasing V mole fraction is shown in Figure 26. Increasing the vanadium concentration increased BCC phase fraction and hardness of the alloy, but this did not translate into improved wear resistance. There was marginal increase in wear resistance even though the hardness increased from 200 HV to a peak hardness of ~650 HV. The optimum composition range for enhanced mechanical and tribological properties was in the range of 1.0 to 1.2 mole fraction of Vanadium. Therefore, multiple competing factors affected the wear behavior, including complex microstructure, elemental segregation, BCC phase fraction, and morphology.  The initial microstructure had the lowest hardness value, which was observed to increase with increasing vanadium content. All three microstructures showed segregation of copper into interdendritic regions [90] (reprinted with permission from Springer).

(p13.3) Boron is known to be a BCC phase stabilizer in ferrous alloys. In contrast, this effect was not seen with boron addition to Al0.5CoCrCuFeNi. The alloy retained its FCC structure when B was less than 10%, while small quantities of ordered FCC phases evolved when the content was increased to ~15% [38]. In contrast to Vanadium addition, changing B content led to a significant strengthening effect. Addition of boron to the AlCoCrCuFeNi system was observed to increase the hardness and wear resistance of the alloy to 736 HV and 1.76 m/mm 3 , respectively. The wear resistance of the alloy was superior when compared to wear resistant SUJ bearing steels. Hardness increased from ~300 HV to 750 HV along with nearly doubling of wear resistance when boron content was increased from 0% to 15%. The changes in hardness and wear resistance with the addition of Vanadium, Boron, and Aluminum are summarized in Figure 27.  The initial microstructure had the lowest hardness value, which was observed to increase with increasing vanadium content. All three microstructures showed segregation of copper into inter-dendritic regions [90] (reprinted with permission from Springer).

(p13.4) Boron is known to be a BCC phase stabilizer in ferrous alloys. In contrast, this effect was not seen with boron addition to Al 0.5 CoCrCuFeNi. The alloy retained its FCC structure when B was less than 10%, while small quantities of ordered FCC phases evolved when the content was increased tõ 15% [38]. In contrast to Vanadium addition, changing B content led to a significant strengthening effect. Addition of boron to the AlCoCrCuFeNi system was observed to increase the hardness and wear resistance of the alloy to 736 HV and 1.76 m/mm 3 , respectively. The wear resistance of the alloy was superior when compared to wear resistant SUJ bearing steels. Hardness increased from 300 HV to 750 HV along with nearly doubling of wear resistance when boron content was increased from 0% to 15%. The changes in hardness and wear resistance with the addition of Vanadium, Boron, and Aluminum are summarized in Figure 27. The initial microstructure had the lowest hardness value, which was observed to increase with increasing vanadium content. All three microstructures showed segregation of copper into interdendritic regions [90] (reprinted with permission from Springer).
## (s18) Future Opportunities and Outlook
(p18.0) Complex concentrated alloys present a plethora of opportunities for the development of next generation materials. The scope is not just limited to bulk materials and melt-deposition coatings but also in the form of thin films and powder-metallurgy products. However, critical knowledge gaps in surface degradation mechanisms need to be assessed prior to determining the true application worthiness of these alloys. The effect of processing on surface degradation mechanisms are not well understood for welding and joining, severe-plastic deformation, and hot working. Another area with very limited number of studies includes extreme environments, such as molten/fused salts, heavy ion/neutron irradiation, and high temperatures.

(p18.1) Understanding the nature and chemistry of the surface passivation layer is critically important for corrosion, erosion, and wear applications. This has not been done in a comprehensive way. Surface characterization using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultra-violet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) could reveal valuable information about the chemistry and electronic structure of the surface passivation layer and help in fundamental understanding of the underlying mechanisms. This knowledge may be utilized to develop specific surface treatments to produce strongly passivating and non-porous oxides that can offer exceptional surface degradation resistance. Slight changes in composition (micro-alloying) or processing conditions have shown large variations in properties, compounding the complexity in analyzing these multi-component systems. In complex precipitation hardened CCAs, composition fluctuations at multiple length-scales (atomic, nano, micro) may lead to "local" effects that nucleate the breakdown of passivation layers. These effects may be captured by phase-specific corrosion and wear tests at the microstructural length-scales, including scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) and nano-scratch/wear tests.

(p18.2) There are very limited reports on the lubricity and friction behavior of complex concentrated alloys. This may be of interest in tribology for developing super-lubricity complex composition coatings. Phase-specific friction studies will provide significant insights into surface degradation from multi-body wear in multi-phase CCAs [101]. Ni free complex alloys might be attractive for biomedical applications. Evaluating in-vitro wear behavior and quantifying cytotoxicity of the wear products will significantly help in developing new biomaterials. Recently reported refractory CCAs may be attractive for highly stressed bearing applications, where high temperature wear behavior, evolution of oxide layers, kinetics of spalling, and pesting are of significant fundamental interest.

(p18.3) Advanced additive manufacturing, LASER melt-deposition, and combinatorial development using powder bed and powder feed techniques for CCAs hold tremendous potential towards meeting long-standing challenges like highly corrosion resistant surface materials and thermal barrier coatings. CCA claddings via melt-deposition is yet to be explored. Electrodeposition of CCA/HEA coatings via co-deposition and auto-catalytic reactions could dramatically enhance functional applications of these alloys. CCA thin films could be potentially transformative as diffusion barriers in integrated circuit (IC) manufacturing because of extremely sluggish diffusion and lattice distortion. The future opportunities and outlook for complex concentrated alloys in different areas are summarized in Figure 34. 
