# A Survey of large, rapid solar wind dynamic pressure changes observed by Interball-1 and IMP 8

CorpusID: 13974862 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/001b497227af3fca742ea3594c7ea4e7ca387754](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/001b497227af3fca742ea3594c7ea4e7ca387754)

Fields: Environmental Science, Physics

## (s4) Discussion of the origins of the pressure changes
(p4.0) One important problem is to determine the origin of observed rapid and large changes in solar wind dynamic pressure. Are they produced by processes near the Sun or during the solar wind propagation through interplanetary space? Some arguments on this point may be discussed using the results of our investigation.

(p4.1) (1) We can estimate the average frequency of rapid and large density changes detected by Interball-1 and IMP 8. Using the total number of events observed by Interball-1 (119 isolated fronts) and the number of days (281) when Interball-1 was definitely in the solar wind (three days for each orbit), we calculated the frequency of pressure events as 0.42 for such an event, per day. IMP 8 is in the solar wind for about 10 days of its 12.5 day orbit around the Earth. In 223 days of solar wind observations we found 91 large pressure change events. Therefore, the frequency of pressure jumps observed by IMP 8 is 0.40 for such an event, per day. Since Interball-1 data was from 1996 and 1998 and IMP 8 data was from 1979, this result suggests that the frequency of such events does not differ significantly between solar minimum and solar maximum.

(p4.2) It is necessary to estimate the homogeneity of the event occurrence rate. The large and sharp pressure changes are not distributed homogeneously. For example, for Interball-1 data, these events are observed on only 30% of the days in 1996 and 1998; gaps of 10-20 days without such pressure changes are common. For IMP 8 data, the large and sharp pressure changes are observed on 20% of the days in 1979 and these "active" days usually occur in groups of 2-3 with large (10-20 days) "quiet" gaps between them. So, the creation of sharp and large pressure changes may require that special conditions exist in the solar wind. The study of such conditions will be the focus of future work.

(p4.3) (2) Shodhan et al. (1999) found that long (1 hour and more) density (pressure) pulses were associated with solar events (coronal mass ejections, CMEs) or with the interaction of fast and slow solar wind streams in the interplanetary medium (corotating interaction regions, CIRs). Some of the sharp density (pressure) fronts, in principal, may be connected to interplanetary shock waves of CME or CIR origin.

(p4.4) To check this point, we compared the changes in pressure with the simultaneous changes in the solar wind bulk speed, thermal velocity and IMF magnitude in the Wind data. Of the 204 pressure change events detected by Interball-1, only 11 cases coincided with a significant increase in the solar wind speed, together with the increasing of density, thermal velocity and IMF magnitude that identified these events as fast interplanetary shocks. In all the other cases, the changes in the solar wind parameters at the pressure fronts did not allow one to identify these events as interplanetary shocks. A similar result was obtained for the IMP 8 data; only 25 of 116 events were identified as interplanetary shocks. All of these shock-like events were excluded from the statistical results discussed above. We conclude that most fast and large solar wind pressure changes are not associated with interplanetary shocks.

(p4.5) (3) We compare the plasma thermal pressure variations (dP th ) with the simultaneous magnetic field pressure variations (dP m ) across the fast and large dynamic pressure fronts. The aim of this comparison is to check the hypothesis that pressure balance is maintained across the boundary of solar wind plasma structures (see, for example, Burlaga et al., 1970Burlaga et al., , 1981; for tangential discontinuities, thought to be the most frequent type of discontinuity in the solar wind, the pressure balance must be maintained in the MHD limit.

(p4.6) We selected the 27 cases from the Interball-1 data that had dynamic pressure changes dP > 3 nPa. For these cases we estimated the thermal pressure changes and magnetic field pressure changes using the bulk velocity, ion thermal velocity, electron temperature and magnetic field amplitude observed by Wind and shifted to the Interball-1 position by the solar wind propagation time. The plasma density was determined by dividing the Interball-1 ion flux data by the bulk velocity observed by Wind.

(p4.7) The changes in dynamic pressure observed by Interball-1 coincide well with observations by Wind after taking the time shift into account. Plasma thermal pressure changes were calculated as dP th = k · dn · (dT i + dT e ), where dT i and dT e are the changes in the ion and electron temperatures across the dynamic pressure front. In most cases the changes in the ion and electron temperatures were not large, 10-20%, whereas the density change is typically a factor of 2-3. The comparison of thermal and magnetic pressure changes for these events is presented in Fig. 8. Several features can be seen from this plot:

(p4.8) -the changes in the thermal pressure and magnetic field pressure always have the opposite sign, as required for pressure balance, with increasing thermal pressure coinciding with decreasing magnetic pressure and vice versa;

(p4.9) -however, values of dP m in all cases except two are significantly (several times) lower than values of dP th (see the dash line in Fig. 8), so pressure balance is often not maintained across events with sharp and large dynamic pressure changes;

(p4.10) -we find a large effect which depends on the sign of the dP th variations (see the solid line in Fig. 8); for positive dP th , (the plasma thermal pressure increases) the change in dP m is, on average, about 8 times less than the thermal pressure change, whereas for negative dP th , the average value of dP m is only about 2 times less than dP th .

(p4.11) For most of the events the direction of the field changes significantly but we need to conclude that these events cannot be tangential discontinuities because pressure balance is not maintained. They could be either slow shocks or rota- tional discontinuities with an anisotropy of the thermal pressure (Hudson, 1971(Hudson, , 1973.
