# Managed Aquifer Recharge: An Overview of Issues and Options 16

CorpusID: 133526589 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ede130015c735e7ef94ccd3f08d7b2f8fa9ebdd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ede130015c735e7ef94ccd3f08d7b2f8fa9ebdd)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) As covered in Chap. 2, many of the world's aquifers are rapidly being depleted. Nearly one quarter of the world's population -1.7 billion people -live in regions where more water is being consumed than nature can renew (Gleeson et al. 2012). Over-exploitation occurs when groundwater abstraction is too intensive, for example for irrigation or for direct industrial water-supply like extracting fossil fuels Foster et al. 2013). When groundwater is continuously overpumped, year after year, the volume withdrawn from the aquifer cannot be replaced by recharge. Eventually, the groundwater level is much lower than its initial level and even when pumping stops, the aquifer has trouble rising once again to its original level. In continental zones, over-exploitation can lead to groundwater drawdown and, ultimately, to subsidence through development of sinkholes when underground caverns or channels collapse. In coastal areas, the decrease in groundwater recharge results in saltwater intrusion into the aquifer formation (Petalas and Lambrakis 2006;De Montety et al. 2008). Preserving local groundwater resources is an environmental and economic issue in coastal zones and is vital in an island context. The increasing demand for water caused by a growing population can lead to the salinization of groundwater resources if these are systematically overexploited. Limiting the salinization of coastal aquifers is consistent with the groundwater objective of the European Union Water Framework Directive, which is to achieve a good qualitative and quantitative status by 2015. The economic advantage of preserving these threatened water resources is that, when there is a growing demand, a local water resource is sustained and there is no need to import water. Transporting water can cost 2-10 times more than limiting the intrusion of saltwater into a coastal aquifer.

(p0.1) All over the world, the problems related to groundwater withdrawal from coastal aquifers are usually complicated because they associate the notion of quantity with that of quality (Werner et al. 2013). They are even more complex given that there is often a high demand for water in coastal areas. Population growth and the development of agriculture, industry and tourism are leading to increased groundwater abstraction, while the effects of global climate change are increasing seasonal variations. The deterioration of groundwater quality and quantity as demand increases is becoming more pronounced. In order to prevent this salinization, long-term operational management measures must be taken.
## (s2) Infiltration Methods
(p2.0) Infiltration methods are designed to facilitate the infiltration of water to the aquifer by means of infiltration basins (ponds, tanks), while improving the quality of the recharge water by natural attenuation in the aquifer's unsaturated zone. They are usually used to recharge water table aquifers or, in some cases, to create hydraulic barriers. One of the main advantages of these methods is that they are inexpensive and relatively easy to implement and maintain. The "infiltration ponds" method includes installations such as dams and small reservoirs, as well as various improvements and installations designed to manage stormwater (or runoff) and individual wastewater treatment units. This category also includes reservoir pavements, recharge pits, drainage trenches, vegetated ditches, mounds systems, sand filters and septic drain fields.

(p2.1) With all of these techniques, the water passes through the unsaturated zone before reaching the aquifer. The water can thus be potentially purified by contact with the soil, which enables the elimination not only of certain pathogenic agents but also of potentially harmful inorganic and organic substances. Infiltration ponds are often used in MAR projects, notably in places where there are frequent water shortages. Depending on which technique is being considered (infiltration ponds, percolation tanks, Soil Aquifer Treatment (SAT) Dillon 2005), basin characteristics such as the desired infiltration rate are adapted to the local objectives and can vary significantly. If the objective is quantitative, the chosen infiltration rate might be relatively high (several meters per day), whereas a lower infiltration rate (an average of 0.5 m.day À1 ) would be recommended when the objective also includes the geo-purification of the infiltrating water.

(p2.2) The geo-purification capacity of the filtering layer is in some cases improved when plants are grown on this layer. Indeed, the presence of plants in the filtering layer protects the surface of the basin from erosion and clogging and is carriers for bacteria that act for biodegradation of some inorganic and organic pollutants. On summer, plants can improve the purification of the infiltrated water by enhancing phytoremediation.

(p2.3) The water temperature also has an influence on the infiltration rate. Colder water infiltrates more slowly due to an increase in viscosity. The volume of water that infiltrates below a basin can therefore decrease significantly in winter. Water that has not been greatly treated is also rich in organic matter, which fosters the development of bacteria. This might decrease the porosity, notably by the formation of biofilms.

(p2.4) To avoid, or rather slow down this clogging process several processes are available, depending on the application (Le Coustumer 2008). The first is to pre-treat the water that will infiltrate. Settling ponds or sand filters can be installed upstream from the infiltration basin, or the chemical properties of the recharge water can be modified by adding various chemical compounds, mostly inorganic. The second solution is to operate infiltration basins alternately, following "wetting-drying" cycles, in order to enable the decompacting and/or maintenance of the basin floor.
## (s4) Filtration Methods
(p4.0) Induced recharge called riverbank filtration, involves increasing the infiltration of water from a river to its alluvial aquifer by pumping in wells located near the riverbank. A string of wells are installed parallel to and near the river. Pumping in the wells lowers the water table, creating a difference in head between the river and the groundwater. This draws the surface water through the riverbank, as long as the riverbank is not clogged and/or the pumping rate is sufficient. The principal aim of this technology is to use the geo-purifying capacity of the riverbank to filter and purify the recharge water. Due to the high concentration of suspended matter in surface water, riverbanks rapidly become clogged. In order to prevent this, the infiltration rate must be relatively low and the riverbanks must be periodically maintained. Another method called dune filtration consists of infiltrating water from ponds constructed in dunes. The water is then extracted from wells or ponds at lower elevation (Dillon 2005 
## (s6) Hydrogeological and Regulatory Constraints
(p6.0) The feasibility of an MAR system depends for the most part on local hydrogeological conditions (Dillon 2005). In the case of infiltration methods, the unsaturated zone must allow the water to infiltrate to the aquifer and the aquifer must be able to store the infiltrated water. Preference is therefore given to sites that have a rather low diffusivity, i.e. relatively low permeability and high storage capacity. These conditions can be found in aquifer formations with interstitial porosity (e.g. sandy, sandstone formations) or with both interstitial and fracture porosity (e.g. chalk). As concerns water quality, when choosing an MAR site, one must be sure that the quality of the recharge water is compatible with the reactive potential of the aquifer matrix and especially that of the unsaturated zone.

(p6.1) Current French regulations state that an MAR system is subject to prior approval in compliance with the environmental code and an impact assessment must be carried out. It must comply with French and European water laws, in particular with respect to the prevention and mitigation of discharge of pollutants to groundwater. In the specific case of MAR systems, the environmental code prohibits the use of treated wastewater in France.
## (s7) Health and Environmental Risks
(p7.0) Depending on the quality and the efficiency of the treatments given to the recharge water, it can contain various amounts of pollutants such as trace metals, nutrients and microorganisms, including pathogenic microorganisms and contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) (Lapworth et al. 2012). Using different waters that have different origins and different qualities, notably treated wastewater, for MAR systems might therefore create high risks for public health. The complexity of reactive transport processes in the unsaturated zone highlights two of the main stumbling blocks that must be taken into consideration if treated wastewater is being considered for MAR: one specific challenge is to have numerical models that can include all of the hydro-biogeochemical processes involved in reactive transport, while a second, more operational, is the need to have a complete biogeochemical and hydrogeological characterisation specific to each MAR site.
## (s12) Hydrogeology Study
(p12.0) The feasibility of an MAR system depends largely on local hydrogeological conditions (Dillon 2005). Understanding of natural recharge, of its evolution, and therefore of the storage capacity of the sub-surface will be a fundamental criterion for decision support in the choice of an artificial recharge site. This step of feasibility needs a closely hydrogeological analysis with the help of hydrogeologic experts that can advise about the drawbacks or benefit of the future considered MAR site.
## (s13) Biogeochemical Processes Evaluation
(p13.0) In the case of artificial recharge systems that involve infiltration techniques, geochemical and microbiological processes might occur in the unsaturated zone that enables the purification of the recharge water. Furthermore, the unsaturated zone must allow the water to infiltrate to the aquifer, the aquifer must be able to store the infiltrated water, and then release it without excessive "dissipation", which would cancel the storage effect. It is, however, possible to identify the main criteria that can affect the geochemical and microbiological processes that enhance the purification of the recharge water as it moves through the unsaturated zone: (i) pH, (ii) redox potential, (iii) organic matter content, and (iv) mineralogy (Johnson et al. 1999;Rinck-Pfeiffer et al. 2000;Pettenati et al. 2012):

(p13.1) (i) In order to limit trace metal mobility and optimize organic contaminant degradation, it is preferable that the pH of recharge water interacting with the aquifer matrix and/or soil presents a range of values between 5 and 8. In general, adsorption processes (surface complexation and ion exchange reactions) of cations such as trace metals and degradation reactions are usually weaker at extreme pH values. Under acidic conditions (pH < 4), the adsorption of protons on negatively charged adsorption sites neutralises the charges of these sites, or even gives them a positive charge, which decreases the adsorption capacity of the components of the medium for cations. Under alkaline conditions (pH > 8), cations do not remain in the form of free ions but form aqueous complexes involving anions, usually the oxyhydroxides group, that are present in the solution. (ii) Geo-purification processes (adsorption, dissolution/precipitation, biodegradation) are strongly influenced by the redox potential. For example, a decrease in the redox potential can cause dissolution of oxide and/or hydroxide carrier phases and therefore the release of adsorbed trace metals at their surface or in their crystal matrix. Furthermore, a decrease in the redox potential modifies the aqueous speciation of trace metals, which can increase their toxicity (for example, by transforming As(V) into As(III)). (iii) The natural attenuation processes occurring in the soil and sub-soil, particularly in the unsaturated zone, have been shown to be quite effective with respect to trace organic removal (Ternes et al. 1998). The biodegradation process is also influenced by organic matter. Organic matter is the main source of energy for microorganisms in the unsaturated zone. In order to enhance the metal adsorption reactions and microbiological reactions including the degradation of organic pollutants or the reduction of nitrates, recharge systems should be installed on sites having significant relatively-insoluble organic matter content. (iv) Another criterion that makes it possible to evaluate the geo-purification capacities of unsaturated zones during artificial recharge is their mineralogy. Indeed, mineralogy can strongly influence the geochemical processes that control the mobility of pollutants in the unsaturated zone. Analysing the mineralogy of the unsaturated zone makes it possible to determine the concentrations of oxyhydroxides and clay minerals, which are the solid phases that have the greatest affinity for pollutants.
## (s15) Cost-Benefit Study
(p15.0) The costs and benefits of the different management solutions (including environmental costs and benefits) must be systematically assessed in close collaboration with hydrogeological study (Shah 2014). The concept of water foot-printing needs to be deepened, establishing practical methods and certifiable systems. Innovative concepts for water resources management need to be developed, with the aim of providing science-proof solutions to societal water challenges. On the basis of French feedback , the feasibility of implementing MAR strongly depends on developing new approaches for water management aiming at setting up innovative alternatives suitable for decision making. These approaches should be ideally based on: (i) the broad participation of stakeholders; (ii) multidisciplinary research; and (iii) the development of scenarios to support short to long term decision making.
