# System Development Guidelines From a Review of Motion-Based Technology for People With Dementia or MCI

CorpusID: 13707407 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/614bff0a35da62680863b1d4c214a8c42761916a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/614bff0a35da62680863b1d4c214a8c42761916a)

Fields: Engineering, Psychology, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Dementia is a progressive neurodegenerative condition of multiple causes (e.g., Alzheimer's disease, vascular disease) which produces noticeable impairments in areas of cognitive functioning such as memory, attention, communication, comprehension and executive function (1,2). Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is defined as a condition in which a person shows mild yet measurable cognitive changes greater than those expected for their age; however, these changes do not impair the person's ability to perform activities of daily living, such as those experienced by people with dementia (3). MCI increases the risk of a person developing dementia (3) although this is not inevitable. As the population continues to age and life expectancy continues to increase (4), the prevalence of conditions such as dementia and MCI is also growing (5). For instance, the number of people living with dementia globally is expected to increase three-fold to 131.5 million by 2050 (5). In the absence of pharmacological or other treatments to reverse these conditions, it is increasingly important to identify interventions that can support people with dementia and MCI to live well (6,7).
## (s4) Cognitive Domain Considerations
(p4.0) The cognitive capabilities of PCI (1-3) must be thoroughly understood, respected and considered when developing or using motion-based technologies with these populations. For example, impairments in attention, concentration, visuospatial abilities, working memory, and cognitive processing speed can impact the way PCI experience and interact with motion-based technology (1-3). These cognitive changes can interfere with the speed at which people learn, how much training they need, and how they perform against standard benchmarks. However, PCI can learn to use motion-based technology with the right prompting and support (7). Thus, it is ideal to design or use motionbased technologies such that the cognitive needs of PCI are accommodated in order to increase accessibility and usability of the device and software. From the literature, cognitive considerations for PCI relative to healthy controls include: loss of executive function, and specifically working memory; leveraging remaining cognitive abilities (e.g., procedural and working memory); utilizing prompts which have been shown effective with PCI; accounting for processing speed differences; and accommodating impairments in attention and concentration (14,17). We now explore these considerations in terms of relevant design and use implications.
## (s12) Physical Domain Considerations
(p12.0) In addition to the cognitive considerations when working with people who have MCI or dementia, it is also necessary to consider the physical effects as well as those from aging, as age is the main risk factor for developing dementia or MCI (2, 3). For example, the presence of dementia or MCI can result in deficits in physical functioning such as motor control, gait, fine motor coordination, speed, and balance (34,35,38). Specifically, the literature pertaining to motion-based technology considers mobility aids, reduced motor control, speed and reaction time, an inability to process complex or repetitive motions, and reduced visual and auditory capabilities in populations of PCI. While many studies recommend the use of trained therapists to facilitate motion-based technology interventions with PCI (25,27,33,34,36,38,41,42), the impact of the physical changes associated with PCI on the ability to interact with the technology can be accommodated and integrated into the technology design for this population. We now consider the effects of these factors on the design and use of motion-based technologies.
