# CLIMATE FEEDBACKS (M ZELINKA, SECTION EDITOR) Using Active Remote Sensing to Evaluate Cloud-Climate Feedbacks: a Review and a Look to the Future

CorpusID: 133662408 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/26b12a668bd65c0ffa899562904679c6f20a665e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/26b12a668bd65c0ffa899562904679c6f20a665e)

Fields: Environmental Science, Geography, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) It has been known since the era of the Earth Radiation Budget Satellites in the 1980s [1] that clouds tend to cool the Earth by approximately 20 W m −2 . In other words, the cloud radiative effect or forcing is R cld = R − R 0 ≈ − 20 W m −2 where R is the temporally and globally averaged net radiation at the top of the atmosphere and superscript 0 denotes clear sky. This tendency to cool the Earth system is about five times the magnitude and of opposite sign to the external radiative perturbation (dR ext ) due to a doubling of CO 2 . Assuming that the climate system is represented by changes to the globally averaged surface temperature (δT sfc ), the change in top of atmosphere net radiative flux (dR), associated with changes in the climate system, is defined as a feedback [λ, W m −2 K −1 ]. A thorough discussion of the primary feedbacks in the climate system is given in [2], and a review of cloud feedbacks (λ cld ) is given in [3]. Uncertainty in the equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS) defined as δT sfc due to CO 2 doubling has been persistently large due primarily to uncertainties in λ cld [4,5].
## (s1) The Nature of the Cloud Response-Forcing and Feedback
(p1.0) Consider that even if the distribution and properties of clouds in the climate system did not change with increasing greenhouse gasses, cloud radiative forcing, R cld , as defined earlier would tend to become smaller just because the infrared opacity of the clear sky atmosphere would increase as greenhouse gas concentrations increase. In other words, a non-zero λ cld would be inferred even if clouds did not change. This highlights the need to carefully interpret changes to R cld (dR cld ) in terms of λ cld . In a paradigm introduced by Soden et al. [12], the change in dR cld can be expressed in terms of dR adjusted for the effects of changes to the net radiation in the cloud-free sky (dR 0 ):

(p1.1) where the terms in the parentheses represent dR 0 . In Eq. 1, G refers to R ext , and the quantities K x refer to the globally averaged radiative kernels ( ∂R ∂x ) due to x where x can be temperature (T), water vapor (w), and albedo (a). K x are functions of the radiative transfer physics such as the radiative properties of clouds and the atmosphere, and they allow for an intuitive evaluation of the feedbacks [13][14][15]. Alternatively, dR can be expressed in terms of the total sky (clear plus cloudy) changes,

(p1.2) where now the terms in the parentheses represent changes to the all-sky net radiation not associated with changes to clouds. Subtracting Eq. 2 from 1, the relationship between R cld and λ cld then becomes

(p1.3) where M is the difference of the parenthesized terms in Eqs. 1 and 2 and represents the extent to which clouds mask changes to non-cloud feedback terms. This relationship between the cloud forcing, feedbacks, and cloud masking was first derived in [12]. The important insight is the relationship between dR cld and λ cld . A decrease in cloud cover with warming that decreases R cld with all else remaining constant, for instance, would result in a positive shortwave λ cld and a negative longwave λ cld with the net depending on their relative magnitudes. If the cloud properties remained the same with decreasing cloud cover, dR cld would approach zero as R approaches R 0 . It is generally understood when evaluating ECS, for instance, that Eq. 3 is considered between two equilibrium climate states that differ by a doubling in CO 2 . However, it was found that following an instantaneous CO 2 doubling, some changes in clouds happened very quickly (within days or months of the CO 2 change) independent of δT sfc that ultimately drove a top of atmosphere (TOA) radiative flux change [6][7][8][9][10]. These rapid adjustments (F cld ) were independent of δ T sfc and therefore independent of λ cld , such that dR cld = F cld + δT sfc λ cld : With this understanding, we would rewrite Eq. 3 to account for the adjustments since the radiative change that defines the feedback response (δT sfc λ cld ) is due to changes in R cld that are not associated with rapid adjustments.

(p1.4) where the prime on M indicates that M now includes masking adjustments for the rapid response of the climate system to the instantaneous CO 2 doubling. Equation 4 illustrates the relationship between the cloud feedback, the cloud forcing, the adjustments, and the cloud masking. In a further innovation, Zelinka et al., [14,15] introduced an approach for calculating λ cld using a cloud occurrence (C) radiative kernel K c where the terms in the K c matrix would be ∂R ∂C as a function of the column optical depth (τ) and cloud top pressure (P CT ) based on the International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP) [26] convention . Then λ cld is expressed in terms of the matrix of K c times the change in an occurrence frequency matrix (δC) of the various cloud types defined in terms of P CT and τ, λ cld = K c *(δC=δT sfc Þ.Note that δC is normalized by the globally averaged temperature change over which the changes in cloud occurrence were determined. In addition, methodologies for decomposing the cloud feedback into contributions from δC, from changes to P CT , and changes to τ were introduced [9,16]. This decomposition effectively separates the occurrence frequencies from cloud properties and separates the cloud properties into important orthogonal and observable macrophysical components. For instance, one would expect that R cld for a given type defined by P CT and τ would be reasonably constant at a given latitude over some averaging period like a month while the distribution of cloudiness type might shift as the climate changes [27,28].

(p1.5) From an observational perspective, there are several challenges to interpreting Eq. 4. First, the distinction between F cld and dR cld are pedagogical in a practical sense since the distinction between F cld and δT sfc λ cld are not observable. However, it is important to know which processes that drive observable changes to the system are and are not associated with feedbacks since they can indicate over what timescales and under what conditions certain change-related processes might emerge from the noise of the climate system. Active remote sensors are uniquely able to observe C with very high accuracy and relatively little ambiguity. As we discuss in the following, the influence of cloud-type changes within the δC matrix have distinct signatures in the climate system. Also, while it is generally assumed that K c is more or less constant [9,[14][15][16], changes to the diurnal distribution of cloud occurrence and changes to radiative properties due to microphysical processes that may be a function of temperature can modulate K c . In the next section, we elaborate on these issues using specific examples from the measurement record and from recent literature.
## (s2) The Role of Active Remote Sensors
(p2.0) Using Eq. 5 as a roadmap, we consider the role of active remote sensing in contributing to our understanding. The challenge that must be overcome is that the conceptual thinking that produced Eq. 5 is rooted in global modeling where equilibrium climate states can be generated numerically from instantaneously perturbed approximations of nature. Because of the drastically different space and timescales of such global modeling exercises compared to measurements and because it is difficult to conduct controlled experiments using the actual Earth, the observational record has played a limited role in developing understanding and in constraining predictions regarding climate feedbacks and forcings. We argue that the primary contribution of active and combined active and passive remote sensors such as the A-Train will be in populating the C matrix on global spatial scales and on timescales that are becoming climate-relevant. This is especially true in light of the emergent constraint concept [17]. To illustrate how active remote sensors can contribute to the cloud feedback/forcing problem, we present an example.

(p2.1) Active remote sensors, particularly millimeter wavelength radar and elastic lidar, are uniquely suited to observing the vertical distribution of clouds and precipitation [29,30] and important first-order properties such as cloud top phase [31][32][33][34]. In Figs. 1, 2, 3, and 4, we present an example of using combined space-borne lidar and radar data to diagnose R cld in terms of the radiative kernel and occurrence matrix.

(p2.2) Examples of C, K c , and R cld matrices were developed following the methodology of [14] using data collected in a 20°× 20°region in the North Atlantic centered roughly on 55°N and 20°W. An entire annual cycle is used in this analysis, and we present an average of day and night measurements. The in-atmosphere K c or K c,atm in Fig. 1 is an observationally derived radiative kernel that was created using fluxes calculated by combining active and passive A-Train measurements and retrievals as described in detail in [37]. Here, we present K c in terms of the geometric cloud top height (CTH) instead of P CT to illustrate the advantage provided by active remote sensors in avoiding the inherently ambiguous P CT [35,38]. Unlike the K c shown in [9], these matrices are not Fig. 1 Atmospheric radiative kernels in units of W m −2 % −1 following the approach by Zelinka [9,16] calculated from single-layer cloud properties from A-Train data over the North Atlantic [35] between 45°N-65°N and 10°W-30°W during calendar year 1997. a In-atmosphere longwave kernel. b In-atmosphere shortwave kernel. c In-atmosphere net radiative kernel necessarily smooth since each CTH-τ bin averages flux data from cloud layers with varying microphysical properties (phase, water path, effective radius). In addition, the observationally derived radiative kernel is limited by the sample size in each CTH-τ bin (Fig. 3) and is influenced by the diurnal variation of cloud layers, with some cloud types occurring more frequently during the night overpass and vice versa.

(p2.3) The net K c,atm is largely dominated by longwave radiation and demonstrates the bifurcation in upper tropospheric heating and lower tropospheric cooling by clouds over these middle-latitude regions. Conversely, the net TOA and surface K c in Fig. 2 are similar to one another, implying that most clouds strongly cool the surface, and this cooling is predominant in the column. Note the difference in the color scale between Figs. 1 and 2.

(p2.4) The cloud occurrence matrix or C in Fig. 3 shows that the distribution of cloud layer occurrence in this region is dominated by optically thick high-level clouds associated with fronts and moderately optically thick low-level clouds that have tops below 3 km. However, the extremely high cloud fraction in this region of 86% indicates the predominance of clouds to the radiation budget of the North Atlantic. Multiplying K c,TOA , K c,atm , and K c,sfc by C allows us to derive matrices of cloud radiative forcing, R cld (Fig. 4). Interestingly, the net radiative forcing of clouds to the atmosphere of the North Atlantic region balances to be effectively zero over the annual cycle considered. Since the atmosphere cloud radiative effect (CRE) balances, the net surface and TOA CRE are effectively identical. The cooling diagnosed in this region on an annual cycle results from optically thick low-level clouds and frontal clouds that have tops in the upper troposphere.

(p2.5) The nuances provided in this example highlight the unique strength of combined space-borne cloud radar and lidar to the cloud feedback problem using the K c kernel approach. Because we can place hydrometeor layers in the atmosphere with very high accuracy using the active remote sensors, we can also derive their radiative properties with improved accuracy. This allows us to demonstrate not only that the atmosphere CRE effectively balances, but that this balance is achieved through cooling in the lower troposphere and heating aloft. Presumably, the energy that is deposited in the upper troposphere is then exported to higher latitudes where it is ultimately radiated to space. It is noteworthy that analyzing only the TOA radiative quantities misses the interesting radiative processes that occur in the atmosphere [37].
## (s8) Summary and Conclusions
(p8.0) In a recent discussion of grand challenges, Bony et al. [49] report that most of the leading advances in our understanding of cloud feedback and climate processes have come primarily from idealized modeling, yet there remain major outstanding uncertainties that must be addressed observationally if we are to reduce the spread in ECS. It is, therefore, incumbent on the observational community to keep pace with the questions being posed by the theoretical community. Because it typically takes a decade or more to move a new observational platform or concept to space, the observational community must be thinking well ahead.
