# A review of uses of satellite imagery in monitoring mangrove forests

CorpusID: 132023404 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a15dcc1589e6f11a60f78bc42f7200fa1585601d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a15dcc1589e6f11a60f78bc42f7200fa1585601d)

Fields: Geography, Environmental Science, Physics

## (s6) The role and needs of satellite imagery data in mangroves monitoring
(p6.0) In the last 3 decades, a significant decline in mangrove forests has become a major environmental issue. The increased awareness of people, particularly environmentalists exerts a pressure on the need for conservation and restoration. As such, retrieving up-to-date information with regard to the extent of damage and condition of mangrove ecosystems is an essential aid to management as well as policyand decision-making processes [9].

(p6.1) Remotely sensed satellite images have been used to characterise mangrove ecosystems for more than two decades; aerial photographs has gradually become obsolete because high resolution images are more advanced, and promise detailed and accurate data [9] [34][35]. The benefits and limitations are listed in Tables 4, 5 and 6. With high resolution images, it is relatively easy to study the costal ecosystems. The embedded detailed information provides a synoptic view, multi-temporal, coverage and multi-spectral ability in the whole range of wavelengths, from visible to microwave. These advantages can effectively act as a tool par excellence in providing advance and reliable information on mangrove extent and status of its growth along the coastal areas [36], which would not be possible by using ground based techniques. The reflectance patterns of vegetation in visible and near infrared (NIR) spectral region give information on the conditions of vegetation covers [36].
## (s9) Conclusion and prospective
(p9.0) In short, usages of satellite images for mangrove forests management are crucial in obtaining information. Satellite imagery data offer considerable advantages in mangrove studies and are useful to monitor mangrove ecosystems. Options to use either optical or radar satellite images depend on a study's needs. The output of a satellite imagery analysis can provide accurate information to facilitate conservation planning and policy-making as the technology is currently in an advanced stage. In the future, the quality of images processing can be improved further if radar and optical data are integrated. These images can be utilised to explore and monitor the development of mangrove forests in a more effective manner, as [44] aptly state that radar data complement optical data. 
