# Computer-Based Interventions for Problematic Alcohol Use: a Review of Systematic Reviews

CorpusID: 13676851 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4ae452a3041e9e05cc0802a6721209a98779183](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4ae452a3041e9e05cc0802a6721209a98779183)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s6) Reviews on Student Populations 1
(p6.0) Three reviews reported outcomes in standard drinking units [14,16,26] [26]. Dedert et al. 2015, the only review reporting outcomes in grammes of ethanol per week among students, found a mean difference of −11.7 g of ethanol (95 % CI −19.3 to −4.1) per week at 6 months between computerbased interventions and control groups reflecting a reduction of about 1.5 UK standard units or one European standard unit. At 12 months, no significant difference between groups was found [24]. Three reviews presented effect sizes on binge drinking [14,16,24] [16], and Dedert et al. 2015 found no effect [24]. Three reviews presented effect sizes on alcohol related problems [14,16,26] Alcohol combined with other health behaviours = 4
## (s7) Reviews on Adult (Non-Student) Populations 2
(p7.0) Riper et al. conducted two reviews focusing on adult problem drinkers [19,20]; the first of the two found a medium effect size on alcohol consumption (Hedges g = 0.44, 95 % CI 0.17 to 0.71) [19] whereas 
## (s11) Length of Intervention-Outcome
(p11.0) Eight reviews (57 %) addressed the association between length of intervention and outcome. Three of these addressed this theme quantitatively [15,19,20].  [20], no significant associations were found in a meta-regression between number of sessions and effect size (b = −0.0001, 95 % CI −0.004 to 0.003). White et al. 2010 noted that the prepost differential effect size for brief personalized feedback programs (d = 0.39) was somewhat smaller than the effect size for the multisession modularized programs (d = 0.56) [17]. Some reviews addressed the theme narratively; Dedert et al. 2015 stated that variability in treatment intensity was insufficient to formally test its association with outcomes [24], while Bhochhibhoya et al. 2015 concluded that more prolonged, multi-session interventions seem to be more effective than one-time interventions [23].
## (s12) Guidance-Outcome
(p12.0) The association between guidance and outcome was addressed in five reviews (36 %). In three of these, some form of quantitative analysis on this theme was performed [14,15,20]. Carey et al. 2009 found that computer-based interventions were more successful in reducing alcohol-related problems at short-term (≤5 weeks) when including human interaction vs. using the computer alone (β = −0.53, p = 0.02) [14]. Rooke et al. 2010 compared interventions with minimal therapist contact (n = 32), moderate therapist contact (n = 8) and major therapist contact (n = 2). No significant association was reported, Q between (2) = 3.29, p = 0.19 [15]. Riper et al. 2014 did not find an association between therapist guidance and outcome: guided (g = 0.23) and unguided (g = 0.20), p = 0.73 [20]. As suggested by both Dedert et al. 2015 [24] and Riper et al. 2014 the variability in amount of guidance, and the lack of published studies on guided interventions, may not yet be sufficient for a sound evaluation of its effect on alcohol-related outcomes.
