# Infection-induced IL-10 and JAK-STAT A review of the molecular circuitry controlling immune hyperactivity in response to pathogenic microbes

CorpusID: 13935319 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e30351c79fd7feadf6a4d8b8bed1db9c53fdd507](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e30351c79fd7feadf6a4d8b8bed1db9c53fdd507)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Balanced Antimicrobial Defense Hinges on the IL-10-JAK-STAT Module
(p0.0) Innate immune activation in response to microbial pathogens occurs as a result of recognition of foreign microbes or their products by phagocytes via pattern recognition receptor (PRR)dependent mechanisms. This leads to the activation of crucial phagocyte effector functions to combat microbes including the synthesis of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, and generation of phagolysosomal proteases that mediate killing of invading microbes. 1 Recognition of microbes by immune surveillance cells such as macrophages using PRRs initiates a signaling cascade that leads to the production of cytokines including interleukins (IL) and chemokines that drive antimicrobial mechanisms and regulate inflammatory responses to clear infection and achieve convalescence.
## (s1) IL-10 Biological Effects during Infection Occur via JAK-STAT Signal Relay
(p1.0) Engagement of the JAK-STAT signaling circuit by ligation of the IL-10 receptor complex occurs principally through STAT3. This is most likely to involve mediator genes induced by STAT3 Figure 1 (See opposite page). Interactions between microbial pathogens and IL-10-JAK-STAT signaling pathway elements. Recent studies (reference shown in parentheses) have shown C. burnetii, M. avium, S. agalactiae and other Gram-negative pathogens induce IL-10 synthesis in contrast to protozoa such as L. major and commensal L. rhamnosus that inhibit its production. STAT3, normally recruited and phosphorylated at the IL-10 receptor complex, are directly engaged by pathogens including S. enterica and T. gondii. Viruses such as HIV also affect STAT3 directly, or indirectly by producing homologs that compete with IL-10 for receptor complex docking sites, as shown for CMV. Nuclear translocation of active STAT3 for contact with STAT binding elements is a potential pathway element for pathogen-driven effects that has not yet been described. SOCS1 and SOCS3, induced as a result of IL-10 signaling through MAPK and AKT/PKB, suppress LPS/TLR4/CD14-induced IL-10, IL-6 biological activity from gp130 receptors, MHC class II, and STAT1induced mediators including NO, TNF-a and IFN-c. Microbes such as L. major hijack this element within the pathway to abrogate suppressive effects of SOCS toward active STAT3 as a mechanism of interfering with antimicrobial responses in macrophages.

(p1.1) transcriptional activity because the inhibitory effects of IL-10 require new protein synthesis. Recently, activated STAT3 was shown to initiate the biological effects of IL-10 in a tristetraprolin (TTP)-dependent manner. 33 TTP removes certain cis-acting A + U rich (ARE)-containing unstable mRNAs such as TNF-a but is not the sole major mediator of IL-10-inhibitory effects because of the emerging picture that there is no single master mediator of IL-10-induced deactivation. Rather, multiple IL-10induced genes control certain aspects of macrophage activation/ deactivation and mediate distinct parts of the anti-inflammatory effects of IL-10. These include, for example, Bcl-3, which controls TNF-a but not IL-6, Dusp1, which blocks p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and inhibits IL-6 and several chemokines (but not IL-12p40) 34 and Nfil3, which inhibits IL-12p40 expression. 35 STAT3-induced genes appear to act as transcriptional suppressors, inhibiting the recruitment of activating factors to target promoters, and may even induce secondary mediators. 1 Products from STAT3 target genes can impede signal transduction from cell surface receptors and activate NFkB and MAPK pathways that directly control pro-suppression and proinflammatory transcriptional events in the nucleus (Fig. 1).
