# Photosensitive drugs: a review on their photoprotection by liposomes and cyclodextrins

CorpusID: 13531224 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4c9377498e917356cd039f21c0d0fc719fc51a9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4c9377498e917356cd039f21c0d0fc719fc51a9)

Fields: Chemistry, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) Photoxicity of drugs
(p1.0) Phototoxicity is a skin irritation induced by chemical products (e.g. drugs) which react to light, usually causing more or less intense dermatitis. The phototoxic drugs can be contained in a topical administration or it may reach the skin via systemic circulation following oral or parenteral administration.

(p1.1) Phototoxic reactions occur after the harmful effects of light-activated compounds on cell membranes and, in some cases, DNA. Photoallergic reactions are cell-mediated immune responses to a slightly activated compound. The drugs, or its metabolites, react to light as chromophores and absorb energy, becoming an 'excited' state. High-energy content is transferred to the tissues when the molecules return to the fundamental state, causing damage to DNA or cell membranes. In addition to the toxic degradation products, free radicals can also be formed.

(p1.2) It is very important to identify the species responsible for allergy or phototoxic effects. An interesting work of 2007 addresses this issue for dihydropyridines (Pizarro et al., 2007). Some drugs of this class were exposed to stressing artificial light and a significant production of single oxygen, superoxide or both was demonstrated. The formation of these species demonstrates the potential of these drugs to cause phototoxic dermatitis. In particular, felodipine and nimodipine are both capable of generating single oxygen, but exhibiting a different reactivity: the former proves to be very reactive in its ground state while the second in the excited state.

(p1.3) Isotretinoin, deriving from the photolysis of tretinoin, has been proved capable of producing teratogenic effects, so precluding its use during pregnancy (Ioele et al., 2005). The photo-degradation of naproxen leads to toxic products (Isidori et al., 2005). Several sunscreens degrade under sunlight, so reducing their protecting potential against UV rays and giving rise to allergenic derivatives (Perioli et al., 2006). Endogenous alterations caused by the light can also occur after drug administration for interaction of the drug with endogenous molecules. A well-known example is the irreversible binding of photo-excited psoralens to lymphocytes because of UVA absorption (Song & Tapley, 1979). Two reviews in 1991 and 1997 discuss in depth the phototoxic and phototherapeutic problems of the drugs (Beijersbergen Van Henegouwen, 1991. Other documents with lots of information on this subject have been published in 2004 and 2008 (Henry et al., 2009;Tønnesen, 2008).
## (s4) Liposomes as drug stabilizers
(p4.0) The characteristic function of liposomes to include substances of different nature has led many researchers to study their application as degradation-preventing systems. (Crosasso et al., 2000;Pietzyk & Henschke, 2000;Fatouros & Antimisiaris, 2002). Some reviews summarize the contributions of many authors on the use of liposomes for the light protection of drugs and cosmetics during the last decades of the twentieth century (Bisby et al., 2000;Brisaert et al., 2001;Ragno et al., 1993Ragno et al., , 1995Ragno et al., , 2006aRagno et al., , 2006b). Subsequently, many other interesting studies and reviews in this field have been published, which we are looking at in this review to report the main ones.

(p4.1) Incorporation into liposomal systems has been deeply investigated for drugs belonging to the class of 1,4-dihydropyridines, known to be photosensitive and leading in most cases to the corresponding pyridine derivatives, devoid of any therapeutic activity (Ioele et al., 2009). In particular, inclusion of amlodipine showed a high protection degree with a rate of degradation comparable to that of solid pharmaceutical formulations. The experiments were monitored by UV spectrophotometry. Liposome and CD complexes showed a degradation of 10%, respectively, at 220 and 480 min, compared with a value of only 10 min for the ethanol solution. Amlodipine pure powder and commercial tablets showed a 10% degradation after 325 and 110 min. (Ragno et al., 2003a).

(p4.2) The previous study was extended to a number of analogs with the aim of developing photostable liquid preparations as an alternative to solid formulations (Ragno et al., 2006b). Analogously to amlodipine, the liposome incorporation of felodipine, nitrendipine, nimodipine and nicardipine showed a satisfactory stability degree. The liposome inclusion allowed a mean drug recovery of 77%, after a light exposure of 30 min of irradiation (21 kJ/min m 2 ). Stability proved to proportionally depend on the quantity of incorporated drug. A main drawback encountered in this work was the limited tendency of these drugs to be included into the liposomal cavities. In fact, the presence of bulky functional groups on both rings of the dihydropyridine derivatives made difficult their incorporation, with respect to compounds with low molecular weight and high hydrophilicity. A real benefit from studies on supramolecular complexes could be the preparation of liquid formulations of 1,4-dihydropyiridines, currently formulated only in tablets.

(p4.3) Tretinoin (all-trans retinoic acid) is widely used for the treatment of acne vulgaris and others keratin related diseases as well. The drug is used mostly in the acne local therapy with an unavoidable light exposure. Topic applications are, however, limited by the high liability of the molecule to photodegradation, suggesting the development of photo-protected formulations. Tretinoin undergoes photodegradation to the 13-cis isomer which in turn is transformed to the 9-cis isomer, even though the most important step is the first isomerization of retinoic acid (Brisaert, 2000). The inclusion of tretinoin into liposomes showed a significant increase in light stability, reducing almost completely the isomerization process. Tretinoin showed a residual concentration of 60% after a light irradiance of 3470 kJ/min m 2 , versus a value of 8% of the ethanol solution (Ioele et al., 2005). Photostabilization of tretinoin was also investigated in niosome matrices using a 30 W UV lamp set at 366 nm, showing a protection profile even better than one resulting from liposome inclusion (Manconi et al., 2003(Manconi et al., , 2006. Some good results have been also obtained from the development of delivery systems for protein and peptide drugs (Goto et al., 2006). Sericin is a protein largely employed as a nutrient biomaterial for biomedical and cosmeceutic applications, despite its low stability to heat and light. The protein was charged into copolymer-liposomes and stored at different temperatures: 4, 30 and 45 C. The complex showed high efficiency in the stabilization of structure and concomitantly caused improved dispersibility and biofeasibility (Suktham et al., 2016). Additionally, this formulation proved to be noncytotoxic to human normal cells even at high concentration (10 mg/mL).

(p4.4) Some antibiotic agents have also demonstrated photolability and attempts to minimize degradation have been proposed by incorporation into liposomal systems. Among the antibacterial agents, fluoroquinolones give rise to phototoxic side effects from the formation of reactive oxygen species after UV rays exposure. Photodegradation of ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin and lomefloxacin has been investigated under several UV radiations amounts (Budai et al., 2008). FS-20 lamp (k ¼ 280-320 nm) was used for irradiation experiments. The UVB-intensity was kept at 1.1 ± 0.1 mW/cm 2 and the irradiance was in the range 0-22 kJ/min m 2 . Lomefloxacin, indicated by the Authors as the most phototoxic compound, was encapsulated into small mono-and multilamellar liposomes. It was stated that the reduction of the photodegradation process greatly depends on the lipid nature. In particular, unsaturated fatty acid chains in the liposomal bilayer alter the lomefloxacin photodegradation pathway, increasing the probability of CO 2 loss, frequency of dehydrogenation and then de-fluorination. The main photoproducts were identified by mass spectrometry. Several anticancer drugs are photosensitive. Due to the high toxicity, these drugs and their delivery systems are today widely studied in the pharmaceutical technology field and many of these studies are devoted to the development of photo-protected formulations. The high sensitivity of doxorubicin to natural or artificial light is well known and this represents a relevant drawback since the drug presents a long half-life and accumulates into the derma, where the light exposure is more likely. Doxorubicin encapsulated in polyethyleneglycol-coated liposomes was more stable in comparison to the photodegradation of the free drug and not influenced by concentration. During and after UV exposure, there was no release of the drug from liposomes to the medium. After induced release of the drug, the degradation kinetics of doxorubicin was identical to that of free drug (Bandak et al., 1999).

(p4.5) The main metabolite isolated from Pothomorphe umbellata, namely 4-neroylcatechol, was complexed with liposomes in order to evaluate the drug stability and the cytotoxicity profile. The complex was subjected to forced degradation and monitored by HPLC. The liposome complex resulted able to reduce the degradation rate in all the attempted conditions, showing a half time 15% higher with respect to the pure compound. Interestingly, contrariwise to the behavior of the free drug, the liposome complex showed to be able to protect the erythrocytes from lysis (Gaeti et al., 2014).

(p4.6) Photostability of supramolecular structures charged with (E)-resveratrol, together with the skin penetration profile of nanostructured formulations, was investigated. Several supramolecular structures such as liposomes, lipid-core polymeric nanocapsules, nanospheres and solid lipid nanoparticles, were designed as carriers for this nutraceutical compound. Liposomes resulted as the most effective matrix for long preserving resveratrol concentration. On the other hand, the small size complexes showed a reduced physical stability under UVA radiations (Detoni et al., 2012). New and more thorough studies are today needed to optimize the vehiculation in liposomes of resveratrol, but also of other nutraceuticals, also because of the increasing importance that these substances are taking for the human health.

(p4.7) The effect of lipid microparticles carrier systems on the light-induced degradation of melatonin was also investigated. Photodegradation experiments were carried out by using a Xenon lamp, wavelengths under 290 nm were filtered and temperature was maintained under 30 C. The solar simulator emission was maintained at 500 W/m 2 . Photolysis experiments demonstrated that melatonin photo-decomposition markedly decreased after tristearin and phosphatidylcholine-based liposphere encapsulation (the degradation rates were 19.6% and 5.6% for free and incorporated melatonin, respectively) .
## (s6) Cyclodextrins as drugs stabilizers
(p6.0) The potential of CD in improving the stability of drugs has been widely investigated in pharmaceutical technology. A number of molecules entrapped in CD matrices have shown an improved stability under various stressing conditions of light, heating, oxidation agents, moisture. Many citations regarding the ability of these matrices to protect the drugs from light are also provided. Some reviews published some years ago provide very detailed information on the use of CD in drug delivery and especially for topical formulations. Many references regarding the ability of these matrices to protect the drugs from light are also provided. (Cal & Centkowska, 2008;Challa et al., 2005). Usually, the drug/CD ratio is 1:1 and the complex stability is generally higher at low temperature (Loftsson et al., 2001;Valle, 2004).
