# Assessing skeletal muscle mass: historical overview and state of the art

CorpusID: 13789744 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9876222e744243398954cf3f1de8628d6938681e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9876222e744243398954cf3f1de8628d6938681e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Sarcopenia, sarcopenic obesity, and cachexia all share a common phenotype: relative reductions in the amount, composition, and function of skeletal muscle [1]. Although often the largest compartment at the tissue-organ level of body composition [2], quantifying the total mass and composition of skeletal muscle in living subjects proved remarkably difficult over the past century compared to fat, bone mineral, body fluids, and other relatively large compartments of clinical interest.

(p0.1) The complexity of measuring skeletal muscle mass seems hard to imagine today when we have several easily applied and widely available measurement techniques that provide accurate regional and whole-body estimates from birth onward. We review here the history of this struggle and the recent advances that provide us with powerful tools to study the disorders that involve loss of skeletal muscle mass and related function. This remarkable journey unfolds over almost two centuries, covers several continents, and represents the imaginative contributions of scientists across the globe.
## (s2) Muscle as a human capacity marker
(p2.0) Just after the collapse of the Habsburg monarchy, Jindřich Matiegka, working at the University of Prague a few years after World War I, communicated his body composition vision in a May 7, 1920 letter to the prominent US physical anthropologist Aleš Hrdlička: "I shall send my proposal for establishing a commission that would work out a method for assessing work efficiency of the human body. I justify my proposal by pointing out that it is a duty of anthropology to develop a method for testing human physical capacity, similar to the methods worked out by psychologists to test mental capacity. Mental and physical capacities together constitute the working capacity and determine the working efficiency of the person" [14]. A year later, Matiegka published what is likely the seminal paper describing anthropometric measurement of skeletal muscle mass and three other functional body compartments [15]. Matiegka's system considered body weight (W) the sum of four components,

(p2.1) where O is skeletal (osseous) weight, D is skin plus subcutaneous adipose tissue weight, M is skeletal muscle weight, and R is remaining weight. Using measuring devices that would be considered crude by modern standards, Matiegka developed his model based on height, bone and extremity breadths, skinfolds, and calculated body surface area.

(p2.2) Sarcopenia, sarcopenic obesity, and cachexia are all circumscribed by adverse outcomes captured by Matiegka's vision of a connection between musculoskeletal mass and function as it relates to human "working efficiency." Another seven decades were needed before anthropometric measurements and models as pioneered by Matiegka could be directly linked to actual measurements of whole-body skeletal muscle mass, either by dissection [16] or with in vivo CT and MRI measurements [17].

(p2.3) Matiegka's anthropometric method provides an opportunity to ask the question, what exactly do we mean by skeletal muscle mass? The five-level model reported by Wang and colleagues at Columbia University in 1992 [2] provides a framework for responding to this question. Wang's model describes the human body as five interconnected areas starting with an elemental level followed by molecular, cellular, tissueorgan, and whole-body levels. With body surface measurements, anthropometry provides a skeletal muscle mass estimate at the tissue-organ level that includes skeletal muscle fibers, nerves, blood vessels, progenitor cells, connective tissue, tendons, intermuscular adipose tissue, and even in some cases bone. By contrast, the creatine-creatinine method largely maps the creatine pool located within skeletal muscle cells [18]. Wang's model provides an important framework for linking the mechanistic basis of a method with specific measured skeletal muscle structures. Each method provides a skeletal muscle mass estimate that can be categorized and modeled as one of Wang's five levels. Wang's model also provides a context for discussing the emerging topic of muscle "quality" that can be framed as ranging from whole-muscle to cells, intracellular organelles, and individual molecular substrates.
## (s6) Recent advances and future potential
(p6.0) A remarkable range of technologies is now available for quantifying regional and total body skeletal muscle mass in almost any setting and at any age, even in utero. An important observation undergoing intense discussion in the sarcopenia field is the observation that skeletal muscle mass and function decline at different rates during the aging process [76,77]. What are the mechanisms of these effects? Should "functional" measures replace or complement "structural" measures as diagnostic components of conditions associated with skeletal muscle changes over time? Important focuses in this debate are the linkages between skeletal muscle structure, composition, and function. At the center of this chain, and one that holds future promise, is the assessment of skeletal muscle composition.

(p6.1) Separating adipose and muscle tissues Matiegka's anthropometric skeletal muscle compartment would by necessity include some adipose tissue interspersed between muscle fibers and compartments [15]. This marbling effect of intramuscular adipose tissue (IMAT) has been recognized in the animal science literature for decades, and ultrasound is the traditional measurement method of choice. The IMAT compartment, weighing several kilograms in adults [78] and a feature of sarcopenia, can now be accurately quantified my CT, MRI, or ultrasound. Anatomic skeletal muscle can be separated into two parts, IMAT and IMAT-free skeletal muscle.

(p6.2) Another MRI approach is to separate skeletal muscle tissue into two molecular level components, fat and fat-free muscle. A range of methods has been developed to accomplish this end that collectively is referred to as fat-suppression  [79]. These approaches all rely on the observation that hydrogen nuclei in the chemical environments of water and fat have different MRI relevant parameters, primarily relaxation time, and resonance frequency or so-called chemical shift. These differences can be exploited to suppress the fat-bound proton signal, and two main groups of techniques are available, relaxation-dependent (e.g., short inversion-time inversion recovery) and chemical shift-dependent (e.g., Dixon-based fat suppression) [80]. Scanning protocols now in development will soon provide estimates of regional and total body fat-free skeletal muscle volume. Possibilities exist to either fully or partially automate the analysis protocol, thus removing a major current task of expert hand image segmentation as is required for quantitative CT and MRI muscle analysis.

(p6.3) Separating muscle extracellular and intracellular compartments With aging and development of sarcopenia or with cachexia-induced skeletal muscle atrophy, there is a relative expansion of the extracellular space that includes fluid and connective tissue with loss of muscle fibers [81,82]. Several new magnetic resonance techniques hold promise for providing information related to the extracellular compartment [83].

(p6.4) The first of these methods is referred to as T1 mapping equilibrium contrast magnetic resonance that gives estimates of myocardial and potentially skeletal muscle extracellular volume fraction [84]. The protocol requires the use of an imaging contrast agent and so far has shown promise in detecting pathological changes in human myocardial tissue, representing a relative increase in extracellular volume and fibrosis [85]. Noncontrast T1-mapping also provides measures of cardiac fibrosis [86].

(p6.5) A second developing approach, magnetic resonance elastography [87,88], provides information on skeletal muscle viscoelastic and mechanical properties that may represent increased connective tissue with functional consequences. The method has been used to measure skeletal muscle stiffness, a property that can change significantly depending upon the contractile state of the muscle [89,90]. Skeletal muscle magnetic resonance elastography can also be used for studying the physiological response of diseased and damaged muscles [91].

(p6.6) Bone and connective tissue are not usually visualized on conventional MRI scans, and a third new method for evaluating the extracellular compartment involves the use of a twodimensional ultra-short echo time (2D UTE) sequence with an inversion pulse for long T(2) water and fat signal suppression [92,93]. This important new method allows visualization of cortical bone and connective tissue structures within skeletal muscle.
