# Impacts of climate change on hydropower development and sustainability: a review

CorpusID: 135193486 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/234f8da5173fc2462ebdf089575194e61c6ca675](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/234f8da5173fc2462ebdf089575194e61c6ca675)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science, Physics

## (s2) National scale of climate change on hydropower
(p2.0) This section focuses on nationwide analyses of climate change impact on hydropower. This type of analysis serves the useful purpose of providing some technical suggestions to decision makers on how to develop national hydropower effectively in future. However, only a few countries have been involved in this detail of analysis so far. For the United States (USA), the Department of Energy (DOE) has prepared a comprehensive assessment examining the effects of climate change on available water for federal hydropower, which accounts for approximately half of the USA's installed conventional hydropower capacity. The assessment highlighted the direct effects of climate change, including drying trends and decadal-scale changes that are likely to have adverse impacts on federal hydropower in many regions over the next 25 years. On a longer-term basis, looking beyond the 2010-2039 time period, climate change is likely to become even more challenging for hydropower operations if warming, drying, and seasonal shifts in hydrological trends continue on their projected trajectories (Sale and Kao 2012), (DOE 2013). The findings and recommendations were posted across all four of the Power Marketing Administration regions, including the Bonneville region, the Western region, the Southwestern region and the Southeastern region, separately.

(p2.1) There was another in-depth analysis of climate change on water resources for hydropower in Nepal, in which climate change was identified as the most likely impact on Nepal's hydropower production capacity over the next few decades. A significant warming trend in recent decades was revealed in the analysis, which was even more conspicuous at higher altitudes. The Himalayan glaciers will gradually melt as a result of global warming in the future, resulting in increased snow-fed rivers that flow through Nepal. However, after a certain critical point, snow-fed river flow will decrease due to the greatly reduced and subsequently melted Himalayan glaciers (http://www.myrepublica.com/portal/index.php?action=news_details&news_id=73723). This analysis also highlights a trans-boundary or regional dimension to climate change impacts, highlighting the need for regional coordinated strategies to cope with such impacts of climate change .

(p2.2) In Sweden, the Swedish regional climate modelling programme (Bergström et al. 2001) simulated the scenarios of river runoff for six selected basins covering the major climate regions, based on the combination of global climate models, dynamical downscaling and hydrological modelling. Changes in runoff totals, runoff regimes and extreme values were analyzed. The results from this programme agreed well with earlier studies in the Nordic countries that water would be more abundant in the north but drastic effects can be seen in the annual river flow cycle.
## (s3) Regional scale of climate change on hydropower
(p3.0) Most of the previous emphasis of climate change studies on hydropower has focused on regional areas, such as basins and valleys, which are the basic units for any global and national level study. Jones et al. (1996) discussed many more issues related to the regional impacts. In this paper, many different regional results in Europe, the USA and China were presented. Some typical findings are listed below.

(p3.1) A study on management adaptation potential of the water resource system at the Peribonka River (Quebec, Canada) indicated that annual mean hydropower would decrease by 1.8% for the period 2010-2039, and then increase by 9.3% and 18.3% during the periods 2040-2069 and 2070-2099, respectively. The trend to increase is statistically significant starting from 2061. Overall, the reliability of a reservoir would decrease and the vulnerability would increase as the climate changes (Minville et al. 2009).

(p3.2) The Northwest Power and Conservation Council (NWPCC), an interstate compact agency, has conducted long term planning for the USA Pacific Northwest (PNW) electricity supply in its 2005 Power Plan. An initial assessment was made of potential impacts of climate change on the hydropower system, but these results were not incorporated into the risk model upon which the 2005 Plan recommendations are based (Northwest Power and Conservation Council 2005). Later, Markoff and Cullen (2008) presented an assessment of uncertainty in future PNW hydropower generation potential based on a comprehensive set of climate models and greenhouse gas emissions pathways. It was found that the prognosis for PNW hydropower supply under climate change is worse than anticipated by the NWPCC's assessment.

(p3.3) There were many studies, including Yao and Georgakakos (2001) These case examples presented above illustrate the typical climate change impact on hydropower. Although they used different models, scenarios, and methodologies in numerous regions of selected countries, all of these papers revealed that climate change has already begun to increasingly affect hydropower capacity and operation mode, and, will further impact hydropower in the future.
## (s5) Causes of Climate change impact on hydropower
(p5.0) Despite large uncertainties in the results and predictions of different model output, there is no doubt that climate change during the next decades will have potentially dramatic impacts on water resources and hydropower (Jones et al. 1996, Bergström et al. 2001). Since the importance of hydropower generation and its potential sensitivity to climate change have already been realized in recent years, some quantitative estimates of the technical potential for hydropower have been established. However, relatively few studies have addressed the specific factors of climate change impact on hydropower. Based on previous studies, this paper focuses on the causal analysis of these impacts, and categorizes them as either direct and indirect impacts.
## (s10) Optimizing hydropower operation and management
(p10.0) Special attention should be devoted to adaptation measures to cope with the varied climate environment. Two prime options are addressed on operation and management of hydropower generation to adapt climate change.

(p10.1) The first option is to enhance the optimal operation of cascade hydropower stations or single hydropower station with reservoir. Scheduling optimization could reduce the water spill with available capacity and storage. There is a persuasive case made by Madani and Lund (2010) showing the annual marginal benefits of capacity expansion were higher for storage than for generation. Although the Dry scenario examined in that study had 20% less runoff than the base historical hydrology, system-wide, revenues decrease by less than 14% through optimally re-operating storage and generation facilities within existing capacities. Scheduling optimization of hydropower station group on a river or a basin, is easy to make full use of water resource at all levels, it also can adjust and compensate for the effects on each single station due to interannual climate variability during the year. In this case, the most important thing is to optimize the hydropower operation pattern to maximize the revenue with limited capacity and available ancillary facilities (Zhang et al. 2012).

(p10.2) The second option, and not mutually exclusive, is to conduct an in-depth risk analysis of climate change impacts on hydropower generation and prepare emergency plan for climate extremes. Changes in mean climate impact caused by global warming on hydropower are relatively limited and easier to be controlled, but the extreme weather events such as floods and drought will seriously affect the production, transmission and distribution of hydropower generation. The frequency and intensity of regional extreme weather caused by climate change is clearly evident. This places potentially severe stress and high risk on hydropower systems. Therefore, it is critically significant for hydropower planners and decision-makers to analyze the potential risk of climate extreme events during the operation. Based on hydrological model forecasts and predictions, emergency plans under different extreme conditions should be established. By optimizing power generation operation and management, the more efficient hydropower stations could not only increase their generation revenue but also play a significant socio-economic role for society.
