# Reconstruction of the alveolar cleft: can growth factor-aided tissue engineering replace autologous bone grafting? A literature review and systematic review of results obtained with bone morphogenetic protein-2

CorpusID: 137196 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9c4f1ba2abd42fb81c1096dbbe3707833d27686](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9c4f1ba2abd42fb81c1096dbbe3707833d27686)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) The incidence of clefts of lip, alveolus and palate (CLAP) varies between races [1]. Mongolians are affected, with incidence of 0.55-2.50 per 1,000 births; Caucasians, 0.69-2.35 per 1,000 births and Negroids, 0.18-0.82 per 1,000 births [1]. Males are more often affected than females [2]. A cleft of the alveolus is present in more than 50% of the cases with CLAP [3].
## (s1) Tissue engineering
(p1.0) The three vital components necessary for the engineering of bone are bone-forming cells, osteoinductive growth hormone and an osteoconductive scaffold. The osteoconductive scaffold provides immediate mechanical support, mimics the bony extracellular matrix and guides the formation of bone in the desired shape and place. The scaffold should be biocompatible and biodegradable. The rate of degradation is ideally inversely proportional to the rate of bone formation. Several synthetic and organic polymers and also ceramics have been proposed as materials to produce scaffolds [9,10].

(p1.1) The scaffold may also serve as a carrier for the osteoinductive growth hormone. The growth hormone is thus delivered locally and ideally over a sustained period of time. The main role of the growth hormone is to recruit mesenchymal stem cells to the area and make them differentiate into an osteogenic cell lineage [9][10][11].

(p1.2) The three vital components necessary for the engineering of bone are bone-forming cells, osteoinductive growth hormone and an osteoconductive scaffold. The osteoconductive scaffold provides immediate mechanical support, mimics the bony extracellular matrix and guides the formation of bone in the desired shape and place. The scaffold should be biocompatible and biodegradable. The rate of degradation is ideally inversely proportional to the rate of bone formation. Several synthetic and organic polymers and also ceramics have been proposed as materials to produce scaffolds [9,10].

(p1.3) The scaffold may also serve as a carrier for the osteoinductive growth hormone. The growth hormone is thus delivered locally and ideally over a sustained period of time. The main role of the growth hormone is to recruit mesenchymal stem cells to the area and make them differentiate into an osteogenic cell lineage [9][10][11].
## (s2) Growth factors
(p2.0) Many growth factors are involved in osteogenesis. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP-2 and BMP-7), transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), insulin-like growth factors I and II (IGF I and II), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factors (FGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) have been proposed for use in bone tissue engineering [9,12,13].

(p2.1) Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are a group of proteins known to play a role in osteogenesis and chondro-genesis. BMPs are also involved in embryonic development and fracture healing. Especially BMP-2 and BMP-7 are known for their osteoinductive qualities [9,[11][12][13]. TGF-β plays a role in osteogenesis, its actions are diverse and TGF-β is thought to influence the activity of BMPs [9,12,13]. IGFs I and II are present in fracture healing sites. IGFs I and II both stimulate type-1 collagen synthesis and decrease collagenase synthesis [9,12,13]. PDGF recruits mesenchymal stem cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,13]. FGF plays a role in maintaining the balance between boneforming cells and bone-resorbing cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,12]. VEGF plays a role in angiogenesis, promotes vasodilatation and increases microvascular permeability [9,12].

(p2.2) Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) contains a wide diversity of growth factors, and therefore, PRP is thought to stimulate bone formation. Growth factors known to be present in PRP are TGF-β, PDGF, IGF, FGF, VEGF, endothelial cell growth factor and epidermal growth factor [14].

(p2.3) Many growth factors are involved in osteogenesis. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP-2 and BMP-7), transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), insulin-like growth factors I and II (IGF I and II), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factors (FGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) have been proposed for use in bone tissue engineering [9,12,13].

(p2.4) Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are a group of proteins known to play a role in osteogenesis and chondro-genesis. BMPs are also involved in embryonic development and fracture healing. Especially BMP-2 and BMP-7 are known for their osteoinductive qualities [9,[11][12][13]. TGF-β plays a role in osteogenesis, its actions are diverse and TGF-β is thought to influence the activity of BMPs [9,12,13]. IGFs I and II are present in fracture healing sites. IGFs I and II both stimulate type-1 collagen synthesis and decrease collagenase synthesis [9,12,13]. PDGF recruits mesenchymal stem cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,13]. FGF plays a role in maintaining the balance between boneforming cells and bone-resorbing cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,12]. VEGF plays a role in angiogenesis, promotes vasodilatation and increases microvascular permeability [9,12].

(p2.5) Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) contains a wide diversity of growth factors, and therefore, PRP is thought to stimulate bone formation. Growth factors known to be present in PRP are TGF-β, PDGF, IGF, FGF, VEGF, endothelial cell growth factor and epidermal growth factor [14].
## (s9) Full text analysis
(p9.0) Three articles were excluded on basis of the full text screening. The article by Chin et al. [22] on BMP-2 was excluded because besides CLAP, facial clefts were reconstructed and because of absence of radiographic quantification of bone in the reconstructed cleft. The article by Fallucco et al. [23] on BMP-2 was excluded because of absence of radiographic quantification of bone in the reconstructed cleft. The article by Hibi et al. [24] on PRP was excluded because bone marrow aspirate was used.

(p9.1) Finally, three articles were accepted for the review ( Table 2). These three articles were on the reconstruction of the alveolar cleft with the use of BMP-2 in the experimental group and with autologous bone graft in the control group.

(p9.2) In all three articles, unilateral clefts only were included. Prior alveolar surgery was an exclusion criterion for patients in Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26]. No mention of prior alveolar surgery was made by Herford et al. [27].

(p9.3) In the three studies, the kit of Infuse® Bone Graft (Medtronic, Sofamor Danek, Memphis, TN) was used. This kit contains an absorbable sponge consisting of type 1 bovine collagen and is impregnated with rhBMP-2. In the three studies, reconstruction of the alveolar cleft in the control group was performed with autologous cancellous bone of the iliac crest.

(p9.4) Mean alveolar cleft size prior to surgery was 0.975 cm 3 in the BMP-2 group versus 1.052 cm 3 in the control group in Alonso et al. [25], 5.6 cm 3 versus 5.1 cm 3 in Dickinson et al. [26] and 10.55 cm 3 versus 17.86 cm 3 in Herford et al. [27].

(p9.5) In the studies by Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26], all patients received preoperative orthodontic expansion of the maxillary segments. No mention of preoperative treatment was made by Herford et al. [27].

(p9.6) Timing of the reconstruction of the alveolar cleft varied between the three studies; Alonso et al. [25] and Herford et al. [27] reconstructed the alveolar clefts during the stage of mixed dentition, whereas Dickinson et al. [26] reconstructed the clefts in skeletally mature patients.

(p9.7) Computed tomography (CT) was used to evaluate bone formation and to measure the quantity of bone formation: Alonso et al. [25] performed a CT at 6 and at 12 months postoperatively, Dickinson et al. [26] performed a CT at 6 months postoperatively and Herford et al. [27] performed a CT at 4 months postoperatively. Dickinson et al. [26]  assessed the quantity of bone formation also on an Orthopantomogram and on periapical films. Length of follow-up differed between the three studies. Herford et al. [27] reviewed the patients after 4 months, whereas Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26] reviewed the patients after 1 year. Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26] assessed the morbidity of the surgical procedures during the first year, whereas Herford et al. [27] did not mention postoperative morbidity, nor complications.

(p9.8) The studies by Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26] are randomised controlled trials, whilst the study by Herford et al. [27] is a controlled retrospective review; hence, the level of evidence is lower for Herford et al. [27]. Table 3 shows a summary of the study design of the three articles.

(p9.9) Three articles were excluded on basis of the full text screening. The article by Chin et al. [22] on BMP-2 was excluded because besides CLAP, facial clefts were reconstructed and because of absence of radiographic quantification of bone in the reconstructed cleft. The article by Fallucco et al. [23] on BMP-2 was excluded because of absence of radiographic quantification of bone in the reconstructed cleft. The article by Hibi et al. [24] on PRP was excluded because bone marrow aspirate was used.

(p9.10) Finally, three articles were accepted for the review ( Table 2). These three articles were on the reconstruction of the alveolar cleft with the use of BMP-2 in the experimental group and with autologous bone graft in the control group.

(p9.11) In all three articles, unilateral clefts only were included. Prior alveolar surgery was an exclusion criterion for patients in Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26]. No mention of prior alveolar surgery was made by Herford et al. [27].

(p9.12) In the three studies, the kit of Infuse® Bone Graft (Medtronic, Sofamor Danek, Memphis, TN) was used. This kit contains an absorbable sponge consisting of type 1 bovine collagen and is impregnated with rhBMP-2. In the three studies, reconstruction of the alveolar cleft in the control group was performed with autologous cancellous bone of the iliac crest.

(p9.13) Mean alveolar cleft size prior to surgery was 0.975 cm 3 in the BMP-2 group versus 1.052 cm 3 in the control group in Alonso et al. [25], 5.6 cm 3 versus 5.1 cm 3 in Dickinson et al. [26] and 10.55 cm 3 versus 17.86 cm 3 in Herford et al. [27].

(p9.14) In the studies by Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26], all patients received preoperative orthodontic expansion of the maxillary segments. No mention of preoperative treatment was made by Herford et al. [27].

(p9.15) Timing of the reconstruction of the alveolar cleft varied between the three studies; Alonso et al. [25] and Herford et al. [27] reconstructed the alveolar clefts during the stage of mixed dentition, whereas Dickinson et al. [26] reconstructed the clefts in skeletally mature patients.

(p9.16) Computed tomography (CT) was used to evaluate bone formation and to measure the quantity of bone formation: Alonso et al. [25] performed a CT at 6 and at 12 months postoperatively, Dickinson et al. [26] performed a CT at 6 months postoperatively and Herford et al. [27] performed a CT at 4 months postoperatively. Dickinson et al. [26]  assessed the quantity of bone formation also on an Orthopantomogram and on periapical films. Length of follow-up differed between the three studies. Herford et al. [27] reviewed the patients after 4 months, whereas Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26] reviewed the patients after 1 year. Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26] assessed the morbidity of the surgical procedures during the first year, whereas Herford et al. [27] did not mention postoperative morbidity, nor complications.

(p9.17) The studies by Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26] are randomised controlled trials, whilst the study by Herford et al. [27] is a controlled retrospective review; hence, the level of evidence is lower for Herford et al. [27]. Table 3 shows a summary of the study design of the three articles.
## (s11) Bone quantity
(p11.0) Dickinson et al. [26] reported more bone formation in the cleft in the rhBMP-2 group (95%) compared to the control group (63%). Alonso et al. [25] and Herford et al. [27] reported slightly less bone formation in the cleft in the rhBMP-2 group compared to the control group, although the differences (5.8% and 7%) seem not significant. Alonso et al. [25] further measured more bone after 12 months compared to after 6 months. In the study by Herford et al. [27], two patients in the rhBMP-2 group showed significantly less bone formation in the cleft than the other patients; the authors explain this by possible wound breakdown of the nasal mucosal layer.

(p11.1) Bone height was measured by Alonso et al. [25] and by Dickinson et al. [26]. Alonso et al. [25] reported lower bone height in the rhBMP-2 group (10.2 mm) than in the control group (13.9 mm), whereas Dickinson et al. [26] reported   [26] higher bone height in the rhBMP-2 group (85%) than in the control group (70%). The position of the bone in the cleft was described by Alonso et al. [25]; in the rhBMP-2 group, most bone was deposited in the supra-apical area of the cleft, whereas in the control group, most bone was seen in the alveolar area.
## (s12) Bone quality
(p12.0) Alonso et al. [25] reported that tooth eruption occurred without complications in both the rhBMP-2 group and the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] inserted dental implants in 2 out of 9 patients in the rhBMP-2 group and in 1 out of 12 patients in the control group. These implants all showed successful osseointegration. Other information on bone quality, i.e. orthodontic movement of teeth into the cleft area or periodontal status, was not provided.

(p12.1) Alonso et al. [25] reported that tooth eruption occurred without complications in both the rhBMP-2 group and the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] inserted dental implants in 2 out of 9 patients in the rhBMP-2 group and in 1 out of 12 patients in the control group. These implants all showed successful osseointegration. Other information on bone quality, i.e. orthodontic movement of teeth into the cleft area or periodontal status, was not provided.
## (s13) Complications and adverse events
(p13.0) Alonso et al. [25] observed local postoperative swelling in 37.5% of the patients in the rhBMP-2 group and significant donor site pain in 87.5% of the patients in the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] reported that the control group showed significant donor site pain, more wound healing problems, longer hospital stay and greater overall cost of the procedure (Table 5).

(p13.1) Alonso et al. [25] observed local postoperative swelling in 37.5% of the patients in the rhBMP-2 group and significant donor site pain in 87.5% of the patients in the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] reported that the control group showed significant donor site pain, more wound healing problems, longer hospital stay and greater overall cost of the procedure (Table 5).
## (s14) Discussion
(p14.0) The main advantage of growth factor-aided tissue engineering is the avoidance of a second surgical site needed for the harvest of autologous bone. This results in shortening of the operation time, absence of donor site morbidity, shorter hospital stay and reduction of overall cost.

(p14.1) Promising results with growth factor-aided tissue engineering techniques have been obtained in several fields. However, for the reconstruction of the alveolar cleft in CLAP, only three studies were found that assessed growth factor-aided bone tissue engineering techniques and met our selection criteria. We found no studies on BMP-7, TGF-β, PDGF, IGF, FGF, VEGF or PRP that met our selection criteria. The three studies that met our selection criteria all assessed BMP-2-aided bone tissue engineering. These three studies used the same bone tissue engineering kit (Infuse® Bone Graft) for the reconstruction of clefts in the experimental group and autologous cancellous bone of the iliac crest in the control group. It is remarkable that only studies with BMP-2 were published and that these studies all used the same product produced by the same company. The similarities with regard to study design and the growth factor used make comparison of the studies feasible. On the other hand, the patient numbers in the three studies are small, and there was some variation in the timing of the procedure: in two studies, the alveolar clefts were reconstructed during the stage of mixed dentition [25,27], whereas in the other study, clefts were reconstructed in skeletally mature patients [26]. The volume of the alveolar  cleft prior to surgery also varied between the three studies, namely Herford et al. [27] reported a much greater volume of the preoperative cleft. This may be explained by the use of preoperative orthodontic expansion of the maxillary segments by Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26]. As to the difference in volume of the cleft between Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26], the different timing of the procedure should again be taken into account. Nevertheless, the results clearly indicate that rhBMP-2 delivered in an absorbable collagen sponge carrier can create a bony bridge in alveolar cleft patients with sufficient volumes of bone, comparable with the amount achieved in iliac crest cancellous bone grafting. An interesting finding by Alonso et al. [25] was the progressive formation of alveolar bone: there appeared to be more bone after 12 months compared to after 6 months in the BMP-2 group. This finding may indicate that evaluation after 4 months, as in the study by Herford et al. [27], is perhaps too quick to assess the final result of the treatment. If this is true, evaluation at a later stage may show more favourable results. A specifically interesting subset of patients are skeletally mature patients as these patients showed better results in the BMP-2 group in terms of bone quantity, less complications and less adverse events compared to patients who received cancellous bone of the iliac crest [26]. Inferior outcome in patients treated with bone grafting after the stage of mixed dentition, i.e. after the eruption of the permanent canines, has been reported previously [28][29][30]. Perhaps, this subset of patients can benefit even more from the application of BMP-2.

(p14.2) It is thought that osteogenesis is a complex process that requires certain combinations of growth factors on specific moments during bone formation. Therefore, it was surprising that the use of just one growth factor in combination with an osteoconductive scaffold led to bone formation. A possible explanation is that BMP-2 stands at or near the top of a cascade of growth factors needed for bone formation and that through biological feedback mechanisms, the right combination of growth factors is attained.

(p14.3) The alveolar bone is a unique bone structure. Besides providing mechanical strength to skeletal system and support for the surrounding soft tissues, the alveolar bone also gives support to teeth and allows tooth eruption, orthodontic movement of teeth into the reconstructed cleft, and, if indicated, osseointegration of dental implants. Unfortunately, quality of bone formation in this respect was not assessed in any of the three studies. Future studies are required to address these issues.

(p14.4) The main advantage of growth factor-aided tissue engineering is the avoidance of a second surgical site needed for the harvest of autologous bone. This results in shortening of the operation time, absence of donor site morbidity, shorter hospital stay and reduction of overall cost.

(p14.5) Promising results with growth factor-aided tissue engineering techniques have been obtained in several fields. However, for the reconstruction of the alveolar cleft in CLAP, only three studies were found that assessed growth factor-aided bone tissue engineering techniques and met our selection criteria. We found no studies on BMP-7, TGF-β, PDGF, IGF, FGF, VEGF or PRP that met our selection criteria. The three studies that met our selection criteria all assessed BMP-2-aided bone tissue engineering. These three studies used the same bone tissue engineering kit (Infuse® Bone Graft) for the reconstruction of clefts in the experimental group and autologous cancellous bone of the iliac crest in the control group. It is remarkable that only studies with BMP-2 were published and that these studies all used the same product produced by the same company. The similarities with regard to study design and the growth factor used make comparison of the studies feasible. On the other hand, the patient numbers in the three studies are small, and there was some variation in the timing of the procedure: in two studies, the alveolar clefts were reconstructed during the stage of mixed dentition [25,27], whereas in the other study, clefts were reconstructed in skeletally mature patients [26]. The volume of the alveolar  cleft prior to surgery also varied between the three studies, namely Herford et al. [27] reported a much greater volume of the preoperative cleft. This may be explained by the use of preoperative orthodontic expansion of the maxillary segments by Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26]. As to the difference in volume of the cleft between Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26], the different timing of the procedure should again be taken into account. Nevertheless, the results clearly indicate that rhBMP-2 delivered in an absorbable collagen sponge carrier can create a bony bridge in alveolar cleft patients with sufficient volumes of bone, comparable with the amount achieved in iliac crest cancellous bone grafting. An interesting finding by Alonso et al. [25] was the progressive formation of alveolar bone: there appeared to be more bone after 12 months compared to after 6 months in the BMP-2 group. This finding may indicate that evaluation after 4 months, as in the study by Herford et al. [27], is perhaps too quick to assess the final result of the treatment. If this is true, evaluation at a later stage may show more favourable results. A specifically interesting subset of patients are skeletally mature patients as these patients showed better results in the BMP-2 group in terms of bone quantity, less complications and less adverse events compared to patients who received cancellous bone of the iliac crest [26]. Inferior outcome in patients treated with bone grafting after the stage of mixed dentition, i.e. after the eruption of the permanent canines, has been reported previously [28][29][30]. Perhaps, this subset of patients can benefit even more from the application of BMP-2.

(p14.6) It is thought that osteogenesis is a complex process that requires certain combinations of growth factors on specific moments during bone formation. Therefore, it was surprising that the use of just one growth factor in combination with an osteoconductive scaffold led to bone formation. A possible explanation is that BMP-2 stands at or near the top of a cascade of growth factors needed for bone formation and that through biological feedback mechanisms, the right combination of growth factors is attained.

(p14.7) The alveolar bone is a unique bone structure. Besides providing mechanical strength to skeletal system and support for the surrounding soft tissues, the alveolar bone also gives support to teeth and allows tooth eruption, orthodontic movement of teeth into the reconstructed cleft, and, if indicated, osseointegration of dental implants. Unfortunately, quality of bone formation in this respect was not assessed in any of the three studies. Future studies are required to address these issues.
## (s23) Background
(p23.0) The incidence of clefts of lip, alveolus and palate (CLAP) varies between races [1]. Mongolians are affected, with incidence of 0.55-2.50 per 1,000 births; Caucasians, 0.69-2.35 per 1,000 births and Negroids, 0.18-0.82 per 1,000 births [1]. Males are more often affected than females [2]. A cleft of the alveolus is present in more than 50% of the cases with CLAP [3].
## (s24) Tissue engineering
(p24.0) The three vital components necessary for the engineering of bone are bone-forming cells, osteoinductive growth hormone and an osteoconductive scaffold. The osteoconductive scaffold provides immediate mechanical support, mimics the bony extracellular matrix and guides the formation of bone in the desired shape and place. The scaffold should be biocompatible and biodegradable. The rate of degradation is ideally inversely proportional to the rate of bone formation. Several synthetic and organic polymers and also ceramics have been proposed as materials to produce scaffolds [9,10].

(p24.1) The scaffold may also serve as a carrier for the osteoinductive growth hormone. The growth hormone is thus delivered locally and ideally over a sustained period of time. The main role of the growth hormone is to recruit mesenchymal stem cells to the area and make them differentiate into an osteogenic cell lineage [9][10][11].

(p24.2) The three vital components necessary for the engineering of bone are bone-forming cells, osteoinductive growth hormone and an osteoconductive scaffold. The osteoconductive scaffold provides immediate mechanical support, mimics the bony extracellular matrix and guides the formation of bone in the desired shape and place. The scaffold should be biocompatible and biodegradable. The rate of degradation is ideally inversely proportional to the rate of bone formation. Several synthetic and organic polymers and also ceramics have been proposed as materials to produce scaffolds [9,10].

(p24.3) The scaffold may also serve as a carrier for the osteoinductive growth hormone. The growth hormone is thus delivered locally and ideally over a sustained period of time. The main role of the growth hormone is to recruit mesenchymal stem cells to the area and make them differentiate into an osteogenic cell lineage [9][10][11].
## (s25) Growth factors
(p25.0) Many growth factors are involved in osteogenesis. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP-2 and BMP-7), transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), insulin-like growth factors I and II (IGF I and II), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factors (FGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) have been proposed for use in bone tissue engineering [9,12,13].

(p25.1) Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are a group of proteins known to play a role in osteogenesis and chondro-genesis. BMPs are also involved in embryonic development and fracture healing. Especially BMP-2 and BMP-7 are known for their osteoinductive qualities [9,[11][12][13]. TGF-β plays a role in osteogenesis, its actions are diverse and TGF-β is thought to influence the activity of BMPs [9,12,13]. IGFs I and II are present in fracture healing sites. IGFs I and II both stimulate type-1 collagen synthesis and decrease collagenase synthesis [9,12,13]. PDGF recruits mesenchymal stem cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,13]. FGF plays a role in maintaining the balance between boneforming cells and bone-resorbing cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,12]. VEGF plays a role in angiogenesis, promotes vasodilatation and increases microvascular permeability [9,12].

(p25.2) Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) contains a wide diversity of growth factors, and therefore, PRP is thought to stimulate bone formation. Growth factors known to be present in PRP are TGF-β, PDGF, IGF, FGF, VEGF, endothelial cell growth factor and epidermal growth factor [14].

(p25.3) Many growth factors are involved in osteogenesis. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP-2 and BMP-7), transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), insulin-like growth factors I and II (IGF I and II), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factors (FGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) have been proposed for use in bone tissue engineering [9,12,13].

(p25.4) Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are a group of proteins known to play a role in osteogenesis and chondro-genesis. BMPs are also involved in embryonic development and fracture healing. Especially BMP-2 and BMP-7 are known for their osteoinductive qualities [9,[11][12][13]. TGF-β plays a role in osteogenesis, its actions are diverse and TGF-β is thought to influence the activity of BMPs [9,12,13]. IGFs I and II are present in fracture healing sites. IGFs I and II both stimulate type-1 collagen synthesis and decrease collagenase synthesis [9,12,13]. PDGF recruits mesenchymal stem cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,13]. FGF plays a role in maintaining the balance between boneforming cells and bone-resorbing cells and promotes angiogenesis [9,12]. VEGF plays a role in angiogenesis, promotes vasodilatation and increases microvascular permeability [9,12].

(p25.5) Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) contains a wide diversity of growth factors, and therefore, PRP is thought to stimulate bone formation. Growth factors known to be present in PRP are TGF-β, PDGF, IGF, FGF, VEGF, endothelial cell growth factor and epidermal growth factor [14].
## (s32) Full text analysis
(p32.0) Three articles were excluded on basis of the full text screening. The article by Chin et al. [22] on BMP-2 was excluded because besides CLAP, facial clefts were reconstructed and because of absence of radiographic quantification of bone in the reconstructed cleft. The article by Fallucco et al. [23] on BMP-2 was excluded because of absence of radiographic quantification of bone in the reconstructed cleft. The article by Hibi et al. [24] on PRP was excluded because bone marrow aspirate was used.

(p32.1) Finally, three articles were accepted for the review ( Table 2). These three articles were on the reconstruction of the alveolar cleft with the use of BMP-2 in the experimental group and with autologous bone graft in the control group.

(p32.2) In all three articles, unilateral clefts only were included. Prior alveolar surgery was an exclusion criterion for patients in Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26]. No mention of prior alveolar surgery was made by Herford et al. [27].

(p32.3) In the three studies, the kit of Infuse® Bone Graft (Medtronic, Sofamor Danek, Memphis, TN) was used. This kit contains an absorbable sponge consisting of type 1 bovine collagen and is impregnated with rhBMP-2. In the three studies, reconstruction of the alveolar cleft in the control group was performed with autologous cancellous bone of the iliac crest.

(p32.4) Mean alveolar cleft size prior to surgery was 0.975 cm 3 in the BMP-2 group versus 1.052 cm 3 in the control group in Alonso et al. [25], 5.6 cm 3 versus 5.1 cm 3 in Dickinson et al. [26] and 10.55 cm 3 versus 17.86 cm 3 in Herford et al. [27].

(p32.5) In the studies by Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26], all patients received preoperative orthodontic expansion of the maxillary segments. No mention of preoperative treatment was made by Herford et al. [27].

(p32.6) Timing of the reconstruction of the alveolar cleft varied between the three studies; Alonso et al. [25] and Herford et al. [27] reconstructed the alveolar clefts during the stage of mixed dentition, whereas Dickinson et al. [26] reconstructed the clefts in skeletally mature patients.

(p32.7) Computed tomography (CT) was used to evaluate bone formation and to measure the quantity of bone formation: Alonso et al. [25] performed a CT at 6 and at 12 months postoperatively, Dickinson et al. [26] performed a CT at 6 months postoperatively and Herford et al. [27] performed a CT at 4 months postoperatively. Dickinson et al. [26]  assessed the quantity of bone formation also on an Orthopantomogram and on periapical films. Length of follow-up differed between the three studies. Herford et al. [27] reviewed the patients after 4 months, whereas Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26] reviewed the patients after 1 year. Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26] assessed the morbidity of the surgical procedures during the first year, whereas Herford et al. [27] did not mention postoperative morbidity, nor complications.

(p32.8) The studies by Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26] are randomised controlled trials, whilst the study by Herford et al. [27] is a controlled retrospective review; hence, the level of evidence is lower for Herford et al. [27]. Table 3 shows a summary of the study design of the three articles.

(p32.9) Three articles were excluded on basis of the full text screening. The article by Chin et al. [22] on BMP-2 was excluded because besides CLAP, facial clefts were reconstructed and because of absence of radiographic quantification of bone in the reconstructed cleft. The article by Fallucco et al. [23] on BMP-2 was excluded because of absence of radiographic quantification of bone in the reconstructed cleft. The article by Hibi et al. [24] on PRP was excluded because bone marrow aspirate was used.

(p32.10) Finally, three articles were accepted for the review ( Table 2). These three articles were on the reconstruction of the alveolar cleft with the use of BMP-2 in the experimental group and with autologous bone graft in the control group.

(p32.11) In all three articles, unilateral clefts only were included. Prior alveolar surgery was an exclusion criterion for patients in Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26]. No mention of prior alveolar surgery was made by Herford et al. [27].

(p32.12) In the three studies, the kit of Infuse® Bone Graft (Medtronic, Sofamor Danek, Memphis, TN) was used. This kit contains an absorbable sponge consisting of type 1 bovine collagen and is impregnated with rhBMP-2. In the three studies, reconstruction of the alveolar cleft in the control group was performed with autologous cancellous bone of the iliac crest.

(p32.13) Mean alveolar cleft size prior to surgery was 0.975 cm 3 in the BMP-2 group versus 1.052 cm 3 in the control group in Alonso et al. [25], 5.6 cm 3 versus 5.1 cm 3 in Dickinson et al. [26] and 10.55 cm 3 versus 17.86 cm 3 in Herford et al. [27].

(p32.14) In the studies by Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26], all patients received preoperative orthodontic expansion of the maxillary segments. No mention of preoperative treatment was made by Herford et al. [27].

(p32.15) Timing of the reconstruction of the alveolar cleft varied between the three studies; Alonso et al. [25] and Herford et al. [27] reconstructed the alveolar clefts during the stage of mixed dentition, whereas Dickinson et al. [26] reconstructed the clefts in skeletally mature patients.

(p32.16) Computed tomography (CT) was used to evaluate bone formation and to measure the quantity of bone formation: Alonso et al. [25] performed a CT at 6 and at 12 months postoperatively, Dickinson et al. [26] performed a CT at 6 months postoperatively and Herford et al. [27] performed a CT at 4 months postoperatively. Dickinson et al. [26]  assessed the quantity of bone formation also on an Orthopantomogram and on periapical films. Length of follow-up differed between the three studies. Herford et al. [27] reviewed the patients after 4 months, whereas Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26] reviewed the patients after 1 year. Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26] assessed the morbidity of the surgical procedures during the first year, whereas Herford et al. [27] did not mention postoperative morbidity, nor complications.

(p32.17) The studies by Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26] are randomised controlled trials, whilst the study by Herford et al. [27] is a controlled retrospective review; hence, the level of evidence is lower for Herford et al. [27]. Table 3 shows a summary of the study design of the three articles.
## (s34) Bone quantity
(p34.0) Dickinson et al. [26] reported more bone formation in the cleft in the rhBMP-2 group (95%) compared to the control group (63%). Alonso et al. [25] and Herford et al. [27] reported slightly less bone formation in the cleft in the rhBMP-2 group compared to the control group, although the differences (5.8% and 7%) seem not significant. Alonso et al. [25] further measured more bone after 12 months compared to after 6 months. In the study by Herford et al. [27], two patients in the rhBMP-2 group showed significantly less bone formation in the cleft than the other patients; the authors explain this by possible wound breakdown of the nasal mucosal layer.

(p34.1) Bone height was measured by Alonso et al. [25] and by Dickinson et al. [26]. Alonso et al. [25] reported lower bone height in the rhBMP-2 group (10.2 mm) than in the control group (13.9 mm), whereas Dickinson et al. [26] reported   [26] higher bone height in the rhBMP-2 group (85%) than in the control group (70%). The position of the bone in the cleft was described by Alonso et al. [25]; in the rhBMP-2 group, most bone was deposited in the supra-apical area of the cleft, whereas in the control group, most bone was seen in the alveolar area.
## (s35) Bone quality
(p35.0) Alonso et al. [25] reported that tooth eruption occurred without complications in both the rhBMP-2 group and the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] inserted dental implants in 2 out of 9 patients in the rhBMP-2 group and in 1 out of 12 patients in the control group. These implants all showed successful osseointegration. Other information on bone quality, i.e. orthodontic movement of teeth into the cleft area or periodontal status, was not provided.

(p35.1) Alonso et al. [25] reported that tooth eruption occurred without complications in both the rhBMP-2 group and the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] inserted dental implants in 2 out of 9 patients in the rhBMP-2 group and in 1 out of 12 patients in the control group. These implants all showed successful osseointegration. Other information on bone quality, i.e. orthodontic movement of teeth into the cleft area or periodontal status, was not provided.
## (s36) Complications and adverse events
(p36.0) Alonso et al. [25] observed local postoperative swelling in 37.5% of the patients in the rhBMP-2 group and significant donor site pain in 87.5% of the patients in the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] reported that the control group showed significant donor site pain, more wound healing problems, longer hospital stay and greater overall cost of the procedure (Table 5).

(p36.1) Alonso et al. [25] observed local postoperative swelling in 37.5% of the patients in the rhBMP-2 group and significant donor site pain in 87.5% of the patients in the control group. Dickinson et al. [26] reported that the control group showed significant donor site pain, more wound healing problems, longer hospital stay and greater overall cost of the procedure (Table 5).
## (s37) Discussion
(p37.0) The main advantage of growth factor-aided tissue engineering is the avoidance of a second surgical site needed for the harvest of autologous bone. This results in shortening of the operation time, absence of donor site morbidity, shorter hospital stay and reduction of overall cost.

(p37.1) Promising results with growth factor-aided tissue engineering techniques have been obtained in several fields. However, for the reconstruction of the alveolar cleft in CLAP, only three studies were found that assessed growth factor-aided bone tissue engineering techniques and met our selection criteria. We found no studies on BMP-7, TGF-β, PDGF, IGF, FGF, VEGF or PRP that met our selection criteria. The three studies that met our selection criteria all assessed BMP-2-aided bone tissue engineering. These three studies used the same bone tissue engineering kit (Infuse® Bone Graft) for the reconstruction of clefts in the experimental group and autologous cancellous bone of the iliac crest in the control group. It is remarkable that only studies with BMP-2 were published and that these studies all used the same product produced by the same company. The similarities with regard to study design and the growth factor used make comparison of the studies feasible. On the other hand, the patient numbers in the three studies are small, and there was some variation in the timing of the procedure: in two studies, the alveolar clefts were reconstructed during the stage of mixed dentition [25,27], whereas in the other study, clefts were reconstructed in skeletally mature patients [26]. The volume of the alveolar  cleft prior to surgery also varied between the three studies, namely Herford et al. [27] reported a much greater volume of the preoperative cleft. This may be explained by the use of preoperative orthodontic expansion of the maxillary segments by Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26]. As to the difference in volume of the cleft between Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26], the different timing of the procedure should again be taken into account. Nevertheless, the results clearly indicate that rhBMP-2 delivered in an absorbable collagen sponge carrier can create a bony bridge in alveolar cleft patients with sufficient volumes of bone, comparable with the amount achieved in iliac crest cancellous bone grafting. An interesting finding by Alonso et al. [25] was the progressive formation of alveolar bone: there appeared to be more bone after 12 months compared to after 6 months in the BMP-2 group. This finding may indicate that evaluation after 4 months, as in the study by Herford et al. [27], is perhaps too quick to assess the final result of the treatment. If this is true, evaluation at a later stage may show more favourable results. A specifically interesting subset of patients are skeletally mature patients as these patients showed better results in the BMP-2 group in terms of bone quantity, less complications and less adverse events compared to patients who received cancellous bone of the iliac crest [26]. Inferior outcome in patients treated with bone grafting after the stage of mixed dentition, i.e. after the eruption of the permanent canines, has been reported previously [28][29][30]. Perhaps, this subset of patients can benefit even more from the application of BMP-2.

(p37.2) It is thought that osteogenesis is a complex process that requires certain combinations of growth factors on specific moments during bone formation. Therefore, it was surprising that the use of just one growth factor in combination with an osteoconductive scaffold led to bone formation. A possible explanation is that BMP-2 stands at or near the top of a cascade of growth factors needed for bone formation and that through biological feedback mechanisms, the right combination of growth factors is attained.

(p37.3) The alveolar bone is a unique bone structure. Besides providing mechanical strength to skeletal system and support for the surrounding soft tissues, the alveolar bone also gives support to teeth and allows tooth eruption, orthodontic movement of teeth into the reconstructed cleft, and, if indicated, osseointegration of dental implants. Unfortunately, quality of bone formation in this respect was not assessed in any of the three studies. Future studies are required to address these issues.

(p37.4) The main advantage of growth factor-aided tissue engineering is the avoidance of a second surgical site needed for the harvest of autologous bone. This results in shortening of the operation time, absence of donor site morbidity, shorter hospital stay and reduction of overall cost.

(p37.5) Promising results with growth factor-aided tissue engineering techniques have been obtained in several fields. However, for the reconstruction of the alveolar cleft in CLAP, only three studies were found that assessed growth factor-aided bone tissue engineering techniques and met our selection criteria. We found no studies on BMP-7, TGF-β, PDGF, IGF, FGF, VEGF or PRP that met our selection criteria. The three studies that met our selection criteria all assessed BMP-2-aided bone tissue engineering. These three studies used the same bone tissue engineering kit (Infuse® Bone Graft) for the reconstruction of clefts in the experimental group and autologous cancellous bone of the iliac crest in the control group. It is remarkable that only studies with BMP-2 were published and that these studies all used the same product produced by the same company. The similarities with regard to study design and the growth factor used make comparison of the studies feasible. On the other hand, the patient numbers in the three studies are small, and there was some variation in the timing of the procedure: in two studies, the alveolar clefts were reconstructed during the stage of mixed dentition [25,27], whereas in the other study, clefts were reconstructed in skeletally mature patients [26]. The volume of the alveolar  cleft prior to surgery also varied between the three studies, namely Herford et al. [27] reported a much greater volume of the preoperative cleft. This may be explained by the use of preoperative orthodontic expansion of the maxillary segments by Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26]. As to the difference in volume of the cleft between Alonso et al. [25] and Dickinson et al. [26], the different timing of the procedure should again be taken into account. Nevertheless, the results clearly indicate that rhBMP-2 delivered in an absorbable collagen sponge carrier can create a bony bridge in alveolar cleft patients with sufficient volumes of bone, comparable with the amount achieved in iliac crest cancellous bone grafting. An interesting finding by Alonso et al. [25] was the progressive formation of alveolar bone: there appeared to be more bone after 12 months compared to after 6 months in the BMP-2 group. This finding may indicate that evaluation after 4 months, as in the study by Herford et al. [27], is perhaps too quick to assess the final result of the treatment. If this is true, evaluation at a later stage may show more favourable results. A specifically interesting subset of patients are skeletally mature patients as these patients showed better results in the BMP-2 group in terms of bone quantity, less complications and less adverse events compared to patients who received cancellous bone of the iliac crest [26]. Inferior outcome in patients treated with bone grafting after the stage of mixed dentition, i.e. after the eruption of the permanent canines, has been reported previously [28][29][30]. Perhaps, this subset of patients can benefit even more from the application of BMP-2.

(p37.6) It is thought that osteogenesis is a complex process that requires certain combinations of growth factors on specific moments during bone formation. Therefore, it was surprising that the use of just one growth factor in combination with an osteoconductive scaffold led to bone formation. A possible explanation is that BMP-2 stands at or near the top of a cascade of growth factors needed for bone formation and that through biological feedback mechanisms, the right combination of growth factors is attained.

(p37.7) The alveolar bone is a unique bone structure. Besides providing mechanical strength to skeletal system and support for the surrounding soft tissues, the alveolar bone also gives support to teeth and allows tooth eruption, orthodontic movement of teeth into the reconstructed cleft, and, if indicated, osseointegration of dental implants. Unfortunately, quality of bone formation in this respect was not assessed in any of the three studies. Future studies are required to address these issues.
