# A review of piroplasmid infections in wild carnivores worldwide: importance for domestic animal health and wildlife conservation

CorpusID: 13146671 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e0dd66b928bc3e21f5d50f27829d3e1656a9f509](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e0dd66b928bc3e21f5d50f27829d3e1656a9f509)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) The incidence and diversity of tick-borne infections in humans and animals have increased in recent years due to several factors. These factors include the existence of better diagnostic tools; increased awareness among the scientific community, veterinarians, physicians and public health authorities; increased contact of humans with wildlife and vectors (urbanization and habitat encroachment); and changes in the environment, such as global climate change [1,2]. These factors have increased the probabilities of contact with ticks and/or sylvatic reservoir hosts [3].

(p0.1) Piroplasmoses are among the most prevalent arthropodborne diseases of animals. Piroplasmoses are caused by hemoprotozoan parasites of the phylum Apicomplexa belonging to four related genera: Babesia, Theileria, Cytauxzoon and Rangelia [3]. Piroplasmids owe their name to the pear-shaped (pyriform) intracellular stages formed in the host erythrocytes [4]. These parasites have a great economic, veterinary and medical impact worldwide. In fact, they are considered to be the second most commonly found parasites in the blood of mammals after trypanosomes [5], and are frequently found infecting free-living animals worldwide. Thus, they have gained increasing attention as emerging tick-borne diseases [3].
## (s4) Theileria spp.
(p4.0) Only two species of Theileria have been described in free-living carnivores, namely T. sinensis and T. parva (Table 1), both found infecting captive lions [67]. Theileria parva is the agent of the Corridor Disease and East Coast Fever in cattle and African buffalo [15], and T. sinensis was reported to infect cattle and yaks in China [68]. Neither of these species was described previously in felids and further genomic studies are needed to characterize these organisms in felids [67]. Interestingly, Githaka et al. [69] inferred from phylogenetic analyses that a piroplasmid detected in cheetahs in Kenya was closely related to a Theileria sp. that infects sheep and giraffes. In summary, these cases of carnivores infected by piroplasmids of herbivores are probably the result of spill-overs from the latter and may have little relevance at the population level.

(p4.1) Only two species of Theileria have been described in free-living carnivores, namely T. sinensis and T. parva (Table 1), both found infecting captive lions [67]. Theileria parva is the agent of the Corridor Disease and East Coast Fever in cattle and African buffalo [15], and T. sinensis was reported to infect cattle and yaks in China [68]. Neither of these species was described previously in felids and further genomic studies are needed to characterize these organisms in felids [67]. Interestingly, Githaka et al. [69] inferred from phylogenetic analyses that a piroplasmid detected in cheetahs in Kenya was closely related to a Theileria sp. that infects sheep and giraffes. In summary, these cases of carnivores infected by piroplasmids of herbivores are probably the result of spill-overs from the latter and may have little relevance at the population level.
## (s5) Rangelia spp.
(p5.0) Only one species, Rangelia vitalii, has been described ( Table 2). This piroplasmid causes the canine rangeliosis, a severe tick-borne hemorrhagic disease of domestic dogs in Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay [70,71]. Rangelia vitalii infection has been described only in two species of wild canids, the crab-eating fox (Cerdocyon thous), with a prevalence of infection of 30 % [11], and the pampas fox (Lycalopex gymnocercus), with two individual cases in Brazil [72,73].

(p5.1) Only one species, Rangelia vitalii, has been described ( Table 2). This piroplasmid causes the canine rangeliosis, a severe tick-borne hemorrhagic disease of domestic dogs in Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay [70,71]. Rangelia vitalii infection has been described only in two species of wild canids, the crab-eating fox (Cerdocyon thous), with a prevalence of infection of 30 % [11], and the pampas fox (Lycalopex gymnocercus), with two individual cases in Brazil [72,73].
## (s6) Cytauxzoon spp.
(p6.0) Infections with Cytauxzoon spp. have been reported almost exclusively in felids ( Table 2). There is currently only one unquestioned accepted species of Cytauxzoon, namely C. felis, which infects North American felids [bobcats (Lynx rufus) and pumas (Puma concolor)] ( Table 2). Another species, C. manul, was described based on material from the Pallas's cat (Otocolobus manul) from Mongolia, and the percent sequence divergence between this parasite and C. felis allowed the authors to consider this as a distinct species [74]. However, many questions remain regarding Cytauxzoon taxonomy. For example, the identification of C. felis as the causative agent of infection outside America is probably incorrect. In this regard, the sequencing of a 1,726-bp region of the 18S rRNA gene of piroplasmids in the Iberian lynx (Lynx pardinus) supported the distinction between American and Eurasian Cytauxzoon spp. and suggested that different species or strains may exist in different geographical locations [75]. Surprisingly, three Cytauxzoon sequences from Iberian lynx were more closely related to the sequence obtained from a Spanish cat than to a fourth sequence from another Iberian lynx, which clustered together with C. manul [75]. This indicates that Cytauxzoon taxonomy remains far from resolved.

(p6.1) Observed prevalences of infection by Cytauxzoon vary between species and locations. In the bobcat, the species for which most information was gathered, the prevalence varies from 7 % in low-endemic areas to 33 % in endemic regions of the USA (Table 2); similar prevalences have been reported in pumas living in the same regions. In the Iberian lynx, the parasite is apparently present only in one of its two main metapopulations (namely at Doñana and Sierra Morena), as infection has never been demonstrated in any of the lynx analyzed from Doñana [75][76][77]. In Sierra Morena, observed prevalences ranged between 15 and 75 % depending on the study ( Table 2).

(p6.2) The only species reported to be infected by Cytauxzoon not belonging to the family Felidae is the South African meerkat (Suricata suricatta; family Herpestidae) and the Hokkaido brown bear (family Ursidae). In the case of the meerkat, a single study reported a prevalence of 57 % in 46 animals sampled in the Kalahari [78]; this species lives on ranchlands in close proximity to human settlements, which may have increased the potential for pathogen interspecific transmission [78]. In the case of the Hokkaido brown bear, only a single case was reported [79].

(p6.3) Infections with Cytauxzoon spp. have been reported almost exclusively in felids ( Table 2). There is currently only one unquestioned accepted species of Cytauxzoon, namely C. felis, which infects North American felids [bobcats (Lynx rufus) and pumas (Puma concolor)] ( Table 2). Another species, C. manul, was described based on material from the Pallas's cat (Otocolobus manul) from Mongolia, and the percent sequence divergence between this parasite and C. felis allowed the authors to consider this as a distinct species [74]. However, many questions remain regarding Cytauxzoon taxonomy. For example, the identification of C. felis as the causative agent of infection outside America is probably incorrect. In this regard, the sequencing of a 1,726-bp region of the 18S rRNA gene of piroplasmids in the Iberian lynx (Lynx pardinus) supported the distinction between American and Eurasian Cytauxzoon spp. and suggested that different species or strains may exist in different geographical locations [75]. Surprisingly, three Cytauxzoon sequences from Iberian lynx were more closely related to the sequence obtained from a Spanish cat than to a fourth sequence from another Iberian lynx, which clustered together with C. manul [75]. This indicates that Cytauxzoon taxonomy remains far from resolved.

(p6.4) Observed prevalences of infection by Cytauxzoon vary between species and locations. In the bobcat, the species for which most information was gathered, the prevalence varies from 7 % in low-endemic areas to 33 % in endemic regions of the USA (Table 2); similar prevalences have been reported in pumas living in the same regions. In the Iberian lynx, the parasite is apparently present only in one of its two main metapopulations (namely at Doñana and Sierra Morena), as infection has never been demonstrated in any of the lynx analyzed from Doñana [75][76][77]. In Sierra Morena, observed prevalences ranged between 15 and 75 % depending on the study ( Table 2).

(p6.5) The only species reported to be infected by Cytauxzoon not belonging to the family Felidae is the South African meerkat (Suricata suricatta; family Herpestidae) and the Hokkaido brown bear (family Ursidae). In the case of the meerkat, a single study reported a prevalence of 57 % in 46 animals sampled in the Kalahari [78]; this species lives on ranchlands in close proximity to human settlements, which may have increased the potential for pathogen interspecific transmission [78]. In the case of the Hokkaido brown bear, only a single case was reported [79].
## (s8) Babesia spp.
(p8.0) Babesia spp. infections normally occur as clinically unapparent infections in immunocompetent hosts [8,93]. Mortalities have rarely been reported in free-ranging and captive carnivores. When mortality takes place, it is usually related to immunosuppression or co-infection with other disease agents. For example, sudden death in two captive grey wolves (Canis lupus) in apparently good body condition associated with B. canis infection could be, according to the authors, secondary to the immunosupression related to captivity, which probably lead to the clinical manifestation [106]. Similarly, marked anemia in a Hokkaido brown bear cub was conceivably caused by the combination of a heavy tick infestation and Babesia sp. infection, which was aggravated by stress factors [79]. Another fatal acute infection by Babesia sp. was recorded in a captive juvenile African wild dog (Lycaon pictus), and was associated with vaccination-induced reduction in its immune competence [35]. In the case of B. microti-like group infection, a clinical case with hemolytic anemia and weakness was reported in a free-living juvenile red fox [64]; these clinical signs are similar to those described in infected dogs with babesiosis [23,24].
## (s9) Rangelia spp.
(p9.0) Clinical signs have been reported in wild foxes naturally infected with R. vitalii. In one case, a wild female pampas fox was found with physical debilitation, motor incordination, dehydratation, pale mucous membranes, apathy, and hypothermia [72]. In another two cases, no signs associated to typical clinical rangeliosis were detected. These included a pampas fox that was in good body condition, with moderately pale mucosae, and a crab-eating fox showing myoclonic rear limbs, paresthesia of front limbs and distinctly pale conjuctivae and oral mucosae [73]. In both canids, necropsy revealed generalized jaundice and histopathology examination showed R. vitalii in endothelial cells of liver, stomach, heart, kidney, lungs, lymph nodes, and gall bladder [73]. The significance of rangeliosis at the population level has not been investigated.

(p9.1) Clinical signs have been reported in wild foxes naturally infected with R. vitalii. In one case, a wild female pampas fox was found with physical debilitation, motor incordination, dehydratation, pale mucous membranes, apathy, and hypothermia [72]. In another two cases, no signs associated to typical clinical rangeliosis were detected. These included a pampas fox that was in good body condition, with moderately pale mucosae, and a crab-eating fox showing myoclonic rear limbs, paresthesia of front limbs and distinctly pale conjuctivae and oral mucosae [73]. In both canids, necropsy revealed generalized jaundice and histopathology examination showed R. vitalii in endothelial cells of liver, stomach, heart, kidney, lungs, lymph nodes, and gall bladder [73]. The significance of rangeliosis at the population level has not been investigated.
## (s11) Role of wildlife in the epidemiology of piroplasmids
(p11.0) As shown in the present review, there is abundant evidence of piroplasmid infections in wild carnivores worldwide, in some circumstances displaying high prevalences. There are species of abundant wild carnivores that could serve as reservoirs for piroplasmids, and a wide range of potential vectors that may allow these parasites to maintain endemic sylvatic life-cycles in their geographical distribution area. This could potentially lead to the transmission of infection to domestic carnivores, especially in peri-urban and urban environments [8,60,90]. In this regard, many wild reservoir hosts (e.g. red fox, golden jackal and raccoon) are increasing in number and expanding their geographical ranges, thus increasing intra-and interspecies contact risk with domestic carnivores [115]. However, a high prevalence of infection alone does not demonstrate that the species in question acts as a reservoir. In addition, many species of wild carnivores are not abundant, and probably unable to maintain a pathogen in the absence of dogs or another reservoir.
## (s12) Zoonotic implications
(p12.0) Zoonotic species are found among Babesia species, but humans are not natural hosts of Theileria spp. or Cytauxzoon spp. Humans can, however, be accidental hosts for numerous Babesia spp. [3,5]. Yet, as far as it is known, none of the piroplasmids infecting wild carnivores are zoonotic. Nevertheless, Hersh et al. [82] described the presence of the zoonotic B. microti in I. scapularis ticks retrieved from raccoons and skunks in the USA. If these ticks were infected after biting these carnivore hosts, this would have major implications for B. microti dynamics. Therefore, raccoons and skunks could play a critical role in the transmission of the disease in the USA as mechanical dispersers of infected ticks. Their role would depend on their B. microti-infected tick loads and relative tick abundance [82]. Nevertheless, infections of carnivores by B. microti have never been confirmed, and references to B. microti infections in carnivores may represent B. microtilike infections (see above).

(p12.1) Zoonotic species are found among Babesia species, but humans are not natural hosts of Theileria spp. or Cytauxzoon spp. Humans can, however, be accidental hosts for numerous Babesia spp. [3,5]. Yet, as far as it is known, none of the piroplasmids infecting wild carnivores are zoonotic. Nevertheless, Hersh et al. [82] described the presence of the zoonotic B. microti in I. scapularis ticks retrieved from raccoons and skunks in the USA. If these ticks were infected after biting these carnivore hosts, this would have major implications for B. microti dynamics. Therefore, raccoons and skunks could play a critical role in the transmission of the disease in the USA as mechanical dispersers of infected ticks. Their role would depend on their B. microti-infected tick loads and relative tick abundance [82]. Nevertheless, infections of carnivores by B. microti have never been confirmed, and references to B. microti infections in carnivores may represent B. microtilike infections (see above).
## (s14) Knowledge gaps and future research perspectives
(p14.0) To better understand the role of wild carnivores in the epidemiology of piroplasmoses and to determine eventual conservation threats for endangered carnivores, it is imperative that research be conducted to fill the gaps existing in the knowledge of the natural history of the different species of piroplasmids. These gaps may include:

(p14.1) The exact determination and classification of the causative agent for diverse piroplasmid infections in wildlife. The identity of the vector/s and/or reservoir/s for many agents (e.g. Cytauxzoon sp. in Europe, Asia, and South America, and for "B. microti-like" or R. vitalii). These data are extremely important to understand the disease dynamics of piroplasmoses and to determine potential distribution areas of the disease. The investigation of the critical role of ticks in the dynamics of piroplasmoses. For some piroplasmids, such as Cytauxzoon spp. in Eurasia, the competent vector is still unknown. It is also necessary to determine the ability of ticks to serve as reservoirs in the absence of the vertebrate host, and the duration of infectivity in the tick vector [3]. The confirmation of the competence of suspected wild reservoirs to infect the tick vector through xenodiagnosis. The investigation of alternative ways of piroplasmid transmission (transplancental, direct) and its role in the maintenance of piroplasmids in the wild in the absence of a tick vector. Improved economical and sensitive serological tests for use in the cases where parasites may be difficult to detect by direct methods, and epidemiological surveys in wild populations. Improvement of the available molecular biology tools for characterization of piroplasmids infecting wild carnivores, and for comparison with domestic animal-derived sequences.

(p14.2) To better understand the role of wild carnivores in the epidemiology of piroplasmoses and to determine eventual conservation threats for endangered carnivores, it is imperative that research be conducted to fill the gaps existing in the knowledge of the natural history of the different species of piroplasmids. These gaps may include:

(p14.3) The exact determination and classification of the causative agent for diverse piroplasmid infections in wildlife. The identity of the vector/s and/or reservoir/s for many agents (e.g. Cytauxzoon sp. in Europe, Asia, and South America, and for "B. microti-like" or R. vitalii). These data are extremely important to understand the disease dynamics of piroplasmoses and to determine potential distribution areas of the disease. The investigation of the critical role of ticks in the dynamics of piroplasmoses. For some piroplasmids, such as Cytauxzoon spp. in Eurasia, the competent vector is still unknown. It is also necessary to determine the ability of ticks to serve as reservoirs in the absence of the vertebrate host, and the duration of infectivity in the tick vector [3]. The confirmation of the competence of suspected wild reservoirs to infect the tick vector through xenodiagnosis. The investigation of alternative ways of piroplasmid transmission (transplancental, direct) and its role in the maintenance of piroplasmids in the wild in the absence of a tick vector. Improved economical and sensitive serological tests for use in the cases where parasites may be difficult to detect by direct methods, and epidemiological surveys in wild populations. Improvement of the available molecular biology tools for characterization of piroplasmids infecting wild carnivores, and for comparison with domestic animal-derived sequences.
## (s26) Background
(p26.0) The incidence and diversity of tick-borne infections in humans and animals have increased in recent years due to several factors. These factors include the existence of better diagnostic tools; increased awareness among the scientific community, veterinarians, physicians and public health authorities; increased contact of humans with wildlife and vectors (urbanization and habitat encroachment); and changes in the environment, such as global climate change [1,2]. These factors have increased the probabilities of contact with ticks and/or sylvatic reservoir hosts [3].

(p26.1) Piroplasmoses are among the most prevalent arthropodborne diseases of animals. Piroplasmoses are caused by hemoprotozoan parasites of the phylum Apicomplexa belonging to four related genera: Babesia, Theileria, Cytauxzoon and Rangelia [3]. Piroplasmids owe their name to the pear-shaped (pyriform) intracellular stages formed in the host erythrocytes [4]. These parasites have a great economic, veterinary and medical impact worldwide. In fact, they are considered to be the second most commonly found parasites in the blood of mammals after trypanosomes [5], and are frequently found infecting free-living animals worldwide. Thus, they have gained increasing attention as emerging tick-borne diseases [3].
## (s30) Theileria spp.
(p30.0) Only two species of Theileria have been described in free-living carnivores, namely T. sinensis and T. parva (Table 1), both found infecting captive lions [67]. Theileria parva is the agent of the Corridor Disease and East Coast Fever in cattle and African buffalo [15], and T. sinensis was reported to infect cattle and yaks in China [68]. Neither of these species was described previously in felids and further genomic studies are needed to characterize these organisms in felids [67]. Interestingly, Githaka et al. [69] inferred from phylogenetic analyses that a piroplasmid detected in cheetahs in Kenya was closely related to a Theileria sp. that infects sheep and giraffes. In summary, these cases of carnivores infected by piroplasmids of herbivores are probably the result of spill-overs from the latter and may have little relevance at the population level.

(p30.1) Only two species of Theileria have been described in free-living carnivores, namely T. sinensis and T. parva (Table 1), both found infecting captive lions [67]. Theileria parva is the agent of the Corridor Disease and East Coast Fever in cattle and African buffalo [15], and T. sinensis was reported to infect cattle and yaks in China [68]. Neither of these species was described previously in felids and further genomic studies are needed to characterize these organisms in felids [67]. Interestingly, Githaka et al. [69] inferred from phylogenetic analyses that a piroplasmid detected in cheetahs in Kenya was closely related to a Theileria sp. that infects sheep and giraffes. In summary, these cases of carnivores infected by piroplasmids of herbivores are probably the result of spill-overs from the latter and may have little relevance at the population level.
## (s31) Rangelia spp.
(p31.0) Only one species, Rangelia vitalii, has been described ( Table 2). This piroplasmid causes the canine rangeliosis, a severe tick-borne hemorrhagic disease of domestic dogs in Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay [70,71]. Rangelia vitalii infection has been described only in two species of wild canids, the crab-eating fox (Cerdocyon thous), with a prevalence of infection of 30 % [11], and the pampas fox (Lycalopex gymnocercus), with two individual cases in Brazil [72,73].

(p31.1) Only one species, Rangelia vitalii, has been described ( Table 2). This piroplasmid causes the canine rangeliosis, a severe tick-borne hemorrhagic disease of domestic dogs in Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay [70,71]. Rangelia vitalii infection has been described only in two species of wild canids, the crab-eating fox (Cerdocyon thous), with a prevalence of infection of 30 % [11], and the pampas fox (Lycalopex gymnocercus), with two individual cases in Brazil [72,73].
## (s32) Cytauxzoon spp.
(p32.0) Infections with Cytauxzoon spp. have been reported almost exclusively in felids ( Table 2). There is currently only one unquestioned accepted species of Cytauxzoon, namely C. felis, which infects North American felids [bobcats (Lynx rufus) and pumas (Puma concolor)] ( Table 2). Another species, C. manul, was described based on material from the Pallas's cat (Otocolobus manul) from Mongolia, and the percent sequence divergence between this parasite and C. felis allowed the authors to consider this as a distinct species [74]. However, many questions remain regarding Cytauxzoon taxonomy. For example, the identification of C. felis as the causative agent of infection outside America is probably incorrect. In this regard, the sequencing of a 1,726-bp region of the 18S rRNA gene of piroplasmids in the Iberian lynx (Lynx pardinus) supported the distinction between American and Eurasian Cytauxzoon spp. and suggested that different species or strains may exist in different geographical locations [75]. Surprisingly, three Cytauxzoon sequences from Iberian lynx were more closely related to the sequence obtained from a Spanish cat than to a fourth sequence from another Iberian lynx, which clustered together with C. manul [75]. This indicates that Cytauxzoon taxonomy remains far from resolved.

(p32.1) Observed prevalences of infection by Cytauxzoon vary between species and locations. In the bobcat, the species for which most information was gathered, the prevalence varies from 7 % in low-endemic areas to 33 % in endemic regions of the USA (Table 2); similar prevalences have been reported in pumas living in the same regions. In the Iberian lynx, the parasite is apparently present only in one of its two main metapopulations (namely at Doñana and Sierra Morena), as infection has never been demonstrated in any of the lynx analyzed from Doñana [75][76][77]. In Sierra Morena, observed prevalences ranged between 15 and 75 % depending on the study ( Table 2).

(p32.2) The only species reported to be infected by Cytauxzoon not belonging to the family Felidae is the South African meerkat (Suricata suricatta; family Herpestidae) and the Hokkaido brown bear (family Ursidae). In the case of the meerkat, a single study reported a prevalence of 57 % in 46 animals sampled in the Kalahari [78]; this species lives on ranchlands in close proximity to human settlements, which may have increased the potential for pathogen interspecific transmission [78]. In the case of the Hokkaido brown bear, only a single case was reported [79].

(p32.3) Infections with Cytauxzoon spp. have been reported almost exclusively in felids ( Table 2). There is currently only one unquestioned accepted species of Cytauxzoon, namely C. felis, which infects North American felids [bobcats (Lynx rufus) and pumas (Puma concolor)] ( Table 2). Another species, C. manul, was described based on material from the Pallas's cat (Otocolobus manul) from Mongolia, and the percent sequence divergence between this parasite and C. felis allowed the authors to consider this as a distinct species [74]. However, many questions remain regarding Cytauxzoon taxonomy. For example, the identification of C. felis as the causative agent of infection outside America is probably incorrect. In this regard, the sequencing of a 1,726-bp region of the 18S rRNA gene of piroplasmids in the Iberian lynx (Lynx pardinus) supported the distinction between American and Eurasian Cytauxzoon spp. and suggested that different species or strains may exist in different geographical locations [75]. Surprisingly, three Cytauxzoon sequences from Iberian lynx were more closely related to the sequence obtained from a Spanish cat than to a fourth sequence from another Iberian lynx, which clustered together with C. manul [75]. This indicates that Cytauxzoon taxonomy remains far from resolved.

(p32.4) Observed prevalences of infection by Cytauxzoon vary between species and locations. In the bobcat, the species for which most information was gathered, the prevalence varies from 7 % in low-endemic areas to 33 % in endemic regions of the USA (Table 2); similar prevalences have been reported in pumas living in the same regions. In the Iberian lynx, the parasite is apparently present only in one of its two main metapopulations (namely at Doñana and Sierra Morena), as infection has never been demonstrated in any of the lynx analyzed from Doñana [75][76][77]. In Sierra Morena, observed prevalences ranged between 15 and 75 % depending on the study ( Table 2).

(p32.5) The only species reported to be infected by Cytauxzoon not belonging to the family Felidae is the South African meerkat (Suricata suricatta; family Herpestidae) and the Hokkaido brown bear (family Ursidae). In the case of the meerkat, a single study reported a prevalence of 57 % in 46 animals sampled in the Kalahari [78]; this species lives on ranchlands in close proximity to human settlements, which may have increased the potential for pathogen interspecific transmission [78]. In the case of the Hokkaido brown bear, only a single case was reported [79].
## (s34) Babesia spp.
(p34.0) Babesia spp. infections normally occur as clinically unapparent infections in immunocompetent hosts [8,93]. Mortalities have rarely been reported in free-ranging and captive carnivores. When mortality takes place, it is usually related to immunosuppression or co-infection with other disease agents. For example, sudden death in two captive grey wolves (Canis lupus) in apparently good body condition associated with B. canis infection could be, according to the authors, secondary to the immunosupression related to captivity, which probably lead to the clinical manifestation [106]. Similarly, marked anemia in a Hokkaido brown bear cub was conceivably caused by the combination of a heavy tick infestation and Babesia sp. infection, which was aggravated by stress factors [79]. Another fatal acute infection by Babesia sp. was recorded in a captive juvenile African wild dog (Lycaon pictus), and was associated with vaccination-induced reduction in its immune competence [35]. In the case of B. microti-like group infection, a clinical case with hemolytic anemia and weakness was reported in a free-living juvenile red fox [64]; these clinical signs are similar to those described in infected dogs with babesiosis [23,24].
## (s35) Rangelia spp.
(p35.0) Clinical signs have been reported in wild foxes naturally infected with R. vitalii. In one case, a wild female pampas fox was found with physical debilitation, motor incordination, dehydratation, pale mucous membranes, apathy, and hypothermia [72]. In another two cases, no signs associated to typical clinical rangeliosis were detected. These included a pampas fox that was in good body condition, with moderately pale mucosae, and a crab-eating fox showing myoclonic rear limbs, paresthesia of front limbs and distinctly pale conjuctivae and oral mucosae [73]. In both canids, necropsy revealed generalized jaundice and histopathology examination showed R. vitalii in endothelial cells of liver, stomach, heart, kidney, lungs, lymph nodes, and gall bladder [73]. The significance of rangeliosis at the population level has not been investigated.

(p35.1) Clinical signs have been reported in wild foxes naturally infected with R. vitalii. In one case, a wild female pampas fox was found with physical debilitation, motor incordination, dehydratation, pale mucous membranes, apathy, and hypothermia [72]. In another two cases, no signs associated to typical clinical rangeliosis were detected. These included a pampas fox that was in good body condition, with moderately pale mucosae, and a crab-eating fox showing myoclonic rear limbs, paresthesia of front limbs and distinctly pale conjuctivae and oral mucosae [73]. In both canids, necropsy revealed generalized jaundice and histopathology examination showed R. vitalii in endothelial cells of liver, stomach, heart, kidney, lungs, lymph nodes, and gall bladder [73]. The significance of rangeliosis at the population level has not been investigated.
## (s37) Role of wildlife in the epidemiology of piroplasmids
(p37.0) As shown in the present review, there is abundant evidence of piroplasmid infections in wild carnivores worldwide, in some circumstances displaying high prevalences. There are species of abundant wild carnivores that could serve as reservoirs for piroplasmids, and a wide range of potential vectors that may allow these parasites to maintain endemic sylvatic life-cycles in their geographical distribution area. This could potentially lead to the transmission of infection to domestic carnivores, especially in peri-urban and urban environments [8,60,90]. In this regard, many wild reservoir hosts (e.g. red fox, golden jackal and raccoon) are increasing in number and expanding their geographical ranges, thus increasing intra-and interspecies contact risk with domestic carnivores [115]. However, a high prevalence of infection alone does not demonstrate that the species in question acts as a reservoir. In addition, many species of wild carnivores are not abundant, and probably unable to maintain a pathogen in the absence of dogs or another reservoir.
## (s38) Zoonotic implications
(p38.0) Zoonotic species are found among Babesia species, but humans are not natural hosts of Theileria spp. or Cytauxzoon spp. Humans can, however, be accidental hosts for numerous Babesia spp. [3,5]. Yet, as far as it is known, none of the piroplasmids infecting wild carnivores are zoonotic. Nevertheless, Hersh et al. [82] described the presence of the zoonotic B. microti in I. scapularis ticks retrieved from raccoons and skunks in the USA. If these ticks were infected after biting these carnivore hosts, this would have major implications for B. microti dynamics. Therefore, raccoons and skunks could play a critical role in the transmission of the disease in the USA as mechanical dispersers of infected ticks. Their role would depend on their B. microti-infected tick loads and relative tick abundance [82]. Nevertheless, infections of carnivores by B. microti have never been confirmed, and references to B. microti infections in carnivores may represent B. microtilike infections (see above).

(p38.1) Zoonotic species are found among Babesia species, but humans are not natural hosts of Theileria spp. or Cytauxzoon spp. Humans can, however, be accidental hosts for numerous Babesia spp. [3,5]. Yet, as far as it is known, none of the piroplasmids infecting wild carnivores are zoonotic. Nevertheless, Hersh et al. [82] described the presence of the zoonotic B. microti in I. scapularis ticks retrieved from raccoons and skunks in the USA. If these ticks were infected after biting these carnivore hosts, this would have major implications for B. microti dynamics. Therefore, raccoons and skunks could play a critical role in the transmission of the disease in the USA as mechanical dispersers of infected ticks. Their role would depend on their B. microti-infected tick loads and relative tick abundance [82]. Nevertheless, infections of carnivores by B. microti have never been confirmed, and references to B. microti infections in carnivores may represent B. microtilike infections (see above).
## (s40) Knowledge gaps and future research perspectives
(p40.0) To better understand the role of wild carnivores in the epidemiology of piroplasmoses and to determine eventual conservation threats for endangered carnivores, it is imperative that research be conducted to fill the gaps existing in the knowledge of the natural history of the different species of piroplasmids. These gaps may include:

(p40.1) The exact determination and classification of the causative agent for diverse piroplasmid infections in wildlife. The identity of the vector/s and/or reservoir/s for many agents (e.g. Cytauxzoon sp. in Europe, Asia, and South America, and for "B. microti-like" or R. vitalii). These data are extremely important to understand the disease dynamics of piroplasmoses and to determine potential distribution areas of the disease. The investigation of the critical role of ticks in the dynamics of piroplasmoses. For some piroplasmids, such as Cytauxzoon spp. in Eurasia, the competent vector is still unknown. It is also necessary to determine the ability of ticks to serve as reservoirs in the absence of the vertebrate host, and the duration of infectivity in the tick vector [3]. The confirmation of the competence of suspected wild reservoirs to infect the tick vector through xenodiagnosis. The investigation of alternative ways of piroplasmid transmission (transplancental, direct) and its role in the maintenance of piroplasmids in the wild in the absence of a tick vector. Improved economical and sensitive serological tests for use in the cases where parasites may be difficult to detect by direct methods, and epidemiological surveys in wild populations. Improvement of the available molecular biology tools for characterization of piroplasmids infecting wild carnivores, and for comparison with domestic animal-derived sequences.

(p40.2) To better understand the role of wild carnivores in the epidemiology of piroplasmoses and to determine eventual conservation threats for endangered carnivores, it is imperative that research be conducted to fill the gaps existing in the knowledge of the natural history of the different species of piroplasmids. These gaps may include:

(p40.3) The exact determination and classification of the causative agent for diverse piroplasmid infections in wildlife. The identity of the vector/s and/or reservoir/s for many agents (e.g. Cytauxzoon sp. in Europe, Asia, and South America, and for "B. microti-like" or R. vitalii). These data are extremely important to understand the disease dynamics of piroplasmoses and to determine potential distribution areas of the disease. The investigation of the critical role of ticks in the dynamics of piroplasmoses. For some piroplasmids, such as Cytauxzoon spp. in Eurasia, the competent vector is still unknown. It is also necessary to determine the ability of ticks to serve as reservoirs in the absence of the vertebrate host, and the duration of infectivity in the tick vector [3]. The confirmation of the competence of suspected wild reservoirs to infect the tick vector through xenodiagnosis. The investigation of alternative ways of piroplasmid transmission (transplancental, direct) and its role in the maintenance of piroplasmids in the wild in the absence of a tick vector. Improved economical and sensitive serological tests for use in the cases where parasites may be difficult to detect by direct methods, and epidemiological surveys in wild populations. Improvement of the available molecular biology tools for characterization of piroplasmids infecting wild carnivores, and for comparison with domestic animal-derived sequences.
