# Assessment of the Participation of the Children with a Developmental Coordination Disorder (DCD): A Review of the Questionnaires Addressed to Parents and/or Teachers

CorpusID: 13853028 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f515040df31202da76ad14b819cbfa691fcfa326](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f515040df31202da76ad14b819cbfa691fcfa326)

Fields: Education, Psychology, Medicine

## (s10) Limitations
(p10.0) This review only integrated six questionnaires which have been analyzed and published in English. It was thus not a systematic review and some other questionnaires that have been missed. The evaluation of the items in regard of the requirement of attention and motor skills has been made on the basis of the existing literature and the clinical research experience of the three authors with an agreement on each of the items. Sometimes, the fact that the comprehension of the items can differ between the raters may have influenced the results presented in Table 2. It should be noted that the lack of inhibition can also be one of the causes of the difficulties that children with DCD often encounter in daily activities such as walking while holding something. This aspect was not considered in this article. More research is needed in this field [27].
## (s11) Conclusion
(p11.0) We suggest that a screening procedure which consists of two questionnaires, should be used in order to properly assess the second criteria of the diagnosis of DCD; the first one is addressed to the parents/caretakers, whereas the second to the teachers. Different questionnaires should be employed to cover the different motor functions of children capable at different ages. Motor items that require less of the child's attention should also be assessed in the early stages. Furthermore, as mentioned by van der Linde et al. [28][29][30][31], questionnaires and an objective measure of the activities should be administered.

(p11.1) The DCDailyQ is currently the only questionnaire which has a good balance between items to identify the difficulties of the child. It contains no equivocal items; all the items fall inside one category. The predictive values are excellent. The DCDailyQ can identify children with and without DCD. More cultural and psychometric validation is still needed in order to use it more widely.
