# Rosuvastatin: A Review of the pharmacology and clinical effectiveness in cardiovascular Disease

CorpusID: 14997839 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0e5a2aacb0bf125ae51a08c0d726ccadab2d687d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0e5a2aacb0bf125ae51a08c0d726ccadab2d687d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) rosuvastatin in secondary prevention
(p4.0) The beneficial effects of statin therapy in patients with ischaemic heart disease are well known. The 4S study showed that simvastatin 20 mg to 40 mg daily significantly reduced major coronary events, coronary death and overall mortality in patients post-MI or those with ischaemic heart disease. 43 In the LIPID study (Long-term Intervention with Pravastatin in Ischaemic Disease), pravastatin 40 mg reduced cardiovascular events and mortality in patients with history of myocardial infarction or unstable angina with different baseline lipid profiles. 44 Other studies  have also established the benefits of treatment after myocardial infarction.
## (s8) rosuvastatin in diabetes
(p8.0) Type 2 diabetes is associated with increased risk of coronary heart disease. In the UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS), every 1 mmol/L increment in LDL-C was associated with a 57% increase in relative risk of coronary heart disease. Furthermore, the LDL-C of diabetic patients predicted their risk of stroke. 64 
## (s11) rosuvastatin in heart failure
(p11.0) The CORONA (Controlled Rosuvastatin Multinational Trial in Heart Failure) investigated the effect of rosuvastatin 10 mg in patients with New York Heart Association functional class II-IV systolic heart failure from ischaemic heart disease. The CORONA study did not establish any reduction in composite Clinical Medicine Insights: Cardiology 2012:6 cardiovascular outcome and death despite favourable effects on LDL-C, triglycerides, HDL-C and CRP. The use of rosuvastatin did however reduce hospitalisation from cardiovascular causes. 72 A similar trend was found in the GISSI-HF study in which only 40% of patients had ischaemic heart failure. In the GISSI HF (Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio della Supravvivenza nell'Insufficienza cardiac) study, rosuvastatin 10 mg had no effects on primary and secondary endpoints when compared with placebo. 73 The two studies show that rosuvastatin did not have extra benefit in reduction of cardiovascular mortality in patients with ischaemic and non-ischaemic heart failure.
## (s14) Intermittent rosuvastatin
(p14.0) Several small studies have reported that alternate-day therapy with rosuvastatin has important benefits in addition to improving the lipid profile. These include limitation of adverse reactions, enhanced patient compliance and reduced cost of treatment. 83 Other studies have looked at weekly rosuvastatin for patients with previous statin intolerance. One study achieved reductions of 23% in LDL-C, 17% in total cholesterol, 12% in triglycerides and an increase of 5% in HDL-C in patients who had a prior history of adverse reactions to one or more statins. 84 These alternative dosing regimens have not been proven to reduce cardiovascular risk. A few studies have started reporting the effects of pulsed combination drug therapy involving rosuvastatin in their regimens. 85
