# A Review of Exposure Assessment Methods in Epidemiological Studies on Incinerators

CorpusID: 14400320 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc567e56b069f6213237a08c128bfea24f156ee0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc567e56b069f6213237a08c128bfea24f156ee0)

Fields: Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s4) 3.3.2
(p4.0) Year of publication Figure 2: Temporal evolution of exposure assessment methods. Methods are classified according to Table 1 and sorted in the -axis from the less precise to the best one.

(p4.1) We then contrasted the results of using alternative approaches for the assessment of the exposure level for each individual in the sample. Exposure variables were categorized in 5 classes (i.e., 1: lowest exposure, 5: highest exposure) using quintiles of each variable distribution. Thus, each exposure class contain approximately the same number of subjects. Only for address distance from the incinerator we defined also a second categorization using regular buffers, as done in the majority of published studies [33][34][35].

(p4.2) Concentration and deposition estimates based on dispersion models are affected by their own degree of uncertainty and should be possibly ground trued with field measurements and/or experiments. A previous validation study conducted in France [32] demonstrated that this kind of models provide a reliable proxy for incinerator exposure in simple terrain such as the area under study: we here assumed that simulated concentrations represent the closest estimate to the actual exposure.

(p4.3) Therefore we evaluated the degree of exposure misclassification using two-way tables and Cohen's kappa test of agreement [36,37]. Cohen's kappa was calculated using quadratic weighting to assign less importance to misclassification between adjacent classes and higher importance to other misclassifications.
## (s9) Evaluation of
(p9.0) Epidemiological analyses carried out on a significant number of municipalities still represent a valuable instrument for public health tracking since they can evidence disease clusters in some regions that must be studied further. Even though any departure of disease incidence in large communities from background levels has to be taken very seriously, it is very difficult to use this type of evidence to infer about the role of specific emission sources (i.e., an incinerator), as many other potential confounding factors might exert a significant effect, particularly in highly urbanized areas. Moreover, the risk of false positive and, to a greater extent, false negative results, common to all exposure assessment methods, can be exacerbated when epidemiological data are averaged out on a vast territory with large internal differences in the exposure levels, as in method 1.1.1.

(p9.1) Almost half of the studies used distance to measure exposure. This is certainly a substantial improvement with respect to just an absence/presence evaluation, as contamination from an atmospheric emission source (e.g., air, soil, and locally produced food) is generally expected to decrease with distance. However, the assumption of isotropy in atmospheric dispersion of contaminants could lead to remarkable errors in exposure assessment. Many features of the emission source (e.g., stack height, gas flow temperature and velocity, and pollutant concentration) and of the local environment (e.g., local meteorology, topography, and land use) determine where and how far stack emissions disperse and how ultimately enter different environmental compartments.  In our simulation study carried out for the Parma incinerator, the distance method assigns the same exposure level to people resident in the northern and eastern parts of the territory around the emission stack, even though simulations showed that concentrations are expected to be higher along the east-west direction than to the north-south one (Figure 3).

(p9.2) Because of the anisotropic dispersion of pollutants in the atmosphere, the expected PM 10 concentrations at the residence address vary wildly inside each 800 m wide buffer Journal of Environmental and Public Health 7 around the incinerator (Figure 4(a)). Consequently, the use of distance from the emission source as a proxy of actual concentrations could cause a high degree of misclassification ( Table 2).

(p9.3) The use of well-tuned atmospheric dispersion models allows a substantial improvement in the estimation of exposure level, especially if carried out along with a fine scale estimation of the spatial distribution of the vulnerable population. Anyway, atmospheric pollution models are themselves affected by a considerable level of uncertainty [48] depending upon assumptions on actual atmospheric conditions, reconstruction of wind fields, and type of dispersion processes, including the possibility of simulating chemical transformation which are known to be highly relevant for the formation of tropospheric ozone and secondary fine particulate matter.

(p9.4) A significant number of the published papers analysed in the present study provided only a limited information on the atmospheric model: generally there was no discussion about the type of model used, the type and source of meteorological data, model adequacy to represent complex morphological natural or urban landscape and/or wind calms, and the assumptions made about pollutant's emission rates and physical-chemical properties.

(p9.5) Only few studies explicitly acknowledged limitations in the modelling approach used. For example, instead of adopting a different dispersion model as suggested by the same authors in a previous study [32], in Viel et al. 's [49] a part of the study area was excluded because dispersion model results were judged unreliable in that area. Another study [50] used maps of ground level concentrations estimated on the basis of emissions and meteorological data, but no dispersion model was cited. Almost all the studies used dioxins as an impact indicator: dioxins represent a family of 210 congeners, each one with different physical-chemical characteristics: no study clearly explained how these chemicals were treated in the model (e.g., using 2,3,7,8-TCDD congener properties). Moreover, some studies did not report a clear definition even of the most basic variables used to measure exposure, that is; averaging time for concentrations [31,45,51] or distinction between concentrations and depositions to ground [31]. As shown in our case study ground level atmospheric PM 10 concentrations and depositions from a point source have very similar patterns with some significant departure, nevertheless the choice of one or the other measure of exposure should be at least discussed, related to the main route of exposure considered. All these pieces of information are important to judge the quality of the exposure assessment process, its uncertainties, and to allow comparability and reproducibility of methods.

(p9.6) Regardless of how detailed, accurate and advanced the model to simulate atmospheric dispersion is, it is still only a part of the impact pathways described in Figure 1. All the studies implicitly assumed that inhalation represents the principal exposure pathway, while no published literature measured or modelled the possible exposure through ingestion of contaminated food or contact with contaminated soil.

(p9.7) No study used measured levels of pollution in different media (e.g., atmosphere, soil, and food) as the exposure variable in the epidemiological model, except for one work [42] that used also measured 24 h average PM 10 concentrations in each community as a predictor for pulmonary function, although there were no differences in average levels between communities defined a priori as exposed and not exposed. Many studies presented information on measured levels of pollution [43,[52][53][54], but these data were not included in the statistical model. This is not surprising, as it is very difficult to discriminate the contribution of singlepoint sources to the observed concentrations levels. The latter, in fact, invariably depend the contribution of several other confounding emission sources [55,56], especially if they are located in urbanized areas with intense traffic or industrial activities. Thus, indirect measures of exposure obtained through modelling represent a valid alternative useful to identify the possible role of a specific emission source. (Criteria 2 and 3). The actual exposure of an individual to the pollutants emitted by an incinerator may occur in different environments and last a variable amount of time. All published studies used the residence as the place where exposure to atmospheric pollution occurs (criterion 2). Notably, one study [57] considered also the location of workplace of studied subjects.
## (s10) Evaluation of Receptor's Exposure
(p10.0) Residence location can be determined with various degrees of precision. The majority of revised studies (48%) used community level to determine residence location (i.e., town, municipality, postcode sector, and school). In this way the same exposure level is assigned to large groups of population, but this assumption was rarely discussed and no measures of exposure variability inside groups were reported. Thus, it was impossible to evaluate the degree of ecological bias [58] that is, how well the variation in risk between groups with different average exposure applies to the variation in risk between individuals.

(p10.1) Some studies used census block or full postcode for determining residence position. The dimension of these blocks may vary greatly depending on the location: normally these blocks are smaller in populated areas but may become very large in other rural zones. Moreover, no information was generally given about blocks extension, and it was difficult to compare very different blocks types like Small Area Health Statistic Unit (SAHSU) [35], UK census postcode system [59], or UK Lower Layer Super Output Areas (LSOA) [60]. In our case study census blocks had an average area of 0.4 km 2 (min: 968.4 m 2 ; max: 6.3 km 2 ) and contained on average 26 addresses (min: 1; max: 130): both address distances and concentrations vary widely inside some census blocks (Figures 4(c) and 4(d)). This was true especially for more exposed areas, since the incinerator is located in a less densely populated area with large census blocks. This aspect could lead to different degree of errors in exposure assignment, that increase with the level of pollutant or proximity to the incinerator.

(p10.2) The most precise way to locate residences is to address geocoding: this procedure assigns a couple of geographic coordinates to each address. Errors in address positioning depend on the quality of the database used but is generally in the order of tens to hundreds meters [61,62], thus small in comparison with the use of census blocks or full postcode.
## (s11) Exposure Misclassification and Confounding Factors.
(p11.0) Almost all papers used categorical definitions of exposure (i.e., exposure classes). One issue rarely discussed is the rationale behind the choice of cut-off values used to classify continuous variables. In the absence of toxicological reference values for this type of exposure, in our case study we used a criterion expected to make the results of the statistical analysis more stable and reliable, that is, having roughly the same number of exposed individuals in each class. In reviewed studies a priori cutoffs of exposure were generally chosen without an explicit justification [33][34][35]51].

(p11.1) When categorical exposure variables are measured with error, they are said to be misclassified. Misclassification can be differential or nondifferential with respect to disease status of an individual person [26], the latter being more probable in reviewed studies and generally leading to risk estimations biased toward the null. Nevertheless, in presence of more than two exposure categories, non-differential misclassification can move estimates of risk away from null and disrupt exposure-response trends [69].

(p11.2) Our case study showed that (i) for exposure measures based on distance a relevant part of the population may be classified in the wrong exposure category (assuming that dispersion model better represents real exposure), with relevant percentages of subjects moving by more than one category;

(p11.3) (ii) the use of census blocks to identify the residence may introduce a certain degree of differential misclassification since the error is higher in more exposed areas and lower for less exposed.
