# Iterative unbiased FIR state estimation: a review of algorithms

CorpusID: 14736678 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/71011a7c81d4a346f364d881201fbc324eefe88b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/71011a7c81d4a346f364d881201fbc324eefe88b)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s3) Time-variant models
(p3.0) In convolution-based filtering (3), we suppose that measurements z n are available on a time horizon of N points (memory b ), from time m = n − N + 1 to time n, that the estimator is causal, and that m 0. In order to findx n+p in state space, the batch p-shift UFIR estimator [8,20] can be applied. For TV models, the p-shift UFIR estimator was derived in [8], assuming that the negative shift p is no smaller than −N + 1. Below, we modify this estimator for arbitrary p, which is needed for one of the smoother forms.
## (s16) Smoothing
(p16.0) Smoothing is commonly associated with a lag q > 0 relating the estimate at a given time index to measurements up to and including some past index. By combining 'future' and past estimates, it becomes possible to obtain better noise reduction for many practical applications. Note that an infinity of smoother solutions exists [31]. We will discuss two basic schemes for UFIR smoothers in this section.
## (s50) Time-variant models
(p50.0) In convolution-based filtering (3), we suppose that measurements z n are available on a time horizon of N points (memory b ), from time m = n − N + 1 to time n, that the estimator is causal, and that m 0. In order to findx n+p in state space, the batch p-shift UFIR estimator [8,20] can be applied. For TV models, the p-shift UFIR estimator was derived in [8], assuming that the negative shift p is no smaller than −N + 1. Below, we modify this estimator for arbitrary p, which is needed for one of the smoother forms.
## (s63) Smoothing
(p63.0) Smoothing is commonly associated with a lag q > 0 relating the estimate at a given time index to measurements up to and including some past index. By combining 'future' and past estimates, it becomes possible to obtain better noise reduction for many practical applications. Note that an infinity of smoother solutions exists [31]. We will discuss two basic schemes for UFIR smoothers in this section.
