# Equipment, measurement and dose-a survey for therapeutic ultrasound

CorpusID: 14952942 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/da4f056a04ad2df5380a069fa2a6e98856825db6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/da4f056a04ad2df5380a069fa2a6e98856825db6)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s1) Methods
(p1.0) The set of questions was intended to help give a picture of the R&D currently going into therapeutic ultrasound. It covered equipment and measurements related to any contemporary therapeutic ultrasound applications (including, for instance, physiotherapy, lithotripsy and drug delivery).

(p1.1) The survey was advertised through the International Society of Therapeutic Ultrasound (ISTU) mailing list, by the Focused Ultrasound Foundation, by notices at the ISTU 2014 conference in Las Vegas and by emails to personal contacts of the DUTy team members. It was divided into four main sections which are as follows:

(p1.2) Your therapeutic ultrasound application (Q1-Q11)-this asked about the applications of therapeutic ultrasound with which the respondents had significant involvement and about the transducers and acoustic fields with which they worked. Measurements you currently perform (Q12-Q24)-this was primarily related to the transducer input/output characteristics and the acoustic field generated in water. Your measurement needs (Q25-Q26)-this asked about the respondents' perception of the shortcomings of the acoustic field measurements they currently make and what their priorities for future improvements were. Your opinion about dose (Q27-39)-this enquired about the application of the concept of "dose" to therapeutic ultrasound.

(p1.3) However, the breakdown of results presented here is grouped slightly differently, in terms of respondents, applications, equipment used, QA and measurement, standards and dose. Detailed questions about specific exposure and dose quantities are not covered here, but they are available in the full dataset in the additional Excel file [see Additional file 1] and are presented in a separate paper [3] which also discusses a proposed framework for exposure and dose quantities.
## (s8) What is "dose"?
(p8.0) Within this section of the questionnaire, the participants were asked about their own usage of the term "dose" with respect to therapeutic ultrasound (Q28) as well as whether they thought that it has a generally understood meaning (Q27). Although responses about the general understanding were widely spread with "There are several different views none of which predominates" being the most common answer (33 %, Fig. 10a), the question about the respondents' own understanding of the term yielded a clear "winner", as more than one third (36 %) chose "It means something quantifiable about the amount of energy a b c Fig. 4 Responses to questions Q9 to Q11 (a-c) related to equipment characteristics. Multiple answers were possible ("Please tick all that apply") a b c d Fig. 3 Responses to questions Q5 to Q8 (a-d) related to equipment characteristics. Multiple answers were possible ("Please tick all that apply") absorbed by the target tissue" as the answer that most closely described their opinion (Fig. 10b).

(p8.1) In agreement with that, the two potential definitions based on energy ("Absorbed energy per unit mass" (Q36) and "Applied total acoustic energy" (Q37)) were always among the top three, when rated against relevance to the respondents' own application, relevance to other applications and acceptability (Q34-Q39, see Additional file 1 or [3] for further details). When "Familiarity" was assessed, "Absorbed energy per unit mass" yielded the highest percentage on "Seen in other literature", indicating that this term is much more common in radiotherapy and the quantification of electromagnetic waves. This preference for "energy" was also reflected by the answers to Q33, where "Acoustic power" and "Exposure time" (whose product is energy) were both believed to be important for the effectiveness of their application by 79 % of the respondents. For all of the four criteria mentioned above, "Thermally equivalent time" was the most popular option-52 % claimed to "Use it regularly" under the "Familiarity" section, 40 % found it "Very relevant" when asked about its "Relevance to my own application", 52 % thought that it was "Generally acceptable" and 30 % assumed that it was "Relevant to most" when asked to comment on "Relevance to other applications". For the last category, "Applied total acoustic energy" had a slightly higher score (34 %).

(p8.2) The strong relationship between the understanding of the term "dose" and thermal mechanisms is also shown by the answers to Q29 (86 % thought dose (as they understood it) is relevant to effects mediated by thermal mechanisms) and Q32, where 70 % thought that "thermal mechanisms" should be of highest priority for the development of future standards.

(p8.3) The participants were given a further list of eight aspects of ultrasound therapy with the request to score whether these would benefit "substantially" or "a little", or are "likely to become worse" from a common understanding of "dose" (Fig. 11a). Most aspects received the highest responses for "Likely to benefit substantially" (with 64 % for "Better planning of treatment parameters in advance" being the highest). The exceptions were "Greater acceptability for new treatments" (where 45 % selected "Likely to benefit a little") and "Better education of patient before treatment" (where 38 % selected "Not likely to make any difference").
## (s9) Discussion
(p9.0) The majority of the questions in the first three sections were straightforward to understand and to answer. The answers on the topic of acoustic conditions used on the one hand not only show the challenging great diversity of conditions (from P < 0.1 W to P > 1000 W, from f < 0.1 MHz to f > 5 MHz, from p r < 0.1 MPa to p r > 20 MPa, from less than five wave cycles to continuous wave) but also clearly indicated the most common regimes for most of the quantities, on which further development of standards, definitions and measuring devices should focus.

(p9.1) However, the section about dose was more problematic because, although the word "dose" is widely used in different areas of medicine, it is not always used in exactly the same way. This makes it difficult to decide what is most appropriate for ultrasound therapy and to compare responses on an equal basis. It was necessary, therefore, to provide some guidance to respondents whilst trying not to bias the answers in any way. The respondents were given descriptions of the usage of "dose" based on wording from Wikipedia entries:

(p9.2) In biochemistry, dose is the quantity of something (chemical, physical, or biological) that may impact an organism biologically; the greater the quantity, the larger the dose. In medicine, the term is usually applied to the quantity of a drug or other agent administered for therapeutic purposes. In toxicology, dose may refer to the amount of a harmful agent (such as a poison, carcinogen, mutagen, or teratogen), to which an organism is exposed. For ionising radiation absorbed dose is a measure of the energy deposited in a medium by ionizing radiation per unit mass of the medium.

(p9.3) It is not necessary for there to be a single-dose quantity which is suitable for all therapeutic ultrasound a b c Fig. 8 Responses to questions Q22 to Q24 (a-c) about the awareness of IEC standards related to ultrasound applications. For instance, dose for lithotripsy may be very different to dose for physiotherapy. The participants were asked specifically about several quantities which are sometimes used in ultrasound but which are dimensionally very different:

(p9.4) Total acoustic energy output (SI unit: joule) Absorbed energy per unit mass (SI unit: joule/kg) Intensity-time-integral (SI unit: joule/m 2 ) Local cavitation index (SI unit: dimensionless or MPa/√MHz) Thermally equivalent time (commonly called "thermal dose" or "cumulative equivalent minutes at 43°C") (SI unit: s)

(p9.5) The responses to these questions are covered in detail in a separate paper [3], but some basic results will be briefly discussed here as well. The two quantities which are most used by the participants were thermally equivalent time and total applied energy, and these were also the quantities that were seen as being of most direct relevance to the individual's own work and also of most  Fig. 9 Responses to question Q25 about perceived shortcomings of current measurement methods general relevance. They were also, therefore, the quantities likely to be most acceptable to the wider community. Absorbed energy per unit mass was generally the next highest scoring, but it should be noted that this quantity (coupled to the thermal properties of the tissue, local blood flow and other aspects) is what governs the temperature rise and therefore the thermally equivalent time. So, although not directly important in itself, knowledge of these distributions is a critical step in planning a treatment.
## (s10) Summary and conclusions
(p10.0) This paper summarises the 123 responses submitted to online survey questions about therapeutic ultrasound, which was prepared as part of the EMRP project "Dosimetry for Ultrasound Therapy" and hosted at www.surveymonkey com. There were questions on clinical applications, equipment, QA and measurement and standards, as well as some questions related to understanding of the term "dose" in the context of ultrasound. The full set of anonymised responses is available as an additional Excel file and a separate paper [3] has been published which discusses exposure and dose in more detail and presents a framework for underpinning future standards and improved metrology in this area. A clear result from this survey is that less than 50 % of the respondents felt that they could characterise their equipment satisfactorily, clearly demonstrating the need for further improvements in measuring devices and for measurement guidelines.

(p10.1) Another finding is that, among the respondents, only 50 % are aware of the relevant standards dealing with therapeutic ultrasound devices or ultrasound in general. On the other hand, an encouraging 45 % of the respondents expressed their willingness to participate in future development of standards (Q43). 
