# The contested concept of vulnerability -a literature review Vulnerability-käsitteen kiistanalaiset merkitykset -systemaattinen kirjallisuuskatsaus

CorpusID: 149553663 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/64a6d59b8aeebce947371f101a386cd267a2e8a4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/64a6d59b8aeebce947371f101a386cd267a2e8a4)

Fields: Sociology

## (s1) Introduction
(p1.0) The concept of vulnerability is widely used in academic research as well as in policy making, health and social care services, and in social work (Brown, Ecclestone, & Emmel, 2017;Hutcheon & Lashewicz, 2014;Schröder-Butterfill & Marianti, 2006). Individuals or groups who need support with social, health or economic problems are often defined as vulnerable. Vulnerability is also used to justify the right to receive certain benefits or to gain access to services or treatment.
## (s3) Who are vulnerable?
(p3.0) Some identification of vulnerable groups was found in almost all the articles. Authors usually focused on a specific group of people. Brown (2017) makes a distinction between approaches that focus on either natural or innate vulnerability or situational vulnerability. The former tends to position certain groups of people in permanent risk situations, whereas situational vulnerability refers to particular circumstances. In our data, vulnerability was categorised either by 'natural' characteristics of people, such as age, sex or disability, or by situational aspects like social, economic and living conditions.

(p3.1) Concerning specific groups, the largest number of articles (19) discussed children and young people. Geographically, those studies were located on six different continents including Africa, Europe, Australia, South America, North America and East Asia. Groups of children and young people categorised and studied as vulnerable included orphans (Baaroy & Webb, 2008), street children (Malindi & Cekiso, 2014), child soldiers in Africa (Johannessen & Holgersen, 2014) and young people in transition to adulthood (Berzin, 2010).

(p3.2) The second largest group seen as vulnerable comprised elderly people (11 articles). These studies had mainly been undertaken in European countries. Elderly people were defined as vulnerable due to their frailty and their often-unmet need for care. The aspects of vulnerability addressed were low income, socio-economic status, poor social relationships, weak autonomy, chronic illness and poor quality of life (e.g. Grundy, 2006;Kreager & Schröder-Butterfill, 2007).

(p3.3) The third topic concerned women in different life situations. There were seven such articles, three of which were studies of motherhood. These studies were located in the US and Europe, with one from Africa. Various groups of women were defined as vulnerable, such as female war survivors in Kosovo (Kellezi & Reicher, 2014) or, as in the context of the US abortion policy, adolescents, women of colour, women living in rural areas or suffering from economic disadvantage (Ely & Dulmus, 2010). Articles also covered topics such as refugee women in Africa (Jaji, 2015) and incarcerated mothers (Few-Demo & Arditti, 2014).
