# A Concise Network-Centric Survey of IP Traceback Schemes based on Probabilistic Packet Marking

CorpusID: 14895300 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ffb1145a51bda49a4b74a7338e3630c5c3ace0c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ffb1145a51bda49a4b74a7338e3630c5c3ace0c)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Internet Protocol (IP) traceback is a method to deal with Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks [1], [2]. Using IP traceback, sources of attack traffic can be identified from the network traffic they generate. A prominent IP traceback technique for identification of flooding style DDoS attacks is Probabilistic Packet Marking (PPM). In PPM-based IP traceback, network routers embed their own identities in packets randomly selected from all the network traffic that the routers process [3]. In the event of an attack, the routers' identity markings present in the attack packets can be used to reconstruct the attack graph -the paths taken by attack traffic -and establish its sources [4], [5]. The technique of probabilistically marking packets for IP traceback is the basis of many schemes hereafter referred to as PPM-based schemes [4], [6], [7], [8]. Multiple additional schemes have been proposed with the purpose to increase the efficiency of PPM-based schemes [6], [8], [9], [10].

(p0.1) Tracing the paths of IP packets back to their origin, known as IP traceback, is an important step in defending against DoS attacks employing IP spoofing. IP traceback facilitates holding attackers accountable and improving the efficacy of mitigation measures. The existing approaches for IP traceback can be grouped into two orthogonal dimensions: packet marking and packet logging. The main idea behind packet marking is to record network path information in packets. In mark based IP traceback, routers write their identification information (e.g., IP addresses) into a header field of forwarded packets. The destination node then retrieves the marking information from the received packets and determines the network path. Due to the limited space of the marking field, routers probabilistically decide to mark packets so that each marked packet carries only partial path information. The network path can be constructed by combining the marking information collected from a number of received packets. This approach is also known as probabilistic packet marking (PPM) [3]. PPM incurs little overhead at routers. However, it requires a flow of marked packets to construct the network path toward their origin.

(p0.2) In this paper, we present a concise network-centric analysis of a selected set of PPM-based schemes. Ten PPM-based schemes are compared in terms of features such as convergence time, the metrics, underlying topologies, incremental deployment, re-marking, and upstream graph. These schemes are PPM [3], AMS [4], PPM-NPC [11], TMS [12], FIT [6], RPPM [7], TPM [8], Randomize-and-link [9], IDPPM [10], and PBS [13]. The schemes considered therein are by no means an exhaustive study of all the PPM-based schemes in existence. However, the collection of schemes is large enough to show the discrepancy in both the metrics and underlying topologies as well as the inadequacy of the topologies that make their direct comparison difficult [14], [15].

(p0.3) Thus, this paper shows that the direct performance comparison of the schemes is complicated or not feasible at all. As our analysis show the reasons for this is (a) many schemes utilize different metrics to measure their performance and, (b) the many schemes are simulated on different kinds of underlying network topologies, the majority of which do not provide an adequate abstraction of the topology of the Internet or focus on different characteristics of it [7], [11], [12].

(p0.4) In detail, the underlying topologies are typically treestructured with a single path from an attacker to the victim. In contrast, the topology of the Internet exhibits alternative routes that make it both resilient and scalable. Both the disparity in metrics and underlying topologies, as well as the inadequacy of the topologies, raise questions about the performances of these schemes in the Internet and the comparability between them. This shows that there is a need to evaluate and compare the schemes on common and appropriate networks. The results of this evaluation can then be used to determine which schemes are the most promising candidates for Internet deployment.

(p0.5) In summary, the contribution of this paper is threefold: (a) an analysis of PPM-based schemes is presented, (b) providing a taxonomy for PPM-based IP traceback schemes, and (c) an analytical model to argue that different underlying topologies inhibit a direct comparison between the performance of the PPM-based schemes.

(p0.6) The remainder of this paper is arranged as follows. Related work, in which the selected set of PPM-based protocols is discussed, is presented in Section II. The analysis of PPMbased schemes as well as additional background is presented in Section III, including considerations on definitions, metrics, and underlying topologies. The theory and system model behind our work is analyzed in Section IV. We discuss outcomes of this paper and conclude in Section V.
## (s3) A. Definitions and expressions
(p3.0) The performance of traceback schemes is commonly measured by the convergence time, also known as the reconstruction time. The convergence time is defined as the total number of received packets required by the reconstruction procedure to return the complete attack graph [3]. The convergence time is dependent on the marked packet distribution P , the number of attackers n, and attack graph G as below.
## (s5) 1) Convergence time metrics:
(p5.0) The convergence time C is the fundamental measure of the speed and success of any Table I  A COMPREHENSIVE COMPARISON OF PPM-BASED IP TRACEBACK SCHEMES SHOWING THE VARIETY OF METRICS EMPLOYED, AND THE TOPOLOGIES  USED FOR THE EVALUATION OF THOSE SCHEMES. THE TABLE PROVIDES A COMPARISON OF 10 DIFFERENT PPM-BASED SCHEMES OVER THEIR  FEATURES. THESE FEATURES INCLUDE convergence time, metrics USED FOR EVALUATION OF THE SCHEMES, WHETHER THEY REQUIRE PRIOR  KNOWLEDGE OF THE upstream graph TO CORRECTLY IDENTIFY ATTACKERS, WHETHER THEY CAN BE incrementally deployed, AND underlying topology.  THE CONVERGENCE TIME EXPRESSIONS PRESENTED IN THE TABLE ARE FOR A DOS SCENARIO ASSUMING NO PRIOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE NETWORK  TOPOLOGY WHILE THE UNDERLYING TOPOLOGY SHOWS THE NETWORK TOPOLOGIES USED IN THE EVALUATION OF THE SCHEMES. THESE TOPOLOGIES  INCLUDE single path, single   PPM-based scheme and it is dependent on many factors. A variety of metrics has been used to measure this dependence with respect to these various factors.

(p5.1) Convergence time versus attack path length shows how C varies with d. This is normally done for a simple topology G tree , with n = 1 but is done for larger values of n in [4], [12], [7], [8], [13].
## (s6) C. Categories of PPM schemes
(p6.0) Despite their large number, PPM-based schemes have similar underlying algorithms in their marking schemes. The underlying algorithm is responsible for how the packets in which the router identities are embedded are selected. For example, the majority of the considered schemes exhibit underlying algorithms in which all routers randomly select packets with equal probability p [3], [4], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. The schemes in this category are prone to re-marking. We refer to this category as the re-marking category of PPM-based schemes. In the other category of schemes, the routers' packet selection process is only partially random. The underlying algorithms in this category prohibit the overwriting of previous router information and as a result exhibit performances that are notably different from the re-marking category [12], [13], [11].

(p6.1) We select three representative marking schemes: PPM [3] to represent the re-marking category, and TMS [12] and PBS [13] to represent the non-re-marking category. The analytical models for these three schemes are markedly different from each other, even for equal marking probability, because of the differences in the schemes' underlying marking algorithms. The performance of any PPM-based scheme can therefore be compared to either one of these schemes, or a combination of them.

(p6.2) Because of re-marking in PPM, the victim typically receives more markings from close-by routers than from distant routers. The chance of receiving a marked packet from a router l hops away is given by the geometric distribution expression p(1 − p) l−1 . This is because a received marked packet indicates that that packet was selected by a router (with probability p), and not selected (with probability 1 − p) by all l − 1 subsequent routers. The analysis for PPM can therefore be applied to any scheme where the markings from distant routers are rarer than markings from close-by routers.

(p6.3) In TMS, the decision to forfeit a marking opportunity if the packet is previously marked means that markings from routers distant from the victim are more prevalent than markings from closer routers. The chance of receiving a marked packet from a router l hops away is given by p(1−p) d−l where d is the attack path length. This is because a received marked packet indicates that that packet was selected by a router (with probability p), after not being selected (with probability 1 − p) by all d − l previous routers. This analysis can be applied to all schemes in which markings from distant routers are more prevalent than markings from close-by routers.

(p6.4) In contrast to TMS, the PBS marking scheme compensates for the missed marking opportunities. Therefore the chance of receiving a marking from a router l hops from the victim is given by p for any router in the path. This analysis can be applied to all schemes in which the markings from the routers are equally prevalent regardless of their distance from the victim.
