# Body mass index and survival in women with breast cancer-systematic literature review and meta-analysis of 82 follow-up studies

CorpusID: 14311053 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19977e605a7a0fc5fe90f6adca8a5dfbb4cc5384](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19977e605a7a0fc5fe90f6adca8a5dfbb4cc5384)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) statistical analysis
(p3.0) Categorical and dose-response meta-analyses were conducted using random-effects models to account for between-study heterogeneity [18]. Summary relative risks (RRs) were estimated using the average of the natural logarithm of the RRs of each study weighted by the inverse of the variance and then unweighted by applying a random-effects variance component which is derived from the extent of variability of the effect sizes of the studies. The maximally adjusted RR estimates were used for the meta-analysis except for the follow-up of randomised, controlled trials [19,20] where unadjusted results were also included, as these studies mostly involved a more homogeneous study population. BMI or Quetelet's Index (QI) measured in units of kg/m 2 was used.

(p3.1) We conducted categorical meta-analyses by pooling the categorical results reported in the studies. The studies used different BMI categories. In some studies, underweight (BMI <18.5 kg/m 2 according to WHO international classification) and normal weight women (BMI 18.5-<25.0 kg/m 2 ) were classified together but, in some studies, they were classified separately. Similarly, most studies classified overweight (BMI 25.0-<30.0 kg/m 2 ) and obese (BMI ≥30.0 kg/m 2 ) women separately but, in some studies, overweight and obese women were combined. The reference category was normal weight or underweight together with normal weight, depending on the studies. For convenience, the BMI categories are referred to as underweight, normal weight, overweight, and obese in the present review. We derived the RRs for overweight and obese women compared with normal weight women in two studies [19,21] that had more than four BMI categories using the method of Hamling et al. [22]. Studies that reported results for obese compared with nonobese women were analysed separately.

(p3.2) The non-linear dose-response relationship between BMI and mortality was examined using the best-fitting second-order fractional polynomial regression model [23], defined as the one with the lowest deviance. Nonlinearity was tested using the likelihood ratio test [24]. In the non-linear meta-analysis, the reference category was the lowest BMI category in each study and RRs were recalculated using the method of Hamling et al. [22] when the reference category was not the lowest BMI category in the study.

(p3.3) We also conducted linear dose-response meta-analyses, excluding the category underweight when reported separately in the studies, by pooling estimates of RR per unit increase (with its standard error) provided by the studies, or derived by us from categorical data using generalised least-squares for trend estimation [25]. To estimate the trend, the numbers of outcomes and population at-risk for at least three BMI categories, or the information required to derive them using standard methods [26], and means or medians of the BMI categories, or if not reported in the studies, the estimated midpoints of the categories had to be available. When the extreme BMI categories were open-ended, we used the width of the adjacent close-ended category to estimate the midpoints. Where the RRs were presented by subgroups (age group [27], menopausal status [28,29], stage [30] or subtype [31] of breast cancer, or others [32][33][34]), an overall estimate for the study was obtained by a fixedeffect model before pooling in the meta-analysis. We estimated the risk increase of death for an increment of 5 kg/m 2 of BMI.
## (s6) BMI and other mortality outcomes
(p6.0) Only two studies reported results for death from cardiovascular disease (N = 151 deaths) [27,112]  Increased risks of mortality were observed in the meta-analyses by menopausal status. While the summary risk estimates seem stronger with premenopausal breast cancer, there was no significant heterogeneity between pre-and post-menopausal breast cancer as shown in the meta-regression analyses (P = 0.28-0.89) (supplementary Tables S3 and S4, available at Annals of Oncology online). For BMI before diagnosis and total mortality, the summary RRs for obese versus normal weight were 1.75 (95% CI 1.26-2.41, I 2 = 70%, P < 0.01, 7 studies) in women with pre-menopausal breast cancer and 1.34 (95% CI 1.18-1.53, I 2 = 27%, P = 0.20, 9 studies) in women with postmenopausal breast cancer.

(p6.1) Studies with larger number of deaths [105,115], conducted in Europe [28,115], or with weight and height assessed through medical records [28,104,115,116] tended to report weaker associations for BMI <12 months after diagnosis and total mortality compared with other studies (meta-regression P = 0.01, 0.02, 0.01, respectively) (supplementary Table S3, available at Annals of Oncology online); while studies with larger number of deaths [101], conducted in Asia [101,102], or adjusted for co-morbidity [101,102] reported weaker associations for BMI <12 months after diagnosis and breast cancer mortality (metaregression P = 0.01, 0.02, 0.01, respectively) (supplementary Table S4, available at Annals of Oncology online).

(p6.2) Analyses stratified by study designs, or restricted to studies with invasive cases only, early-stage non-metastatic cases only, or mammography screening detected cases only, or controlled for previous diseases did not produce results that were materially different from those obtained in the overall analyses (results not shown). Summary risk estimates remained statistically significant when each study was omitted in turn, except for BMI ≥12 months after diagnosis and total mortality. The summary RR was 1.06 (95% CI 0.98-1.15) per 5 kg/m 2 increase when Flatt et al. [117] which contributed 315 deaths was omitted.
