# Molecular Sciences Nutrigenomics and Beef Quality: A Review about Lipogenesis

CorpusID: 14919998 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/783bdeaf3ab3820a4f3c6c222e710bdcfd62b301](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/783bdeaf3ab3820a4f3c6c222e710bdcfd62b301)

Fields: Medicine, Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The amount, distribution and composition of fat in beef are some of the factors that exert the greatest impact on the organoleptic and nutritional quality of this food. Procedures to modify and control the formation of adipose tissue in cattle have been largely investigated in animal nutrition and growth in the past decades. Understanding the physiology of the formation and composition of fat in cattle might result in countless possibilities towards guiding nutrition and the production of high-quality beef. Several studies have found correlations between marbling score and meat flavor. Thus, nutrition and management strategies able to increase the intramuscular fat content might contribute to increasing the added value of beef.

(p0.1) The formation and composition of fat in cattle and other ruminants is a complex process with multifactorial regulation. Genetic factors, age at slaughter, growth rate and sex are the parameters that exert the most impact on the amount and composition of animal fat. In addition, nutritional factors act differently on lipid synthesis of ruminants and non-ruminants. In the latter, carcass fat profile is similar to the profile of fatty acids consumed [1], while, in the former, ruminal biohydrogenation and fatty acid tissue metabolism (mRNA synthesis, enzyme activity, etc.) interfere considerably with synthesis and the profile of fatty acids that composes the meat fat [2]. Two pathways of action should be studied with regard to lipid metabolism and beef quality. One pathway is related to knowledge on the ruminal biohydrogenation of dietary fatty acids, and, consequently, on the amount and concentration of fatty acids that are absorbed and transported to the tissues. The other pathway is related to the action of fatty acids as metabolic modifiers, either by directly altering the synthesis and deposition of fatty acids in the tissues or by affecting biological processes in the animals, such as the modulation of gene expression in ruminants. In either case, understanding the action of fatty acids in animal metabolism demands adequate knowledge of the molecular processes involved in the synthesis and utilization of fatty acids in the tissues. The studies addressing these subjects usually associate gene expression and nutrition; therefore, they are called nutrigenomics or functional genomics.

(p0.2) Before discussing in detail how some nutrients, such as fatty acids, might change the expression of definite genes, the main processes involved in adipogenesis and lipid metabolism will be briefly reviewed, as several of the investigated genes encode enzymes or are transcription factors that modulate the expression of genes involved in lipid metabolism.
## (s2) Commitment
(p2.0) Currently, the mechanisms controlling adipogenesis in fetal and postnatal skeletal muscle in vivo remain poorly defined, although numerous in vitro cell culture studies suggest that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPARγ) and CCAAT-enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBP) are crucial factors controlling adipogenesis from commitment of multipotent stem cells to differentiation into adipocytes [12][13][14]. The current thought is that MSC at the initial stage of determination give rise to myogenic factor five expressing (myf5(+)) and non-expressing (myf5(´)) cells [15]. Myf5 is a crucial early myogenic transcription factor, expression of which is highly specific to committed skeletal myoblastic cells [16]. Muscle and brown adipocytes develop from myf5(+) cells, whereas chondrocytes, osteoblasts, fibroblasts and white adipoblasts develop from myf5(´) cells [4,17]. The further commitment of myf5(+) and myf5(´) cells to myogenic, adipogenic, or osteogenic cells is controlled by different groups of protein such as the zinc finger protein (ZFP) family, the wingless (Wnt) protein family, the hedgehog protein family, the bone morphogenic protein (BMP) family, and the nuclear hormone superfamily [18][19][20]. The outcomes of different transcription factors depend on relative concentration, stage of differentiation, cell to cell interactions, and the nature of the extracellular matrix. The exact stage at which they act is not well defined in the literature and needs further research to elucidate the precise role of these signals.

(p2.1) Zinc finger proteins are the largest transcription factor family in mammals [21] and contain one or more zinc finger motif(s) that regulate diverse growth and developmental processes, including adipogenesis, through DNA/RNA binding, protein-protein interactions, transcription activation, and regulation of apoptosis [22]. Zinc finger proteins, notably Zfp423, Zfp467, and Zfp521 control BMPs are the members of transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) super family and play critical role in the commitment of MSCs into cell lineages. There are 14 members in the BMP family (BMP-2 to BMP-15). BMP4 stimulates the differentiation of MSC to adipocyte lineage, BMP2 promotes the osteogenic lineage, and BMP7 plays a crucial role in brown adipocyte differentiation [28]. The primary function of many proadipogenic factors (i.e., b-catenin and preadipocyte factor-1) is repression of genes inhibiting adipogenesis. BMP4 dissociates a complex of Wnt proteins that suppress PPARG expression and adipogenesis [29] (Figure 1).
## (s6) Lipogenesis
(p6.0) Lipogenesis is a physiological process of endogenous fatty acid synthesis that increases inversely to muscle tissue development. Therefore, after puberty and sexual maturity, as muscle growth decreases, adipose tissue increases [65]. According to Pethick et al. [66], fat deposition is not homogeneous throughout the animal body; the first observed depot to form is internal fat (abdominal, renal-inguinal and pelvic), followed by intermuscular, subcutaneous and intramuscular fat or marbling.

(p6.1) For fat synthesis to occur, triglycerides must be incorporated into the animal adipose tissue, after the absorption of dietary fatty acids or de novo synthesis of other fatty acids [67]. The main factor in the control of fat deposition rate is the animal's nutritional status, as acetate, a volatile fatty acid produced in ruminal fermentation, is the main precursor for the synthesis of fatty acids among ruminants [68]. Following its absorption across the ruminal epithelium and distribution to the peripheral tissues, acetate is converted in adipose cells into acetyl-CoA through the action of the enzyme acetyl-CoA synthetase [69]. The gene that encodes this enzyme is known as acyl-CoA synthetase short-chain family member 2 (ACSS2). This step also occurs with dietary long-chain fatty acids. (abdominal, renal-inguinal and pelvic), followed by intermuscular, subcutaneous and intramuscular fat or marbling. For fat synthesis to occur, triglycerides must be incorporated into the animal adipose tissue, after the absorption of dietary fatty acids or de novo synthesis of other fatty acids [67]. The main factor in the control of fat deposition rate is the animal's nutritional status, as acetate, a volatile fatty acid produced in ruminal fermentation, is the main precursor for the synthesis of fatty acids among ruminants [68]. Following its absorption across the ruminal epithelium and distribution to the peripheral tissues, acetate is converted in adipose cells into acetyl-CoA through the action of the enzyme acetyl-CoA synthetase [69]. The gene that encodes this enzyme is known as acyl-CoA synthetase short-chain family member 2 (ACSS2). This step also occurs with dietary long-chain fatty acids.

(p6.2) The presence of acetyl-CoA and reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) is essential for de novo fatty acid synthesis. In addition to acetate, another source of acetyl-CoA is the pyruvate produced through glycolysis, following decarboxylation in the mitochondria. However, as lipogenesis takes place in the cytosol, acetyl-CoA, which is not permeable through the mitochondrial membrane, is transported as citrate to the extracellular compartment, where it is cleaved by the enzyme citrate lyase into oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA ( Figure 2). NADPH, in turn, is synthesized in the pentose phosphate pathway, and, in the case of ruminants, also through the transformation of citrate into α-ketoglutarate in the cytosol, which then re-enters the mitochondria [70]. In non-ruminant animals, citrate lyase, malate dehydrogenase and malic enzyme are responsible for the production of more NADPH molecules from cytosolic citrate [68].  The presence of acetyl-CoA and reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) is essential for de novo fatty acid synthesis. In addition to acetate, another source of acetyl-CoA is the pyruvate produced through glycolysis, following decarboxylation in the mitochondria. However, as lipogenesis takes place in the cytosol, acetyl-CoA, which is not permeable through the mitochondrial membrane, is transported as citrate to the extracellular compartment, where it is cleaved by the enzyme citrate lyase into oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA ( Figure 2). NADPH, in turn, is synthesized in the pentose phosphate pathway, and, in the case of ruminants, also through the transformation of citrate into α-ketoglutarate in the cytosol, which then re-enters the mitochondria [70]. In non-ruminant animals, citrate lyase, malate dehydrogenase and malic enzyme are responsible for the production of more NADPH molecules from cytosolic citrate [68].
## (s8) Nutrigenomics and Circulating Glucose
(p8.0) Several studies sought to establish whether nutrition might alter the expression of genes that encode enzymes involved in the digestion of starch and glucose transporters, thereby increasing circulating glucose. Swanson et al. [101] found higher levels and activity of pancreatic α-amylase in lambs fed high-starch diets; however, expression of the alpha 2B amylase (AMY2B) gene tended to be lower in lambs fed high-starch compared to animals fed a low-starch diet. These authors observed that the mechanisms of regulation of pancreatic α-amylase in ruminants are very complex and likely regulated by both transcriptional and post-transcriptional events.

(p8.1) In a study conducted with steers, Swanson et al. [102] assessed the effects of abomasal infusion of partially hydrolyzed starch and/or casein. The results indicated a tendency for a reduction in AMY2B expression in conjunction with decreased synthesis and activity of α-amylase in the animals given partially hydrolyzed starch. Therefore suggesting that there is an inverse relationship between intestinal starch flow and AMY2B expression.

(p8.2) Following post-ruminal starch digestion and glucose release into the intestinal lumen, glucose must be absorbed by the enterocytes. According to Kellett et al. [103], there are at least three membrane monosaccharide transport proteins in mammals. Ferraris and Diamond [104] showed that nutrients regulate intestinal monosaccharide absorption in many species and that the activity and expression of the genes that encode the glucose transporters might be modulated based on the diets that are used.

(p8.3) The main monosaccharide transporter is the sodium-glucose linked transporter 1 (SGLT1) and is encoded by the solute carrier family 5 (sodium/glucose cotransporter), member 1 (SLC5A1) gene. This sodium-dependent glucose transporter is able to transport glucose and most monosaccharides, except for fructose, across the enterocyte brush border. The solute carrier family 2 (facilitated glucose/fructose transporter), member 5 (GLUT5) transports fructose only across the brush border, while the solute carrier family 2 (facilitated glucose transporter), member 2 (GLUT2) transports glucose, fructose and all other monosaccharides across the enterocyte brush border and basolateral membrane [105].

(p8.4) In a study conducted to assess abomasal and ruminal infusions of hydrolyzed starch on monosaccharide transporter mRNA synthesis in the intestine, Liao et al. [105] found that ruminal infusion of hydrolyzed starch increased duodenal expression of SLC5A1 by approximately 64%. In turn, Guimarães et al. [106] did not find any effect of post-ruminal starch and casein infusions on SLC5A1 abundance in the small intestines of Holstein steers. However, the results showed greater gene expression in the middle and end of the jejunum, independent of the treatment. A similar finding was reported by Rodriguez et al. [107], who worked with crossbred steers given an abomasal starch and glucose infusion and a ruminal starch infusion.
## (s9) Transcription Factors and Lipid Metabolism in Beef Cattle
(p9.0) Several key events involved in the synthesis of fat in the animal tissues take place at the molecular level. The association of nutritional factors with the modulation of fat metabolism is one of the recent targets of nutrigenomic studies conducted with beef cattle. Within this context, special attention has been given to the study of nuclear receptors related to fatty acid metabolism [108][109][110][111][112][113]. Those receptors form an intracellular protein receptor superfamily included within the transcription factors class. Upon binding to the DNA, those factors allow RNA polymerase binding and transcription initiation. Such factors participate in several physiological functions, including homeostasis, reproduction, growth, differentiation, morphogenesis, apoptosis and metabolism [114].
## (s10) Transcription Factors and Lipid Metabolism in Beef Cattle
(p10.0) Several key events involved in the synthesis of fat in the animal tissues take place at the molecular level. The association of nutritional factors with the modulation of fat metabolism is one of the recent targets of nutrigenomic studies conducted with beef cattle. Within this context, special attention has been given to the study of nuclear receptors related to fatty acid metabolism [108][109][110][111][112][113]. Those receptors form an intracellular protein receptor superfamily included within the transcription factors class. Upon binding to the DNA, those factors allow RNA polymerase binding and transcription initiation. Such factors participate in several physiological functions, including homeostasis, reproduction, growth, differentiation, morphogenesis, apoptosis and metabolism [114].
## (s12) Effects of Nutrients on Transcription Factors Gene Expression
(p12.0) The expression, and consequently the action, of transcription factors depend on the animals' physiological conditions and developmental stage, whereby the corresponding genes are expressed only at the appropriate times. In addition, definite nutrients, such as long-chain fatty acids, are able to regulate the expression of transcription factors. According to Bionaz et al. [111], several fatty acids might, to varying degrees, activate various PPAR isotypes, with PUFAs showing more affinity for PPARα, which is encoded by the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARA) gene [134].
## (s14) Tissue Uptake of Fatty Acids
(p14.0) Triglycerides stored in adipocytes might originate either from the uptake of fatty acids from the blood or from de novo synthesis. For uptake to occur, the circulating triglycerides present in lipoproteins, such as chylomicrons, must first undergo the action of the enzyme LPL and then be carried by fatty acid-binding protein 4 (FABP4), which is responsible for the transport of fatty acids into cells [141].
## (s15) Synthesis of Fatty Acids
(p15.0) As previously mentioned, acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) and the fatty acid synthase complex (FAS) are the enzymes involved in de novo synthesis [75]. Following their synthesis or uptake by adipocytes, the fatty acids might be exposed to the action of the enzyme stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD).

(p15.1) In mammals, ACC activity is highly regulated by the diet, hormones and other physiological factors [147]. Food intake, especially of low-fat foods, induces ACC synthesis, with a consequent increase in its activity [148]. In fish, ACC was mainly studied due to its role in the biosynthesis of fatty acids in the adipose tissue; such studies were conducted in the liver and in primary hepatocyte cultures [149].
