# Microbial monoterpene transformations-a review

CorpusID: 1454053 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d3c5ebb711b6b06e1297c0cb1d7adc11d768bdd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d3c5ebb711b6b06e1297c0cb1d7adc11d768bdd)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Chemistry, Biology

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Annually about 120 Pg of carbon dioxide are assimilated by plants. A part is transformed into chemically complex molecules and released into the environment by emission or excretion (Ghirardo et al., 2011). Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) comprise a large number of molecules, including various hydrocarbons, single carbon compounds (e.g. methane), isoprene and terpenes (e.g. mono-and sesquiterpenes). The atmosphere is loaded with an estimated VOC emission rate of about 1150 Tg C yr −1 (Stotzky and Schenck, 1976;Guenther et al., 1995;Atkinson and Arey, 2003). These estimates included only nonmethane VOCs of biogenic origin (BVOCs); a second source are anthropogenic VOCs. Among the BVOCs, isoprene and monoterpenes dominate with estimated emission rates of about 500 Tg C yr −1 and 127 Tg C yr −1 , respectively (Guenther et al., 1995). Monoterpenes (C 10 H 16 ) consist of two linked isoprene (C 5 H 8 ) units and include in the strict sense only hydrocarbons. Often the term monoterpene is applied including monoterpenoids which are characterized by oxygen-containing functional groups. Structural isomers-acyclic, mono-, and bicyclic monoterpenes-, stereoisomers as well as a variety of substitutions result in a large diversity of molecules. Today, more than 55,000 different isoprenoids are known (Ajikumar et al., 2008). Monoterpenes are not only emitted as cooling substances (Sharkey et al., 2008), but can also be stored intracellularly serving mainly as deterrent or infochemical (Dudareva et al., 2013). Wood plants mainly accumulate pinene and other pure hydrocarbon monoterpenes as constituents of their resins, whereas citrus plants are the major source of limonene. Flowers, however, produce and emit a variety of oxygenated monoterpenes (e.g. linalool) (Kesselmeier and Staudt, 1999 and references therein, Sharkey and Yeh, 2001;Bicas et al., 2009).

(p0.1) In the atmosphere, monoterpenes are transformed in purely chemical reactions within hours. Photolysis and reactions with molecular oxygen, ozone, hydroxyl radicals, NO x species, and chlorine atoms result in carbonyls, alcohols, esters, halogenated hydrocarbons, and peroxynitrates. These products condense and lead to the formation of secondary aerosols. Rain or precipitation transports them to soils (Atkinson and Arey, 2003;Fu et al., 2009;Ziemann and Atkinson, 2012). Monoterpenes reach the surface layers of soils by leaf fall and excreted resins. Also roots emit monoterpenes into the rhizosphere (Wilt et al., 1993;Kainulainen and Holopainen, 2002). Deeper soil layers do contain significant less monoterpenes than the surface soil layer. Emission into the atmosphere and biotransformations in the surface layer mainly by microorganisms are the major sinks. An alternative, abiotic photoreactions like in the atmosphere, is limited by light availability in soil (Kainulainen and Holopainen, 2002;Insam and Seewald, 2010).
## (s1) BICYCLIC MONOTERPENES
(p1.0) (+)-Camphor [1, Figure 2] (C 10 H 16 O) is the substrate of one of the first and best described monoterpene transforming enzymes, a specific cytochrome P450 monooxygenase (cam-ABC, P450cam, EC 1.14.15.1) from Pseudomonas putida (ATCC 17453). Initially, (+)-camphor is hydroxylated. The resulting 5-exo-hydroxycamphor [2] is oxidized by a NAD-reducing dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.327) which gene camD is part of the operon camDCAB. The diketone is oxidized in a Baeyer-Villiger like oxidation to a lactone, either by a 2,5-diketocamphane 1,2monooxygenase or a 3,6-diketocamphane 1,6-monooxygenase (camE 25−1 E 25−2 or camE 36 , EC 1.14.13.162). The lactone spontaneously hydrolyses to 2-oxo-3 -4,5,5-trimethylcyclopentenylacetic acid which is activated as coenzyme A thioester by a specific synthase (camF 1,2 , EC 6.2.1.38). This CoA-ester serves as substrate for another specific monooxygenase (camG, EC 1.14.13.160), which initiates the cleavage of the second ring by formation of a lactone. After hydrolysis of the lactone, the linear product is oxidized to isobutanoyl-CoA and three acetyl-CoA. All corresponding genes (camABCDEFG) have been identified on a linear plasmid (Ougham et al., 1983;Taylor and Trudgill, 1986;Aramaki et al., 1993;Kadow et al., 2012;Leisch et al., 2012;Iwaki et al., 2013).
## (s5) MONOTERPENES IN THE CARBON CYCLE
(p5.0) Habitats with a dense vegetation of wood and flowers are expected to contain larger populations of monoterpene transforming microorganisms. Whereas coniferous forests emit up to 6.7 g carbon * m −2 * yr −1 , broadleaf evergreen forest and grassland emit only 3.5 and 2.5 g carbon * m −2 * yr −1 , respectively (Tanaka et al., 2012). Monoterpene emission rates between 0.3 and 7 g carbon * m −2 * yr −1 for the United States-mainly αand β-pinene, limonene and β-myrcene (Geron et al., 2000)-can support the aerobic growth of 0.15-3.5 g bacteria * m −2 * yr −1 , assuming 50% of carbon incorporated into biomass. This is a significant potential, considering the presence of around 10 g microbial biomass in the top centimeter of soil per square meter.

(p5.1) In marine systems, isoprene and monoterpenes (mainly αpinene) are produced by phytoplankton and algae and partially emitted into the atmosphere (reviewed by Yassaa et al., 2008;Shaw et al., 2010). Isoprene emission was estimated to 0.2-1.2 Tg carbon * yr −1 (Palmer and Shaw, 2005;Gantt et al., 2009;Shaw et al., 2010). For the ocean surface area this results in an emission rate of 0.0025 g carbon * m −2 * yr −1 . Current uncertainties in the size of emission based on shipborne measurements in comparison to satellite data (Luo and Yu, 2010) may be resolved by incorporating an export from the continental atmosphere to the oceanic atmosphere (Hu et al., 2013). Isoprene-amended samples from marine habitats were enriched in bacteria affiliating with Actinobacteria, Alphaproteobacteria, and Bacteroidetes and first strains were shown to degrade isoprene and aliphatic hydrocarbons (Acuña Alvarez et al., 2009).

(p5.2) In summary, these findings indicate a higher abundance of monoterpene transforming and mineralizing bacteria in soils than in the ocean. Indeed, most monoterpene transforming bacteria have been enriched or isolated from soil and freshwater samples in habitats with monoterpene emitting vegetation.
## (s7) DATABASES FOR PATHWAY ANALYSIS AND A LOOK AT METAGENOMES
(p7.0) Databases are nowadays available for the analysis of enzymatic reactions and metabolic pathways in metagenomic and genomic sequence datasets. The most relevant are the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), MetaCyc and the Biocatalysis/Biodegradation database of the University of Minnesota.

(p7.1) First studies used KEGG to identify monoterpene-related genes in metagenomes of microbiomes in insects and nematodes feeding on a monoterpene-rich diet. Pine beetles encounter the high terpenoid concentrations of conifers and may take advantage of detoxification processes catalyzed by their symbionts/microbiomes (Adams et al., 2013). The KEGG pathway for limonene and pinene degradation (ko00903) was used to identify genes encoding enzymes putatively involved in monoterpene degradation. Five enzymes were present and more abundant in the metagenomes than in a combined metagenomic set of plant biomass-degrading communities. These enzymes were an aldehyde dehydrogenase, an oxidoreductase, an enoyl-CoA hydratase and two hydratases/epimerases. Whether these genes are truly involved in monoterpene metabolism or the degradation of cyclic compounds, e.g. related aromatic lignin monomers, is an open question. Taxonomically, these genes affiliated with the genera Pseudomonas, Rahnella, Serratia, and Stenotrophomonas.

(p7.2) The pinewood nematode Bursaphlenchus xylophilus transcribes cytochrome P450 genes as main metabolic pathway for xenobiotics detoxification, but not all enzymes needed for terpenoid metabolism were detected by transcriptomic analysis. Metagenomic data of nematode bacterial symbionts included the complete α-pinene degradation pathway (Cheng et al., 2013). Annotation based on KEGG revealed that the degradation pathways for limonene and pinene (map00903) and for geraniol (map00281) accounted for 2.5% of mapped metagenes. The majority of these genes affiliated to Pseudomonas, Achromobacter, and Agrobacterium. Strains isolated from the nematode and capable of growth on α-pinene affiliated to Pseudomonas, Achromobacter, Agrobacterium, Cytophaga, Herbaspirillum, and Stenotrophomonas.
## (s8) CONCLUSION
(p8.0) The synthesis and transformation of BVOCs, especially terpenoids, by plants is well studied (Kesselmeier and Staudt, 1999). Corresponding pathways have been elucidated and a variety of corresponding enzymes have been isolated and characterized (Mahmoud and Croteau, 2002;Yu and Utsumi, 2009). In contrast, the exploration of the microbial transformation and mineralization of monoterpenes has accumulated a small coverage of the field. Simply, over the last 50 years, research on bacterial monoterpene metabolism had only found the interest of very few principal investigators. Now, large sequence datasets of organisms and biological communities provide an unprecedented insight into the diversity of pathways and provide us with challenging hypotheses. However, the basis for the annotation is the biochemical characterization of enzymes which is only available for few monoterpenes. Only three pathways are completely known on the genetic and enzymatic level: the ones for camphor (CAM), p-cymene (CYM/CMT), and citronellol/geraniol (ATU/LIU). For pinene, the gene for a key enzyme, the α-pinene oxide lyase (EC 5.5.1.10), is still unknown. The lack of such a key enzyme sequence for a KEGG pathway (map00903) illustrates our uncertainty in the interpretation of metagenomic and genomic datasets. Progress in proteomic and metabolomic analyses in the last years support now biochemical and genetic experiments which will swiftly reveal the desired identification of key enzymes in the monoterpene metabolism.
