# A Survey on Service Composition Middleware in Pervasive Environments

CorpusID: 15264530 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d96105828f2994fd7d02a9a6cc807e508663e621](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d96105828f2994fd7d02a9a6cc807e508663e621)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s1) SCM: Service Composition Middleware Model
(p1.0) Based on several studies [22][24] that resolve the service composition process problem into several fundamental problems, we define a service composition middleware as a framework providing tools and techniques for composing services. We define a service composition middleware model, SCM model, as an abstract layer, general enough to describe all existing service composition middleware. The SCM model is at a highlevel of abstraction, without considering a particular service technology, language, platform or algorithm used in the composition process. The aim of this definition is to give the basis to discuss similarities and differences, advantages and disadvantages of all available service composition middleware and to highlight the nowadays existing lacks concerning the service composition problem in pervasive environments. As depicted Figure 1, the SCM interacts with the application layer by receiving functionality requests from users or applications [5] [7]. SCM needs to respond to the functionality requests by providing services that fulfill the demand. These services can be atomic or composite. The Service Repository represents all the distributed service repository where services are registered. The SCM interacts with the Service Repository to choose services to compose.
## (s3) MySIM: Spontaneous Service Integration for Pervasive Environment
(p3.0) MySIM [17] is a spontaneous middleware that integrate services in a transparent way without disturbing users and applications of the environment. Service integration is defined as being a service transformation from one service technology to another (Translator), a service composition and a service adaptation. MySIM selects services that are composable, generates composition plans (Generator), evaluate their QoS degrees (Evaluator) and implements new composite services in the environment (Builder). These new services publish well known interfaces but new implementations and better QoS. MySIM also proposes to adapt the application execution to the services available by redirecting the application call to services with better QoS.

(p3.1) MySIM architecture is depicted under the SCM model in Figure 2. The Translator service transforms services into a generic Service model. The Generator service is responsible of the syntactic and semantic matching of the service operations for composition and adaptation issues. The QoS service evaluates the composition or substitution matching via non functional properties and the Decision service decides which services to compose or to substitute. Finally the Builder service implements the composite service, and the Registry service publishes its interfaces.

(p3.2) MySIM is implemented under the OSGi/Felix platform. It uses the reflexive techniques to do the syntactic interface matching and ontology online reasoner for the semantic matching. The service composition is technically done by generating new bundles (unit of deployment) that composes the services together. The results show the heavy cost of the semantic matching. The solution is interesting but solutions need to be found to make the spontaneous service integration scalable to large environments.
## (s4) SeSCo: Seamless Service Composition
(p4.0) SeSCo [10] presents a service composition mechanism for pervasive computing. It employs the service-oriented middleware platform called Pervasive Information Communities Organization (PICO) to model and represent resources as services. The proposed service composition mechanism models services as directed attributed graphs, maintains a repository of service graphs, and dynamically combines multiple basic services into complex services (Builder). The proposed service composition mechanism constructs possible service compositions based on their semantic and syntactic descriptions (Generator). SeSCo [10] proposes a hierarchical service overlay mechanism based on a LATCH protocol (Evaluator). The hierarchical scheme of aggregation exploits the presence of heterogeneity through service cooperation. Devices with higher resources assist those with restricted resources in accomplishing service-related tasks such as discovery, composition, and execution.

(p4.1) SeSCo architecture is depicted under SCM model in Figure 4. No Translator module is provided and SeSCo uses the same language to present the user task and the composite service. The service matching is done on a semantic interface matching and the evaluation is upon the input/output matching correctness.

(p4.2) SeSCo [10] evaluated its approach by calculating the composition success ratio for different lengths of composition which is essentially the number of services that can be used to compose a single service. This evaluation shows the effect of limiting the length of the composition to a predefined number. If the service density is higher, even with a lower value of composition length, a successful composition can be achieved. However, at lower service densities, it might be necessary to allow higher composition lengths for better composition.
## (s5) Broker Approach for Service Composition
(p5.0) Broker [6] presents a distributed architecture and associated protocols for service composition in mobile environments that take into consideration mobility, dynamic changing service topology, and device resources. The composition protocols are based on distributed brokerage mechanisms (Evaluator) and utilize a distributed service discovery process over adhoc network connectivity. The proposed architecture is based on a composition manager, a device that manages the discovery, integration (Generator), and execution of a composite request (Builder). Two broker selectionbased protocols -dynamic one and distributed one -are proposed in order to distribute the composition requests IJCSI IJCSI 6 to the composition managers available in the environment. These protocols depend on device-specific potential value, taking into account services available on the devices, computation and energy resources and the service topology of the surrounding vicinity.
## (s7) SeGSeC: Semantic Graph-Based Service Composition
(p7.0) SeGSeC [8] proposes an architecture that obtains the semantics of the requested service in an intuitive form (e.g. using a natural language) (Tranlator), and dynamically composes the requested service based on its semantics (Generator). To compose a service based on its semantics, the proposed architecture supports semantic representation of services -through a component model named Component Service Model with Semantics (CoSMoS) -discovers services required for composition -through a middleware named Component Runtime Environment (CoRE) -and composes the requested service based on its semantics and the semantics of the discovered services -through a service composition mechanism named Semantic Graph-Based Service Composition (SeGSeC).
## (s9) WebDG: Semantic Web Services Composition
(p9.0) WebDG [12] proposes an ontology-based framework for the automatic composition of web services. [12] presents an algorithm to generate composite services from high level declarative descriptions. The algorithm uses composability rules, in order to compare the syntactic and semantic features of web services to determine whether two services are composable.  7 WebDG architecture is depicted under SCM model in Figure 7. The service composition approach is depicted under four phases of request specification (Translator), service description matchmaking (Generator), composition plan selection (Evaluator) and composite service generation (Builder). A prototype implementation WebDG is provided and tested on a E-government Web service applications. The WebDG evaluation aims to test the possibility of generating plans for a large number of service interfaces, the effectiveness and speed of the matchmaking algorithm, and the role of the selection phase (QoC parameters) in reducing the number of generated plans. The result show that most of the time is spent on checking message composability. On the other hand, a relatively low value of composition completeness generates more plans, each plan containing a small number of composable operations. In contrast, a high value of this ratio generates a smaller number of plans, each plan having more composable operations.
## (s15) Conclusions
(p15.0) The development of pervasive computing has put the accent on a well identified problem, the service composition problem. Composing services together on various platforms, extending environments with new functionalities, are the new trends pervasive computing aims to achieve. Many composition middleware have reached a certain maturity, and propose complete architectures and protocols to discover and compose services in pervasive environments. Many surveys [5][7] [22][31] [33] list service composition middleware according to predefined criteria or properties. They very often consider middleware for the composition of a particular technology such as Web services composition middleware. The application of service composition middleware to pervasive environment is rather new, and a real lack in analyzing and classifying service composition middleware under a reference model is noticed.
