# Overview of Wireless Sensor Network

CorpusID: 15880829 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0eee677f2a2105d98a170ed4a549e0efd1325a67](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0eee677f2a2105d98a170ed4a549e0efd1325a67)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s14) Protocols for Information via Negotiation (SPIN):
(p14.0) Sensor protocols for information via negotiation (SPIN), is a data-centric negotiation-based family of information dissemination protocols for WSNs (Kulik et al., 2002). The main objective of these protocols is to efficiently disseminate observations gathered by individual sensor nodes to all the sensor nodes in the network. Simple protocols such as flooding and gossiping are commonly proposed to achieve information dissemination in WSNs. Flooding requires that each node sends a copy of the data packet to all its neighbors until the information reaches all nodes in the network. Gossiping, on the other hand, uses randomization to reduce the number of duplicate packets and requires only that a node receiving a data packet forward it to a randomly selected neighbor. Low-energy adaptive clustering hierarchy (LEACH) is a routing algorithm designed to collect and deliver data to the data sink, typically a base station (Heinzelman et. al. 2000).
## (s16) Power-Efficient Gathering in Sensor Information Systems (PEGASIS):
(p16.0) Power-efficient gathering in sensor information systems (PEGASIS) (Lindsey et al., 2002) and its extension, hierarchical PEGASIS, are a family of routing and information-gathering protocols for WSNs. The main objectives of PEGASIS are twofold. First, the protocol aims at extending the lifetime of a network by achieving a high level of energy efficiency and uniform energy consumption across all network nodes. Second, the protocol strives to reduce the delay that data incur on their way to the sink.

(p16.1) The network model considered by PEGASIS assumes a homogeneous set of nodes deployed across a geographical area. Nodes are assumed to have global knowledge about other sensors' positions. Furthermore, they have the ability to control their power to cover arbitrary ranges. The nodes may also be equipped with CDMA-capable radio transceivers. The nodes' responsibility is to gather and deliver data to a sink, typically a wireless base station. The goal is to develop a routing structure and an aggregation scheme to reduce energy consumption and deliver the aggregated data to the base station with minimal delay while balancing energy consumption among the sensor nodes. Contrary to other protocols, which rely on a tree structure or a cluster-based hierarchical organization of the network for data gathering and dissemination, PEGASIS uses a chain structure.
## (s17) Directed Diffusion:
(p17.0) Directed diffusion (Intanagonwiwat et al., 2000) is a data-centric routing protocol for information gathering and dissemination in WSNs. The main objective of the protocol is to achieve substantial energy savings in order to extend the lifetime of the network. To achieve this objective, directed diffusion keeps interactions between nodes, in terms of message exchanges, localized within limited network vicinity. Using localized interaction, direct diffusion can still realize robust multi-path delivery and adapt to a minimal subset of network paths. This unique feature of the protocol, combined with the ability of the nodes to aggregate response to queries, results into significant energy savings. The main elements of direct diffusion include interests, data messages, gradients, and reinforcements. Directed diffusion uses a publish-and-subscribe information model in which an inquirer expresses an interest using attribute-value pairs. An interest can be viewed as a query or an interrogation that specifies what the inquirer wants.
## (s18) Geographic Adaptive Fidelity (GAF):
(p18.0) GAF (Xu et al., 2001) is an energy-aware location-based routing algorithm designed mainly for mobile ad hoc networks, but may be applicable to sensor networks as well. The network area is first divided into fixed zones and forms a virtual grid. Inside each zone, nodes collaborate with each other to play different roles. For example, nodes will elect one sensor node to stay awake for a certain period of time and then they go to sleep. This node is responsible for monitoring and reporting data to the BS on behalf of the nodes in the zone. Hence, GAF conserves energy by turning off unnecessary nodes in the network without affecting the level of routing fidelity.
## (s19) Security issues in wireless sensor network
(p19.0) Security issues in sensor networks depend on the need to know what we are going to protect. In (Zia et al., 2006), the authors defined four security goals in sensor networks which are Confidentiality, Integrity, Authentication and Availability. Another security goal in sensor network is introduced in (Sharma et al., 2011).Confidentiality is the ability to conceal message from a passive attacker, where the message communicated on sensor networks remain confidential. Integrity refers to the ability to confirm the message has not been tampered, altered or changed while it was on the network. Authentication Need to know if the messages are from the node it claims to be from, determining the reliability of message's origin. Availability is to determine if a node has the ability to use the resources and the network is available for the messages to move on. Freshness implies that receiver receives the recent and fresh data and ensures that no adversary can replay the old data. This requirement is Overview of Wireless Sensor Network 19 especially important when the WSN nodes use shared-keys for message communication, where a potential adversary can launch a replay attack using the old key as the new key is being refreshed and propagated to all the nodes in the WSN ( Sen, 2009). To achieve the freshness the mechanism like nonce or time stamp should add to each data packet.

(p19.1) Having built a foundation of security goals in sensor network, the major possible security attacks in sensor networks are identified in (Undercoffer et al., 2002) . Routing loops attacks target the information exchanged between nodes. False error messages are generated when an attacker alters and replays the routing information. Routing loops attract or repel the network traffic and increases node to node latency. Selective forwarding attack influences the network traffic by believing that all the participating nodes in network are reliable to forward the message. In selective forwarding attack malicious nodes simply drop certain messages instead of forwarding every message. Once a malicious node cherry picks on the messages, it reduces the latency and deceives the neighboring nodes that they are on a shorter route. Effectiveness of this attack depends on two factors. First the location of the malicious node, the closer it is to the base stations the more traffic it will attract. Second is the percentage of messages it drops. When selective forwarder drops more messages and forwards less, it retains its energy level thus remaining powerful to trick the neighboring nodes. In sinkhole attacks, adversary attracts the traffic to a compromised node. The simplest way of creating sinkhole is to place a malicious node where it can attract most of the traffic, possibly closer to the base station or malicious node itself deceiving as a base station. One reason for sinkhole attacks is to make selective forwarding possible to attract the traffic towards a compromised node. The nature of sensor networks where all the traffic flows towards one base station makes this type of attacks more susceptible. Sybil attacks are a type of attacks where a node creates multiple illegitimate identities in sensor networks either by fabricating or stealing the identities of legitimate nodes. Sybil attacks can be used against routing algorithms and topology maintenance; it reduces the effectiveness of fault tolerant schemes such as distributed storage and disparity. Another malicious factor is geographic routing where a Sybil node can appear at more than one place simultaneously. In wormhole attacks an adversary positioned closer to the base station can completely disrupt the traffic by tunneling messages over a low latency link. Here an adversary convinces the nodes which are multi hop away that they are closer to the base station. This creates a sinkhole because adversary on the other side of the sinkhole provides a better route to the base station. In Hello flood attacks a Broadcasted message with stronger transmission power is pretending that the HELLO message is coming from the base station. Message receiving nodes assume that the HELLO message sending node is the closest one and they try to send all their messages through this node. In this type of attacks all nodes will be responding to HELLO floods and wasting the energies. The real base station will also be broadcasting the similar messages but will have only few nodes responding to it. Denial of service (DoS) attacks occur at physical level causing radio jamming, interfering with the network protocol, battery exhaustion etc. An specific type of DoS attack, Denial-of-service attack has been explored in (Raymond et al., 2009), in which a sensor node's power supply is targeted. Attacks of this type can reduce the sensor lifetime from years to days and have a devastating impact on a sensor network.
## (s24) Data link layer
(p24.0) Data link layer does the error detection and correction, and encoding of data. Link layer is vulnerable to jamming and DoS attacks. TinySec (Karlof et al., 2004) has introduced link layer encryption which depends on a key management scheme. However, an attacker having better energy efficiency can still rage an attack. Protocols like LMAC (Hoesel et al., 2004) have better anti-jamming properties which are viable countermeasure at this layer.
