# Dependability-Explicit Engineering with Event-B: Overview of Recent Achievements

CorpusID: 15223518 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f081c6372a983939460933a867b2b4004e0dc3d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f081c6372a983939460933a867b2b4004e0dc3d)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Nowadays we tend to place increasing reliance on computer-based systems and software which they are running. The degree of reliance that we can justifiably place on a system is expressed by the notion of dependability [1]. However, the analysis of recent software-caused accidents has shown that the current development process is inadequate for achieving high degree of dependability. While a number of existing methods and tools address certain aspects of dependable systems development, there is still a lack of a general viable dependability-explicit techniques for developing software for complex systems.
## (s2) Dependability in System Development
(p2.0) The notion of dependability encompasses a wide range of system properties. Traditionally, dependability can by characterised by such attributes [1] as reliability, safety, availability, maintainability, confidentiality and integrity. In the Deploy project, the main focus has been on developing techniques addressing safety, reliability and availability.

(p2.1) The system dependability is impaired by failures, errors and faults [1]. To break the chain of propagation of a fault -a physical defect or malfunction of a system component -towards the system boundary, the system designers employ a variety of techniques to avoid and remove faults, as well as tolerate and forecast them. Let us now discuss the ways in which Event-B facilitates development of dependable systems.

(p2.2) The main purpose of fault prevention (or fault avoidance) techniques is to avoid occurrence or introduction of faults during the development process. Development in Event-B allows the designers to better understand the system requirements and properties and express them in precise mathematical way. The verification that proceeds hand-in-hand with the modelling enables early identification of design errors and avoid dependability-impairing failures.

(p2.3) Fault tolerance methods are used to design a system in such a way that it is capable of functioning despite the presence of faults. While specifying fault tolerant systems in Event-B, we model not only nominal system behaviour but also failure occurrence and fault tolerance as an intrinsic part of the system specification. It allows us to formally underpin fault assumptions and rigorously define fault tolerance mechanisms.

(p2.4) Fault removal is a set of techniques for identifying and removing the causes of errors. The fault removal process at the development stage starts with system verification, which is followed by diagnosis and correction steps. While modelling systems in Event-B, we rely on proofs, probabilistic extension of Event-B and associated probabilistic model checking to verify correctness of functional behaviour and satisfaction of the desired dependability attributes.

(p2.5) Fault forecasting aims at evaluation of the impact of fault occurrence and activation on the system behaviour. Such an evaluation has qualitative and quantitative aspects. The qualitative analysis helps to designate and classify failure modes as well as identify combinations of faults of components that may potentially lead to a system failure. We have demonstrated that how a seamless integration between Event-B and various techniques for safety analysis facilitate qualitative assessment of the impact of faults on the system dependability. The probabilistic extension of Event-B allows for the quantitative assessment of to what extent certain attributes of dependability are satisfied.

(p2.6) Therefore, we believe that Event-B constitutes a suitable and versatile framework for creating a rigorous dependability-explicit development process. Next we overview in a more details our contributions to attaining establishing dependabilityexplicit development process with Event-B.
## (s4) Goal-oriented refinement of reconfigurable systems
(p4.0) In [5,6,17], we have investigated the problem of ensuring safety and fault tolerance of mobile agent systems. The work has resulted in defining the modelling patterns to represent agent roles in dynamic scopes and deriving the logical conditions to ensure system dependability.

(p4.1) In [7], we have continued our study of multi-agent systems and have proposed a goal-oriented approach to development of multi-agent systems. It is currently recognized that the goal-oriented development facilitates design of complex dynamically adaptable systems. In goal-oriented development the system requirements are defined in terms of goals -the functional and non-functional objectives that a system should achieve. Often changes in system operational environment, e.g., caused by failures of agents -independent system components of various types -might hinder achieving the desired goals. In [ADA] we have proposed a formal development approach that ensures goal reachability "by construction". Essentially, our approach allows the developers to define system goals at different levels of abstraction and guarantee goal reachability despite agent failures. We have derived refinement patterns modelling the mechanisms for dynamic system reconfiguration by reallocating goals from failed agents to healthy ones and, per se, guarantee dependability. We believe that our approach offers a scalable technique for formal development of dynamically reconfigurable dependable systems.
## (s6) Quantitative Assessment of Dependability
(p6.0) To facilitate dependability-explicit development in the probabilistic Event-B [16], we strengthened the notion of Event-B refinement by requiring that a refined model, besides being a proper functional refinement of its more abstract counterpart, also satisfies a number of quantitative constraints. These constraints ensure that the refined model improves (or at least preserves) the current probabilistic measures of system dependability attributes. In our work, these additional constraints are usually derived from the fundamental properties of Markov processes. To validate the proposed approaches, in Deploy we have conducted a number of case studies including formal development and quantitative assessment of a fault tolerant satellite system, formal modelling integrated with safety analysis of a radio-based railway crossing controller, service-oriented system etc. This work allows the designers to to evaluate the impact of the chosen design decisions on system dependability.
