# Hallux valgus-a case for a physiotherapist or only for a surgeon? Literature review

CorpusID: 15297384 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/588a84e82d93a02ecf261aa49dbeb8675cd1061f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/588a84e82d93a02ecf261aa49dbeb8675cd1061f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) General analysis is presented in
(p3.0) The effects of rehabilitation after hallux valgus surgery were studied by Schuh et al 8) . They analysed the changes in plantar pressure distribution during the stance phase of gait in patients who received physical therapy and gait training in the postoperative period. This was a prospective descriptive study. The material included thirty participants who underwent Austin and scarf osteotomy for correction of mild to moderate hallux valgus deformity.

(p3.1) The therapy was based on multimodal rehabilitation program, which initially included: an Aircast cryo-cuff (applied for 8 hours starting immediately after surgery on the day of the operation and on the first postoperative day), the Rathgeber postoperative shoe (for 4 weeks) and a special sock, Gilofamed, that reduces swelling and the need for dressing changes. Then, 4 weeks after surgery, the first session of physical therapy was implemented and it was continued with a frequency of once per week.

(p3.2) To reduce swelling of the leg, elevation, lymphatic drainage, activation of the muscle pump, and cryotherapy (cool packs) were used. The aim of the gait training was to achieve physiological gait patterns. During the stance phase, participants trained to strike the heel in its physiological position at the lateral aspect of the heel. In midstance and the terminal stance, weight bearing on the first metatarsal was stressed. This was done with training of active push-off by the great toe flexors, the flexor digitorum longus and brevis muscles, and the lumbrical muscles.

(p3.3) The next stage of rehabilitation was selective strengthening of the peroneus longus muscle, whose function is to pronate the midfoot and it is responsible for ground contact of the first ray, the most heavily loaded structure of the foot during gait. When this muscle is weak, compensation in the form of valgus positioning of the knees can appear. Fascial release techniques for the peroneal muscles were also performed. To decrease the tone of the tibialis anterior muscle, velocity dependent resistance to stretch was used.

(p3.4) Manual therapy aimed to improve the range of motion of all metatarsophalangeal joints (MTP), and it included caudal sliding of the proximal phalanx (to improve flexion), and dorsal sliding of the proximal phalanx (to improve extension). Moreover, to activate the mechanoreceptors that restrain the afferent pain sensors the oscillating traction was implemented. Mobilization of the first MTP, Lisfranc, transverse tarsal, subtalar and ankle joints was also performed, and concentric strengthening exercises of the great toe flexors and extensors were included in the treatment protocol.

(p3.5) Schuh et al. reported an increase in plantar pressure parameters in the region of the great toe and the first ray after hallux valgus surgery in patients who received physical therapy as well as gait training in the post-operative period. They cited articles 9-13) that studied changes in plantar pressure distribution after hallux valgus surgery and found decreased loading parameters in the hallux and the first metatarsal head region after surgery. These studies did not include physical therapy or gait training. Therefore, Schuh et al. 8) suggested that postoperative physical therapy and gait training may lead to improved function and weight bearing of the first ray after hallux valgus surgery. However a major limitation of their study was the absence of a control group.

(p3.6) The effectiveness of manual therapy for patients with hallux valgus was analysed by du Plessis et al 6) . Their study was a parallel-group randomised trial which aimed to test an innovative protocol of manual and manipulative therapy (MMT) and compare it with a treatment of a night splint(s) for symptomatic mild to moderate hallux valgus deformity. Fifteen participants in the control group used a night splint(s) and the second experimental group (n=15) received a structured protocol of MMT (4 treatments over a 2-week period). The MMT protocol was based on the Brantingham protocol and included graded mobilisation of the affected hallux/1st MTPJ, judicious manipulation of the affected hallux/1st MTPJ, post-treatment cold therapy and additional mobilisation/manipulation of foot and ankle joints. The outcomes were measured using a visual analogue scale, foot function index and hallux dorsiflexion (goniometry). The results show that there were no statistically or clinically significant differences between the two groups, suggesting that manipulative therapy (experimental group) was equivalent to standard care of a night splint(s) (control group) for symptomatic mild to moderate hallux valgus in the short term.

(p3.7) Conservative treatment through manual therapy and specific foot exercises was presented by Jedynak 14) in a case study. A patient was treated using foot mobilisation techniques (FMT) which included: anterior calcaneal thrust, posterior talar mobilisation, lateral navicular manipulation, cuneiform-1st metatarsal mobilisation, 1st metatarsophalangeal joint (MTPJ) mobilisation and medial sesamoid mobilisation. These manual interventions were performed at a frequency of three times per week for three months. Over a six-month period, specific foot exercises: isometric contraction of the intrinsic muscles of the foot to maximum tolerance held for 20 seconds (three repetitions twice daily), isometric contraction of the extrinsic muscles of the foot to maximum tolerance held for 20 seconds (three repetitions twice daily), and dynamic adduction and release of the abductor hallucis with five-second holds (five repetitions twice daily). The exercises were based on the physiotherapeutic principles of strengthening and re-training these muscles, which are responsible for stabilisation of the tarsal and metatarsal bones of the feet. The following outcome measures were used: FHSQ (foot health status questionnaire for pain and function), IM angle (intermetatarsal angle), and HA angle (hallux abductus angle). The FHSQ results showed an improvement in both foot pain and foot function measurements at three and six months. Further radiographic measurements indicated there was a slight reduction in the IM angle of both feet and the HA angle of one of them.

(p3.8) The effects of a combined treatment program consisting of exercise and taping for patients with hallux valgus were assessed in a preliminary study of Bayar et al 15) . Twenty female patients with a diagnosis of hallux valgus were included in the research. The subjects were randomly divided into 2 groups (each containing 10 subjects): a group which was treated with taping and foot exercises and a control group which did only the foot exercises. The researchers assessed the following parameters: hallux valgus angle using a goniometer, foot pain using the visual analogue scale (VAS), and walking ability evaluated by walking ability scale (WAS). These parameters were re-evaluated after 8 weeks of therapy.

(p3.9) The exercise program consisted of passive abduction of the hallux with traction of the first metatarsophalangeal joint and active abduction of the hallux. The subjects were asked to do the exercises 2 times daily with 10 repetitions for a period of 8 weeks. The study group was also treated with non-elastic white tape. There was a significant decrease in  the hallux valgus angle, resting pain and walking pain in both groups. Furthermore, improvement of walking ability in the study group was noted. The treatment results of the two groups were significantly different in favour of the study group with decreases in all of the parameters. This led the authors to conclude that complex therapy combining exercise and taping produces better results in patients with hallux valgus deformity than just exercise.
## (s4) DISCUSSION
(p4.0) The studies reviewed employed various interventions and different protocols making their comparison difficult. Nonetheless all of the studies reported beneficial effects after the implementation of various physiotherapy methods. The most common benefits were reduction in pain and correction of deformity.

(p4.1) The outcome measures were not always well chosen. The visual analogue scale is often not an appropriate method of pain assessment. Appropriate instruments are standardized questionnaires which assess pain during certain actions or in certain positions. Also, the studies reviewed here were characterized by small numbers of participants. The largest study group consisted of 30 patients 8) . None of the studies assessed the long-term results of treatment. All of the studies examined the patients just after the end of therapy and none performed a follow up.

(p4.2) This literature review shows that patients with hallux valgus can be treated with physiotherapy. Physiotherapy may be used alone or in combination with other conservative treatments as a basic treatment for mild hallux valgus or as a supplement to surgical treatment in the post-operative period. In agreement with other researchers 21) , it is our opinion that the physiotherapy approaches should primarily concentrate on pain relief and improvement of foot function and secondarily on the correction of deformity. Even if physiotherapy only inhibits further deformation, it should be recognized as a therapeutic success, and for patients receiving surgery, physiotherapy can prevent the occurrence of complications.
