# A review of communication-oriented optical wireless systems

CorpusID: 16050825 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ddd83478ac477d4b9e5d81d628ecda8938a54e6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ddd83478ac477d4b9e5d81d628ecda8938a54e6)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) It has been more than 30 years since optical wireless (OW) was proposed as an alternative broadband technology for wireless data transmission applications [1]. The underlying concept of OW is very simple: utilize optical beams to carry data through the atmosphere or vacuum. As a result, OW link architectures are very similar to optical fiber communication point-to-point links, with the exception that no optical fibers are deployed as a transmission medium. OW is also very similar to RF wireless, but radio waves are replaced with light and antennas with free-space optical transceivers. Despite this superficial resemblance between OW and RF links, OW exhibits several appealing attributes when compared to RF. OW links are inherently broadband and optical frequencies in the infrared and visible spectrum are neither regulated nor licensed. Optical components are also cheaper and consume less electrical power than high-speed RF components. Finally, OW links do not suffer from multipath fading and have much less potential for interference with RF-sensitive electronic systems. These advantages do not, however, imply that OW is a universal replacement for RF communications. The application of OW systems is limited when considering area coverage and user mobility, where RF technologies prove invaluable. In addition, OW systems operate under strict eye safety regulations, while at the same time incoherent OW receivers present lower sensitivity than their RF counterparts because of their photo-electric conversion mechanisms and the impact of ambient light noise sources. Table 1 summarizes the main differences between OW and RF systems.

(p0.1) To better understand the place of OW systems in the wireless world, Figure 1 summarizes state-of-the art commercial RF and OW technologies, as well as technologies under standardization by major bodies including IEEE, 3GPP, Bluetooth and IrDA. Technologies are presented with respect to their area of coverage, ranging from a few centimeters in personal communications to over 1 km in outdoor communications, and the data rates they attain, including low rate legacy links under 1 Mb/s (Bluetooth and older IrDA systems). Clearly, contemporary OW links provide channel rates up to 10 Gb/s, which directly compare to the ones of optical fibers. At the same time, commercial OW links operate at link distances that are challenging to attain in RF (3G/4G) and millimeter-wave (60 GHz) broadband communications. OW is a unique technology that provides an attractive alternative in niche application areas, complementing fiber-optic and RF wireless solutions when they are either too costly to deploy, create undesirable interference, or are not feasible at all. Figure 2 illustrates some of the application areas in which OW has been successfully applied. Two mainstream application areas of OW are last-mile broadband access and office interconnection; both are the business objectives of a number of component and system manufacturers. In such applications, state-of-the-art OW systems support 10 Gb/s Ethernet, which equals the bandwidth provided by metro fiber optic systems and is significantly higher than the 1.25 Gb/s Ethernet provided by competing RF wireless systems that operate in the 60 GHz frequency range. At the same time the deployment cost of OW systems is significantly lower than that of fiber optics, which can easily reach $1M/mile in urban areas. OW installation only requires the alignment of two freespace optical transceivers rather than digging trenches and repairing roads.
## (s7) Multispot diffusing links
(p7.0) Spatial diversity techniques have been successfully applied to indoor OW links in a topology that is termed multispot diffusing (MSD) and shown in Figure 5c [108]. The MSD architecture aims to combine the advantages of point-to-point links with the mobility of diffuse links [108][109][110][111][112][113][114][115]. To this end, the MSD transmitter modulates data onto a series of beams that are projected onto the ceiling above the communications floor. The MSD receiver ideally images one or perhaps several spots and decodes data from the diffusely reflected energy. The same data is modulated for all spots and the arrangement and number of spots is optimized so that at least one spot is in the imager for every receiver position.

(p7.1) Even though both diffuse OW and MSD links rely on diffuse reflections on surfaces inside the room, there are large differences in the underlying channel models of both topologies. The first main difference lies in the intensity distribution of the optical transmitter. Whereas diffuse OW links emit light over a large divergence angle, the MSD transmitter uses a series of narrow divergence beams directed to the ceiling. This more efficient organization of the optical intensity leads to a far smaller path loss in MSD systems than in diffuse systems. The second major difference lies in the construction of the receiver. The MSD receiver consists of a series of narrow FOV elements directed to the ceiling. These narrow FOV receivers reject a large portion of ambient light. In addition, the narrow FOV receivers are able to reject any stray multipath signals and this effect significantly improves the bandwidth of the channel. It has been shown that in a typical room setting the channel bandwidth of an MSD system is in excess of 2 GHz, which is in stark contrast to the tens of MHz available in diffuse systems [116].
## (s11) Channel modeling
(p11.0) A major effect of the atmosphere on optical beams is the rapid attenuation of their power when they propagate through obscurations (haze, fog, snow and rain). For a single mode Gaussian beam of small angle beam divergence θ and power P TX at the transmitter, the received power at an aperture of area A at range L equals

(p11.1) where a is the intensity attenuation coefficient along the obscured path. Typical obscuration losses that are encountered near the ground range from 0.5 dB/km in clear air, 3 dB/km in haze, 50 dB/km in thick fog, and 350 dB/km in impenetrable fog (OW links are more affected by snow and fog than they are by rain). At high altitude in clear air the attenuation may be as low as 0.1 dB/km, although aerosols can still affect the channel [151]. In practice, the exponential decay of the optical power means that OW links do not work over significant distances through obscuration and it is not practical to attempt to operate OW links through significant obscuration by increasing transmitter power. Some additional range can be accomplished by decreasing beam divergence angle θ, although this imposes more rigorous pointing and tracking requirements on the link.
## (s15) Hybrid OW/RF channel model
(p15.0) In a hybrid OW/RF system, it is necessary to include both the OW and RF channel impairments in the overall system performance. In general, OW and RF links, depending on the frequency of operation, can be modeled independently to include the weather effects. As a result, separate channel models for the OW and RF links are mostly adequate to predict the hybrid system performance. Most practical OW systems employ intensity modulation with direct detection (IM/DD). The OW channel propagation results in a multiplicative effect on the transmitted optical intensity of the laser source with a channel gain factor. The channel gain includes atmospheric attenuation, pointing error effects and atmospheric turbulence. A detailed discussion of the channel impact on OW only systems has been presented in Section 4. Since the OW link operates with direct line-of-sight (LOS), the RF link too has LOS, and therefore the RF link can be modeled as a Ricean channel and often as an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel for good channel conditions. However, for longer and high altitude links severe fading in the RF link can occur. One example is [222], where the link operates over a distance of 150 km at a height of 10,000 ft. Both frequency-flat and frequency-selective fading were observed for a system operating in the Xand Ku-band at a data rate of 274 Mb/s. When higher RF frequencies are considered (such as at millimeter wavelengths) the OW and RF channels may not be truly independent. Higher RF frequency bands support higher data rates, but they are also more affected by atmospheric effects and pointing errors. Consequently, higher RF frequencies are affected by scintillations, and moderate to heavy rain events were reported to affect both OW laser link at 850 nm and millimeter wave RF [227]. Pointing errors can also affect scintillation statistics for both channels [228]. In such a case, pointing error correlations between the two links cannot be ignored.
## (s16) Hybrid OW/RF link architecture and networking
(p16.0) The RF link in hybrid OW/RF channels can be used for link acquisition, data transmission control and/or data transfer. Accordingly, hybrid systems are divided into three categories, depending on the usage of the RF link, as follows:

(p16.1) (1) Hybrid OW/RF using RF as the control link: The RF link is generally more reliable than the OW link and less sensitive to pointing. Thus, it can be used to assist in the pointing and acquisition of the OW link. It can also be used to provide packet retransmission requests. Successful RF retransmission requests can significantly improve system performance, as observed in [222] for a multi-Gb/s data rate system.

(p16.2) (2) Hybrid OW/RF with switching and data splitting: Since the OW link is the primary channel, the RF link can be used either as a backup or as a parallel link carrying a fraction of the transmitted data. An experimental 2.9 km hybrid OW/RF link is described in [229], where the RF link works in a standby mode. The laser link provides connection at 155 Mb/s and the received signal level is checked every 5 s. When the signal falls below a certain threshold, data transmission switches to the RF link, which operates at 2.4 GHz with a data rate of 11 Mb/s. Data transmission continues on the RF link until an improved signal level is detected and then the transmission switches back to the laser link. Although this hybrid OW/RF experiment is important, this approach under-utilizes resources, as only one link is active at any given time.

(p16.3) When using both OW and RF links concurrently, data is partitioned between the links. In [224], a dynamic load switching algorithm is employed and incremental load shifting from one link to the other is carried out, based on the status of the two links. For this purpose, BER is recorded on both links every minute and the averaging effect over a window is used for switching. A practical coded OW/RF switching scheme using an automatic load distribution between the links is described in [230]. The data packets are encoded using Raptor codes and sent over the two links at their respective rates of 1 Gb/s and 96 Mb/s. Both the links employ cyclic redundancy check (CRC) codes and discard corrupted packets. The receiver decodes the entire message when there are a sufficient number of correctly received packets. The transmitter continues sending encoded packets for a given message until it receives a 1-bit feedback message. Although for a given reliability level the data rate of this approach is less due to Raptor code overhead, the average data rate is improved by nearly six times in some cases. The use of Raptor codes for hybrid OW/RF systems is also considered in [231].

(p16.4) (3) Hybrid OW/RF with codeword partitioning: If the transmitted data are encoded for error correction, separate encoding and decoding over OW and RF links do not fully exploit the available diversity. For example, when the OW link deteriorates, a data packet encoded and decoded only over the OW link may still be received in error. If, however, some of the encoded bits are transmitted over a more reliable RF link, there is a higher probability of correctly receiving the packet. This idea has been recently explored by many researchers. In general, as more and more bits are transmitted over a more reliable RF channel, the hybrid link remains operational even with less available OW SNR. This gives rise to trade-offs between OW and RF link parameters.

(p16.5) A non-uniform rate-compatible low density parity check (LDPC) code is proposed in [232] for partitioning data into OW and RF links. The code rate is changed through puncturing of the coded bits. To get insights into the behavior of LDPC codes over hybrid channels, density evolution for hybrid channels is described in [226]. For a given code rate and OW/RF signal-to-noise ratios, the minimum RF data rate needed for the convergence of the decoder algorithm is obtained. This helps in the code requirements and design of hybrid systems. For example, the receiver can ask for an increase or decrease in RF rate in steps. Hybrid channel density evolution analysis for irregular LDPC codes shows that some further improvement in performance can be obtained. The performance improvement is higher for stronger turbulence channels. An experimental testbed verification demonstrating the joint decoding of LDPC codes over the two channels is carried out in [233]. Convolutional and turbo codes for hybrid channels are also investigated in the literature [234,235]. Since these codes require simpler encoders than decoders, they can be useful at transmitters with limited resources. The convolutionally coded bits are partitioned into OW and RF channels using an optimized pattern and interleaved before modulation [234]. This bit-interleaved coded modulation is able to exploit the diversity of the two links. In [235], error analysis for turbo codes in hybrid channels showing trade-offs between RF and OW SNRs is described. Optimal turbo-coded bit allocations for puncturing and RF transmission are analyzed and related algorithms are also presented.

(p16.6) From a networking perspective, hybrid OW/RF networks are required to provide high-rate data connectivity with low end-to-end delay. A multihop network with short length links will provide high availability since the shorter OW links are less vulnerable to outages [224]. However, adding more hybrid nodes is costly and it also increases end-to-end delay. A hybrid wireless network of backbone nodes is considered in [223], where the nodes can be pointed to new nodes if necessary. Topology discovery, dissemination, link restoration, optimal OW/RF configurations and routing are very critical for network operation. These functions are accomplished through cooperation of the RF and OW subsystems. For link restoration, an increase in OW transmit power, bit rate reduction and hybrid link switching were explored. Alternatively, OW beam search along with RF connectivity can be used. If the OW link fails in a switched hybrid system then the connection switches to the RF link and optical beam probing can be continued until the OW link is restored [223]. A detailed OW/RF network analysis, with links using codeword partitioning, is an open research problem.
