# A Review on Recent Contribution of Meshfree Methods to Structure and Fracture Mechanics Applications

CorpusID: 16230919 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d710c7c1667f253b38494c3448a5ff222c6b22e9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d710c7c1667f253b38494c3448a5ff222c6b22e9)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) EFG and MLPG
(p1.0) Meshfree methods are classified based on use of global or local weak form to derive system matrices. Accordingly, EFG method is based on global weak form, while MLPG method is based on local symmetric weak form (LSWF). In both these methods, approximation is based on moving least square (MLS) approximants. But in moving least square methods interpolants do not pass through data point as interpolation functions are not unity at nodes [5]. Hence, imposition of essential boundary conditions (EBCs) gets complicated in these methods. Present section provides basics of shape function construction, selection of weight functions, and techniques to impose essential boundary conditions and integration.
## (s3) Selection of Weight Functions.
(p3.0) Weight function selection is also an important parameter while developing the meshfree solution. It should be constructed in such a way that their value should decrease as the distance from to increase. Selected weight functions must be positive and the function and its derivative should be continuous up to required degree [5]. Some of the weight functions used are as the following.
## (s4) Imposing Essential Boundary
(p4.0) Conditions. Because MLS shape functions used in EFG and MLPG do not satisfy Kronecker delta criterion, process of imposition of EBCs gets complicated than FEM. Number of techniques were developed for enforcing EBCs in the problem like Lagrange multiplier, penalty method, orthogonal transformation techniques, coupling with FEM, Nitsche's method, singular weighing functions, boundary collocation, and D' Alembert's Principle. Out of these techniques, penalty method can be easily implemented and do not increase much computational effort. Detailed description of these techniques can be referred from references [5,[14][15][16][17][18][19].
## (s13) Composite Solids.
(p13.0) Functionally graded materials (FGM) possesses continuously varying microstructure and material properties in a predetermined way and they are used in structures subjected to nonuniform service conditions. Rao and Rahman proposed EFG approach for calculating stress intensity factors (SIF) for stationary crack in twodimensional functionally graded materials of arbitrary geometry. In proposed method, the interaction integral method was extended for FGM and material properties were taken as smooth functions of spatial coordinates and two newly developed interaction integrals were introduced for analysis of basic modes and mixed mode fracture problems [87]. While twodimensional stress analysis problems of anisotropic and linear elastic/viscoelastic solids with continuously varying material properties were addressed by Sladek et al., using MLPG with unit step function as test function in local weak form which leads to local boundary integral equations (LBIEs). MLS was adopted for approximating physical quantities in LBIEs and for time-dependent problems, Laplace transformation was utilized [88]. Delamination and matrix cracking are routine damage mechanisms observed during analysis of laminated structures. Guiamatsia et al. proposed EFG for the first time to simulate delamination (interlaminar) and intralaminar matrix microcracking in composite laminates. Modeling was done at mesolevel, where each ply represented individually and background integration cells were arranged per layer in a way that they are not traversed by material interfaces. Virtual crack closure technique (VCCT) was used for crack advancement in the present technique [89]. Orthotropic composites possess high specific strength and stiffness characteristics because of their constituents and extensively applied in various engineering applications. Ghorashi et al. presented a new approach for modeling discrete cracks in two-dimensional orthotropic media by EFG method. In proposed approach, recently developed orthotropic enrichment functions were used which were used earlier in the extended finite element method along with a subtriangle technique for enhancing the Gauss quadrature accuracy near the crack [90].
