# A review of global surveillance on the muscle strengthening and balance elements of physical activity recommendations

CorpusID: 169642562 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/393ad1cc1e2b1f7f0edcfb19d4320159205cfdbd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/393ad1cc1e2b1f7f0edcfb19d4320159205cfdbd)

Fields: Business, Medicine

## (s1) Methods
(p1.0) In 2015 the Global Observatory for Physical Activity (GoPA) produced a set of 'country cards' which summarised demographic data and physical activity policy, surveillance and research indicators across 139 countries, representing a global coverage of 64.1% of the world's countries and 85.4% of the world's population in 2013 16 . The set of country cards was published in November 2016 as the 'GoPA 1 st physical activity almanac' (https://indd.adobe.com/view/f8d2c921-4daf-4c96-9eaf-b8fb2c4de615). The development of each country card was supported by a contact in each of the participating countries who assisted in reviewing, revising and approving the accuracy of the content.

(p1.1) The surveillance indicator on the GoPA country cards summarises the physical activity prevalence in each country (among adults and older adults combined), by gender and overall. We decided to use the surveillance tools that were used in the development of the GoPA country cards as the basis for our global review, as these tools were considered by the country contacts to provide the most valid and respected physical activity prevalence estimate for the country. We attempted to obtain a copy of each survey that was used to inform the GoPA prevalence estimates. This was done by: 1) undertaking online searches using the Google search engine; 2) searching the GoPA archive which was created during the construction of the country cards; and 3) emailing the country card contacts to request a copy of their survey.

(p1.2) Each tool was reviewed to determine whether it included questions on muscle strengthening and balance activities. For example we reviewed all questions in each of the surveys to determine whether they included questions such as 'do you regularly undertake muscle strengthening activities?', 'do you regularly undertake activities to improve your balance?', and/or whether they included questions about participation in activities which are known to increase strength or improve balance, such as weight lifting or one leg stands. We also considered whether each survey would elicit a detailed list of activities that respondents had taken part in, which would inform judgements about their level of participation in muscle strengthening and balance activities. No requirement was set in terms of eliciting the frequency, intensity, time, or type of muscle strengthening and balance activities, simply that at least one question was asked about these types of activities. In addition, the calculation and reporting of each survey was reviewed to confirm whether achievement of the strength and balance recommendations was factored into the national prevalence estimates (i.e. whether the prevalence estimate was based on reported moderate to vigorous physical activity only or whether any attempt was made to incorporate self-reported muscle strengthening and/or balance activities into the calculation).
