# Sphingolipid Metabolic Pathway: An Overview of Major Roles Played in Human Diseases

CorpusID: 16206331 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ea3eacd81ee7f714dee15eb8d329bb45d11c7d3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ea3eacd81ee7f714dee15eb8d329bb45d11c7d3)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Sphingolipids are a class of natural lipids comprised of a sphingoid base backbone, sphingosine. Sphingosine N-acylated with fatty acids forms ceramide [1], a central molecule in the sphingolipid biology. A variety of charged, neutral, phosphorylated, or glycosylated moieties are attached to ceramide further forming complex sphingolipids [2] (see Figure 1 for details). For example, phosphoryl choline attached to ceramide makes the most abundant mammalian sphingolipid, sphingomyelin. These moieties result in both polar and nonpolar regions giving the molecules an amphipathic character which accounts for their tendency to aggregate into membranous structures. Furthermore, such variations found in their chemical structures allow them to play diverse roles in cellular metabolism. Research in the past decade has clearly indicated that sphingolipids are not just the structural components of cell membrane but also act as signaling molecules controlling a majority of cellular events including signal transduction, cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis [3][4][5]. Ceramide, sphingosine, sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), and ceramide-1-phosphate (C1P) have emerged as chief bioactive mediators in the context of sphingolipid biology.

(p0.1) Although sphingolipids contribute to only a small proportion of the total cellular lipid pool, their accumulation in certain cells may be a trigger for pathology of many diseases. Because of the presence of a highly integrated metabolic network among various bioactive sphingolipids, it can be implicated that manipulation of one enzyme or metabolite may result in unexpected changes in metabolite levels, enzyme activities, and cellular programs [6,7].

(p0.2) Whilst the scientific literature has been enriched by articles focusing on structural diversity and cellular metabolism, this review focuses on how alterations in expression of genes involved in sphingolipid metabolism could result in the progression of severe diseases. We chose three most prevalent diseases: type 2 diabetes, Alzheimer's disease, and hepatocellular carcinoma and analyzed the nature of gene expression changes in these disease conditions. The gene expression changes were further translated into possible physiological effects and these effects were analyzed to check for any correlation to the key pathology of the disease in  Figure 1: Structure of key sphingolipid molecules. All sphingolipids are comprised of a sphingoid base, and in mammals sphingosine (mainly C-18) is the major sphingoid base (a). A long chain fatty acid attached to sphingosine through amide linkage forms ceramide (b). Complex sphingolipids are obtained by replacement of hydrogen group of ceramide (H * ) with various functional head groups (represented as R group in (e)). Complex sphingolipids vary in the nature of the polar head groups. For example, in sphingomyelin the head group is phosphocholine whereas in glycosphingolipids the head group could be one or more sugar residues. The phosphorylated derivatives, namely, sphingosine-1phosphate (c) and ceramide 1 phosphate (d), are obtained by action of respective kinases on sphingosine and sphingosine-1-phosphate.

(p0.3) question. It turns out that, under these disease conditions at least, the sphingolipid metabolic pathway is modulated in such a way that the resultant changes in the physiology act as a significant contributor to the disease pathology.
## (s4) Sphingolipid Metabolism in Pathogenesis of Human Diseases
(p4.0) Human diseases resulting due to impaired sphingolipid metabolism are generally the outcome of defect in enzymes that degrade the sphingolipids [22]. In general, they are a group of relatively rare inborn errors of metabolism resulting in accumulation of sphingolipids (sphingolipidosis) caused by defects in the genes coding for proteins taking part in the lysosomal degradation of sphingolipids [23]. Historically, the pathological significance of sphingolipid related diseases is discussed with reference to sphingolipidosis. There has been a tremendous progress in the sphingolipid research in the recent past and it is now clear that sphingolipids can play a major role in pathogenesis of several diseases apart from traditionally studied sphingolipidosis. Deregulation of sphingolipid homeostasis is established as a key factor in the pathogenesis of several disorders like metabolic, neuronal, and proliferative disorders.

(p4.1) Recent studies have established the role of altered sphingolipid metabolism in brain cells in Alzheimer's disease [24]. The key role of sphingomyelinases in this disease is to promote apoptosis in neuronal cells through generation of proapoptotic molecule, ceramide [25]. In addition, serine palmitoyl transferase (SPT) has been shown to be downregulated by the amyloid precursor protein [26]. This exclusive physiological function of the amyloid precursor protein suggests the involvement of SPT and sphingolipid metabolism in Alzheimer's disease pathology.

(p4.2) It has been established for decades that patients with cirrhosis had increased levels of plasma long chain fatty acids (LCFA) as compared to controls, and the level of these substances is augmented with greater severity of the disease [27]. Furthermore, ceramide has been known as the prototype of sphingolipids that provokes cell death and its levels increase in response to apoptotic stimuli such as ionizing radiation or chemotherapy. In the liver, accumulation of ceramide may contribute to a variety of complications, leading to the substitution of steatosis to steatohepatitis [28], which can further develop into cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Different studies have shown that either pharmacologic ceramide accumulation or systemic intravenous administration of liposomal ceramide is an effective approach against HCC [29].

(p4.3) Though a lot of research has already been done to emphasize the association of sphingolipids with several disorders, an understanding of the respective pathology in more detail with reference to sphingolipid metabolic pathway genes would be desirable. An analysis of the expression levels of genes involved in sphingolipid metabolic pathway presented below throws more light on the predisposition of sphingolipid pathway genes to execute the disease process.

(p4.4) Here we discuss the role of sphingolipid metabolism in three different disease conditions-type 2 diabetes mellitus Compartment C-1 is a de novo ceramide synthesis channel, compartment C-2 represents reactions leading to synthesis of complex sphingolipids, compartment C-3 is comprised of reaction leading to hydrolytic generation of ceramide from sphingomyelin, and compartment C-4 represents reactions in which ceramide is converted into other intermediates like sphingosine-1-phosphate and ceramide-1-phosphate. Activities/status of each compartment can be translated into different physiological events; accumulation of ceramide due to increased production of ceramide in C-1 would result in ER stress, increased generation of ceramide-1 phosphate, and sphingosine-1-phosphate in compartment C-4 results in progrowth and proinflammatory scenario in the cell. In different disease conditions, the status of each of these compartments contributes to the overall pathology of the disease.

(p4.5) (T2DM), Alzheimer's disease (AD), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). For this purpose, we obtained the patterns in expression profiles of genes involved in sphingolipid metabolism under each of the diseased state from publicly available databases and mapped them to different physiological processes visualized through hypothetical compartments ( Figure 3). Once the sphingolipid gene expression pattern from each study was mapped to a physiological process, possible effects of changes in the enzymes were predicted under diseased conditions. This is discussed in detail in the subsequent sections.
## (s5) Role of Sphingolipid Metabolism in Pathogenesis of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM).
(p5.0) T2DM is a metabolic disease characterized by insulin resistance primarily in adipose, liver, and muscle tissues. Earlier reports suggesting that sphingolipids might play a role in insulin signaling came from experiments indicating accumulation of ceramides in insulin-resistant tissues. Zucker obese rats, a common model to study insulin resistance, were found to have elevated ceramide levels within the liver and skeletal muscles [30]. Ceramide can influence insulin signaling pathway by two autonomous mechanisms: (1) through activation of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), which in turn can dephosphorylate and hence inhibit Akt/PKB [31] and (2) by inhibiting the translocation and activation of Akt/PKB through protein kinase C [32]. Ceramide analogs have been shown to inhibit insulin stimulated glucose uptake, GLUT4 translocation, and glycogen synthesis in cultured cells. They inhibit Akt/PKB in cultured muscle cells [33][34][35], adipocytes [36], and hepatocytes [37]. Decreasing the levels of ceramide by using inhibitors can restore the insulin sensitivity in lipid induced insulin resistant cell culture [33,34]. Ceramide levels have also been reported to increase in the muscles or liver of insulin-resistant rodents [30] or human [38,39]. S1P having progrowth properties often opposes ceramide action, allowing researchers to purport the existence of a ceramide: S1P rheostat that controls cellular responses [40]. Sphingosine kinase (SPHK) hence is an important lipid kinase that maintains the balance between progrowth and proapoptotic precursors. Recently, it has been reported that such a rheostat is very important for both islet function and beta cell survival and may act as a possible therapeutic target to protect the beta cell from diabetes related complications and to improve pancreatic islet function [41].
## (s6) Role of Sphingolipid Metabolism in Pathogenesis of
(p6.0) Alzheimer's Disease. Sphingolipids form the integral component of the brain and a proper sphingolipid homeostasis is essential for the normal functioning of neurons. Several neurological disorders like Niemann-Pick disease (type I), Gaucher's disease, and Tay-Sacks disease result due to impaired activities of the enzymes that handle complex sphingolipids [14]. Studies suggest that even minor changes in sphingolipid balance may play significant roles in the development of neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease [58], amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [59], Parkinson's disease [60], and dementia [61].
## (s7) Role of Sphingolipid Metabolism in Pathogenesis of Hepatocellular Carcinoma
(p7.0) Impaired sphingolipid homeostasis is a common theme for most of the cancers [79] and overexpression of SPHK1 has been identified in multiple cancer cells derived from breast, colon, lung, ovary, stomach, uterus, kidney, and rectum [80]. Central to the role of sphingolipids in cancer is the fact that ceramide generated through either the de novo/hydrolytic pathway is a proapoptotic molecule and sphingosine-1-phosphate and ceramide 1 phosphate resist the action of ceramide and promote cell proliferation [81]. Owing to the significant role of sphingolipids in cell death/survival regulation, the alteration in sphingolipid metabolism has a profound impact on cancer biology and therapy. While increased levels of progrowth sphingolipids would enhance the cell proliferation, channelizing the proapoptotic ceramide into other sphingolipid molecules would augment resistance to drug induced cell death. In fact many cancer cells suppress their ceramide biosynthetic machinery while upregulating the biosynthesis of progrowth sphingolipids like S1P. This modulation would serve to increase proliferation of these cells. Besides maintaining a proliferative phenotype, many cancer cell types resist therapy in several ways including escape from therapy-induced apoptosis [82]. Decreasing the levels of proapoptotic ceramide in the cells is one of the adaptive means to resist therapy-induced apoptosis.

(p7.1) Hepatocellular carcinoma is a common type of liver cancer resulting due to either viral causes or cirrhosis. We analyzed gene expression data obtained from several studies (GSE21362, GSE6764, GSE14323, GSE5975, GSE25097, GSE10459, and GSE14323) and Figure 6 demonstrates the status of four compartments in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The expression of genes involved in the de novo ceramide synthesis is unaltered as depicted by compartment C1 and levels of CERT are upregulated. In compartment C2, markedly, there is an upregulation of the enzymes involved in the synthesis of complex sphingolipids. In compartment C3, hydrolytic generation of ceramide from sphingomyelin is downregulated once again ensuring lesser levels of ceramide.
