# An Overview of Genetic Transformation of Soybean

CorpusID: 16096302 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5cc8291d1cc070656ca1861350c50b610c2c6d10](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5cc8291d1cc070656ca1861350c50b610c2c6d10)

Fields: Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Different approaches for soybean transformation
(p1.0) In soybean transformation, two major methods are now widely utilized: Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of different explant tissues and particle bombardment. The Agrobacterium-mediated method, as a simple protocol, does not require any specific or expensive equipment. Moreover, this method usually produces single or low copy numbers of insertions with relatively rare rearrangement [13]. On the other hand, bombardment technique directly introduces desired genes into the target plant cell with small tungsten or gold particles [9]. The success of this approach critically depends upon the ability of the target tissue to proliferate as well as proper pre-cultures to make a target plant.
## (s6) Hypocotyl based transformation
(p6.0) Another type of explant tissue, hypocotyl, was also investigated with 13 different soybean genotypes. Most of the genotypes initiated shoots from this type of explant [36]. This method was reported to be genotype-independent regeneration protocol via organogenesis and utilized the acropetal end of a hypocotyl section from a 7-day old seedling. Despite inducing adventitious shoots from the explant, most recovered shoot did not matured in the soil. Wang et al [37] reported successful production of fertile transgenic plants using hypocotylbased Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. To improve the transformation system, two different chemicals, cytokinin hormone 6-Benzylaminopurine (BAP) and silver nitrate, were added to the shoot formation media. In spite of the term "hypocotyl" used in the above transformation system, the true tissues responsible for regeneration are actually the preexisting meristem tissues located at the nodal area of the cotyledon, essentially the same source of tissue as cotyledonary-nodes [17] except that cotyledons were removed [45,46].
## (s9) Agrobacterium-mediated transformation mechanism
(p9.0) Agrobacterium is a unique organism to generate transgenic plants and in natural conditions [41]. It allows introduction of a single stranded copy of the bacterial transferred DNA (T-DNA) into a host cell and integration of the genomic DNA of interest, resulting in genetic manipulation of the host. Since the development of disarmed tumour-inducing (Ti) plasmid [42][43], Agrobacterium has been used to transform various major crops for genetic modification [44][45][46].

(p9.1) Agrobacterium recognizes wounded host plant cells which produce penolic compounds such as acetosyringone as inducers of vir gene expression [47], and attach to the plant cells to export the T-DNA after virulence (Vir) protein activation. Acetosyringone is now routinely used for improving transformation efficiency. After vir gene activation, a single stranded T-DNA copy (T-strand) is transferred into the plant by type IV secretion system (T4SS) which is related to VirB complex [48]. The VirB complex is composed of at least 12 proteins (VirB1-11 and VirD4) which form a multisubunit envelope-spanning structure [49]. Various
## (s12) New directions of soybean genetic engineering, skills and vectors
(p12.0) To date, the Agrobacterium-and biolistic-mediated transformation methods remain the very successful methods in soybean transformation, whereas other available transformation technologies have not been practical in soybean, which include electroporation-mediated transformation [72], PEG/liposome-mediated transformation [73], silicon carbide-mediated transformation [74], microinjection [75] and chloroplast-mediated transformation [76]. Of these two, Agrobacterium-mediated transformation has become more adapted in public laboratories worldwide. On the other hand, there are unintended insertions such as unwanted antibiotic markers and promoters, which can be inserted during transformation. This problem has raised potential biosafety issues related to environmental concerns and human health risks. To overcome these potential risks, methods of developing marker free transgenic plants have been developed, such as cotransformation [77], transposon-mediated transformation [78] and site-specific recombination [79].

(p12.1) Among the various methods, co-transformation system is one of the most commonly used methods to produce marker free transgenic plants. In co-transformation systems, a marker gene and genes of interest are placed on separate DNA molecules and introduced into plant genomes. Then, the non-selectable genes segregate from the marker gene in the progeny generations. Most strains of A. tumefaciens have the ability to contain more than one T-DNA, and crown gall tumors were often co-transformed with multiple T-DNAs [42]. As a result, there are two possibilities; Multiple T-DNAs were delivered into plant cells either from a mixture of strains ('mixture methods') or from a single strain ('single-strain methods'). Depicker et al. [80] described that a single strain method was higher in efficiency than a mixture method. For a single-strain method of co-transformation, Kamori et al., [77] tested cotransformation method to develop a suitable superbinary vector system. Using the unique plasmids which carried two T-DNA segments marker free rice and tobacco were produced and evaluated. LBA4404, a derivative of an octopine strain, were used for these co-transformation methods and they hypothesized that LBA4404 may be an important factor contributing to the high frequency of unlinked loci.
## (s13) Zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) and transcription activator-like effectors (TALEs)
(p13.0) Although many methods have been developed, soybean is considered a recalcitrant plant to transform compared to Arabidopsis and rice. Since full genome sequencing data has been rapidly updated in soybean, soybean transformation technology is becoming an essential approach for genomic research. For the phenotypic analysis of genes, knock-out or gene-silencing plants are used to study gene function. However in soybean, making bulk knock-out mutants through conventional mutagenesis approaches is not immediately feasible because of low transformation efficiency. Thus, development of innovative gene targeting methods is necessary to make knock-out plants in soybean.

(p13.1) Zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) and meganucleases cut specific DNA target sequences in vivo and thus are powerful tools for genome modification. In particular zinc finger domain, which predominantly recognize nucleotide triplets, have been widely used in this research. Importantly, ZFNs modification has been reported in soybean (Glycine max), maize (Zea mays), tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) and Arabidopsis [87][88][89][90]. Unfortunately, Ramirez et al. [91] found a major disadvantage of ZFNs; they observed that the modular assembly method of engineering zinc-finger arrays has a higher failure rate than previously reported.

(p13.2) To overcome the ZFNs's weakness, in late 2009, a novel DNA binding domain was identified which was a member of the large transcription activator-like (TAL) effector family [92][93]. Transcription activator-like effectors (TALEs) are produced by plant pathogens in the genus Xanthomonas as virulence factors and TAL effector-mediated gene induction leads to plant developmental changes [94][95]. The type III secretion system is used by Xanthomonas to introduce virulence factors into plant cells [96]. Once inside the plant cell, transcription activator-like (TAL) effectors (TALEs) enter the nucleus, bind effector-specific DNA sequences, and transcriptionally activate gene expression [97][98]. For genomic engineering, two methods of TALEs were developed: TALE nucleases (or TALENs) and TALE transcription factors (or TALE-TFs). Both TALENs and TALE-TFs contain as many as 30 tandem repeats of a 33-to 35-amino-acid-sequence motif ( Figure 2). The amino acids in positions 12 and 13 in each 33-to 35-amino-acid-sequence motif have the repeat variable di-residue (RVD). Using this specific ability, two pair (left and right TALENs) of repeats with different RVDs are designed by PCR and bound in the target DNA sequence [92][93]. Fok1 combined with TALE nucleases (or TALENs) make double-strand breaks (DSBs) at specific locations in the genome. These DSBs are repaired by homologous recombination (HR) or non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathways. During DSBs repair, errors in genome via insertion, deletion, or chromosomal rearrangement could be induced by HR and NHEJ ( Figure 2). Unlike TALENs, TALE-TFs require only a single TALE construct for activity induction when com-bined with VP64 activator (derived from the herpex simplex virus activation domain). VP64 binds with RNA polymerase and causes transcriptional activation of the gene of interest [99]. For making transgenic plants, the TALEs technique can be combined with the Agrobacterium-mediated transformation method and it is assumed that gene targeting knock-out will be applied in soybean research. 
