# Methods for Recovering Microorganisms from Solid Surfaces Used in the Food Industry: A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 16604574 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b38572c3722b0feeee55585b587f9d58a026cf78](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b38572c3722b0feeee55585b587f9d58a026cf78)

Fields: Medicine, Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s5) Rinsing and Immersion Methods
(p5.0) Often used to detect and enumerate bacteria present within food processing or packaging environments, the rinsing method exists in multiple variations within different studies. In general, the surface of interest (chips or surface patches) or sampling tool (swab, sponge) is placed in a sterile plastic bag with a filter. The weight of the surface sample is calculated and sterile buffer is added (for example: 1% sodium citrate, distilled water). Then, the plastic bag is shaken according to a specific protocol: more or less vigorously for a short or a long time. This step could be destructive for the surface sample. At the end, the rinsing solution is collected under sterile conditions for microbiological analysis.

(p5.1) Ak et al. tested different soaking methods to recover microorganisms present on plastic and wooden boards [45]. Typically, the tested surface remained around one minute in contact with the solution before the rinse was diluted and spread over non-selective or selective agar media. Obviously, and according to one study about the efficacy of several microbiological methods for turkey carcass enumeration [46], the more microorganisms were heterogeneously spread on a surface, the more effective the rinsing method was. These results were in contrast with those of localized methods such as swabbing and scrubbing. However, this method is less effective than destructive methods, especially for porous, irregular materials, in which microorganisms could penetrate. Moreover, rinsing methods can only be applied to removable pieces of material which have a limited size.
## (s6) Sonication Methods
(p6.0) Sonication is the use of ultrasound to break cellular membranes or molecular aggregates, in order to clean or disinfect the surface by using an ultrasonic-bath. Some medical publications deal with the monitoring of microorganisms on solid surfaces for hygienic and health issues [47,48]. The use of ultrasound (sonication) to dislodge biofilms from the surface of implants that have been removed can increase the detection limit of microbiological studies [49]. Sonication is currently used, coupled to immersion and agitation methods, to recover pathogenic bacteria biofilms from solid surfaces which are often made of metal or stainless steel.
