# Molecular mechanisms of neuropathological changes in Alzheimer's disease: a review

CorpusID: 16783636 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/01faf6e3c71267c0f55f655ed98f631347fccd18](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/01faf6e3c71267c0f55f655ed98f631347fccd18)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Amyloid cascade hypothesis
(p1.0) The human amyloid precursor protein (APP) was first identified in 1987 by several laboratories [20,64,57]. The APP gene was then mapped to chromosome 21 [58]. It has been determined that the APP gene contains 19 exons and spans more than 170 kb [74]. APP has several isoforms generated by alternative splicing of exons 1-13, 13a, and 14-18. The predominant transcripts are APP695 (exons 1-6, 9-18, not 13a), APP751 (exons 1-7, 9-18, not 13a), and APP770 (exons 1-18, not 13a).
## (s2) Amyloid precursor protein trafficking
(p2.0) Amyloid precursor protein is biosynthesized in endoplasmic reticulum and anterogradely transported to the Golgi apparatus and then to the trans-Golgi network in distinct transport vesicles by conventional kinesin. In the trans-Golgi network APP undergoes various posttranslational modifications (phosphorylations, tyrosine sulfations and N-and O-glycosylations). Recently, calsyntenin-1 has been shown to be co-transported with APP along axons [69]. Calsyntenin-1 brain cellular level is reduced in persons with Alzheimer's disease and the extent of calsyntenin-1 reduction correlates with increased Aβ levels. GTPase activity of Rab3, a small G-protein of the Rab family that is involved in the late steps of exocytosis, is required for APP transport vesicles [65].

(p2.1) After insertion of APP at the plasma membrane it undergoes rapid clathrin-mediated endocytosis. C-terminal of APP with four amino acid sequence, YENPY, is the major signal for clathrin-mediated APP endocytosis [50]. Many intracellular adaptors bind to this C-terminal part of APP, for example Fe65, Mint proteins, Dab1 or JIP [11]. Lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP1) and apolipoprotein E receptor 2 are able to interact directly with APP. Depending on the linker protein involved, apolipoprotein E receptor 2 and APP are connected intracellularly via Dab1 (disabled family member), Mint1 or Fe65 adaptors or extracellularly by F-spondin [11]. There are alternative ways of APP after internalization. Amyloid precursor protein can be transported rapidly and directly from the cell surface to lysosomes [36]. Amyloid precursor protein can be also degraded in proteasome [9]. Amyloid precursor protein can be transported from endosomes to Golgi apparatus and/or TGN from where it could be distributed back to plasma membrane.
## (s4) Tau protein (microtubule-associated protein tau, MAPT)
(p4.0) The human gene for tau protein (MAPT gene) is located on chromosome 17 [45]. It contains 15 exons. Exons 2, 3 and 10 are alternatively spliced resulting in six isoforms. There are 79 potential serine and threonine phosphate acceptor residues in the longest iso-form of tau. Tau has more than 30 phosphorylated sites. Normal tau protein stabilizes microtubules in the cytoskeleton of neurons, promote neurite outgrowth, membrane interactions, facilitate enzyme anchoring and facilitate axonal transport of organelles to nerve terminals [27]. The phosphorylation of tau protein regulates microtubule binding and assembly [71]. It has been demonstrated that in solution normal tau associated with the hyperphosphorylated tau protein to form large tangles of filaments [1]. In AD, tau protein is hyperphosphorylated then it accumulates in neurons and forms paired helical filaments. Tau protein loses its capability to bind with microtubules and it leads to neurodegeneration. Astrocytes are essential for the Aβ-induced tau phosphorylation observed in primary neurons [19].
