# Cognitive behavioural therapy for auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia: A review

CorpusID: 17201391 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cc4d1f20814292b0c3a441d6a2442cd6309eca33](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cc4d1f20814292b0c3a441d6a2442cd6309eca33)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s4) Non-RCT clinical studies
(p4.0) We found six non-RCT studies examining the efficacy of CBT for AHs in patients with psychosis. Details on the methodologies and results of the studies are shown in Table 2.

(p4.1) In the latest study, Zanello et al [30] investigated the effectiveness of a group cognitive behavioural therapy for AHs, the Voices Group, in 41 patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorders. The program Voices Group was conducted for seven specific sessions. The results showed a significant reduction in the severity of AHs (P < 0.005) and in total symptoms severity score of BPRS 4.0 [Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale [36] ; without hallucination (P < 0.01)]. This result remained stable after the 6-mo follow-up.

(p4.2) Thomas et al [25] conducted an open label trial on the efficacy of CBT in reducing AHs in 33 subjects with schizophrenia. They also investigated the role of insight, beliefs about the origin of hallucinations, negative symptoms and cognitive disorganization as predictors of the outcome. The study observed post-treatment improvements in hallucination severity when AHs were considered a specific target of psychological treatment.
## (s5) DISCUSSION
(p5.0) The present review describes the efficacy of CBT in patients with AHs. In summary, the two RCTs included showed a greater efficacy of CBT compared to standard care on AHs. However, in Shawyer et al [24] , TORCH participants subjectively reporting greater improvement in command hallucinations compared to Befriending but no significant group differences on primary outcome measure that was level of compliance with harmful command hallucination. In Birchwood et al [21] instead, CTCH participants showed an improvement in this measure.

(p5.1) One possible explanation of the discrepancy between the two RCTs in term of efficacy on reducing level of compliance with harmful command hallucinations is that, within the general framework of CBT, different theoretical approach can play a different role on the efficacy of the intervention. Indeed, the two RCTs were built on different theoretical frameworks. The TORCH framework is based on the "acceptance" of voices by "cultivating the capacity to just notice voices and associated thoughts rather than believing and acting on them". The CTCH focuses on targeting individuals' appraisals, behavior and affect, and not necessarily symptoms. It is based on the nature of the relationship with the personified voice. Therefore, if the voice hearer believes the voice to have malevolent intent, and crucially to have the power to deliver the threat, this can motivate compliance or appeasement behavior. In addition, in Shawyer et al [24] the intervention "befriending" was used as the control condition and it has a similar amount of therapist engagement and expectancy as CBT. This is likely to have resulted in smaller between-group effect sizes respect to Birchwood et al [21] . As regards non RCT-studies, all papers included showed reduction on frequency and severity of AHs and distress related to them. However, the lack of content details and on rationales within non-RCTs studies decreases their comparability and therefore the chance to draw final conclusions.

(p5.2) In terms of predictive variables, negative symptoms appeared to be the strongest predictor of the treatment efficacy. It may be that negative symptoms are a barrier to treatment specific to hallucinations, although it would be important to verify this association in other studies. However, based on this finding, it is possible to propose that negative symptoms interfere with engagement in therapy, in rapport with the therapist, and completion to homework. This might lead to modifications of CBT to treatment for the presence of negative symptoms, such as the use of more behavioral methods.

(p5.3) Some limitations and strenghts should be con- Decrease in the hallucinations item score of Bprs (P < 0.05) Decrease in the total symptoms severity score of BPRS (P < 0.01)
## (s6) 6-mo
(p6.0) Thomas et al [16]  Hutton et al [18]   sidered in our review. Firstly, the role and the possible interference of antipsychotic medications with psychotherapy should be further assessed in the primary studies. Secondly, there is a discrepancy of study design and outcome measures between studies, which did not allow a quantitative analysis of the results. Thirdly, most studies are only preliminary and underpowered. Among strenghts, we have two RCTs with 241 individuals randomized in total and both of them conclude that CBT may be an alternative for individuals with schizophrenia who experience AHs despite antipsychotic treatment.
