# Epistemic cognition in medical education: a literature review

CorpusID: 17200177 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c12ab0241605f2316f1f1874a82805d387a4bad](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c12ab0241605f2316f1f1874a82805d387a4bad)

Fields: Education, Psychology, Medicine

## (s7) Study characteristics
(p7.0) The majority of the studies (20/27) were published since the year 2000. Disciplinary affiliations of the journals in which these studies appear were concentrated within education (mostly medical education) and sociology. Six of the studies were published in family medicine journals, most of which focused on ambiguity and uncertainty. Most studies reported small sample sizes; about half had 40 or fewer participants, and most included qualitative approaches (16 qualitative and 3 mixed methods). The samples of most studies (16) included medical students, but about half also included physicians and residents. The majority of the studies were conducted in the United States (11) and Western Europe (11), but our review represents research conducted in twelve countries (Appendix 1).
## (s10) Changes in epistemic cognition with experience
(p10.0) Several studies indicated that epistemic cognition changes over time and with experience using retrospective reflections of participants or cross-sectional studies. For example, awareness of uncertainty in clinical situations increases over time. 30,31,32 Lingard et al. found that medical students adopted physicians' ways of speaking about uncertainty with greater confidence, 33 and Nevalainen et al. noted that students learn to recognize uncertainty as part of medicine and to accept that their knowledge is incomplete. 20 Reflecting on their experience in medical school, second-year medical students described changes in their epistemic views, Eastwood et al. Epistemic cognition in medical education  especially in certainty of knowledge. In considering humanistic elements of medicine, such as understanding patients' experiences, they began to question black and white conceptions of knowledge and recognize the possibility for error. 25 Furthermore, Gordon et al. conclude that the process of assimilation, in which students reflect upon meanings of experiences and incorporate them into their knowledge structures, is learned over time. 34 Three studies pointed to the transition from medical student to physician as a critical time for assimilation of knowledge and values, gaining awareness of and learning to manage uncertainty, and understanding complexity of patients' stories. 32,34,35 
## (s15) Discussion
(p15.0) Through review of the literature on epistemic cognition in medical education, we found that analytical procedures, sample sizes, disciplines of journals, and geographical locations of studies varied considerably. The sample included a high proportion of qualitative and mixed methods research, which may relate to increased attention to the value of qualitative research as a means to explore complex issues in medical education and practice. 53 This interest may increase the attractiveness of studying epistemology by making that work more publishable.

(p15.1) The studies we reviewed found that although uncertainty in medicine was widely recognized, medical students and physicians had relatively simple epistemic positions. However, epistemic cognition was found to relate to the context of the educational or clinical environment and generally to increase in sophistication over time. Biomedical and biopsychosocial epistemologies were found to correlate with anxiety associated with uncertainty in the clinical environment, and approaches to learning were found to relate to epistemic cognition and context of education. Additionally, reactions to ambiguity and uncertainty were shown to be nuanced among specialties, gender, and years in practice.
## (s19) Epistemological approach to uncertainty and ambiguity
(p19.0) While the connections between epistemic cognition and tolerance of ambiguity and uncertainty are not well understood, it is assumed that epistemic cognition influences such dispositions and behavior. Evans et al. assert that "primary care physicians should give strong consideration to how their epistemological commitment influences their affective and behavioral reactions to uncertainty". 30 Biopsychosocial epistemologies have been found to relate to lower anxiety with uncertainty, but specific elements of epistemic cognition that influence physicians to be more comfortable with uncertainty appear unknown. Also, although popular perception suggests that evidence based medicine mitigates uncertainty, Timmermans et al. suggest that it instead brings the existence of uncertainty to the fore by highlighting limitations of evidence based medicine in clinical practice. 62 Thus an epistemological approach to uncertainty in medicine has great potential to advance physicians' integration of information from various sources, particularly for complex patient cases.
