# Molecular Sciences Effects of Probiotics and Synbiotics on Obesity, Insulin Resistance Syndrome, Type 2 Diabetes and Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease: A Review of Human Clinical Trials

CorpusID: 17334122 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d5fc5cbb8ae8ac986b3ecbba59c669808d98327](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d5fc5cbb8ae8ac986b3ecbba59c669808d98327)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The microbiota (the full collection of microbes that naturally exist within a particular biological niche) has a profound influence on human physiology, affecting metabolism and the immune system and protecting against pathogens while modulating gastrointestinal (GI) development [1][2][3]. affect intestinal ecology is still under debate because there are numerous confounding elements, such as dissimilarities in microbial strains, concentrations of viable cells and product formulations [3,28,29].
## (s3) Probiotics
(p3.0) Lactobacillus salivarius Ls-33 was tested in obese adolescents to investigate its impact on fecal microbiota and anthropometric measures, biomarkers related to inflammation, carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. The ratios of Bacteroides, Prevotellae, and Porphyromonas group bacteria to Firmicutes-belonging bacteria, including Clostridium cluster XIV, Blautia coccoides, Eubacterium rectale group and Roseburia intestinalis, were significantly increased after the administration of L. salivarius Ls-33. However, the overall cell numbers of fecal bacteria, including the groups above as well as Clostridium cluster I and cluster IV, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Enterobacteriaceae, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus group and Bifidobacterium spp., were not significantly altered by intervention. Similarly, the short chain fatty acids (SCFA) remained unaffected [31]. Moreover, Gobel et al., (2012) [32] carried out an intervention to study the Lactobacillus salivarius Ls-33 effects on some inflammation biomarkers and several parameters of metabolic syndrome in adolescents with obesity. However, they did not find changes in those parameters.

(p3.1) The effect of L. gasseri SBT2055 was examined in two studies using a cohort of Japanese adults with large visceral fat areas (VFA). The participants were randomly assigned to three groups receiving increasing colony-forming units (CFUs) of L. gasseri SBT2055 for 12 weeks. The results showed a reduction in body mass index (BMI), waist, abdominal VFA and hip circumferences [33,34]. Additionally, a hypocaloric diet supplemented with a probiotic-enriched cheese containing Lactobacillus plantarum reduced the BMI, the putrescine content and the intestinal lactobacilli in Russian adults with obesity and hypertension. Similarly, there was a reduction in the blood pressure (BP), namely a lower diastolic BP and a tendency toward lower systolic BP at the end of the intervention in the obese hypertensive patients that received the hypocaloric diet supplemented with the probiotic cheese [35].

(p3.2) The administration of L. acidophilus La5, B. lactis Bb12, and L. casei DN001 was evaluated in individuals with high BMI who were randomly assigned to three groups depending on particular intervention diets: one group was established with a regular yogurt with low calorie diet (RLCD), the second one received a probiotic yogurt with low calorie diet (PLCD) and, the third one received probiotic yogurt without low calorie diet (PWLCD) for about two months. A reduction in BMI, fat percentage, and leptin level was observed that was more obvious in groups who received the weight-loss diet including probiotic yogurt. Additionally, a reduction in the serum levels of CRP was more evident in the PWLCD group than in the PLCD and RLCD groups after the 8-week intervention. The expression of the FOXP3, T-bet, GATA3, TNF-α, IFN-γ, TGF-β, and ROR-γt genes in peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMCs) were assessed before and after intervention. In the three groups, ROR-γt expression was reduced and FOXP3 was increased. The expression of the TNF-α, TGF-β, and GATA3 genes did not change. Interestingly, T-bet gene expression was down-regulated in the PLCD and PWLCD groups. However, the IFN-γ expression was down-regulated in all groups. The authors suggested that weight loss diet and probiotics yogurt had effects on gene expression in PBMCs among overweight and obese individuals [36][37][38].

(p3.3) An 8-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-and compliance-controlled parallel study in overweight and obese subjects was conducted to evaluated the effects of one strain of E. faecium and two strains of S. thermophilus [39]. The patients were randomly divided into five groups: (1) a yogurt fermented with two strains of S. thermophilus and two strains of L. acidophilus; (2) a placebo yogurt fermented with delta-acid-lactone; (3) a yogurt fermented with two strains of S. thermophilus and one strain of L. rhamnosus; (4) a yogurt fermented with one strain of E. faecium and two strains of S. thermophiles; and finally (5) two placebo pills daily [39]. After adjustment for small changes in body weight, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) decreased and fibrinogen increased significantly after 8 weeks in the group that received the yogurt fermented with one strain of E. faecium and two strains of S. thermophilus compared to the group consuming chemically fermented yogurt and the placebo pill group. Additionally, after 8 weeks, the systolic BP was significantly more reduced in group 1 and the group that received the yogurt fermented with one strain of E. faecium and two strains of S. thermophilus than in group 3 [39].
## (s7) Synbiotics
(p7.0) Patients with IRS were supplemented with either synbiotic capsules containing seven strains plus fructo-oligosaccharide or placebo capsules to evaluate the insulin resistance and lipid profile. Levels of fasting blood sugar and insulin resistance were improved significantly in the synbiotic group [49].

(p7.1) In summary (Table 2), some probiotic strains have beneficial effects such as decreasing the cell adhesion molecule-1 levels. Moreover, in postmenopausal women, L. plantarum decreased TC, IL-6 γ-GTP, glucose and homocysteine levels after 90 days. Finally, synbiotic mixture improved the insulin resistance and HDL-C and reduced the TAG and TC levels in subjects with IRS. 
## (s9) Probiotics
(p9.0) Hariri et al. (2015) investigated the effect of consuming probiotic soy milk containing L. plantarum A7 or soy milk alone. Each day, the subjects received probiotic soy milk or regular soy milk to supplement their usual diet. Probiotic soy milk significantly decreased the levels of promoter methylation in the proximal and distal MLH1 promoter region compared with the baseline values, while the plasma concentration of 8-hydroxy-20-deoxyguanosine decreased significantly compared with the subjects receiving soy milk. Additionally, a significant increase in superoxide dismutase activity was observed in the probiotic soy milk group compared with the baseline value. However, there were no significant changes from baseline in the promoter methylation of MSH2 within either group. Therefore, L. plantarum A7-inoculated soy milk can have antioxidative properties and decrease the risk of mismatched base pairs in DNA among patients with T2D [50].

(p9.1) L. acidophilus La-5 and B. animalis subsp. lactis BB-12 administration was evaluated on T2D patients. There was a significant difference between groups concerning mean changes in the HbA1c, TC and LDL-C levels [51]. In addition, an increase in HDL-C levels and a decrease in the LDL-C/HDL-C ratio in the intervention group [52].

(p9.2) Previous studies using the same strains [53,54] were carried out in T2D patients. The authors reported significantly decreased fasting blood glucose, TC, LDL-C and hemoglobin A1c levels as well as increased erythrocyte superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase activity and total antioxidant status compared with the control group. They concluded that probiotic yogurt is a promising tool for diabetes management, and it may be a functional food that can exert antidiabetic and antioxidant properties [53,54].

(p9.3) In a double-blind, randomized study, males with T2D, impaired or normal glucose tolerance were enrolled and placed on a 4-week treatment course with either L. acidophilus NCFM or a placebo to investigate the effects of oral supplementation with the probiotic on insulin sensitivity and the inflammatory response [55]. After the treatment, the probiotic strain was detected in 75% of the fecal samples. Insulin sensitivity was preserved only among volunteers in the L. acidophilus NCFM group. Finally, baseline inflammatory markers and the systemic inflammatory response were unaffected by the L. acidophilus NCFM supplementation [55].
## (s10) Synbiotics
(p10.0) The synbiotic supplementation was used to determine the effects on metabolic profiles, CRP and oxidative stress in T2D patients. The multispecies probiotic supplement consisted of 7 viable and freeze-dried strains and fructo-oligosaccharides. A significant increase in HOMA-IR in both groups was detected. However, the increase in the placebo group was significantly higher than that in the probiotic group. The mean changes in serum CRP were significantly lower in the experimental group. Additionally, probiotic supplementation led to a significant increase in the plasma total glutathione levels compared to the placebo [56].

(p10.1) A clinical trials were performed in T2D patients to examined the effects of synbiotic bread contained L. sporogenes and inulin. Consumption of the synbiotic bread resulted in a significant reduction in the serum insulin levels, HOMA-IR, and homeostatic model assessment-β-cell function, serum lipid profile (TAG, TC/HDL-C) and a significant increase in the serum HDL-C levels compared to the control bread [57,58].

(p10.2) Finally, a synbiotic shake containing L. acidophilus, B. bifidum and fructo-oligosaccharides was investigated on glycemic and cholesterol levels in elderly people with T2D. The TC, TAG, HDL-C and blood sugar levels were evaluated. The synbiotic group did not experience any reduction in total cholesterol and TAG levels, but had a significant increase in HDL-C and a significant reduction in fasting glycemia [59].

(p10.3) In summary ( Table 3), some of the effects of probiotics in subjects with T2D included a lower fasting blood glucose level, improved insulin sensitivity and an increased antioxidant status. Some synbiotics increased the total glutathione levels, HDL-C and reduced the fasting glycemia levels and CRP. Moreover, an improved serum lipid profile was observed in patients with T2D after the consumption of synbiotics. L. sporogenes, 1ˆ10 8 CFU and 0.07 g inulin per 1 g 8 wk
## (s12) Probiotics
(p12.0) The effects of L. bulgaris and S. thermophilus were measured on different parameters of liver function and cardiovascular risk factors. This treatment revealed a decrease in alanine amino transferase (ALT), aspartate amino transferase (ASP) and γ-GTP levels as indicators of improving liver function [60].

(p12.1) On the other hand, in obese children with NAFLD treated with L. rhamnosus strain GG, presented a significant decrease in the titer of anti-peptidoglycan-polysaccharide antibodies, which are suitable as an indirect indicator of SIBO. Moreover, in this randomized clinical trial, a restoration of liver function was also observed in the probiotic group through a decrease in ALT [61].

(p12.2) A double-blind, randomized, controlled clinical trial was conducted using a probiotic yogurt with L. acidophilus La5 and B. lactis Bb12 for 8 weeks on patients with NAFLD. L. acidophilus La5 and B. lactis Bb12 consumption resulted in a reduction in the serum levels of ALT, ASP, TC, and LDL-C compared with the control group [62].
## (s13) Synbiotics
(p13.0) The translocation of products derived from bacteria such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS), ethanol and SCFA leads to their arrival to the liver from the intestinal lumen. Additionally, SCFAs stimulated the synthesis and storage of hepatic triacylglycerols. This process can saturate the detoxification mechanisms of the liver, resulting in an accumulation of intrahepatic triacylglycerol (IHTG) content, thus increasing the fatty liver severity. Recently, a randomized study on the use of a synbiotic that contains five probiotics (L. plantarum, L. delbrueckii spp. bulgaricus, L. acidophilus, L. rhamnosus, B. bifidum and inulin) over 6 months in adults with NASH produced a significant decrease in IHTG [67].
