# An overview of treatment options for urinary stones

CorpusID: 17467866 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/58a30a6aeb4d3c15652f215a7030f74d9b2c3d5a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/58a30a6aeb4d3c15652f215a7030f74d9b2c3d5a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Shafi H, et al.
(p0.0) ESWL is comprised of shattering forces produced by an external power source called lithotriptor, which produces high intensity and low frequency acoustic waves. All lithotripsy machines consist of 4 components: an energy source, a focusing system, a localization unit, and a coupling machine. The shock waves are concentrated directly onto renal or ureteral stone. The mechanism of fragmentation relies on cavitation, shear, and spalling (15). Cavitation is considered to be the most important force responsible for fragmentation of the stones into smaller pieces which can then be easily passed through the ureters (15). Also, for having a maximum efficacy on the outcome of the ESWL, several technical factors need to be taken into account, such as the energy level, type, size and location of the stone, presence of UTI, frequency of the pulses, endourologic skills and previous experience with ESWL (22)(23).

(p0.1) According to AUA Ureteral Stone Clinical Guidelines (24), ESWL is considered as the first line treatment modality for calculi less than 1 cm. The success rate of ESWL decreases when stone is located in the lower pole (25). Lingeman et al. reported stone-free rates of approximately 30% for patients with lower pole calculi of 11-20 mm and 20% for patients with calculi >20 mm (25).

(p0.2) Other factors related to renal anatomy such as hydronephrosis, stenosis of the ureteropelvic junction, horseshoe kidney and patient-related factors such as obesity, skin to stone distance and chronic renal disease, can also influence the result of ESWL (26)(27)(28).
## (s3) The current indications for open surgery according to
(p3.0) European Association of Urology (EAU) (34) are as follows: complex stone burden, unsuccessful minimally invasive procedures such as ESWL or PCNL, comorbid medical diseases, morbid obesity, anatomical abnormalities (such as infundibular stenosis, PUJ obstruction, and stricture), skeletal deformity and nonfunctional kidney (nephrectomy) (42)(43)(44).

(p3.1) Therefore, while current emphasis is placed on minimally invasive stone treatments, open stone surgery maintains a small but significant role in the treatment of patients with renal and ureteral calculi.
## (s4) Medical therapy
(p4.0) Medical expulsive therapy (MET) is a watchful waiting approach for treating urethral calculi and can be used successfully for a considerable number of patients (45)(46). About 70% of ureteric stones are found in the lower third of the ureter at the time of presentation (4)(5). Stones located in the distal portion of the ureter will have a successful spontaneous stone passage in about 50% of cases (45). The stone expulsion time depends on many factors consisting of stone size, location, and associated obstruction (47)(48)(49). Nevertheless, a watchful approach can result in a number of complications such as urinary tract infections, hydronephrosis, and colic events (50).
