# Herbal Remedies for Coccidiosis Control: A Review of Plants, Compounds, and Anticoccidial Actions

CorpusID: 18320800 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6ad60f6007c46884e12f80a44aaccb3f4c56fc09](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6ad60f6007c46884e12f80a44aaccb3f4c56fc09)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Each year, over 50 billion chickens are raised as a source of meat, accounting for over one-third of protein food for humans [1]. However, poultry production is often confronted by avian coccidiosis, flu, and other infectious diseases [1]. Avian coccidiosis is characterized as an infectious protozoan disease caused by gut parasites of the genus Eimeria (Coccidia subclass) [2]. So far, nine Eimeria species, E. acervulina, E. brunetti, E. maxima, E. necatrix, E. praecox, E. mitis, E. tenella, E. mivati, and E. hagani, have been identified from chickens [3]. These parasites can infect and multiply within the mucosal epithelia in different parts of bird guts via oral route. As a result, they cause gut damage (i.e., inflammation, hemorrhage, diarrhea, etc.), morbidity, and mortality in poultry [4]. This disease annually causes a global loss of over 2.4 billion US dollars in the poultry industry, including poor growth performance, replacement of chicks, and medication [1].
## (s3) Plants and Compounds for Avian Coccidiosis
(p3.0) Over 300,000 species of flowering plants have been recorded worldwide. So far, less than 1% of them have been explored for use against protozoan diseases [18]. In this section, a total of 68 plants and phytocompounds, which were scientifically tested for suppression of Eimeria species, are described and discussed [1,9,11,12]. Table 1 
## (s6) Condensed Tannins and Pine
(p6.0) Bark. The extract from the bark of the pine tree (Pinus radiata), which is rich in condensed tannins, was reported to inhibit the life cycle of Coccidia as evidenced by decreased sporulation of the oocysts of E. tenella, E. maxima, and E. acervulina [25]. The mode of action of condensed tannins was suspected to be penetration of the wall of the oocyst and damage to the cytoplasm since the tannins could inactivate endogenous enzymes responsible for the sporulation process. This was further supported by the appearance of abnormal sporocysts in oocysts [25].
## (s7) Garlic (Allium sativum) and
(p7.0) Allicin. Garlic and its sulfur compounds, allicin, alliin, ajoene, diallyl sulfide, dithiin, and allylcysteine, are reported to have broad antimicrobial activities which can eliminate negative factors of microbial infections. An in vitro study has shown that allicin inhibits sporulation of E. tenella effectively [26][27][28]. The anticoccidial mechanism of garlic and its sulfur compounds remains elusive.
## (s8) Selenium, Phenolics, and Green Tea (Camellia sinensis).
(p8.0) Green tea extracts have been shown to significantly inhibit the sporulation process of coccidian oocysts [29,30]. Accordingly, the selenium and polyphenolic compounds in green tea are thought to be active compounds to inactivate the enzymes responsible for coccidian sporulation [29,30].
## (s9) N-3 Fatty Acids, Flavonoids, Vernoside, and Their Plant
(p9.0) Sources. Upon the invasion of Eimeria sporozoites into the intestinal epithelium, reactive nitrogen species (RNS) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) are often produced by host cells, leading to the death of sporulating oocysts [21]. Similarly, another study demonstrated that the extracts from Berberis lyceum, in which berberine was enriched, inhibited the sporozoites of E. tenella in chickens via induction of oxidative stress. Other studies indicated that extracts from Linum usitatissimum [21], Ageratum conyzoides [31], and Vernonia amygdalina [32] controlled coccidian infection via induction of oxidative stress. Moreover, N-3 fatty acids, flavonoids, and vernoside were identified as active compounds present in L. usitatissimum, A. conyzoides, and V. amygdalina, respectively. These compounds were shown to elicit oxidative stress ( Table 2). Oxidative stress is known to cause imbalance of oxidant or antioxidant species in the host and is often observed in a wide range of microbial and parasitic infections including coccidiosis [19]. Moreover, these natural extracts not only enhanced chicken growth but also had no noticeable toxicity.
## (s11) Essential Oils and Their Plant
(p11.0) Sources. Essential oils derived from plants showed inhibition of Eimeria species at different developmental stages (Figure 1). Essential oils are an important natural product resource, which are rich in many phytocompounds. Both in vitro and in vivo studies reported that essential oils can be used as feed additives in chickens to control coccidiosis [1,11,12].         Increasing digestion and gut microbiota [93][94][95] ?: unknown.

(p11.1) Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 13 originally identified as a novel anticoccidial compound as indicated by the lesion index, the oocyst index, and the anticoccidial index [37]. However, its anticoccidial activity remains unknown.
## (s12) Proanthocyanidin and Grape Seed.
(p12.0) Proanthocyanidin is a naturally occurring polyphenolic antioxidant widely distributed in grape seed and other sources. Grape seed proanthocyanidin extract was shown to reduce E. tenella infection as shown by gut pathology, body weight, and mortality [38]. Accordingly, this extract decreased nitric oxide but increased superoxide dismutases in the plasma of chickens [38]. These data suggest that proanthocyanidin from grape seed diminishes coccidiosis via downregulation of oxidative stress.
## (s13) Plants and Compounds That Modulate Host Immunity against Eimeria.
(p13.0) From an evolutionary point of view, birds have a complete immune system consisting of innate and adaptive immune responses [96]. Both immune responses are responsible for coccidial clearance and vaccine immunization [12,97]. Medicinal plants often have immunomodulatory compounds which boost antimicrobial immune responses to uphold homeostasis of poultry health [91,98]. Therefore, immunoregulatory plant extracts and compounds could be utilized as an alternative method to reinforce immune response against avian coccidiosis. Immunoregulatory phytochemicals for avian coccidiosis are described in Table 3 and Figure 2.
## (s14) Arabinoxylans, Wheat (Triticum aestivum), and Sugar Cane (Saccharum officinarum). Akhtar and colleagues
(p14.0) showed that arabinoxylan, a bioactive compound from wheat bran, improved coccidiosis in chickens as indicated by body weight, oocyst count, and gut lesions [69]. In contrast, Awais and Akhtar reported that different extracts of sugar cane juice and bagasse protected against coccidiosis in chickens as shown by body weight gain, oocyst shedding, lesion score, and anticoccidial indices [99]. The data from both studies revealed that wheat bran arabinoxylan and sugar cane conferred host protection against Eimeria infection via natural and adaptive immune response. Cell-mediated immunity seemed to be a key factor in response to coccidiosis in chickens when compared to humoral immunity [69,99].
## (s15) Polysaccharides from Astragalus membranaceus Radix,
(p15.0) Carthamus tinctorius, Lentinus edodes, and Tremella fuciformis. Guo and colleagues reported that the polysaccharides derived from the herb A. membranaceus Radix and the mushrooms L. edodes and T. fuciformis effectively controlled E. tenella infection in chickens [80]. Concurrent with the anticoccidial protection, the polysaccharides could enhance anticoccidial antibodies and antigen-specific cell proliferation in splenocytes via cellular and humoral immunity to E. tenella in chickens [80]. Their mechanism appeared to stimulate cell proliferation of the lymphocytes via regulation of DNA polymerase activity.
## (s18) Oriental Plum (Prunus salicina) and Phenolics.
(p18.0) One report showed that dietary supplementation of plum fruit powder, rich in phenolic compounds, added to chicken feed significantly diminished E. acervulina infection in chickens as demonstrated by increased body weight gain and reduced fecal oocyst shedding [81]. Accordingly, plum fruit powder greatly augmented the transcription of IFN-and IL-15 and splenocyte proliferation, indicating that plum fruit can boost immune response to coccidiosis.
## (s19) Mushroom (Fomitella fraxinea) and Lectin.
(p19.0) One study showed that the lectin derived from a mushroom, F. fraxinea, protected chickens from Eimeria challenge via enhancement of both cellular and humoral immune responses [74]. This work also suggested that this mushroom could enhance both immune responses to Eimeria species in chickens. This study implies that immunoregulatory botanicals such as mushroom can improve poultry growth and development via immune protection from infectious pathogens and toxins. Moreover, botanicals, containing micro-and macronutrients, can increase growth performance in poultry.
## (s20) Propyl Thiosulfinate and Propyl Thiosulfinate Oxide.
(p20.0) One study showed that garlic compounds, propyl thiosulfinate (PTS) and propyl thiosulfinate oxide (PTSO), could alter the expression levels of 1,227 transcripts related to intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL) in chickens. PTSO/PTS was shown to activate transcription factor, NF-B, which plays a key role in regulating the immune response upon infection. Therefore, it seems that a combination of PTSO and PTS rendered chickens more resistant to experimental E. acervulina infection and augmented adaptive immunity, including a higher antibody response and greater splenocyte proliferation, compared with control chickens [75]. Another in vitro study showed that PTS could stimulate splenocyte proliferation and directly kill the sporozoites, pointing to the same conclusion [75].
## (s21) Tannins and Chicoric Acid from Emblica officinalis
(p21.0) and Echinacea purpurea. Tannins and chicoric acid, isolated from E. officinalis [77] and E. purpurea [102], respectively, were reported to effectively elicit humoral immune response against coccidial infection in chickens. However, the mechanism by which both compounds boost anticoccidial immunity is not clear.
## (s24) Polyacetylenes and Bidens pilosa. As described in
(p24.0) Compared to anticoccidial drugs, B. pilosa was shown to produce little or no drug resistance in Eimeria [9]. Botanicals developed low resistance in Eimeria probably because different compounds target multiple pathways related to drug resistance [9,12].

(p24.1) It should be noted that the plant-and phytochemicalbased remedies can be used per se or in combination with other anticoccidial agents. This idea was further confirmed by one publication indicating that Echinacea, an immunotherapeutic herbal extract, was used to boost the immunization efficacy in chickens in combination with anticoccidial vaccines [78].
