# HIV Among Indigenous peoples: A Review of the Literature on HIV-Related Behaviour Since the Beginning of the Epidemic Charlotte Reading

CorpusID: 18164826 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c53da27451f3d68aa0229e105d68819e21cf4838](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c53da27451f3d68aa0229e105d68819e21cf4838)

Fields: Sociology, Political Science, Medicine

## (s3) Search Strategy and Information Sources
(p3.0) We followed by the 'Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses' (PRISMA) guidelines [25] in the preparation of this literature review. In December 2013, author JN conducted searches in Medline, Embase and Web of Science. Search terms included HIV and AIDS as well as the four countries of focus: Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the United States. We examined the methods sections of systematic reviews on Indigenous peoples to be as inclusive as possible with the search terms. The search terms for Indigenous peoples included: ((American Native Continental Ancestry Group) OR (Oceanic Ancestry Group) OR (Maori) OR (Native Americ*) OR (Indigeno*) OR (First Nation*) OR (aborigin*) OR (torres strait*) OR (inuit) OR (native hawai*) OR (Alaska* native*) OR (metis)).
## (s5) Data Extraction and Synthesis
(p5.0) Using the final list, information was extracted by author TG from each study on country of focus, population group(s), year of publication, methods employed, sample size, and key findings. A tailored data extraction form was used. Each full article was read by multiple authors. We reviewed various HIV and behavioral frameworks to determine which suited the study best based on what themes were emerging while being guided by the social determinants documentation. Meade and Sikkema's theoretical model of HIV risk behavior among adults with mental illness captured a number of the key themes, behaviors and determinants found through our synthesis [26]. Using Karina Walters' term of ''indigenization'' [27], we ''indigenized'' Meade and Sikkehma's framework to reflect our findings through an iterative process.
## (s6) Results
(p6.0) Through the search strategy, 1200 articles were identified. After a series of reviews of titles, abstracts and full texts, 107 studies were included in this review ( Fig. 1) which are all identified in Table 2.     (Fig. 2). The review identified articles concerning HIV among Indigenous peoples dating back more than 20 years (Table 3). For instance, we discovered a 1990 study, which concluded that American Indians in the Pacific Northwest of the USA were considered more 'vulnerable' to HIV than the general population [28]. The first article on rates of HIV infection in Australia's Aboriginal and Torres strait islander population was published in 1993 [29]. In general, the number of relevant articles has been increasing over time with a peak in the 2005-2009 period. Overall, 77 (72 %) of the articles used quantitative methods including cross-sectional studies, analysis of medical records, use of surveillance data and retrospective analyses; 27 (25 %) used qualitative methods including focus group and face to face interviews; and 4 (4 %) used both qualitative and quantitative methods. Sample sizes ranged widely in both types of studies. Of the 26 studies examining PLWH, 10 (38 %) used qualitative methods compared to only one of 21 (5 %) studies focused on PWID (Table 4). Australian studies were the most likely to use qualitative methods.
## (s8) Determinants and Behaviors
(p8.0) Based on review of the 107 articles, determinants of HIV risk were organized into the following themes based on an adaptation of Meade and Sikkema's HIV risk model [26] and using the social determinants framework as guidance: substance use, childhood abuse, domestic violence, social relationships, and mistrust of health services (Fig. 3). These are all underpinned by a history of colonization.
## (s9) Childhood Abuse
(p9.0) Childhood abuse-both sexual and emotional-was highlighted in a number of articles as a contributor to future behavior that increased exposure to HIV infection. Two Canadian qualitative studies with Indigenous women found that repeated childhood abuse was experienced by the majority of participants [65,66], beginning as early as 4 years of age and often leading to alcohol and drug abuse. Similarly, a US study found that Indigenous women who were physically and emotionally abused as children had 5.14 times greater odds of having a STI in their lifetime than did women who experienced only marginal or no physical-emotional abuse [67]. A Vancouver-based study compared Indigenous and non-Indigenous MSM and found that Indigenous respondents were more likely to report sexual abuse during childhood [68].

(p9.1) Foster care among Indigenous youth has been linked to poor emotional health, increased drug use and greater involvement in sex work [69]. Indigenous youth are also more likely than non-Indigenous youth to experience physical and emotional trauma (often intergenerational), which increases their exposure to sexual exploitation and drug use. Similarly, family instability and sexual abuse at a young age have been associated with HIV positive status among Indigenous youth [30,70,71]. More broadly, early sexual initiation, high-risk partnership patterns and involvement in sex work increase Indigenous youth's HIV risk [71,72]. A qualitative study from Canada revealed that the ''legacies of residential schools… [and] the disruption of traditional culture'' shaped how Indigenous individuals experienced their HIV diagnosis [73].
## (s10) Domestic Violence
(p10.0) One Canadian study found that inconsistent condom use by young women was predicted by having experienced recent sexual abuse [74]. A US study revealed that almost twothirds of the participating Indigenous women had experienced coercive sexual contact [75]. These women attributed some of the challenges they faced to the breakdown of Indigenous support structures and traditional teachings.

(p10.1) Domestic violence was not only found among Indigenous women. Research from Alberta, Canada revealed that HIV-positive Indigenous gay and bisexual men were 2.48 times more likely to report intimate partner violence than white counterparts [76].
## (s11) Social Relationships
(p11.0) Eleven articles focused specifically on Indigenous MSM and a number of these identified social disadvantage, including high rates of unemployment, low educational achievement, poor access to health resources, especially condoms, and poor access to health services as significant barriers to HIV prevention [68,[77][78][79]. Two Australian studies revealed that Indigenous respondents were significantly more likely to have engaged in unprotected anal intercourse with casual partners than non-Indigenous MSM (23.5 vs. 20.7 %; p = 0.01) [78,80]. A multi-centre US study among urban Indigenous MSM found a high rate of HIV prevalence (34 %) among those who only had sex with men [81].

(p11.1) Two articles included specific reference to two-spirit individuals [38,77]; two-spirit is a concept of Indigenous gender identity-and not specifically of sexual orientation-whereby individuals have a blend of both male and  [26]) Solid lines represent determinants that impact HIV behavior. Note: Dashed lines represent hypothesized relationships between determinants female spirits. Victimization and discrimination were identified as putting Indigenous MSM or two-spirit men at higher risk of HIV infection [38]. Once again, mistrust of health service providers was identified as a significant barrier to HIV prevention, testing and treatment [77].
## (s12) Substance Use
(p12.0) The majority of articles focusing on PWID were from Alaska and Canada, with British Columbia featuring prominently. In fact, only one study on Indigenous PWID originated in Australia. However, across the four countries, injecting drug use was commonly reported as a form of pain relief or alleviation of past trauma and abuse and was often associated with sex work. [45,72,82].
## (s13) Mistrust of Health System
(p13.0) Mistrust of health services was common [48] with one article from 2007 reporting that a third of respondents believed that 'white' people intentionally spread HIV among native peoples [86]. Two papers discussed barriers to testing for Indigenous peoples, with stigma and lack of confidentiality being identified as significant impediments [35,87]. The consequent late testing for HIV was highlighted as a contributing factor to poor health outcomes for Indigenous peoples [88].

(p13.1) In two of the studies focused particularly among women, women expressed distrust of the health system as well as fear of judgment and discrimination by health providers [65,89]. One study suggested that this mistrust cascaded into misperceptions of personal risk: one survey on HIV risk behavior and perceptions among Native American women in the US revealed that those who were classified as higher risk actually felt less vulnerable to HIV and were less ready to change their behaviors compared with those classified as lower-risk [90].

(p13.2) Likewise, the denial of HIV within Indigenous communities was cited as a critical determinant of risk for Indigenous youth. As a result, although Indigenous youth experience greater actual risk of contracting HIV, awareness and perception of that risk are generally low [51,56,91,92]. Moreover, Indigenous youth and their parents report low levels of knowledge about HIV, which often leads to low perceived vulnerability, diminished prevention and reduced testing [51,93].

(p13.3) Several articles highlighted the need for greater cultural sensitivity and competencies among health staff, care providers and health programs serving Indigenous communities [37,49,94,95]. Discrimination and judgmental behavior on the part of health care providers were frequently reported as a deterrent to seeking medical treatment [96][97][98].

(p13.4) While the review did not identify differences between Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples' physiological responses to treatment, low income, high rates of unemployment, younger age, being female and having experienced incarceration or homelessness were found to contribute to poor treatment outcomes among Indigenous peoples [34,97,99,100]. The two most significant factors affecting treatment adherence and outcomes among Indigenous peoples were ongoing substance abuse and the timing of treatment uptake [33,41,50,101].
## (s14) Discussion
(p14.0) This review of literature reveals a long history of studies that identify the threat of HIV infection among Indigenous peoples in Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the United States. More than 100 articles on HIV-related behaviors and determinants have been published since 1990, highlighting various Indigenous groups including MSM, PWID and youth that demonstrate the impact of areas such as childhood abuse, domestic violence and substance use on HIV behavior.

(p14.1) A quarter of studies used qualitative methods and most of those examined perceptions and social aspects of HIV among Indigenous peoples through face to face interviews. These studies were able to extract some of the particular challenges that Indigenous peoples face in addressing HIV. The quantitative studies published in the early years of the epidemic often relied on surveillance data but more recent studies have utilized specific studies designed for Indigenous populations.

(p14.2) Factors identified as contributing to HIV risk include social disadvantage, poor access to health services, high rates of injecting drug use and STIs, as well as exposure to stigma and discrimination. It is worth noting that there was little differentiation between remote and urban-dwelling Indigenous peoples in both Australia and Canada, with people in both locations being exposed to similar levels of disadvantage. Many of the determinants associated with HIV risk also contribute to mistrust of health services, which in turn contributes to late testing for HIV among Indigenous peoples and subsequent poor health outcomes.

(p14.3) The review revealed a number of themes associated with HIV risk for particular population groups. For instance, childhood sexual abuse was experienced by substantial numbers of HIV-positive Indigenous women and MSM, who also experience considerable stigma and poor access to services. A number of studies also identified injecting drug use as a significant determinant of HIV risk among Indigenous populations.

(p14.4) Although we included articles that explicitly focused on Indigenous peoples, we acknowledge that Indigenous peoples do not always self-identify as 'Indigenous' so that under-reporting or mis-reporting of indigeneity can occur. Some articles might have been missed due to our inclusion criteria, which required some substantial focus on Indigenous peoples and the emphasis on behavior did exclude articles that focused only on epidemiology. We also acknowledge that some of the early HIV publications were in grey literature and therefore were beyond the scope of this review. Overall however, other reviews have acknowledged substantial data gaps with regard to Indigenous health [102].
