# The Poverty Impacts of Climate Change A Review of the Evidence The World Bank Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Network Poverty Reduction and Equity Unit WPS5622

CorpusID: 18396504 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b501171f2c30e9127cc907df05f4f31ba93d22b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b501171f2c30e9127cc907df05f4f31ba93d22b)

Fields: Economics, Environmental Science

## (s1) INTRODUCTION
(p1.0) The continued decline in global poverty during the last 100 years is a remarkable achievement, a decline that has been even more significant in the last three decades. In 1981, the percentage of the world population living below $1.25 a day was 52 percent. By 2005, that rate had more than halved to 25 percent (Chen and Ravallion, 2010). This trend is expected to continue especially if developing countries manage to sustain the rapid per capita income growth rates they achieved over the last decade. If developing countries do maintain their income growth rates, poverty headcounts at the $1 or $2 per day could turn out to be almost obsolete as measures of well-being over the next 50 to 100 years.
## (s29) INTRODUCTION
(p29.0) The continued decline in global poverty during the last 100 years is a remarkable achievement, a decline that has been even more significant in the last three decades. In 1981, the percentage of the world population living below $1.25 a day was 52 percent. By 2005, that rate had more than halved to 25 percent (Chen and Ravallion, 2010). This trend is expected to continue especially if developing countries manage to sustain the rapid per capita income growth rates they achieved over the last decade. If developing countries do maintain their income growth rates, poverty headcounts at the $1 or $2 per day could turn out to be almost obsolete as measures of well-being over the next 50 to 100 years.
