# Pulmonary embolism in the elderly: a review on clinical, instrumental and laboratory presentation

CorpusID: 187052 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/305f824d70e593841e3d4da4a67f216806f8ee8a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/305f824d70e593841e3d4da4a67f216806f8ee8a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Pre-test clinical probability and D-Dimer
(p2.0) Two studies have analyzed the fi eld of applicability of PTP combined with D-Dimer for ruling out PE in the elderly Söhne et al 2005). These studies have reported that the percentage of high PTP increases in elderly compared to younger patients, whereas the percentage of low PTP decreases.
## (s3) Pulmonary embolism in the elderly
(p3.0) One study  has shown that 86% of patients with PE had D-Dimer Ͼ500 µg/L measured with latex agglutination. In another study D-Dimer, measured by immunoturbidimetric method, was over the cut-off value in 98.5% of patients (Söhne et al 2005). Four studies demonstrated that all patients (100%) had D-Dimer values higher than cut-off (Tardy et al 1998;Barro et al 1999;Ceccarelli et al 2003).
## (s4) Instrumental examinations for confi rming PE
(p4.0) Two studies have analyzed the effect of age on the diagnostic performance of helical angio-CT to diagnose PE. Either by single detector or multidetector helical pulmonary angio-CT, the sensitivity, specifi city, positive, and negative predictive values are not infl uenced by age, making applicable and safe the diagnostic strategies based on these investigations Stein et al 2007).

(p4.1) In selected elderly patients without previous cardiopulmonary diseases ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) lung scan has similar applicability in the elderly compared with younger patients (Stein et al 1996). In unselected patients, rate of non diagnostic lung scan is higher in elderly patients (Calvo-Romero et al 2005). The diagnostic yield of lung scan decreases from 68% in patients under 40 years to 42% in the patients aged 80 years and older (Righini et al 2000).
