# A review of ropinirole prolonged release in Parkinson's disease

CorpusID: 18061016 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2c0a647d9ada830dacba6f2395a0c63080fb249d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2c0a647d9ada830dacba6f2395a0c63080fb249d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Treatment of advanced Parkinson's disease
(p3.0) There are multiple treatment options available for advanced PD patients that develop levodopa-induced motor fl uctuations and dyskinesia. 7,8 One approach is to adjust the dosage or dosing frequency of levodopa or to switch to an extended release formulation of levodopa. However, several studies have demonstrated that the extended release formulation of levodopa does not reduce "off" time compared to the immediate release formulation. 7 Another approach is to add an adjunctive therapy to levodopa such as amantadine, an MAO-B inhibitor, a COMT inhibitor, and/or a dopamine agonist.

(p3.1) Amantadine has been shown to be effective in reducing dyskinesia. 7 In a double-blind study, amantadine (100 mg twice daily) was shown to reduce dyskinesia by 24%. 20 Although not available in the US, an intravenous formulation of amantadine (amantadine sulfate) has been shown to reduce dyskinesia by up to 50% after an infusion of 200 mg compared to placebo. 21 The MAO-B inhibitors, selegiline, orally disintegrating selegiline and rasagiline are approved as adjunct treatments to levodopa. Selegiline is generally given twice daily with 5 mg taken in the morning and afternoon. There are insuffi cient data on the effects of selegiline on motor complications and it has been concluded that it may possibly reduce motor fl uctuations. 7 Orally disintegrating selegiline is a newer formulation of selegiline which has fewer amphetamine metabolites and eliminates the need for swallowing pills. It is approved for the treatment of patients with levodopa-induced wearing off and has been shown to reduce "off" time by 2.2 hours per day compared to 0.6 hours with placebo. 22 Orally disintegrating selegiline is initiated at 1.25 mg once daily and increased after 6 weeks if needed to 2.5 mg once daily. The American Academy of Neurology (AAN) evidence-based review of treatment options for motor fl uctuations concluded that rasagiline was effective in reducing "off" time and should be offered as a treatment option. Reductions in daily "off" time ranged between 0.5 and 1.0 hours per day depending on the dose of rasagiline. 7 In advanced PD, rasagiline is initiated at 0.5 mg once daily and increased to 1.0 mg once daily as needed.

(p3.2) COMT inhibitors are another adjunctive option for the treatment of advanced PD. The enzyme COMT breaks down levodopa; therefore, the addition of a COMT inhibitor allows more levodopa to reach the brain. Entacapone and tolcapone are the COMT inhibitors available for the treatment of advanced PD and they are used only in conjunction with levodopa. The AAN evidence-based guidelines concluded that entacapone is effective in reducing "off" time an average of 0.7 to 1.2 hours per day and should be offered to patients with motor fl uctuations. 7 Entacapone is available in 200 mg tablets. One tablet is given with each dose of levodopa, not to exceed a total daily dose of 1600 mg of entacapone. Entacapone is also available in a triple combination tablet containing carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone. There are six strengths of the triple combination available in which each tablet contains 200 mg of entacapone and either 50, 75, 100, 125, 150 or 200 mg of levodopa and carbidopa equivalent to one quarter of the levodopa dose. Tolcapone has been determined to be probably effective in the treatment of "off" time with an average daily reduction in "off" time of 0.9 to 1.8 hours. 7 It was also noted that tolcapone should be used with caution due to potential hepatotoxicity and requires regular safety monitoring. Tolcapone is initiated at 100 mg three times daily and increased to 200 mg three times daily if necessary. If there is no reduction in "off" time after 3 weeks of tolcapone therapy it should be discontinued.

(p3.3) The dopamine agonists pramipexole and ropinirole have been determined to probably be effective in reducing "off" time and should be considered as a treatment option. 7 Pramipexole has been shown to reduce "off" time by an average of 12% to 24% and ropinirole by an average of 7% to 19%. Both medications are generally given three times daily for advanced PD with a maximum daily dose of 4.5 mg of pramipexole and 24 mg of ropinirole. The rotigotine patch is not approved for advanced PD in the US; however, outside of the US it is approved at dosages up 16 mg/24 hours. Rotigotine 8 mg/24 hours was shown to reduce "off" time by 1.8 hours a day and the 12 mg/24 hour dose by 1.2 hours a day. 23 Cabergoline, a once-daily, ergot dopamine agonist, has been shown to reduce "off" time by 18%. 7 Apomorphine is the only injectable medication approved for the treatment of PD. It is a fast-acting, short-duration treatment used for advanced PD as a rescue therapy for patients with severe "off " periods and has been shown to reduce daily "off" time by an average of 2 hours. 24 A common problem in early and advanced PD is patient medication compliance. In early disease, patients generally initially receive benefi t from their treatment regimen in spite of late or missed doses of medication. As the disease progresses, multiple medications are often prescribed with more complicated dosing schedules and in order to maintain benefi t and avoid motor complications, adherence to the prescribed dosing schedule becomes an important issue. In a 4-week study of medication compliance in PD patients with a dosing schedule requiring the intake of medication at least three times daily, only 10% of the patients had complete compliance. Furthermore, it was reported that 51% of the patients missed at least one dose a week, 21% missed at least three doses per week and 82% of patients did not take their medication on time. 25 The most common reasons for non-compliance were forgetting to take their medication or not having access to their medication at the scheduled dosing time. Medication compliance was also measured in a larger multicenter study of 112 PD patients using electronic monitoring bottles. 26 The median overall compliance for taking the amount of medication prescribed was 97.7%, compliance for taking the medication on the right day was 86.2% and compliance for taking it at the right time was 24.4%. It was also shown that those with suboptimal compliance had worse motor scores and those taking once-daily preparations had better compliance than those taking multiple daily doses. This study highlights the need for medications with less complicated dosing schedules with fewer daily doses. In 2008, the FDA approved ropinirole prolonged release which is a once daily 24-hour formulation of the dopamine agonist, ropinirole. This is the fi rst once-daily oral dopamine agonist approved for both early and advanced PD in the US.
## (s7) Effi cacy studies Early Parkinson's disease
(p7.0) There are currently limited studies of ropinirole prolonged release in the literature. The EASE-PD Monotherapy study was a multicenter, randomized, double-blinded, crossover study involving ropinirole immediate release and ropinirole prolonged release to determine non-inferiority. Participants were required to be within Hoehn and Yahr stage I-III and not taking levodopa or dopamine agonists for at least two weeks prior to the study. 31 The only concomitant antiparkinsonian medications allowed were stable doses of selegiline, amantadine and anticholinergics. After taking placebo for 7 days, 161 patients were randomized into four possible permutations of formulation sequence: 1) immediate release -immediate release -prolonged release, 2) immediate release -prolonged release -prolonged release, 3) prolonged release -prolonged release -immediate release and 4) prolonged release -immediate release -immediate release. During the first 12-week period, patients were given the fi rst formulation in their sequence such that 50% initially received ropinirole immediate release 0.25 mg three times daily and the other 50% initially received ropinirole prolonged release 2 mg once daily. Over those 12 weeks, patient doses were increased and titrated clinically to achieve effi cacy and tolerability up to a maximum of 24 mg daily in either formulation. 31 After the initial titration period, subjects taking either immediate (8.9 points) or prolonged release (10.4 points) formulations had overall improvement in their UPDRS motor scores but there was no signifi cant difference in effi cacy between the two formulations. Only patients who achieved a stable UPDRS motor score over a 2-week period were allowed to proceed to an 8-week maintenance period. 31 It is important to note that at the end of these 8 weeks, half of the patients initially taking ropinirole immediate release were switched overnight to the closest available ropinirole prolonged release dose. Likewise, half of the patients initially taking ropinirole prolonged release were switched overnight to the closest available ropinirole immediate release dosing regimen. The remaining patients underwent a dummy switch overnight and therefore remained on the same medication they were already taking. After a second 8-week maintenance period, a similar switch took place whereby this time anyone who had actually switched drugs previously was given a dummy switch overnight, and those who had the dummy switch previously changed to the alternate formulation of drug. In this way, by the end of the second 8-week maintenance period, all participants had successfully been switched to the alternate formulation (50% after the fi rst maintenance period and the other 50% after the second period).

(p7.1) A total of 114 subjects completed the study. 31 Subjects initially titrated on ropinirole prolonged release were able to begin with a higher total daily dose (2 mg instead of 0.75 mg) and achieve the maximum daily dose of 24 mg with fewer dose titrations (minimum 8 dose titrations) compared to those on immediate release (minimum 13 dose titrations). Only fi ve patients taking ropinirole immediate release required the next higher dose of ropinirole prolonged release after being switched to maintain effi cacy. Similarly, only two patients taking ropinirole prolonged release required the next higher dose of ropinirole immediate release after switching. No dose reductions were performed because of adverse effects. The overall mean change in UPDRS motor scores was a clinically insignifi cant worsening of 0.6 points in the ropinirole immediate release group and a clinically insignifi cant improvement of 0.1 points for the ropinirole prolonged release group noted throughout the three 8-week maintenance periods suggesting that similar doses have similar effi cacy. 31 Inferiority was based on a predefi ned UPDRS motor score difference between the immediate release and prolonged release groups of at least three points on the UPDRS motor subscale. Therefore, ropinirole prolonged release was concluded to be non-inferior to ropinirole immediate release. There were no signifi cant differences between groups in UPDRS activities of daily living (ADL), Beck Depression Inventory scores, Epworth Sleepiness Scale scores or Parkinson's Disease Sleep Scale scores. It is important to mention that overall medication compliance was signifi cantly better in those taking ropinirole prolonged release (97%) compared to ropinirole immediate release (88%-92%; p Ͻ 0.01).

(p7.2) The authors concluded that ropinirole prolonged release was not inferior to ropinirole immediate release and that it was a safe and effective treatment for early PD. They also demonstrated that an overnight switch with an approximate 1:1 conversion ratio from ropinirole immediate release to ropinirole prolonged release was well tolerated.
## (s10) Conclusion
(p10.0) There are several potential advantages in using ropinirole prolonged release versus the immediate release formulation, especially during the more advanced stages of PD. Many patients with motor fl uctuations cycle between "on" and "off" states so maintaining more consistent dopaminergic activity using ropinirole prolonged release could alleviate or potentially even delay the onset of these fl uctuations. Furthermore, slower absorption and steadier plasma levels with ropinirole prolonged release are likely to increase tolerability by reducing adverse effects associated with the more marked peak and troughs of the immediate release formulation. In addition, the simpler titration schedule may allow the patient to achieve clinically desired results more quickly than with the immediate release formulation. 31 Once-daily instead of multiple divided doses is also likely to increase patient compliance as most patients with PD are already on a complicated regimen.

(p10.1) Ropinirole prolonged release appears to be a safe, well-tolerated option for treating early and advanced PD. This medication has a wide spectrum of use in PD and can include patients who need initial monotherapy, those insuffi ciently controlled by levodopa, and those already taking a dopamine agonist with motor fl uctuations related to variations in plasma levels. Patients who are prescribed this medication are more likely to witness objective improvement in motor function as well as subjective improvement in ADL, several important aspects regarding quality of life, and possibly even depression. Several pending studies will likely elaborate more on comparisons between immediate and prolonged release forms of ropinirole although the adverse effect profi les appear to be similar. Because immediate release ropinirole is approved for restless legs syndrome, further studies using ropinirole prolonged release in restless legs syndrome are also likely in the future.
