# An overview and methodological assessment of systematic reviews and meta-analyses of enhanced recovery programmes in colorectal surgery

CorpusID: 18059443 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2613034cadd1a4d8160338ff0bc135337430412a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2613034cadd1a4d8160338ff0bc135337430412a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) RESULTS
(p6.0) The report by Paton et al included 11 systematic reviews of ERAS programmes for colorectal surgery. One review 4 focused on quality of life and patient satisfaction and another on compliance and variations in practice, 5 leaving nine reviews that reported length of stay, of which seven reported a pooled effect estimate (WMD in days). The review by Zhuang et al, 6 which was published too late to be fully discussed by Paton et al, is also included in this report, giving a total of 10 systematic reviews that met the inclusion criteria for this methodological study (table 1).
## (s7) Not cited
(p7.0) Spanjersberg et al 20 Wind et al, 7 Gouvas et al, 13 Walter et al, 14 Varadhan et al 15 Lv et al, 21 Zhuang et al 6 Lv et al 21 Gouvas et al, 13 Walter et al, 14 Varadhan et al, 15 Spanjersberg et al 20
## (s9) Methodological differences between systematic reviews
(p9.0) The four early systematic reviews of ERAS for colorectal surgery showed a number of methodological differences. Although inclusion criteria appeared similar, Walter et al excluded two trials that were included in the reviews by Eskicioglu et al and Gouvas et al. In one case, 9 this was reported to be because the trial included some patients who had undergone small bowel surgery; the reason for the other exclusion 12 was not reported. Walter et al also differed from the other reviews in its definition of outcomes: length of stay was measured as total days of admission in this review and as days spent in hospital after surgery in the other reviews published in the same period.
## (s11) Findings in relation to previous studies
(p11.0) The existence of multiple systematic reviews covering the same topic was investigated by Siontis et al. 31 They found that of 73 systematic reviews (with meta-analysis) published in 2010, 49 (67%) had at least one other published meta-analysis on the same topic. A particularly striking example was the existence of 11 meta-analyses of statins to prevent atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery; all except the first of these showed a large positive effect of the intervention. Our findings reinforce those of Siontis et al, although even where reviews included exactly the same trials, their pooled estimates of effect were not necessarily identical. Enhanced recovery differs from an intervention like statins after cardiac surgery, being more complex and changing over time as more elements are incorporated into routine practice. This would tend to favour increased variation between reviews along the lines we observed.

(p11.1) A slightly different approach to investigating overlap between systematic reviews was taken by Woodman et al, 32 who looked at the differences between eight reviews of community interventions to promote physical activity. Across the eight reviews, there were 28 included studies, of which 22 (79%) were only included in one review. There was little cross-citation between reviews. For most reviews, Woodman et al could explain why primary data were not included, which was usually due to the reviews having a relatively narrow scope. Despite these issues, the review conclusions were similar. Comparing our results with those of Woodman et al, the enhanced recovery reviews had a higher degree of overlap, although they differed with respect to inclusion of non-randomised studies (not discussed in this paper). The differences between the enhanced recovery and physical activity reviews probably reflect the fact that enhanced recovery, although a complex intervention, is more narrowly defined than interventions to increase physical activity.
## (s14) Unanswered questions/further research
(p14.0) The current study suggests a need for further, more in-depth research into methods of quality assessment of systematic reviews; to make the best use of a cumulative evidence base for decision-making and to identify methodological issues and decision points that may influence the eventual conclusions of a review. These issues are particularly important for researchers seeking to help decision-makers interpret and use systematic reviews. Enhanced recovery is a complex intervention with multiple components and its successful implementation is likely to be influenced by numerous background factors. Given this background, researchers and clinicians carrying out new systematic reviews should ensure that their chosen method of synthesis is appropriate for exploring intervention complexity. The recently published research agenda for reviews of complex interventions 37 provides timely guidance in this regard. Ideally, systematic reviews of emerging complex interventions (eg, interventions to support integration of health and social care) should use standardised methods and outcome definitions and be regularly updated, although this may be difficult to achieve in practice.
