# Dry, aligning, dilute, active matter: A synthetic and self-contained overview

CorpusID: 189762178 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d08bbeeff21d452cb1516762c761dd200bf8198](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d08bbeeff21d452cb1516762c761dd200bf8198)

Fields: Computer Science, Physics

## (s1) Singular situation of DADAM
(p1.0) After more than 20 years have passed, it is fair to say that the field of active matter physics was born in 1995. Not that nobody had ever worked before on out-ofequilibrium systems spending energy at the level of some local units to produce motion or deformation -a loose definition of active matter. But in 1995, in a radical move typical of statistical physics, Tamás Vicsek and collaborators, motivated by collective animal and bacterial behavior, introduced a very simple model of collective motion (Vicsek et al., 1995). In the now-famous Vicsek model, pointwise particles move at constant speed, locally aligning their velocities in the presence of noise. If the noise is weak enough, velocities can align on large scales. Such collective motion in the Vicsek model no more pretends to describe realistic situations than the Ising model does pretend to describe real magnetic materials. And indeed, over the years, the role played by the Vicsek model is not without resemblance to that of the Ising model in the wider setting of statistical physics.
## (s2) Modern viewpoint on DADAM
(p2.0) DADAM, as we will see below, is arguably one of the most advanced areas of active matter physics in terms of knowledge of the phenomena at play and of their theoretical description. The class represented by the Vicsek model is only one of a few basic classes (see below). generally of orientational order, was approached as an order/disorder transition: at strong noise local alignment is too weak to produce order ( Fig. 0.1a), whereas decreasing the noise one sees collective motion, i.e. order ( Fig. 0.1c). In 1995, and over the following years, Vicsek and collaborators studied the order/disorder transition numerically at moderate system sizes and number of particles, concluding to a continuous phase transition at a critical point representing a new universality class (Vicsek et al., 1995;Czirók et al., 1997). This view held until it was discovered that, at finite but larger system sizes, the transition is discontinuous (Fig. 0.1d) and that, near onset of global order, active particles spontaneously organize themselves into a number of high-density high-order bands traveling in a sparse disordered gas (Fig. 0.1b) (Grégoire and Chaté, 2004;Chaté et al., 2008). The idea of phase-separation, of some coexistence phase separating the disordered phase from a homogeneous ordered one, started being mentioned here and there (Mishra et al., 2010;Marchetti et al., 2013), but it is the work of Solon & Tailleur on the active Ising model (Solon and Tailleur, 2013;Solon and Tailleur, 2015) that triggered a change of perspective from an order/disorder problem to a phase separation framework akin to a liquid-gas transition. In this framework, detailed below, the traveling bands of the Vicsek model are characteristic of the coexistence phase separating the disordered gas from an ordered liquid.
## (s3) These lectures notes
(p3.0) Most of these lecture notes focus on results obtained in two spatial dimensions (2D). This is the dimension of choice for dry active matter, which often consists in particles in strong interactions with a substrate and/or confinement, something common for 2D or quasi-2D systems such as motility assays, vertically vibrated granular media, or groups of walking/crawling animals and cells.

(p3.1) Many of the following results rely on numerical simulations, a common situation for out-of-equilibrium systems involving numerous nonlinear mechanisms. All the simulations reported, be they of particle-based models or hydrodynamic partial differential equations, have used periodic boundary conditions, something hard to realize experimentally, but very useful and simpler in practice in systems of moving particles. Even though real situations almost always have to deal with interactions of particles with walls, and even though interesting if not fundamental phenomena arise in active matter systems in the presence of walls (see, e.g., the contribution of Yariv Kafri in this volume), it is better, in a first step, to set one free from walls in order to better grasp the essential bulk behavior of these systems.

(p3.2) We have kept the reference list at some minimal level. There are two main reasons for this. One is that we present below a (hopefully) coherent and self-contained account of what has emerged from series of papers reporting partial progress and sometimes contradicting each other. Sending the reader to some of these historical papers might trigger some confusion. Unfortunately, there is no review paper on DADAM, and we hope that this work will fill this gap to some extent. There exist, nevertheless, more general review articles about active matter which, at least, offer some organized access to original papers: (Ramaswamy, 2010;Marchetti et al., 2013;Bechinger et al., 2016).
## (s5) Specific properties of the polar, Vicsek class
(p5.0) Extensive simulations of the Vicsek model have shown that its phase diagram conforms to the general picture sketched above ( Fig. 0.6a). True long-range polar order is observed in the liquid phase ( Fig. 0.6b). As mentioned above, giant number fluctuations have been found in that phase, with a scaling exponent φ 1.6, i.e. compatible with the Toner and Tu value 8 5 . Superdiffusive behavior in the direction transverse to order, a property also following from the Toner-Tu calculation, is indeed present, with again a scaling exponent compatible with the Toner-Tu calculation (Fig. 0.6c). However, a direct, accurate assessment of the Toner-Tu predictions has not yet been reported.  Large-enough systems simulated long enough in the coexistence phase display many traveling bands such as that of Fig. 0.1b. Not too far from the gas binodal line B gas , the bands are arranged in a smectic way: they form a train of identical, equally-spaced, equal-speed objects ( Fig. 0.7a). Close to the liquid binodal B liq , the bands are more numerous and interact strongly with each other, leading to disordered configurations ( Fig. 0.7b).

(p5.1) The bands are 'quanta' of liquid, uniquely defined at fixed noise strength: bands observed at different densities not too far from the gas binodal are identical objects, while the gas level (vapor density) remains constant ( Fig. 0.7c). Their number increases linearly with the dimension of the system along the polar order and/or with the global density ρ 0 ( Fig. 0.7d). One is thus in presence of a microphase separation scenario, one in which the coexisting liquid is quantized into "microphases" (the bands). The shape of these individual quanta of liquid (i.e. the density and order profiles of the bands) varies with the noise level, from rather sharp at low noise to wider and smoother at high noise ( Fig. 0.7e). It is largely believed, but was never reported clearly, that true long-range polar order is also present in the coexistence phase.

(p5.2) The two binodal lines defining the phase diagram correspond to non-critical transitions. If the liquid binodal B liq (separating the coexistence phase from the liquid) remains hard to estimate numerically (see (Solon et al., 2015b) for a reasonable at-  tempt), the gas binodal B gas can be clearly defined by the density of the residual gas separating bands (which varies only with the noise strength η). At finite system size, the transition appears discontinuous since the system has to jump from zero to one band (or vice-versa). Tn the infinite size limit on the other hand, one has always an infinite number of bands but the distance between bands diverges at the gas binodal, so that the liquid fraction goes continuously to zero and the transition is actually continuous.
## (s6) Specific properties of the nematic classes
(p6.0) The two DADAM classes with nematic alignment, namely the active nematics and the self-propelled rods classes, display very similar properties. We thus present them together. Again the phase diagram in the density/noise strength plane contains two binodal lines delimiting the coexistence phase situated between the disordered gas and the ordered liquid ( Fig. 0.8a,b).

(p6.1) Nematic alignment favors local nematic order. At finite system size, for weak enough noise and/or large enough global density, i.e. in the liquid phase, global nematic order arises, with typically one half of particles moving in each of the two directions determined by the global nematic director (Fig. 0.4a)). No segregation into oppositelygoing polar lanes is observed, even in the self-propelled rods case where particles do not reverse their velocity 1 .

(p6.2) The two nematic classes are only distinguished by the reversal rate α. The major reported difference between the two classes concerns the nature of the long-range nematic order. For active nematics with fast velocity reversals, one observes that the nematic order is only quasi-long-range: the scalar nematic order parameter decays algebraically with system size, with typically a small decay exponent increasing continuously from zero when the noise strength is increased ( Fig. 0.8a,b). In contrast, without velocity reversals (α = 0), global nematic order appears truly long-range 2 ( Fig. 0.8c) Theoretical approaches (of the sort performed by Toner, Tu, Ramaswamy, et al.) predict asymptotic QLRO, and are currently unable to account for the true long-range nematic order observed for α = 0. Caution is advised here: It could very well be that the difference is just a finite-size effect and that quasi-long-range order is finally observed in the self-propelled rods case at very large system sizes: In the self-propelled rods case, there is indeed a finite scale, independent of system size, which has been barely passed in numerical work: a given particle, in the nematic liquid phase, travels for some time along one of the two opposite global directions before collisions with other particles make it go along the other direction. These flight times are exponentially distributed, with a characteristic time typically in the thousands of timesteps. The corresponding lengthscale is indicated by the vertical dashed line in Fig. 0.8c. Simulations of systems much larger than this scale are needed. A recent publication (Shankar et al., 2018) also advocates a possibly very late crossover between LRO and QLRO behavior at large system sizes.

(p6.3) The liquid phases of the two DADAM nematic classes also display long-range correlations and giant number fluctuations. At odds again with theoretical predictions, the scaling exponent of GNF in both nematic classes takes values 1.6−1.7 very close to that observed in the polar class. We note that in (Shankar et al., 2018) corrections to this scaling have been derived, however their amplitude remains too small to account for such numbers 3 . Note that this is similar to the equilibrium XY model for which the decay exponent increases linearly with temperature. (e): Decay of nematic order parameter with linear system size for Vicsek-style self-propelled rods without velocity reversal (α = 0) in the liquid phase (ρ = 1 8 , η = 0.048). This decay, slower than a power law, is best fitted by an algebraic decay to S∞ = 0.813(1) with an exponent ≈ −0.68. The dashed vertical line indicates the lengthscale χ corresponding to the characteristic flight time of particles along one of the two directions defined by the global nematic order.

(p6.4) The coexistence phase of the nematic DADAM classes is dominated by the emergence of high-density high-order bands, with the nematic direction along the band, spontaneously standing out of a sparse disordered gas (see Fig. 0.4b for an example). The nematic bands do not travel like their polar counterparts. Like in the polar class, one needs a large enough system to see these objects. In very large systems, many nematic bands bend, stretch, split, and merge ( Fig. 0.9a). This is because the straight nematic band solution is in fact unstable. It has been recently realized that this instability can take two different forms, depending on the velocity-reversal rate α.

(p6.5) For α small (including 0), the band is subjected to a long-wavelength instability along itself. In a system of moderate size, one easily observes a single band occupying a growing fraction of space when the global density is increased, or a constant fraction of space when system size is increased at fixed parameters ( Fig. 0.9b). The surrounding gas remains roughly constant. One is thus, as announced, in the presence of a liquidgas phase separation scenario. Taking the proportion of space occupied by the band as the liquid fraction, one can determine the binodal lines (corresponding to liquid fraction 0 and 1), which yields the phase diagram given in Fig. 0.8b. If one takes a single, stable band observed in a smallish system, and then collate many copies of this system to make an initially straight long band, a long wavelength oscillation of the band develops, leading to its break-up, and finally to spatiotemporal chaos ( Fig. 0.9c).

(p6.6) For fast velocity reversals (say α = 0.5), one can never observe a steady nematic band: it intermittently breaks up into many transversal pieces ( Fig. 0.9d) before eventually forming again. The band interfaces are also rougher than in the small-α region. All this makes it difficult to measure and even define the liquid fraction in the system. One way out of this problem is to consider coarse-grained density and nematic order fields, and build a 2D histogram of these field values: in the coexistence phase of interest here, one sees two well-separated regions that can be used to defining the gas and the nematic liquid and thus the liquid fraction ( Fig. 0.9f). Importantly, only the relative proportion of particles in each region varies when the global density is increased. Using this methodology the phase diagram shown in Fig. 0.8a can be built.

(p6.7) In all cases, the coexistence phase appears to be in fact a regime of spatiotemporal band chaos, with typically very large correlation lengths and times. Thus, the disorderorder transition, in the DADAM nematic classes, is relegated to the liquid binodal B liq separating the coexistence phase from the nematic liquid.
## (s7) Hydrodynamic theories for the 3 basic DADAM classes
(p7.0) Numerous works on active matter are performed at the hydrodynamic level of a few partial differential equations (PDEs) governing the evolution of 'slow' fields representing the large-scale dynamics of the system at stake. One can either consider stochastic or deterministic PDEs. Here, we mostly discuss deterministic hydrodynamic equations, from which a lot can be learnt. However, it is clear that even though such deterministic PDEs do include some (mean-field) effects of the noise at play at the microscopic level, they cannot account for all fluctuations. In particular they cannot display the anomalously strong fluctuations shown in the previous section to dominate the ordered liquid phases of DADAM systems.

(p7.1) There exist different ways to arrive at hydrodynamic equations. Here we first discuss this in general, before describing our favorite method, the Boltzmann-Ginzburg-Landau (BGL) approach, pioneered and developed by Eric Bertin and collaborators (Bertin et al., 2006;Bertin et al., 2009;Peshkov et al., 2014). Finally, the rest of this section is devoted to studying the solutions of the hydrodynamic equations derived using the BGL method for the 3 basic classes of DADAM.
## (s11) Properties common to all 3 classes
(p11.0) The sets of hydrodynamic equations obtained above using the BGL approach share many properties, leading to the same overall structure of their phase diagrams. First of all, the equation governing the ordering field (f 1 in the polar class, f 2 in the nematic classes) contains the expected Ginzburg-Landau structure,

(p11.1) In all cases ξ > 0, which ensures that the cubic nonlinearity saturates the growth of order occurring when µ > 0. In all cases µ depends linearly on ρ: µ = aρ + b with a and b depending on the noise coefficients. This "ϕ 4 " or Mexican hat potential leads to the existence of a spatially-homogeneous ordered solution with |f | 2 = µ/ξ as soon as µ > 0. In the (ρ 0 , σ) plane, the line µ = 0 has the expected form, growing like a square root from the origin, saturating at high densities (S gas line in Fig. 0.10). Above it, the homogeneous disordered solution is linearly stable, below it it is unstable 13 . In this region, the homogeneous ordered solution exists. It is found to be linearly unstable near onset, i.e. below the µ = 0 line, down to a similar line (S liq line in Fig. 0.10). This linear stability analysis can be performed semi-numerically for arbitrary perturbations of wavenumber q 14 or analytically in the limit |q| → 0 of small wavenumbers. In the polar class for instance, the real part of the growth rate G(q) of the associated instability reads, in the limit of small longitudinal wavenumbers q (Bertin et al., 2009):

(p11.2) where ∂µ 1 = dµ 1 /dρ (> 0) and λ = κ 1 + κ 2 (> 0). This growth rate will therefore always take positive values close to S gas , where the linear coefficient µ 1 → 0. Thus, one can easily see that the instability arises from the ρ-dependence of the linear coefficient µ 1 and, more precisely, from the fact that µ 1 grows with ρ. A similar argument applies to the classes with nematic alignment, such that it constitutes a characteristic feature of DADAM. The growth of µ with ρ is the translation at hydrodynamic (and kinetic) level of the positive feedback mechanism between local density and local order discussed at the microscopic level, and argued to be at the origin of phase separation. The S gas and S liq lines delimiting the domain of linear instability of the homogeneous ordered solution are, in the language of phase-separation, the spinodal lines. In between them, perturbations around the ordered solution grow immediately. In this region, all our hydrodynamic equations possess no stable homogeneous solutions, they only support inhomogeneous solutions. As we will see below, these closely resemble the traveling wave trains observed in the Vicsek model, and the nematic bands observed in the nematic DADAM classes. They exist beyond the region delimited by the spinodal lines. They are observed to compose the dominating attractor of the dynamics up to a line (B gas line in Fig. 0.10) located above the µ = 0 gas spinodal S gas , and down to a line (B liq line in Fig. 0.10) below the liquid spinodal S liq . The two lines B gas and B liq are nothing but the binodal lines in the phase-separation language. They are the lines corresponding to those delimiting the coexistence region at the microscopic level.

(p11.3) Locating them implies a fine study of the nonlinear, inhomogeneous solutions of the hydrodynamic equations, something possibly delicate (see below). The spinodal lines, on the other hand, are easy to determine, but they have limited physical significance, and they do not correspond to the transitions found at the microscopic fluctuating level.
## (s13) Inhomogeneous solutions in the polar class
(p13.0) In Figure 0.12, we show a typical numerical simulation of Eqs. (0.23) in two dimensions using parameter values taken between the two spinodal lines. It rapidly displays solutions homogeneous along one dimension (usually along one of the axes of the simulation domain). These effectively one-dimensional solutions typically consist of bands of various shapes traveling in both possible directions. Eventually, one side wins and all remaining bands, after some time, have very slightly different speeds. Then, a long "coarsening" process follows during which the faster bands merge with slower ones. This is such a slow process that often the ultimate state of a single propagating domain cannot be reached. (Moreover, space and time discretization effects are likely to "interfere", quantizing possible band speeds, de facto arresting the coarsening.) As expected, this is observed not only in the region between the spinodals where no spatially-homogeneous solution is stable, but also beyond it, above the basic µ 1 = 0 line, and also in the region of stability of the ordered homogeneous solution |f 1 | 2 = µ/ξ. This phenomenology is different from what happens at the microscopic level in the Vicsek model, where a regular smectic arrangements of identical traveling bands is reached after transients.

(p13.1) We now discuss the inhomogeneous solutions in some detail. As a matter of fact, the Toner-Tu equations do support, even at fixed parameter values, multiple coexisting, numerically observable (and thus linearly stable) solutions. This has been shown in detail in (Solon et al., 2015a), and we sketch here the methodology followed and the main conclusions of this work.

(p13.2) Even though it is possible to work with the full equations (0.23), it is convenient to work on a simplified version, here written only in one space dimension x for a scalar order parameter m since we are looking for solutions homogeneous in y. These simplified equations read:

(p13.3) where the explicit coefficients v 0 and P have been introduced to keep track of the corresponding terms in the following, a single advection term m∂ x m appears in 1D, and the linear term is expressed in a minimal form, all this without loss of generality at 4 different times following a noisy disordered initial condition. The solution first remains "two-dimensional" (t = 500). After a short transient (≈ 1000), it becomes homogeneous along one direction (here y) and polar order is strictly along the other (x), with bands traveling in opposite directions (t = 4000). Narrow bands may survive crossing each other, but eventually all remaining bands travel to the right (t = 20, 000). Their regularization into a periodic train of identical bands is extremely slow and numerically near-impossible due to pinning effects by the underlying simulation grid and the exponentially-weak interactions between bands. At t = 700, 000 the solution indeed remains mostly unchanged, except for only one thin band (indicated by the black arrow in the preceding snapshot) that has disappeared. Parameters: ρ0 = 0.5, η = 0.5, L = 4096, dx = 0.5, dt = 0.01.

(p13.4) at the qualitative level. (Note also that all explicit dependences on the global density ρ 0 and on the noise have been suppressed.) The spinodal lines marking the linear stability limits of homogeneous solutions are readily found: the disordered solution m = 0, ρ = ρ 0 become unstable for ρ 0 > ϕ g , which defines the gas spinodal S gas . The ordered solution m 2 = (ρ 0 −ϕ g )/ξ then exists, but is unstable until the liquid spinodal line S liq defined by ρ 0 > ϕ = ϕ g + 

(p13.5) where the dots denote derivation with respect to z. Solving Eq. (0.36a) gives ρ(z) = ρ g + v0 c m(z). Since ρ(z) = ρ g when m(z) = 0, the integration constant ρ g is the density in the gaseous phase surrounding a localized polar excitation. Inserting the expression of ρ in Eq. (0.36b) we obtain the second-order ordinary differential equation

(p13.6) Equation (0.37) has a mechanical interpretation, in which it describes the position m, varying along time z, of a particle of mass D in a potential H(m), subjected to a (position-dependent) friction f (m):
