# Various Indices for Diagnosis of Air-gap Eccentricity Fault in Induction Motor-A Review

CorpusID: 196007574 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50f5b4b7d7a340438fa549fea4d91d7a6aaff0a9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50f5b4b7d7a340438fa549fea4d91d7a6aaff0a9)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Because of its simple construction and cheap maintenance and repair, the induction motor is the most commonly used motor in the industry. Since induction motors are used very frequently, their protection and fault diagnosis schemes were developed along with their invention [1]. At that time schemes like overvoltage, ground fault and overcurrent protection were only applied. But now day's scenario has been completely changed. Now, induction motors are exclusively used for severe process dynamics and control process and any fault in the motor will result in shut down of the whole process. So, in order to prevent huge financial loss, it is mandatory to have a trustworthy fault detection and diagnosis system for early detection of incipient fault.

(p0.1) There are basically electrical and mechanical faults in induction motors, of which 60% are mechanical faults and 80% of mechanical faults results in air-gap eccentricity [2], [3]. There are basically three types of eccentricity i.e. static, dynamic or mixed eccentricity.
## (s1) Air gap eccentricity fault
(p1.0) There are basically three axes i.e. rotor symmetry axis Or, stator symmetry axis Os and rotor rotation axis Ow in an induction motor which coincides with each other in ideal condition. If eccentricity exists then there is a dislocation of any of the axis from the other two axes or dislocation of all the axes [4]. Eccentricity results in the unequal air-gap length along the stator to rotor circumference. This unequal air-gap length may either be static or dynamic depending upon the type of eccentricity. If stator symmetry axis Os separates from the other two axes, the minimum/maximum air gap length is static and is called as static eccentricity. If rotor symmetry axis Or separates from the other two axes and the minimum/maximum air gap length is dynamically moving then it is dynamic eccentricity. If all the three axes separate then it is mixed eccentricity. Three types of eccentricity are shown in (Fig. 1). There is a generation of radial Unbalanced Magnetic Pull (UMP) between rotor and stator due to eccentricity which amplifies the degree of eccentricity within the motor. An enormous amount of burden is created on the machine which causes the wear and tear of the ball bearings. Also, the undesirable vibrations are produced in the stator windings due to radial magnetic forces caused by eccentricity. The worst happens when eccentricity causes rotor to stator rub which permanently damages stator core and rotor cage [6], [8].
## (s5) Difference of area under
(p5.0) Park's vector current for two consecutive current cycles to the average of all the areas (APC) [12]- [14] For a 4-pole eccentric induction motor, if the magnitude of Park's vector of current is plotted for two subsequent cycles against its angle from zero to 2π in electrical radians, then two different curves are obtained. If the difference of average area of two given curves and the sum of area of two curves is calculated then it can be used as an index for detection and diagnosis of eccentricity fault. Research can be further expanded to detect the dynamic and mixed eccentricity. Also, the effect of the variations in loading conditions and magnetic saturation can be determined.
## (s7) Low-frequency components of stator current (LFS) [22]-[27]
(p7.0) There is a drawback of the third index i.e. as it is based on high-frequency components noise signals also interfere highly with the main signal. To detect and to separate these signals is not so easy and requires very expensive hardware and software setup. Therefore such an index is required which is based on low-frequency components. It is found that following harmonic components of stator current exists in a motor with mixed eccentricity:

(p7.1) = | 1 ± | (5) where f1 is the fundamental frequency component of the supply, fr is the frequency of rotor rotation in rotation per second (rps) and k is any random integer. The fundamental component of supply is surrounded with two harmonic components around it with k = 1. These two harmonics can be used as an eccentricity fault index for detection of fault. Unlike HS it is independent of the number of rotor slots and motor's number of poles. But it depends upon the presence of mixed eccentricity within the machine. It has an advantage of comparatively easy computation and measurement. But till now the effect of unbalanced voltage, fluctuating load, magnetic saturation has not been found out and can be considered for further experimentation.
## (s8) Stator current's low and high frequency component (SLH) [28]-[33]
(p8.0) Both the low and high-frequency components must be found out and analyzed carefully in order to get more accurate results for mixed eccentricity. In reality low and high-frequency components are interconnected as due to the presence of both dynamic and static eccentricity stator current's lowfrequency components given by (5) also create some high-frequency components given by (4). Therefore in order to get more explicit results for mixed eccentricity both high and low frequency must be detected and analyzed. The motor's number of poles and fluctuating load conditions does not effect the given fault index which makes it advantageous. But the effect of magnetic saturation is yet to be found.
## (s10) Gyration radius of the torque developed (GRT)
(p10.0) The measurement of the developed torque is not an easy task as some special types of sensors are to be applied to the motor case which makes it difficult and expensive. It can be used as an index because stator current can be used as a replacement for it [35], [36]. If sampling is applied over the developed torque signals for a complete cycle and total N samples are gathered then for the first torque difference the time series is given by:

(p10.1) where ∆ ( ) = ( ) − ( − 1) and k is the number of torque samples. If a 2D phase space diagram is made with ∆ ( ) on the vertical axes and ∆ ( − 1) on the horizontal where and is the number of torque samples. If a 2D phase space diagram is made with on the vertical axes and on the horizontal axes, it will show a considerable difference for eccentric motor as compared to healthy induction motor. Therefore it can definitely be used as an eccentricity fault index. On the 2D diagram, for a unit mass at any point, the mass center lies on the coordinates 0 and 1 for the total diagram. These 0 and 1 are given by:
