# Emotionally-Aware Chatbots: A Survey

CorpusID: 195345457 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c131665638feb8c11f936989ffc6187317593b41](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c131665638feb8c11f936989ffc6187317593b41)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s3) RESOURCE FOR BUILDING EAC
(p3.0) In this section, we try to investigate the available resources in building EAC. As other artificial intelligent agents, building chatbot also needs a dataset to be learned, to be able to produce a meaningful conversation as a human-like agent. Therefore, some studies propose dataset which contains textual conversation annotated by different emotion categories. Table 2 summarizes the available dataset that found in recent years. We categorize the dataset based on the language, source of the data, and further description which contains some information such as annotation approach, size of instances, and emotion labels. All datasets were proposed during 2017 and 2018, started by dataset provided by NLPCC 2017 Shared Task on Emotion Generation Challenge organizers. This dataset gathered from Sina Weibo social media 7 , so it consists of social conversation in Chinese. Based on our study, all of the datasets that we discover are only available in two languages, English and Chinese. However, the source of these datasets is very diverse such as social media (Twitter, Sina Weibo, and Facebook Message), online content, and human writing through crowdsourcing scenario. Our investigation found that every dataset use different set of emotion label depends on its focus and objective in building the chatbot. As we mentioned in the previous section, that emotion classifier is also an integral part of the emotionally-aware chatbot. In building emotion classifier, there are also available several affective resources, which already widely used in the emotion classification task. Table 3 shows the available affective resources we discovered, range from old resources such as LIWC, ANEW, and DAL, until the modern version such as DepecheMood and EmoWordNet. Based on some prior studies, emotion can be classified into two fundamental viewpoints, including discrete categories and dimensional models. Meanwhile, this feature view emotion as a discrete category which differentiates emotion into several primary emotion. The most popular was proposed by [14] that differentiate emotion into six categories including anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, and surprise. Three different resources will be used to get emotion contained in the tweet, including EmoLex, EmoSenticNet, LIWC, DepecheMood, and EmoWordNet. Dimensional model is another viewpoint of emotion that define emotion according to one or more dimension. Based on the dimensional approach, emotion is a coincidence value on some different strategic dimensions. We will use two various lexical resources to get the information about the emotional dimension of each tweet, including Dictionary of Affect in Language (DAL), ANEW, and NRC VAD.
