# The critical success factors of GDPR implementation: a systematic literature review -Source link Topics: General Data Protection Regulation, Critical success factor and European union Related papers: EU general data protection regulation : changes and implications for personal data collecting companies Privacy Impact Assessment: Comparing methodologies with a focus on practicality Success Factors of Artificial Intelligence Implementation in Healthcare. Barriers and strategies applying Cleaner Production: a systematic review International experience with performance-based risk-sharing arrangements: implications for the Chinese innovative pharmaceutical market. Repositório ISCTE-IUL Deposited in Repositório

CorpusID: 195516596 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9017318dc3a0df9025a2e339c55e19b22f6563ee](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9017318dc3a0df9025a2e339c55e19b22f6563ee)

Fields: Business, Computer Science, Law

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Since the foundation of the Internet and the World Wide Web, the evolution of technology has enabled the increasing collection, process and storage of large amounts of personal data (Huth, 2017). New information tools and techniques such as Big Data, Data Mining and Machine Learning revolutionized business models through the processing of data, as well as Cloud Computing and the Internet of Things, which leveraged the consumption of data to a whole new level. All these improvements led to the ubiquitous Information Technology society we have today, having a visible digital impact in many organizations across several sectors, which take advantage of all the possibilities provided by new technologies (Lopes and Oliveira, 2018).
## (s4) GDPR Implementation
(p4.0) In order to comply with the Regulation and avoid fines, organizations must adopt protection policies and implement appropriate technical and organizational measures to ensure that the processing of personal data is in accordance with GDPR. This measures include pseudonymization, encryption, maintaining a record of the processing activities, and applying Privacy by Design and by Default principles. Furthermore, organizations must also be able to demonstrate compliance to Supervisory Authorities (European Commission, 2016). Besides technological challenges, GDPR also brings a lot of juridical and functional changes, along with the necessity to educate staff and change their mindset and culture to this new paradigm (Freitas and Mira da Silva, 2018). Since GDPR imposes a lot of changes and challenges, organizations will need to review their processes, routines and procedures, in order to ensure that they collect, hold and process personal data in accordance with the Regulation (Tikkinen-Piri et al., 2018).
## (s7) Motivation
(p7.0) The implementation of GDPR imposes a set of legal, technological and functional changes, having a major impact in organizations, regardless of their sector or industry (Freitas and Mira da Silva, 2018). Every organization will need to reconsider the way they collect, store and process personal data, adopt new measures and policies, and re-design internal processes to demonstrate their compliance (Boban, 2018). However, GDPR does not provide specific guidelines regarding its implementation, not being prescriptive in the technologies to use to achieve compliance (Tankard, 2016). That's why organizations, in general, are having serious difficulties in understanding the Regulation and how to implement it (Sirur et al., 2018). Specially, organizations that deal with large amounts of personal data are being greatly affected (Seo et al., 2018). Therefore, this research aims to obtain information regarding GDPR implementation and compliance, in order to identify the critical success factors which contribute to GDPR implementation, including both positive (enablers) and negative (barriers) factors.
## (s15) GDPR Implementation
(p15.0) The enforcement of the General Data Protection Regulation has dictated the need for organizations to comply with its requirements and obligations. Since Supervisory Authorities may impose sanctions whenever non-compliance is detected, organizations need to review their processes and procedures to ensure compliance and avoid sanctions (Tikkinen-Piri et al., 2018). For organizations, this requires the implementation of complex technological solutions, as well as new organizational duties and extensive changes in the organization's business model, which may also affect resource usage (Skendzic et al., 2018;Tikkinen-Piri et al., 2018). Although many organizations understand the importance of complying with the new Regulation, the uncertainty around GDPR has led to some divided approaches (Sirur et al., 2018) because GDPR is not prescriptive regarding solutions to achieve compliance, not providing specific guidelines to implement its requirements (Tikkinen-Piri et al., 2018). Therefore, every organization must find and implement organizational and technological solutions to put the provisions in practice (Tikkinen-Piri et al., 2018;Freitas and Mira da Silva, 2018). For that, and to achieve compliance, it is very important to design an implementation strategy and roadmap.
## (s16) GDPR Implementation Roadmap
(p16.0) A detailed roadmap will help business to prioritize, as well as to demonstrate a proof of the compliance process if required by Supervisory Authorities (Garber, 2018). The literature already presents some suggestions regarding plans for implementing GDPR. The first suggestion is an implementation plan with 4 steps. It starts by establishing an implementation step list in order to be complaint. Then, it is suggested to set realistic timelines and allocate enough resources to support the compliance process. Afterwards, compliance recommendations should be prioritized in order to make strategic decisions. Finally, when the process of compliance is in course, the organization should continue with ongoing reviews and improvements regarding the implementation program (Boban, 2018). Even though this approach takes into account the resources allocation and the continuous evaluation of the implementation plan, with monitoring and implementing improvements, it is very superficial and low detailed and does not focus on understanding GDPR requirements, which is very important to derive a strategy for compliance, nor in data management.

(p16.1) Another alternative suggests an implementation roadmap, but with much more detail regarding GDPR. The first step consists in auditing the data and internal processes to understand in which extent the GDPR applies to the organization, by analyzing the owned personal data. After that, the organization should put data management into practice, by adopting transparent policies in order to show how they collect and process data. Then, security measures should be established to protect these data. Finally, appropriate tools should be used to ensure new requirements, record keeping and documentation (Gabriela et al., 2018). This approach is very complete and implicitly takes into account GDPR requirements in the first step. However, it does not specify the security measures to be applied and does not take into account the impact of the implementation plan in the organization resources, namely people. Other approach refers the initial steps to make before implementing measures in order to achieve compliance stated by Baker & McKenzie, an international law firm. The first one consists in assessing whether or not the organization falls within the GDPR scope. Then, organizations need to understand the GDPR compliance obligations, how to comply with them and assess their impact. After that, organizations should identify new responsibilities and risks, and identify strategies to mitigate them. The final step is to devise a strategy for GDPR implementation (Tankard, 2016). In fact, it is a very complete approach regarding steps to do before putting the compliance process into action. However, the author did not completed the roadmap suggested by Baker & McKenzie with specific implementation strategies nor security measures to put in practice. The last roadmap found in the literature is divided in three stages. In the first stage (Gather), organizations should map all the personal data they own. In the second stage (Analyze), organizations should analyze these data in order to detect flaws. It may be necessary to carry DPIAs as well. With the flaws identified and the risks measured, a strategy plan can be traced, with solutions to achieve compliance. Finally, in the Implement stage, organizations must implement the necessary changes, including security mechanisms. In the end of the last stage, organizations must ensure the continuity of their compliance by performing periodically compliance audits (Lopes and Oliveira, 2018). Besides being the most complete roadmap in the literature, it is the only approach that mentioned risk assessment, which is a GDPR requirement whenever processing of personal data may result in high risk to the privacy of its owners.
## (s18) Data and Documentation
(p18.0) GDPR can be seen as a data governance framework, which encourages organizations to have an overview of the personal data they own, including having plans regarding the collection, use and destruction of data (Hoofnagle et al., 2019). So, every organization must know what personal data do they have, the reason for collection, origin, how was the collection performed and location (Magnusson and Iqbal, 2017). Moreover, it is also important to know how the data is processed (Freitas and Mira da Silva, 2018). Therefore, an audit of the organizations' information must be performed in order to identify the existing personal data, which will help to implement a good Data Management (Laybats and Davies, 2018). The literature already presents a list with steps in order to perform this audit. It starts with listing all systems and databases containing personal data, followed by the identification of all data sources and associated communications. Afterwards, a classification matrix should be implemented in order to classify existing data (Magnusson and Iqbal, 2017). However, it does not assess the reason behind the collection of data nor how it was collected. Furthermore, the documentation process is also not referred in this list. In fact, organizations must document not only the existing data but the processing operations as well (Lopes and Oliveira, 2018). Regarding data flow mapping, in order to know the behaviour of existing data and increase their control over it, organizations can use graphical representations such as Business Process Management Notation (BPMN) (Presthus et al., 2018). It is also important to review documents such as contracts, privacy policies and consent forms, among others (Lopes and Oliveira, 2018). Organizations must also adopt the data minimization principle, required by GDPR, which ensures that personal data must be "adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which they are processed" (European Commission, 2016). After having a good data management in place, organizations will be able to answer to deletion and access requests by their customers, as well as Supervisory Authorities requests for compliance demonstration. By practising high-quality data and document management, which provides a comprehensive and holistic view of all the existing data, organizations can go a step further and implement data analytics (Garber, 2018), in order to maximize the potential and value of their data.
## (s20) Training Awareness
(p20.0) In order to increase the organization's familiarity to GDPR, training sessions should be carried to ensure that everyone follows the internally determined rules and pose no risk to the client's data (Magnusson and Iqbal, 2017). In fact, most of the data breaches are internal and not due to external hacks (Addis and Kutar, 2018). Therefore, data protection training awareness, whether through online courses or face-to-face, is a must for all staff in order to sustain the right levels of compliance (Perry, 2019).
## (s21) Data Protection Officer
(p21.0) Organizations must designate a Data Protection Officer in case of being a public authority, or when the processing operations require regular and systematic monitoring of data subjects or processing of sensitive data on a large scale.

(p21.1) The DPO will bring expertise regarding information privacy and security, and will help the organization to achieve compliance by giving advice and recommendations, including monitoring compliance with the Regulation (European Commission, 2016). However, the designation itself is not enough, since a DPO can only help organizations when functionally independent (Drewer and Miladinova, 2018). Furthermore, all the employees must be aware of this new role and responsibilities in order to maximize its contribution (Presthus et al., 2018).

(p21.2) Even though it is not mandatory, the appointment of a DPO can facilitate compliance and become a competitive advantage (Drewer and Miladinova, 2018), and demonstrates that the organization recognizes data as its main asset and the fact that it is crucial to their success (Zerlang, 2017).
