# catalysts European Regulatory Framework and Particulate Matter Emissions of Gasoline Light-Duty Vehicles: A Review

CorpusID: 198356669 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0d75b57dcb383f541cde110d5d5c02714251c62a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0d75b57dcb383f541cde110d5d5c02714251c62a)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s5) Test Cycles and Procedures
(p5.0) Emissions were tested over the European driving cycle (EDC) or MVEG (motor vehicle emissions group) cycle (Euro 1 and Euro 2). Effective in 2000 with the Euro 3 standard, the cycle was modified to eliminate the 40 seconds engine warm-up period before the beginning of emission sampling. This modified cold start test is referred to as the New European Driving Cycle (NEDC).

(p5.1) Regulation 715/2007, which established the Euro 5 and 6 engine standards, stated that the [European] Commission should "keep under review the need to revise the New European Drive Cycle." In September 2017 the worldwide harmonized light vehicles test procedure (WLTP) and the corresponding worldwide harmonized light vehicles test cycle (WLTC) replaced the NEDC procedure for new car types (September 2018 for all new vehicles). The WLTC is based on real-world driving profiles and contains more dynamic driving conditions than the NEDC, such as higher maximum velocity and less idling time. The new testing procedure contains more differences than the speed profile alone, and these differences can be grouped in four categories [82]:
## (s7) Real-Driving Emissions (RDE)
(p7.0) Despite the increasing stringency of the European emission standards, a series of studies, beginning in 2011 using portable emission measurement systems (PEMS) mounted onboard vehicles [83], as well as studies utilizing remote sensing techniques [84], reported unexpectedly high real-world emissions of nitrogen oxides (NO x ) from European diesel passenger cars.

(p7.1) The gap between official laboratory results and the actual on-road emissions led to a revision of the emission type approval requirements in the EU. The use of PEMS and the introduction of the 'not-to exceed' (NTE) regulatory concept was based on Regulation 715/2007 where it was stated that revisions may be necessary to ensure that real world emissions correspond to the levels measured at type approval. A technical working group on real-driving emissions (RDE) was set up in 2011. The work of the RDE group produced several pieces of legislation: Commission Regulation (EU) 2016/427 (first regulatory act of the RDE regulation) introduced on-road testing with PEMS to complement the laboratory Type I test for the type approval of light-duty vehicles in EU. Subsequently, Commission Regulation (EU) 2016/646 introduced the NTE concept, which equals the emission limit for the laboratory Type I test multiplied by a so-called conformity factor (CF) that takes into account the measurement uncertainty of the PEMS. Both regulations were consolidated in the WLTP EC Regulation (EU) 2017/1151, and further developed by EC Regulation (EU) 2017/1154 (the third part of the RDE Regulations), which also introduced a RDE conformity factor for the on-road test of solid particle number (SPN) emissions. The fourth part of the RDE Regulation 2018/1832 introduced on-road emissions testing as part of in-service conformity checks and slightly lowered the conformity factor for NO x following a review [85].

(p7.2) The RDE test is performed during vehicle operation using a PEMS with SPN CF 1.5 from September 2017 for new models and from September 2018 for all new vehicles of types M, N1 and one year later N1-II, NI-III, and N2 vehicles. A temporary CF for NO x was set at 2.1 and can be used upon the request of the manufacturer in Europe from September 2017 for new models and from September 2019 for all new vehicles. The final CF for NO x for January 2020 (new models) and 2021 (all new vehicles) was originally set at 1.5 and it was reduced, following a review, to 1.43 in 2018 [85].
## (s12) PM Mass Emissions
(p12.0) The PM mass emissions of PFI vehicles (Figure 1, upper panel) are low and typically <2 mg/km for all regions. Higher emissions were measured for older vehicles (pre-2000) [91,92]. Some aggressive cycles, such as the Common Artemis Driving cycles (CADC), gave also emission levels around 10 mg/km (such cases not plotted in the figure). PM limits in the US were tightened from 6.2 mg/km (1999-2017, Tier 2) to 1.8 mg/km (from 2017, Tier 3). In California, a further reduction to 0.62 mg/km is phased-in starting 2025. Interestingly there are no PM data for US MY after 2013, probably due to the increased research interest on GDIs and their high market share. In China, a PM limit of 4.5 mg/km applies to GDI vehicles only, starting with China 5. The limit continues through China 6a (2020), and further tightens to 3 mg/km with China 6b (2023).
## (s21) Low Ambient Temperature
(p21.0) Catalysts 2019, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 30 at 23 °C the emissions on average doubled at -7 °C [152]; however, for lower emission levels they increased up to 3-4 times. While none of the Euro 6 vehicles exceeded the 6 × 10 12 p/km limit, all exceeded 6 × 10 11 p/km at −7 °C. For those GDIs that were equipped with GPF, their tailpipe emissions did not significantly increase at the −7 °C tests and they remained below the 6 × 10 11 p/km limit (MY after 2011).   ; however, for lower emission levels they increased up to 3-4 times. While none of the Euro 6 vehicles exceeded the 6 × 10 12 p/km limit, all exceeded 6 × 10 11 p/km at −7 °C. For those GDIs that were equipped with GPF, their tailpipe emissions did not significantly increase at the −7 °C tests and they remained below the 6 × 10 11 p/km limit (MY after 2011).   Currently, gasoline vehicles have limits for CO and HCs at −7 • C. Discussions are ongoing to introduce a low temperature procedure in the regulations. The results of the two figures can support in deciding future limits. Figure 6 summarizes the results of studies that measured (solid) particles sized below 23 nm, which is currently the lower size limit defined in the EU regulation. Additionally, based on the size distributions of solid particles shown in Figure 3, the fraction of particles below 23 nm was estimated assuming a lognormal distribution and was added in Figure 6. The assumption of monomodal size distributions is not necessarily true and underestimates the cases with a separate nucleation mode. Until early 2000s, there are only estimations of the particle number fraction below 23 nm. Due to the large GMD, this fraction is found to be below 15% of the total number. The estimated percentage after 2009 raises up to 45% for both GDIs and PFIs (one 2012 GDI estimated at close to 100%). The measured percentage for GDIs is in the same range with a few measurements in the 45 to 60% range. However, for PFIs the measured percentage is up to 75% (95% in one case). Currently, gasoline vehicles have limits for CO and HCs at −7 °C. Discussions are ongoing to introduce a low temperature procedure in the regulations. The results of the two figures can support in deciding future limits. Figure 6 summarizes the results of studies that measured (solid) particles sized below 23 nm, which is currently the lower size limit defined in the EU regulation. Additionally, based on the size distributions of solid particles shown in Figure 3, the fraction of particles below 23 nm was estimated assuming a lognormal distribution and was added in Figure 6. The assumption of monomodal size distributions is not necessarily true and underestimates the cases with a separate nucleation mode. Until early 2000s, there are only estimations of the particle number fraction below 23 nm. Due to the large GMD, this fraction is found to be below 15% of the total number. The estimated percentage after 2009 raises up to 45% for both GDIs and PFIs (one 2012 GDI estimated at close to 100%). The measured percentage for GDIs is in the same range with a few measurements in the 45 to 60% range. However, for PFIs the measured percentage is up to 75% (95% in one case).  Figure 7 plots the ratio of particles above over below 23 nm as a function of the emission levels following the regulatory method (SPN23). Generally, there is a tendency of a higher percentage with lower emissions. This is an indication that for high concentrations coagulation takes place and increases the GMD [153]. In addition, the relative contribution of lubricant increases as soot from combustion decreases. The percentage can be >30% for emission levels <1 × 10 12 p/km.  Figure 7 plots the ratio of particles above over below 23 nm as a function of the emission levels following the regulatory method (SPN 23 ). Generally, there is a tendency of a higher percentage with lower emissions. This is an indication that for high concentrations coagulation takes place and increases the GMD [153]. In addition, the relative contribution of lubricant increases as soot from combustion decreases. The percentage can be >30% for emission levels <1 × 10 12 p/km. Currently, gasoline vehicles have limits for CO and HCs at −7 °C. Discussions are ongoing to introduce a low temperature procedure in the regulations. The results of the two figures can support in deciding future limits. Figure 6 summarizes the results of studies that measured (solid) particles sized below 23 nm, which is currently the lower size limit defined in the EU regulation. Additionally, based on the size distributions of solid particles shown in Figure 3, the fraction of particles below 23 nm was estimated assuming a lognormal distribution and was added in Figure 6. The assumption of monomodal size distributions is not necessarily true and underestimates the cases with a separate nucleation mode. Until early 2000s, there are only estimations of the particle number fraction below 23 nm. Due to the large GMD, this fraction is found to be below 15% of the total number. The estimated percentage after 2009 raises up to 45% for both GDIs and PFIs (one 2012 GDI estimated at close to 100%). The measured percentage for GDIs is in the same range with a few measurements in the 45 to 60% range. However, for PFIs the measured percentage is up to 75% (95% in one case).  Figure 7 plots the ratio of particles above over below 23 nm as a function of the emission levels following the regulatory method (SPN23). Generally, there is a tendency of a higher percentage with lower emissions. This is an indication that for high concentrations coagulation takes place and increases the GMD [153]. In addition, the relative contribution of lubricant increases as soot from combustion decreases. The percentage can be >30% for emission levels <1 × 10 12 p/km. Measured: Based on 23 nm and 10 nm condensation particle counters (CPCs) downstream of a thermal pretreatment unit. Estimated: Based on solid particle size distributions (Figure 3). No corrections for particle losses. Dashed lines show the 6 × 10 11 p/km limit for 23 nm (vertical) and 10 nm (diagonal).
