# Pragmatic methods for reviewing exceptionally large bodies of evidence: systematic mapping review and overview of systematic reviews using lung cancer survival as an exemplar

CorpusID: 197402720 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12cafffcaa0b9728f503e336f0c9960b09520806](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12cafffcaa0b9728f503e336f0c9960b09520806)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Meta-analysis
(p6.0) Meta-analyses using individual patient data (IPD), where raw data from multiple studies are synthesised, are considered the gold standard for synthesising prognostic factor studies [28,29]. However, they must be based on a systematic approach and attempt to include all relevant studies in order to avoid producing biased estimates or erroneous conclusions. Meta-analyses of IPD including only studies from a single research group are unlikely to include all relevant data and were excluded.
## (s10) Synthesis
(p10.0) The findings of existing reviews can be utilised within an overview of reviews or integrated into a new review in different ways [31]. The current review represents a rapid review approach, and as such, we chose not to disaggregate and/or re-analyse the existing review findings. Rather, we used the complete reviews and combined their findings in a narrative synthesis.

(p10.1) The findings of the overview of reviews were summarised and analysed using structured tables, listing all the factors investigated by each review, whether or not they were significantly associated with survival, and the direction of impact. Some systematic reviews included a meta-analysis or meta-regression (pooled analysis), whilst others only presented a narrative synthesis. Prognostic factors that were identified as being 'significantly' associated with survival were those that were shown to be statistically significant in either pooled analysis or by more than 50% of studies in the narrative synthesis. For reviews that reported both pooled analysis and narrative synthesis, this was based on the results of the pooled analysis. Pooled analyses and narrative syntheses were summarised separately. Where significant findings were based on only a single included study within a review, this has been highlighted. The magnitude of effects was only extracted for modifiable factors and presented in separate tables. This included both the summary effect estimate and 95% confidence intervals from both univariate and multivariate analysis, where presented.
## (s16) Healthcare provider and system
(p16.0) Six modifiable factors that were categorised as healthcare provider and system were included: insurance status, multidisciplinary team (MDT) patient management, surgeon, procedural volume, and timeliness of care. These were investigated in five reviews, most of which used a narrative synthesis.

(p16.1) One review from the USA investigated the association between insurance status and survival in patients with NSCLC (621). Patients with Medicaid or no insurance had worse survival, higher incidence rates, and later stage at diagnosis than those with private or Medicare insurance, and were also less likely to undergo curative procedures than those with private, Medicare, or other funded insurance in 6/9 studies.

(p16.2) One review investigated the impact of MDTs on patient outcomes (5807). This was a poor quality systematic review that considered any cancer type. Patient care being managed by an MDT was identified as a significant factor associated with improved survival in NSCLC, according to a single study.

(p16.3) Two reviews evaluated the association between time to diagnosis or treatment, and survival. Both reviews presented a narrative synthesis based on vote counting. The patient journey from symptom onset to diagnosis or treatment initiation can be broken down into multiple different intervals [32]. One review (722) that investigated the effects of timeliness of care for lung cancer as a whole did not differentiate between the diagnostic and treatment interval, whilst the second review (8441), which evaluated any cancer type, but reported separate data for NSCLC, did distinguish between interval types (outlined in Table 4). In the review limited to lung cancer, shorter intervals were associated with significantly improved survival in three out of eighteen studies, and reduced survival in four; eight studies did not report significant findings (722). The second review reported that shorter intervals between either symptom onset or being seen in primary care, and diagnosis were associated with improved survival in NSCLC, according to a single study (in 1/1 and 1/4 studies, respectively) (8441). However, shorter intervals between symptom onset and first being seen in primary care, and being seen in primary care and starting treatment, were associated with reduced survival, according to one out of 2 studies. The discordant finings reported by both these reviews are likely to be due to the 'waiting time paradox' [33][34][35], where patients with rapidly growing or metastatic tumours are more likely to experience symptoms that draw attention to the underlying cancer, but have poor outcomes.

(p16.4) One review evaluated the effect of both surgeon specialty and volume of lung resections for cancer in a hospital or by a surgeon on post-operative mortality or overall survival (414). Hospitals performing a high-volume of resections for lung cancer had significantly better outcomes, in terms of post-operative mortality, than low-volume hospitals, but there was no significant difference between the two for overall survival. Surgeon procedural volume showed no significant effect on post-operative mortality, but general surgeons had significantly higher mortality risks than general thoracic or cardiothoracic surgeons.
