# A Review on Bacteriorhodopsin-Based Bioelectronic Devices

CorpusID: 19094542 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d042475e8309c0cfe985b6a92178d9f5d0e39db](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d042475e8309c0cfe985b6a92178d9f5d0e39db)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Engineering, Computer Science, Materials Science

## (s2) General Structure and Operation Principles of bR
(p2.0) Extracted from H. salinarum, bR molecule is made up of 248 amino acid residues in a polypeptide chain, which consists of seven transmembrane α-helices (shown in Figure 3) [41][42][43][44][45]. Each bR molecule contains a chromophore named retinal, which is covalently linked to the amino group of lysine-216 in the G helix via a protonated Schiff base [46][47][48]. The Schiff base is located in the center of a cavity enclosed by seven transmembrane helices, which effectively divides the proton channel into two partitions: the extracellular and cytoplasmic half-channels [42,44,49]. The extracellular region and cytoplasmic region mostly contains charged residues (e.g., Asp 85) or hydrophobic residues, which serves as the proton acceptor or proton donor to Schiff base, respectively [50,51]. . Schematic structure of bR molecule which contains seven α-helices. The red arrows and the corresponding numbers (in yellow) indicate the path of the transport of a proton from the cytoplasmic to extracellular side of the membrane. The insert on the top right corner is the molecular formula of lysine-216. Reproduced from [51].
## (s5) Optical Volumetric Memories
(p5.0) As described above, the bR protein translates proton orientation from the cytoplasmic side to the outside of the cell membrane, thereby converting the light energy into chemical energy. The proton transfer is accompanied by a series of spectral changes in the protein, known as the bR photocycle, which contains intermediate states with different spectral absorption maximums. In addition to the core loop, the bR cycle of the light has a branch cycle, from the O state to the P state to the Q state, and the P and Q states contain 9-cis-retinal in their photochromic groups. These states are achieved by photochemical excitation of all-trans-retinal, while Asp 85 is protonated simultaneously. Both proton transitive and 9-cis-conversion show low quantum efficiency. However, the consideration of branch states P and Q is critical in volume holography and page-oriented optical memory applications.

(p5.1) The use of conversion from B to K state of bR protein can complete the data read and write. In 2003, the researchers proposed the use of bR as an active layer in a single write-in optical memory [20]. As shown in Figure 6, writing data to the memory area was done by pulsed-doubled Nd: YAG lasers (Coherent, Dieburg, Germany). The reading of the data stored in the bR film can be achieved by a conventional optical microscope or directly by a charge coupled device (CCD) matrix or a CCD line camera, as shown in Figure 7. The spatial distribution of photo anisotropy is easily observed by irradiating the bR film with a later polarized white light and observed by a rotatable linear polarizer. The recording of the information in the bR film was then performed by exposing the 3 ns pulses from the 532 nm light of the Nd: YAG laser. As an example of this new bR application, an identification card equipped with an optical record bar with a capacity of about 1 MB of data is provided. The current recording density is 125 kB/cm 2 , much lower than the optical limit, but allows the use of plastic optical devices for cheap operation.  Most applications are based on the so-called M-type photochromic effect of bR, and the quantum efficiency is quite low, only about 0.02%, which limits its practical application and can only be used for transient optical data storage, while, in the case of bR, a light conversion product called F540 state excited by a 790 nm femtosecond laser pulse is stable for photochemical reactions or thermal pathways. Yao Baoli et al. studied the optical properties of the F540 state and analyzed the photo anisotropy of the F540 state using the Jones matrix theory [22]. When the bR film is excited by a linearly polarized femtosecond laser pulse, the selection of molecules occurs. Its long axis aligns the bR molecules in the light polarization direction and converts it into the F540 state, while the bR molecules in the direction perpendicular to the direction of polarization of the light are still in the B state. bR films exhibit strong anisotropic absorption after being excited by linearly polarized femtosecond lasers. However, in the case of excitation by the circularly polarized femtosecond laser beam, since the probability of the F540 state is equal in all directions, no photo anisotropy is observed in the experiment, and by using two polarization states of the femtosecond pulse laser, which demonstrates the permanent optical anisotropy of the write once read (WORM) optical data store (shown in Figure 8). Since the polarization information is also written on the storage medium, it is not possible to copy it in a common manner. This storage technology has potential applications in advanced optical security. Besides the use of linearly polarized femtosecond laser, phase change of the light is also information for optical memories. Martin Imhof et al. measured the optical changes of the bR film caused by the TPA recording and determined the Muller matrix of the bR film [21], showing the potential application of bR film in safety technology. Researchers have demonstrated that the two-photon-induced photobleaching (TPP) converts the bR film to a phase mask so that it can use angle-multiplexing data storage in security technology. As shown in Figure 9, a readout is performed by a 632 nm tunable linearly polarized beam of a He-Ne laser using a frequency doubled Nd: YAG laser (Infinity 40-100, Coherent, k = 532 nm). The TPP of the bR membrane mainly leads to the phase change of the optical properties, and the absorption of the dichroism plays a very small role. Thus, the bR film is suitable for polarized data storage. bR film can not only carry optical information, but also act as a linear polarizer. In addition to its phase shift characteristics, a bR film containing data written with a linearly polarized laser beam is similar to a linear polarizer. This makes it possible to read the polarization data directly with only one polarizer. Figure 9. The linearly polarized 532 nm pulsed laser is used to cause permanent optical anisotropy in the bR film [21].

(p5.2) As mentioned above, the bR protein has been used in the field of information storage for some preliminary applications. When the bR protein is excited by green light, it follows the light cycle and starts from the K state and ends with the O state. The second excitation caused by the red light raises the branching light cycle from O considered binary 0 to P and Q which is considered binary 1. During this P-state transition, the data are written and stored or read into the Q state. By using these binary files, the data are stored and read from the WH protein-based holographic record. The P and Q states are the height states that are capable of absorbing light in the blue spectrum. The stored data of the bR are erased by blue light excitation. In this way, it stores the perfect holographic material as a memory. bR not only allows writing and reading data, but also helps to erase, refresh and reset data. It refreshes every 1024 bits to complete once, and through the red light to continue to reset the lighting. bR protein could play an important role in future applications as a holographic material in CDMA, CNN-UM and POAC.
## (s6) Holographic Associative Processors
(p6.0) Bacteriorhodopsin has been serving as an archetypal biomaterial for studies involving optical processors. For example, from the view of computer science, Jordan A. Greco et al. explored the use of bacteriorhodopsin in optical associative processors recently. [23] They not only investigated complex Fourier association using computer simulations but also associated the results with the holographic properties of bR-based thin films and explored their uses in algorithms of processors. Owing to ability of bR-based thin film in combining dynamic photochromism with high quantum efficiency of the blue-shifted intermediates during the bR photocycle and structural stability, this work can provide a method for both real-time computing and long-term data storage. The light path diagram of the experimental set up applied in writing and reading a volume transmission hologram is shown in Figure 10. Besides, from a biomolecule directed evolution standpoint, Jason. R Hillebrecht et al. investigated methods to optimize the photoactive protein bR for optical holographic memories recently [24]. They proposed optimization strategy of main and branched photocycle, key photochemical intermediates such as M-state, O-state, and Q-state using site-directed mutagenesis to improve efficacy of bR-based holographic memories. There have been over 800 semi-random mutants being studied for seeking the lengthened M-state and O-state lifetimes at 412 and 650 nm, respectively, through genetic modification. The length of lifetime M-state mutants can improve the holographic sensitive property of bR compared to the native bR for real-time holographic processors permanent. Another more permanent intermediate state, Q-state, is required for application of long-term holographic data storage. Amazingly, that device has the ability of regenerating the entire image by selecting from thousands of stored holograms only requiring a partial input one.

(p6.1) In conclusion, the first step towards achieving the goal of incorporating biomolecule into hybrid semiconductor-based holographic associative processors has been anticipated. With the process of technology, we have reason to believe that bR-based holographic associative processors have more potential foreground in both real-time computing and long-term data storage applications in the future.
## (s8) Motion Biosensors
(p8.0) Motion biosensor is a visual information system based on light-sensitive biomaterials, which instantaneously senses optical flow to detect the information of the motion of objects. Among biomaterials, bR is the most extensively studied. bR as a light-driven proton pump in nature can detect changes in the light just like human eyes, and it is the differential photocurrent response that reflects the information of moving objects. Motion biosensors are different from those traditional silicon-based AVLSI (Analog Very-Large-Scale-Integration) motion sensors. On the one hand, biomaterials are renewable and abundant, while, on the other hand, they are free of bias supply and need little time for preparation process.

(p8.1) A high-speed motion detection system that utilizes light-sensitive bioelectronic components was explored in 2005 [27]. Each sensing element is a bR-based photocell which consists of a sandwich-structural, ITO (Indium Tin Oxide) electrode/bR film/ITO electrode, as shown in Figure 11.

(p8.2) The photoelectric response of bR photodetector experimented by the current mode exhibits a wide dynamic range that is approximately linear over a light power range of µW to W and very fast response time up to µs. In addition, the device exhibits high-resolution because of the high degree of differential photosensitivity of bR material, which makes it possible to achieve real-time vision processing by a densely packed array of numerous bR photocells. Figure 11. Structure of bR-based photocell. Sandwich structure: 1/5, glass substrate; 2/4, ITO transparent conductive coating; 3, polyester thin film; 6, deposited bR film. Reproduced from [27].

(p8.3) Over a long period of development of bR-based motion biosensor, there appears a novel construction of optical-flow sensing function using the bR biopolar photosensor array. For example, Yoshiko Okada-Shudo's group developed a novel optical-flow sensing method [25]. They used a bipolar photosensor array with bR wildtype and its variant (D96N) and obtained the optical-flow curves of motion detection using a simple array. As shown in Figure 12, they deposited ITO in an 8 × 1 pixel pattern on a pair of substrates to fabricate the bipolar photosensor array and each pixel is square of 4 mm × 4 mm arrayed with a gap of 1 mm. To investigate further, research on a two-dimensional bipolar photosensor array with 8 × 8 pixels is under way. Besides, the single photocell marked with a pattern has been developed recently, which can detect the speed and direction of the moving light, especially can detect two or four directions owing to the asymmetry of the pattern. In another work, the group fabricated a photosynthesis protein-based sensor consisting of only one-sensing-element in free of complex software algorithms [26]. When light scans the patterned sensing area, the edges of each pattern can make photoelectric response, which shows information about light's speed and direction as shown in Figure 13. They successfully detected the speed and directions even contain two or four of object motion owing to the asymmetry of those mask patterns. Besides, this motion sensor may be applied to contact-free gestural manipulation with a laser pointer for remote control systems. Up to now, there have been various bR-based motion biosensors, from single sandwich-structural photocell to bR biopolar photosensor array or single photocell marked with a pattern, which may be applied to contact-free gestural manipulation. In general, bR-based motion biosensor has positive promise in remote control systems in the future.
## (s9) X-ray Sensor
(p9.0) The technique of X-ray detection has still been under further development to improve its low sensitivity, complex processing requirements and so on. Therefore, some new materials have been used in the fabrication to achieve real-time and reusable radiation sensing recently. Bacteriorhodopsin, as a light driven proton pump protein molecule, has been used to fabricate photodetectors with sensing range from UV to infrared of the photospectrum since 2006 [100]. More importantly, in 2011, Ahmadi's group proposed that bR could also be used in a sensor to detect the X-ray region for the first time and the flexible X-ray sensor based on bacteriorhodopsin they fabricated was able to achieve real-time monitoring of radiation dosage, energies and dose rates [35]. This flexible X-ray sensor is comprised of the following structure like a sandwich: PET-ITO-(bacteriorhodopsin, Kapton film)-ITO-PET. bR thin film is coated and dried on ITO electrodes which are connected to voltage supply. The Kapton Polyimide film is used to form an electrical insulation between two conductive ITO sheets. The sensing area is in the shape of a circular with radius of 3 mm.

(p9.1) As we know, X-ray interacts with matter in three main ways: photoelectric absorption, elastic and inelastic Compton scattering, and electron-hole pair production and these interactions will produce various types of electrons or photons. Which interaction mechanism it follows will mainly depends on the energy of the interacting X-ray and the composition of the matter. Because of changes in electric current that radiation induced, it can be used as a sensor to detect X-ray and its performance is evaluated under different dose rates, energies and field sizes. The output photocurrent is proportional to the dose rate and energy as well as field size increases. It also shows that integrated electric charge makes a linear response with the change of radiation dosage. In conclusion, the response of this flexible sensor could detect X-ray in real time. Before long, using bR sensor, Morteza Ahmadia's group accomplished measuring X-ray beams in keV order in real time [102].

(p9.2) bR-based X-ray radiation detector can be readily miniaturized and relatively easy to fabricate and use. Besides, it possesses capability for real-time data collection and reusability. In a way, it has great potential in the military and medical field such as both diagnostic radiology and radiation therapy in the future.
## (s12) bR Related Artificial Retinal Prostheses
(p12.0) With more and more attention on bioelectronics for medical care recently, bacteriorhodopsin has been explored as an important photoactive element in the protein-based retinal prosthesis used for patients suffering from retinal degenerative diseases.

(p12.1) Michael Frydrych et al. produced a simple color-sensitive artificial retina, in which bR and its two artificial variants were used to form a matrix as photosensitive elements [19]. The outstanding advantage of this retina was its easy construction and high performance in recognition of color, achieving low-level processing of input information in color space transformation to improve the spatial resolution. They employed an artificial neural network in the system to learn self-organizing color adaptation algorithm to tune color space transformation parameters to learn colors and adapt to an environment as a natural system does. In this system, the optoelectrical signal generated by the elements consisting of three proteins was amplified and connected to a computer that simulated as the preprocessing layer as shown in Figure 19. Owing to bR whose photochromic or photoelectric properties were employed in this system belonged to biomaterials, the system was regarded as an intelligent color-sensitive artificial retina. Figure 19. The system of bR-based artificial retina and the scheme of the bR element. The 40 nm thick gold layer is on the mixed film of PVA and bR as electrode of the conductive glass. Reproduced from [19].

(p12.2) The use of orientated bR in generating the photoelectrical signal can show its unique performance of rapid responsivity, high quantum efficiency. Besides, it possesses optical potentials in coupling its response with charge-sensitive semiconductor arrays directly. Thus, it has been widely used as a photosensitive element in artificial protein-based retinal prosthesis. Except that, artificial retinas based on bR exhibit excellent ability of differential responsivity, edge enhancement and motion detection. Based on the above, we have full reason to believe that bR will have an enormous breakthrough in the study of artificial retinal prostheses in the future.
