# A review of quantitative genetic components of fitness in salmonids: implications for adaptation to future change

CorpusID: 19016867 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7d9958d14be2ad58d9a4e3be22a1088ff7bd235c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7d9958d14be2ad58d9a4e3be22a1088ff7bd235c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Salmonine fishes are experiencing many anthropogenic disturbances and may need to adapt if they are to persist. In their native range, for instance, many populations are extinct or threatened with extinction, typically due to human activities (e.g., Gustafson et al. 2007). Consequently, there is considerable interest in predicting whether and how populations (or more specifically, traits within populations) will evolve in response to these perturbations (e.g., Crozier et al. 2008). Understanding the adaptive potential of these fishes requires information on quantitative genetic parameters, which is the goal of this paper. Specifically, we reviewed estimates of two quantitative genetic parameters, heritability (h 2 ) and genetic correlation (r G ), for fitness traits for Pacific salmon and trout (Oncorhynchus spp.), Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar Linnaeus) and brown trout (Salmo trutta Linnaeus), and the circumpolar charr (Salvelinus spp.).
## (s3) Literature search
(p3.0) We limited our review to the peer-reviewed literature. Consequently, data included in unpublished studies, data published in book chapters, technical reports, or theses/ dissertations were not included. We did not limit studies included in our review any further. Published literature was found by performing searches of three online databases, BIOSYS, ASFA, and Web of Science. We searched using different combinations of the following keywords: trout, salmon, char, charr, Salmo, Oncorhynchus, Salvelinus, heritability, genetic correlation, quantitative genetic parameters, and genetic architecture. As our goal was to include all peer-reviewed published works on the subject, we also scanned the literature cited from books (e.g., Tave 1993), previously published reviews (e.g., Gjedrem 2000), or other published works (e.g., papers estimating quantitative genetic parameters). We included all papers published before and up to April 2007, when the literature search was performed.
## (s16) Discussion
(p16.0) Quantitative genetic parameter estimates are generally calculated for two purposes. First, they are calculated for use as evidence that a trait under study is heritable (a 'virtually certain' outcome, Lynch and Walsh 1998). Second, parameters are estimated for use in models to make predictions about changes in a trait value with a given level of selection. Both points are important for the focus of this special issue of Evolutionary Applications -scientists interested in predicting the evolutionary trajectory of salmonine fishes may want to use previously published quantitative genetic parameter estimates, both as evidence that the trait can/will evolve and for use in predictive models to estimate the rate of response to changing conditions, which determines the likelihood of population persistence in response to environmental change (e.g.,  Table S7). Gomulkiewicz and Holt 1995). Thus, our objectives in conducting this review were to address both of these topics. It is important to bear in mind, however, that these were seldom the goals of the studies that we reviewed, most of which were conducted for the purposes of estimating responses to selection for aquaculture or other production goals. Thus the distribution of studies was very uneven with respect to species and traits under study and did not necessarily reflect the distribution of species at risk of extinction, traits essential for survival or adaptation of wild populations, or other conservation goals. Listed is the F-statistic, associated degrees of freedom and P-value for each factor separately and for their interaction. The data used in these analyses were based on the ''medianized r G dataset'' (see Methods and Table S7). These data were generated based on the 'medianized r G dataset' (see Methods and Table S7).
## (s18) Environmental variation and heritability
(p18.0) Estimates of genetic parameters are influenced by the environment in which parents and offspring are reared. Heritability estimates as ratios of genotypic variance over phenotypic variance are directly affected by the influence of the environment on total phenotypic variance in a trait. Heritability and genetic correlation estimates may also be influenced by the quality of the environment (i.e., whether or not it is 'favorable' to the trait; Hoffman and Merilä 1999). For both parameters, the value (and in the case of correlations, the sign) of the estimate may change under the influence of varying environmental quality (Hoffman and Merilä 1999;Sgrò and Hoffman 2004). Moreover, the class of traits (e.g., life history, morphological) may not be equally affected (Charmantier and Garant 2005). This becomes important when evaluating the results of this review both because the majority of published estimates were generated from experiments conducted under farmed or hatchery conditions ('treatment', Fig. S1E) and because, contrary to a previously published review (Weigensberg and Roff 1996), we found direct effects of treatment and more complex effects of the source population on estimates of genetic parameters. Each of the potential treatment settings (hatchery, farmed, sea-ranched, wild) is associated with a unique set of advantages and disadvantages in terms of estimating quantitative genetic parameters and on the traits mea-sured themselves. For instance, highly controlled operations such as hatcheries or fish farms, allow maximum control over many aspects of the rearing conditions (e.g., temperature, density): a highly domesticated stock may find the hatchery conditions favorable, while a wild stock would find them stressful. Thus, the quantitative genetic parameters estimated may not have relevance for wild populations.
## (s21) Implications for adaptation in a changing global environment
(p21.0) Predicting the response of organisms to future anthropogenic disturbance and climate change is a challenging yet critical goal of contemporary evolutionary ecology. Previous work has demonstrated that evolution can sometimes (Grant and Grant 1995), but not always (Merilä et al. 2001), be predicted in the short-term with knowledge about the strength of selection acting on traits combined with estimates of genetic parameters for those traits.
## (s22) Limitations and recommendations
(p22.0) Palmer (2000) noted that h 2 estimates less than zero are under-reported. In several papers included in our dataset, the authors noted that they had calculated negative h 2 estimates, but as negative values made no sense, they reported the estimates as zero. And for our analyses, h 2 estimates below zero were rounded up to zero, and estimates above one were rounded down to one. The consequence of this action may be a bias in our distribution of h 2 estimates (Palmer 2000). We suggest that authors report the estimated values, which can subsequently be rounded or not depending on the specific application.

(p22.1) In many cases, we could not determine the value of a factor (e.g., life history stage, treatment) from the description in the paper. In most cases, it was the broodstock source which could not be determined (368 h 2 estimates from 25 different papers included in the 'complete h 2 dataset', Table S2; 233 r G estimates from 11 different papers included in the 'complete r G dataset', Table S5). The broodstock source represents the genetic baseline upon which experiments were conducted. Our data analysis revealed differences in parameter estimates among broodstock source types, thus we recommend that authors clearly state the type of population upon which they experiment.

(p22.2) Nearly a third of all parameter estimates were reported without standard errors (h 2 = 1040, r G = 829; based on 'complete datasets', Tables S2 and S5, respectively) and more than half without a P-value (h 2 = 2905, r G = 1857; based on 'complete datasets', Tables S2 and S5, respectively) (a lack also noted earlier by Mousseau and Roff 1987). Instead, authors often just stated whether the estimate was significantly different from zero. We recommend that authors publish standard errors and P-values along with their parameter estimates so that analyses of bias (sensu Roff 1996) can be performed.
