# Continuous Glucose Monitoring Sensors for Diabetes Management: A Review of Technologies and Applications

CorpusID: 201185249 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2e00b3af5e06ddadf639028d6a4450c6afcdbeb0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2e00b3af5e06ddadf639028d6a4450c6afcdbeb0)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Among the many glucose-sensing mechanisms tested to guarantee all the necessary requirements for long-term use of biosensor in free-living conditions, i.e., biocompatibility, lifetime, safety, sensitivity, and specificity, the most popular technique used for continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) systems relies on the glucose oxidation reaction [1]. Specifically, CGM devices based on this principle use a glucose-oxidase-doped platinum electrode deposited on a needle inserted in the subcutaneous tissue to ignite and catalyze glucose oxidation. This results in the production of gluconolactone, hydrogen peroxide, and an electrical current signal that is transformed, in the end, to a glucose concentration through a calibration process using a few self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) samples collected by the patient [2].
## (s4) Personal use
(p4.0) In addition to the retrospective data analysis, CGM systems for personal use allow the individual to visualize in real-time information on current BG and trend on a portable receiver or a smartphone application. Most of personal CGM systems currently on the market, including the Dexcom G5 Mobile and G6, the Medtronic Enlite and Guardian, and the Senseonics Eversense, provide high and low BG alerts that help the patient to detect hypo/hyperglycemic events. Alerts are not available with the FreeStyle Libre, which, despite considered a glucose sensor for personal use, falls within the category of FGM devices. Alerts have been introduced in a new generation FGM device, i.e., the FreeStyle Libre 2. Devices for personal use also allow data sharing with third parties, such as parents, partners and caregivers. The Dexcom G5 Mobile and G6 and the Eversense sensors can share the data in real-time, a feature that is very useful for the pediatric population, as parents are enabled to check remotely their children's BG during school, physical activity or sleep. The Freestyle Libre and the Medtronic Enlite and Guardian sensors can share the data, but not in real-time.

(p4.1) Until a few years ago, all CGM devices for personal use were approved to be used in adjunct to SMBG, i.e., before making the treatment decisions patients were required to check CGM readings by confirmatory fingersticks. Indeed, as described in Section "History of CGM Sensors, " past CGM sensors suffered from accuracy problems due to plasma-interstitium kinetics, imperfect calibrations, compression artefacts and sensitivity to interfering substances, such as acetaminophen. Thanks to recent technological developments and enhancement of signal processing algorithms, the accuracy of CGM sensors has been remarkably improved during the last years, reaching the range of accuracy performance of SMBG devices (MARD <10%). These improvements led to the regulatory approval of CGM nonadjunctive use, i.e., the use of CGM readings to make treatment decisions without confirmatory fingersticks, whose safety and effectiveness have been proved by simulations [8] and a randomized non-inferiority clinical trial [33]. From 2014 to 2015, three CGM sensors received the nonadjunctive label in Europe: the FreeStyle Navigator II, the FreeStyle Libre and the Dexcom G5 Mobile. The approval of nonadjunctive use by the FDA came a couple of years later: the Dexcom G5 Mobile obtained the approval in 2016, followed by the FreeStyle Libre in 2017 and the Dexcom G6 in 2018. Despite the nonadjunctive label, sensor companies still recommend the use of confirmatory fingersticks when symptoms do not match sensor's readings or a trend arrow is not displayed. With the FreeStyle Libre, confirmatory fingersticks are also recommended when glucose is rapidly changing and in order to confirm hypoglycemia or impending hypoglycemia.

(p4.2) Real-time CGM sensors for personal use, in particular those approved for nonadjunctive use, can be used by the patients to make therapeutic decisions, e.g., insulin dosing. Compared to conventional SMBG devices, CGM also provides information on current glucose trend that can be exploited for a more accu-rate calculation of insulin boluses. Clinical experts in the field have proposed some guidelines that recommend the patient to increase or decrease the insulin dose by a certain amount (either proportional to the dose or inversely proportional to the patient's correction factor) when the CGM trend arrow indicates glucose concentration is rising or decreasing [34]. Nevertheless, these guidelines have never been assessed in clinical trials and survey data evidenced that patients actually perform much greater corrections to the insulin dose than those recommended by the guidelines [35]. A recent in silico study compared three different trend adjustment guidelines in simulation [36]; the results evidenced that none of the guidelines prevailed on the others for all the pre-meal scenarios, suggesting that these simple guidelines can be further improved.
## (s7) THE IMPACT OF CGM ON DAILY MANAGEMENT OF DIABETES
(p7.0) Nowadays, the beneficial impact brought by the integration of a CGM system in diabetes management has been proven [49]. Indeed, initial reluctance from both clinicians and patients has diminished through years thanks to the constant accumulation of clinical evidence from research over adult and pediatric populations with T1DM [29]. Just to mention a few, recent research proved CGM sensors to be effective for patients with frequent hypoglycemic events [7], sensor augmented pumps [50], and gestational diabetes [47], treated with either continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) or a multiple daily injection (MDI) insulin regimen. Published randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have been devoted to study the impact of CGM sensor systems on (1) improving glycemic control, (2) mitigating hypoglycemic episodes, (3) reducing glycemic variability. In the following, some significant literature results proving the beneficial impact of CGM are reported.
## (s10) Reduction of glycemic variability
(p10.0) Several studies appear to confirm that glycemic variability can play a key-role in the appearance of vascular damages [29] and in the set-up of hypoglycemic events [55]. CGM sensors are important also in reducing glycemic variability in individuals affected by diabetes. In Jamiolkowska et al. [56], 40 subjects aged 14.6 years have been recruited to evaluate whether the use of CGM could improve glycemic variability in terms of glucose standard deviation (SD) and area under the curve (AUC). Results showed a reduction of SD from 60.7 to 51.7 mg/dL as well as a decreasing of AUC with threshold fixed at 140 mg/dL from 41.2% of the control group to 21.2% of the group that accepted the adoption of CGM use. Another study from Tumminia et al. [57] compared 10 individuals with T1DM undergoing MDI therapy. Participants were monitored for 6 months while being randomized into two groups to compare SMBG versus CGM in terms of SD of the glucose profile and range of glycemic excursions (RGEs). Results showed a reduction of both SD and RGE when using CGM compared to SMBG (62.3 mg/dL vs. 75.5 mg/dL and 132.3 mg/dL vs. 175.3 mg/dL, respectively).

(p10.1) In summary, the use of CGM was shown to be crucial to allow people affected by diabetes reducing glycemic variability. As a result, this unlocks the possibility of mitigating the shortcoming of both hypo and hyperglycemia as well as dangerous micro/macrovascular complications.
## (s12) Decision support systems
(p12.0) The increased amount of available information brought by wearable devices, such as CGM systems and physical activity monitoring bands, has led to the development of decisionmaking tools and applications that can enhance the management of the disease [58]. A decision support system (DSS) gives the possibility to support users with proactive and personalized decisions in any scenario of their daily living and allows to react at shorter time scales. Over the past few years, DSSs for diabetes have been an emerging concept in health care. By means of this new technology, data can be automatically collected, transmitted, aggregated with other physiological data, analyzed, stored, and presented to the patient. By integrating e-health and tele-monitoring systems, DSSs for T1DM have the potential to improve glycemic outcomes thanks to prevention of hypo-or hyperglycemic events, reducing uncertainty when making critical self-management decisions [59]. A DSS for diabetes treatment provides an alternative to the closed-loop system, the so-called artificial pancreas (AP). Indeed, a wide range of users do not feel confident with the use of AP systems, being concerned about errors occurring in the insulin pump, and they prefer an open-loop therapy, which can be assisted by DSSs. Most of DSSs already available in the literature are composed by a predictive glucose module (which alerts the user whenever its BG is predicted to fall outside the safe range in the next future), an insulin suspension module (which temporarily suspends basal insulin delivery to avoid hypoglycemia when BG is critically low in patient using insulin pumps), and an adaptive insulin bolus calculator (which provides users with a suggestion of the correct insulin dosage to compensate the BG fluctuation due to a meal).
## (s13) Basal insulin attenuation/suspension
(p13.0) Since 2006, medical devices integrating CGM sensors and insulin pumps have become commercially available, the Medtronic MiniMed Paradigm REAL-time system being the first device allowing such integration. Later in 2009, Medtronic integrated systems have been equipped with the low glucose suspend (or threshold suspend) feature that allows to automatically suspend basal insulin infusion for up to 2 hours when CGM measurements fall below a user-defined low glucose threshold. This feature, implemented in the Medtronic Paradigm Veo and MiniMed 530G, was designed to mitigate hypoglycemic events in insulin pump therapy [65]. Most recent Medtronic systems, i.e., the MiniMed 640G and 630G, implement the SmartGuard feature, which also allows to suspend basal insulin infusion when CGM measurements are predicted to fall below a preset threshold in the next 30 minutes (prediction low glucose management) [66].

(p13.1) Basal insulin suspension algorithms have been intensively studied also by academic research groups. In particular, the group led by Dr. Bruce Buckingham have been very active in this research line since 2009, by testing several prediction algorithms and insulin suspension criteria in both inpatient and outpatient clinical trials. Their final algorithm performs 30-minute ahead glucose prediction by a Kalman filter and suspends basal insulin when the predicted glucose concentration fall below 80 mg/dL [67]. Basal insulin delivery is restarted as soon as CGM measurements start rising or after 2 consecutive hours of suspension.

(p13.2) The algorithms developed by Buckingham et al. [67], as well as those implemented in commercial devices, can only turn on or off basal insulin delivery. A different approach was adopted by the group led by Prof. Kovatchev at the University of Virginia, who proposed algorithms to attenuate, rather than suspend, basal insulin delivery in presence of hypoglycemia risk. Specifically, their "power brakes" algorithm performs 15-minute ahead glucose prediction using physiological model-based Kalman filtering and applies a BG risk function in order to calculate a basal insulin attenuation factor depending on predicted risk of hypoglycemia [68].

(p13.3) Several clinical trials were performed to assess the safety and effectiveness of basal insulin suspension algorithms both in clinic under controlled conditions [69][70][71][72] and at home under real-life conditions [67,[73][74][75]. Evidences from these trials supported the effectiveness of these algorithms in reducing hypoglycemia, at the expenses of a slight increase in hyperglycemia. Nevertheless, the use of basal insulin suspension was not associated with a significant increase of HbA1c or occurrence of ketoacidosis.
