# A Review on Neuronutrition

CorpusID: 202000565 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1d8b5a1b3a30f31bf0358bcc574a534cbbf3897](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1d8b5a1b3a30f31bf0358bcc574a534cbbf3897)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s6) Nerve Impulse Propagation
(p6.0) The speed at which the impulses propagate is influenced by the myelination of the nerves. Myelination is a process of insulating the nerve fibers with the production of the myelin sheath which is made up of lipids and proteins. This sheath acts as an insulator which allows the rapid and efficient transmission of the nerve impulses. To maintain the integrity of the myelin sheath, folate and vitamin B12 is essential and thiamine is required for the maintenance of the nerve membrane potential and the proper conductance. Moreover, iron is an essential substance in the development of cells that produce myelin (Huskisson et al., 2007).
## (s7) Homocysteine Metabolism
(p7.0) Homocysteine is a sulfur-containing amino acid that is an intermediate in the metabolism of sulfur-containing amino acid methionine. This homocysteine can be remethylated into methionine with folate and vitamin B12 and it can also be metabolized into cysteine with vitamin B6. In the absence of these nutrients, the homocysteine level is increased. Elevated homocysteine level in the blood is linked with dementia and Alzheimer's disease (Prins et al., 2002).
## (s10) Zinc
(p10.0) The brain contains high levels of Zinc where it has catalytic, structural, and regulatory roles in cellular metabolism. Zinc has an additional role in the central nervous system as a neurosecretory product and as a cofactor. In this role, zinc is highly concentrated in the synaptic vesicles of the so-called 'zinc-containing' neurons. These neurons are exclusively found in the forebrain. Neuropsychological impairment is one major health consequence of zinc deficiency. Zinc is involved in many enzymatic reactions inside of the brain and it assists with the metabolization of omega-3-fatty acids. More than one-third of the world's population is zinc deficient. Research has linked low dietary zinc intake to depressive symptoms-the lower the zinc levels, the greater the depression. Zinc levels are 30% lower in individuals with ADHD. Sources of zinc are pumpkin seeds, beans, nuts, oatmeal, egg yolks, fresh gingerroot, etc (Sandstead et al., 2000).
## (s17) neurodIseAses A n d d I e t
(p17.0) A neurologic deficit refers to the abnormal function of a specific body area. This altered function is due to the weaker function of the nerves system causing neurodegenerative diseases. They are caused by degeneration (dysfunction and death) of neurons within the brain. Neurological disorders are now the leading source of disability globally, and aging is increasing the burden of neurodegenerative disorders. Some of the most leading neurodegenerative diseases are Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, dementia, and cognitive decline, etc which can be prevented by changing the form of diet.

(p17.1) Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by a massive neuronal death-causing memory loss, cognitive impairment and behavioral alteration that ultimately lead to dementia and death. Hyperphosphorylation of tau protein and betaamyloid results in "protein misfolding disorder" which in turn leads to Alzheimer's disease. The number of AD patients in the world is estimated at 46.8 million and is expected to increase up to 131.5 million by 2050. A higher dietary intake of vitamin C, E, B 12 , flavonoids, antioxidants can reduce the risk of developing AD. The polyphenols containing beverages have a positive effect on the treatment of AD as they reduce the homocysteine concentration. Several polyphenols have the potential to scavenge reactive oxygen species (ROS) and superoxide radical. A diet containing a minimum amount of saturated fatty acids and a high amount of unsaturated fatty acids, polyphenols, vitamins and regular intake of fruits helps in reducing the risk of developing AD. According to the World Health Organization, the Mediterranean diet is a positive approach in preventing many diseases including AD. It is proved through numerous experimental data that nutrients such as PUFA, polyphenols, vitamins can enervate the neurodegenerative process in AD (Ravi et al., 2018).

(p17.2) Parkinson's disease is a second most chronic degenerative disorder normally defined as a disorder of movements that affects nerve cells in the part of the brain controlling muscle movements. In a normal person, brain Cells in Substantia Nigra produce and release dopamine which lands on neurons of the other parts of the brain which is responsible for the regulation of muscle movement. But in the case of Parkinson's disease patient, the Substantia Nigra degenerates which no longer able to produce dopamine which leads to loss of control of muscle movements resulting in Parkinson's disease. In working up with the PD patients, it is advised to include the nutritional assessment as it may ameliorate (Barichella et al., 2009). Fruits and vegetables with a high amount of phytochemicals and antioxidants may slow down the progression of PD. Omega 3 fatty acids have a protective effect on neurodegenerative disorders. Normally a diet that is rich in phytochemicals, bioconstituents can be used for disease management (Seidl et al., 2014). Dietary intake of vegetables from Solanaceae family such as tomatoes, peppers showed reduced risk towards PD (Nielsen et al., 2013). conclusIon No single food is key to good brain health but rather a combination of healthy foods is likely to help protect the brain. From this review, it is important to notice that the pattern of diet over life span affects brain health. Most of the population does not meet the recommended dietary allowance (RDA) of important brain vitamins and minerals. These are only the minimum recommended intakes. Diet, an exercise in our daily routine have the potential to alter brain health and mental function. The studies relating to diet and brain health are at its infancy stage and hence further clinical studies are needed for the effect of diet, exercise, nutrition with neurodegenerative diseases. Ultimately the success in clinical trials will results in the incorporation of the nutrients in daily diet. 
