# Radar and Communication Co-existence: an Overview

CorpusID: 202561030 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd6e46880757904ae5b9b41fab42a6e48bf7d31d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd6e46880757904ae5b9b41fab42a6e48bf7d31d)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s2) A. System Model
(p2.0) In the discussion below, we unify the Single-Input Single-Output (SISO) and MIMO settings as they are amenable to similar approaches. Thus, to keep the discussion as general as possible, we consider a scenario wherein a MIMO radar with M T transmit and M R receive (typically, but not necessarily co-located) antennas should co-exist with a MIMO communication system equipped with N T transmit and N R receive antennas, respectively, as illustrated in Fig.1 The MIMO radar transmits M T signals, where the signal transmitted from the i-th transmit element is characterized by a fast-time code c i = [c i (0), . . . , c i (P r − 1)] ∈ C Pr . The continuous-time waveform for the i-th transmit element is then given byc

(p2.1) Here ψ(·) is a Nyquist waveform of bandwidth 1 B = 1 Tr , i.e., such that its autocorrelation R ψ (·) satisfies the condition R ψ (kT r ) = δ(k), with δ(·) denoting the Kronecker delta, and 1

(p2.2) Tr is the fast-time coding rate. The product between the bandwidth and the "effective" duration of these coded pulses is typically much larger than one. Therefore, these signals are sometimes referred to as "sophisticated waveforms", as opposed to conventional un-sophisticated signals whose bandwidth is on the order of the inverse of their duration.

(p2.3) In this architecture of Figure 1, every radiating element is allowed to transmit a train of N coded pulses of the form (1), spaced the pulse repetition time T apart, and amplitudemodulated by a slow-time code g i = [g i (0), g i (1), ..., g i (N − 1)] T ∈ C N . Thus the i-th element transmits the signal

(p2.4) 1 Nyquist waveforms with bandwidth B = 1 Tr are strictly band-limited, and therefore not time-limited. In practice, they are generated by truncation of an ideal waveform, whereby the discretization may incur some degree of aliasing: however, by allowing some excess bandwidth, this effect can be kept under control. A detailed discussion can be found in [32]. Some special cases of the radar signal model (2) are as follows:

(p2.5) 1) A single-antenna transmitter using a single signal with fast-time code c = [c(0), . . . , c(P r − 1)] T , corresponding to N = M T = 1.

(p2.6) In the discussion below, we unify the Single-Input Single-Output (SISO) and MIMO settings as they are amenable to similar approaches. Thus, to keep the discussion as general as possible, we consider a scenario wherein a MIMO radar with M T transmit and M R receive (typically, but not necessarily co-located) antennas should co-exist with a MIMO communication system equipped with N T transmit and N R receive antennas, respectively, as illustrated in Fig.1 The MIMO radar transmits M T signals, where the signal transmitted from the i-th transmit element is characterized by a fast-time code c i = [c i (0), . . . , c i (P r − 1)] ∈ C Pr . The continuous-time waveform for the i-th transmit element is then given byc

(p2.7) Here ψ(·) is a Nyquist waveform of bandwidth 1 B = 1 Tr , i.e., such that its autocorrelation R ψ (·) satisfies the condition R ψ (kT r ) = δ(k), with δ(·) denoting the Kronecker delta, and 1

(p2.8) Tr is the fast-time coding rate. The product between the bandwidth and the "effective" duration of these coded pulses is typically much larger than one. Therefore, these signals are sometimes referred to as "sophisticated waveforms", as opposed to conventional un-sophisticated signals whose bandwidth is on the order of the inverse of their duration.

(p2.9) In this architecture of Figure 1, every radiating element is allowed to transmit a train of N coded pulses of the form (1), spaced the pulse repetition time T apart, and amplitudemodulated by a slow-time code g i = [g i (0), g i (1), ..., g i (N − 1)] T ∈ C N . Thus the i-th element transmits the signal

(p2.10) 1 Nyquist waveforms with bandwidth B = 1 Tr are strictly band-limited, and therefore not time-limited. In practice, they are generated by truncation of an ideal waveform, whereby the discretization may incur some degree of aliasing: however, by allowing some excess bandwidth, this effect can be kept under control. A detailed discussion can be found in [32]. Some special cases of the radar signal model (2) are as follows:

(p2.11) 1) A single-antenna transmitter using a single signal with fast-time code c = [c(0), . . . , c(P r − 1)] T , corresponding to N = M T = 1.
## (s5) 4)
(p5.0) A multi-antenna transmitter wherein each antenna transmits a train of unsophisticated signals, amplitude-modulated by the slow-time code. In this case, P r = 1 and the N ×M T space-time code matrix G = [g 1 , . . . , g M T ] is the degree of freedom at the transmitter side [17]. Radars use radio waves to determine the range, angle, or velocity of objects. The operation of a typical MIMO radar receive chain is summarized in the box of Page 4. The radar range resolution is dictated, for a given Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), by the transmit bandwidth, i.e., 1/T r in (1). The velocity resolution is determined by the duration of coherent integration, i.e., N T in (2). In situations 1) and 3) no Doppler processing is undertaken, mainly due to the fact that typical single-pulse durations are too short to allow measuring the Doppler shift induced by targets in moderate radial motion. In settings 2) and 4) moving objects generate steering vectors and Doppler shifts up to 1 T can be unambiguously measured. Likewise, pulse trains with Pulse Repetition Time (PRT) T generate range ambiguities whereby scatterers located at distances corresponding to delays which are integer multiples of T contribute to the same range cell.

(p5.1) The signal model for the communication system is simpler in that we just have to distinguish between the case of single and multiple transmit antennas. In particular, we assume that the communication system operates on the same frequency band as the radar, occupying a fraction B L of its dedicated bandwidth. Setting T c = L/B, the signal radiated by the i-th transmit element is written as

(p5.2) where v i (p) is the data sequence to be transmitted, and ψ L (·) satisfies the Nyquist criterion with respect to T c = LT r . The situation of full spectral overlap corresponds to L = 1.
## (s6) B. Uncoordinated design: radar centric
(p6.0) We begin by discussing a "radar-centric" approach in which the radar function is considered primary, while unlicensed users are allowed to transmit in partial spectral overlap on the same bandwidth. Following [9], [10], we assume N I interferers of the form (3). Their presence is acknowledged by limiting the amount of interference the radar produces on the shared bandwidths. The focus is on the design of the radar system, assumed to employ a single coded pulse according to Classic collocated MIMO radar processing traditionally includes the following stages: 1) Sampling: At each radar RX 1 ≤ j ≤ M R , the signal r j (t) is projected onto the orthonormal system {ψ(t − mT r )} Pr−1 m=0 and sampled at its Nyquist rate B = 1 Tr , creating the samples r j (m), 0 ≤ m ≤ P r − 1. 2) Matched filter: The sampled signal is convolved with the transmitted radar codes c i , 1 ≤ i ≤ M T . The time resolution attained in this step is 1/B. 3) Beamforming: The correlations between the observation vectors from the previous step and the steering vectors corresponding to each azimuth on the grid defined by the array aperture are computed. 4) Doppler detection: The correlations between the resulting vectors and Doppler vectors, with Doppler frequencies lying on the grid defined by the number of pulses, are computed. The Doppler resolution is 1/N T . 5) Peak detection: A heuristic detection process, in which knowledge of the number of targets, targets' powers, clutter location, and so on, may help in discovering targets' positions. For example, if we know there are κ targets, then we can choose the κ-strongest points in the map. Alternatively, constant false alarm (FA) rate detectors determine a power threshold, above which a peak is considered to originate from a target so that a required probability of FA is achieved. situation 1) of the previous section, designed so as to guarantee the maximum possible Signal to Interference-plus-Noise Ratio (SINR) at the radar RX. Assume that the radar RX is equipped with a single antenna and the interference is dominated by the direct path between the radar and the communication: the subscript j can thus be removed from the variables in (4). Thus, r j (t) becomes r(t), and u CR

(p6.1) dictated by the distance between the i-th communication TX and the radar RX. Such a model holds for narrowband systems where the flat fading assumption is valid [14], and can be extended to more sophisticated situations by using different forms of channel responses [34]. For simplicity, we assume there is only one target and let the target delay be τ = 0.
## (s7) C. Uncoordinated design: communication centric
(p7.0) The approach of optimizing radar waveforms, although theoretically well established, is not always applicable, mainly due to the fact that governmental and military agencies are unwilling to make major changes in their radar deployments, which may impose huge costs. Thus, coexisting communication systems must be equipped with proper counter-measures to guarantee required Quality of Service (QoS) when the radar system(s) do not modify their transmission policy. Attention is thus shifted back to the communication transceiver, which explains the name "communication-centric" design. The approaches so far available in the literature focus either on the receiver [11], when prior information on the radar signals is not available, or on the transmitter [13], when the structure of the radar transmitted waveform is known.

(p7.1) Assume first the scenario considered in [11], wherein a multiplicity of radars may be potentially active in full spectral overlap with a communication system. Each radar is allowed to transmit a sophisticated waveform, but no prior knowledge as to the number of active systems, their distance from the communication receiver or the channel gains is available. The scenario is thus akin to the one outlined in situation 3) of the list of Sec. II-A, wherein M T now plays the role of the maximum number of potentially active emitters. The antennas of such a "multiple input" system are widely spaced, so that the delays with which their signals arrive at the communication receiver are all different and unknown.

(p7.2) As to the communication signal, the scenario assumed in [11] is fairly general. The transmitted symbols are assumed to undergo suitable pre-coding, where the choice of the precoding matrix dictates the type of system, ranging from Code-Division Multiple Access (CDMA) to Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing (OFDM). In particular, suppose the communication and radar systems have the same bandwidth, i.e., L = 1, T c = T r and ψ L (t) = ψ(t). The signal transmitted by the communication system in the interval [0, P r T r ] is assumed to have the form
## (s8) D. Coordinated design
(p8.0) The major drawback of the previous approaches is that they rely on a simplified scenario wherein several important phenomena are not accounted for: -The radar system, especially when operating in search mode, generates reverberation from the surrounding environment, the so-called clutter, which impairs not only its own performance, but also the performance of the communication system. -The scattering centers generating clutter could have radial motion with respect to both the radar and the communication receivers, thus generating Doppler shifts that should be accounted for if slow-time coding is considered.

(p8.1) Cooperation between the active systems, possibly operating in full spectral overlap, in order to negotiate the respective transmit policies and adjust the corresponding detection/demodulation strategies is the idea underlying co-design, first introduced in [3], and further developed in [14], [16], [17]. It is generally assumed that the radar and the communication system may exchange information. The availability of large data-bases accurately mapping the scattering characteristics of large areas has allowed the development of cognitive systems (see, e.g., [36], [37]): joint design of the radar waveform(s) and the communication system codebook thus appears as a natural means to allow co-existence by preserving the performances of both. Consider an N T × N R communication system co-existing in full spectral overlap with an M T × M R MIMO radar with closely spaced antennas and co-located transmitter and receiver. We denote by D the space-time code matrix of the radar: if fast-time coding is adopted, then D = C, with C defined in situation 3). If, instead, slow-time coding is undertaken, then D = G and situation 4) occurs. Denote by V the signal matrix of the communication system, composed of the N T spatial codewords emitted in successive epochs.
## (s10) A. Environment sensing techniques
(p10.0) The idea of knowledge-based design is central for spectrumsharing systems [4], [7], [14], [17]- [19], [39]. The communication and/or the radar system undertake suitable "environment sensing" phases in order to determine the transmit policies. Inspired by cooperative methods in cognitive radio networks, [14] uses pilot signals to estimate the channels and feed back the channel information between the subsystems, possibly assigning to one of them a functional priority, like, e.g., in [40], [41], where the radar is considered primary. These approaches rely on a centralized architecture, namely on a strict coordination between the active players in order to allow co-existence.

(p10.1) More recently, approaches wherein the radar and/or the communication system are able to "learn" the environment without transmitting pilots or avoiding the need for coordination have been proposed. These advanced approaches are discussed in the following two scenarios: 1) Environment sensing at the communication RX: A communication system shares its spectrum with an ensemble of potential interferers, i.e., a set of radar/sensing systems. The interfering waveforms from the radars lie in the subspace of a known dictionary, and impinge on the communication RX with unknown, possibly time-varying delays and coupling coefficients. 2) Environment sensing at the radar RX: A sparse target scene is assumed, allowing to reduce the radar sampling rate without sacrificing delay and Doppler resolution. The Xampling framework can be adopted, where the system architecture is designed for sampling and processing of analog inputs at rates far below Nyquist, whose underlying structure can be modeled as a union of subspaces [24]. The former situation has been described in Sec. II-C. The communication RX must be made adaptive, in order to accomplish jointly the two tasks of interference estimation/removal and data demodulation. For the latter situation, the SpeCX system (shown in Figure 5) was proposed in [4], and combines sub-Nyquist multi-band sensing with sub-Nyquist radar so as to enable the radar to sense the communication channel at very low rates. Compared to the other works, SpeCX presents a complete solution that shows recovery of both the radar and communication signal with minimal known information about the spectrum.
## (s12) B. Knowledge-based design
(p12.0) In this subsection, we survey knowledge-based radar transmission designs based on environment sensing. For example, in some settings, the radar interference can be eliminated by forcing the radar waveforms to live in the null space of the interference channel between the radar transmitters and the communication receiver [18]. This idea is well studied in the cognitive radio research community, and also applied to spectrum sharing systems. Typical approaches include exploiting the spatial degrees of freedom granted by a MIMO radar [7], [18], [19], [39] and adaptive transmit/receive strategies to test the occupancy of the frequency bands [4].
## (s14) A. Embedding data into radar waveforms
(p14.0) A fairly natural evolution of radar and communication coexistence is to use radar to perform communication, also known as Dual Function Radar Communication (DFRC) [47]. This approach is illustrated in Figure 6, wherein radar and communication systems are combined in the same hardware platform, usually with the same waveform or transmitter, which should be designed so as to guarantee the performance of both systems. As echoed by the name itself, in these  architectures co-existence is basically "functional" and no spectrum overlap or resource negotiation takes place. This philosophy relies on the strategy of "information embedding". Consider a joint radar communication platform equipped with M T transmit antennas arranged as a uniform linear array (ULA). The radar receiver employs an array of M R receive antennas with an arbitrary linear configuration. Without loss of generality, a single-element communication receiver is assumed to be located in the direction θ c , which is known to the transmitter.
## (s28) A. System Model
(p28.0) In the discussion below, we unify the Single-Input Single-Output (SISO) and MIMO settings as they are amenable to similar approaches. Thus, to keep the discussion as general as possible, we consider a scenario wherein a MIMO radar with M T transmit and M R receive (typically, but not necessarily co-located) antennas should co-exist with a MIMO communication system equipped with N T transmit and N R receive antennas, respectively, as illustrated in Fig.1 The MIMO radar transmits M T signals, where the signal transmitted from the i-th transmit element is characterized by a fast-time code c i = [c i (0), . . . , c i (P r − 1)] ∈ C Pr . The continuous-time waveform for the i-th transmit element is then given byc

(p28.1) Here ψ(·) is a Nyquist waveform of bandwidth 1 B = 1 Tr , i.e., such that its autocorrelation R ψ (·) satisfies the condition R ψ (kT r ) = δ(k), with δ(·) denoting the Kronecker delta, and 1

(p28.2) Tr is the fast-time coding rate. The product between the bandwidth and the "effective" duration of these coded pulses is typically much larger than one. Therefore, these signals are sometimes referred to as "sophisticated waveforms", as opposed to conventional un-sophisticated signals whose bandwidth is on the order of the inverse of their duration.

(p28.3) In this architecture of Figure 1, every radiating element is allowed to transmit a train of N coded pulses of the form (1), spaced the pulse repetition time T apart, and amplitudemodulated by a slow-time code g i = [g i (0), g i (1), ..., g i (N − 1)] T ∈ C N . Thus the i-th element transmits the signal

(p28.4) 1 Nyquist waveforms with bandwidth B = 1 Tr are strictly band-limited, and therefore not time-limited. In practice, they are generated by truncation of an ideal waveform, whereby the discretization may incur some degree of aliasing: however, by allowing some excess bandwidth, this effect can be kept under control. A detailed discussion can be found in [32]. Some special cases of the radar signal model (2) are as follows:

(p28.5) 1) A single-antenna transmitter using a single signal with fast-time code c = [c(0), . . . , c(P r − 1)] T , corresponding to N = M T = 1.

(p28.6) In the discussion below, we unify the Single-Input Single-Output (SISO) and MIMO settings as they are amenable to similar approaches. Thus, to keep the discussion as general as possible, we consider a scenario wherein a MIMO radar with M T transmit and M R receive (typically, but not necessarily co-located) antennas should co-exist with a MIMO communication system equipped with N T transmit and N R receive antennas, respectively, as illustrated in Fig.1 The MIMO radar transmits M T signals, where the signal transmitted from the i-th transmit element is characterized by a fast-time code c i = [c i (0), . . . , c i (P r − 1)] ∈ C Pr . The continuous-time waveform for the i-th transmit element is then given byc

(p28.7) Here ψ(·) is a Nyquist waveform of bandwidth 1 B = 1 Tr , i.e., such that its autocorrelation R ψ (·) satisfies the condition R ψ (kT r ) = δ(k), with δ(·) denoting the Kronecker delta, and 1

(p28.8) Tr is the fast-time coding rate. The product between the bandwidth and the "effective" duration of these coded pulses is typically much larger than one. Therefore, these signals are sometimes referred to as "sophisticated waveforms", as opposed to conventional un-sophisticated signals whose bandwidth is on the order of the inverse of their duration.

(p28.9) In this architecture of Figure 1, every radiating element is allowed to transmit a train of N coded pulses of the form (1), spaced the pulse repetition time T apart, and amplitudemodulated by a slow-time code g i = [g i (0), g i (1), ..., g i (N − 1)] T ∈ C N . Thus the i-th element transmits the signal

(p28.10) 1 Nyquist waveforms with bandwidth B = 1 Tr are strictly band-limited, and therefore not time-limited. In practice, they are generated by truncation of an ideal waveform, whereby the discretization may incur some degree of aliasing: however, by allowing some excess bandwidth, this effect can be kept under control. A detailed discussion can be found in [32]. Some special cases of the radar signal model (2) are as follows:

(p28.11) 1) A single-antenna transmitter using a single signal with fast-time code c = [c(0), . . . , c(P r − 1)] T , corresponding to N = M T = 1.
## (s31) 4)
(p31.0) A multi-antenna transmitter wherein each antenna transmits a train of unsophisticated signals, amplitude-modulated by the slow-time code. In this case, P r = 1 and the N ×M T space-time code matrix G = [g 1 , . . . , g M T ] is the degree of freedom at the transmitter side [17]. Radars use radio waves to determine the range, angle, or velocity of objects. The operation of a typical MIMO radar receive chain is summarized in the box of Page 4. The radar range resolution is dictated, for a given Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), by the transmit bandwidth, i.e., 1/T r in (1). The velocity resolution is determined by the duration of coherent integration, i.e., N T in (2). In situations 1) and 3) no Doppler processing is undertaken, mainly due to the fact that typical single-pulse durations are too short to allow measuring the Doppler shift induced by targets in moderate radial motion. In settings 2) and 4) moving objects generate steering vectors and Doppler shifts up to 1 T can be unambiguously measured. Likewise, pulse trains with Pulse Repetition Time (PRT) T generate range ambiguities whereby scatterers located at distances corresponding to delays which are integer multiples of T contribute to the same range cell.

(p31.1) The signal model for the communication system is simpler in that we just have to distinguish between the case of single and multiple transmit antennas. In particular, we assume that the communication system operates on the same frequency band as the radar, occupying a fraction B L of its dedicated bandwidth. Setting T c = L/B, the signal radiated by the i-th transmit element is written as

(p31.2) where v i (p) is the data sequence to be transmitted, and ψ L (·) satisfies the Nyquist criterion with respect to T c = LT r . The situation of full spectral overlap corresponds to L = 1.
## (s32) B. Uncoordinated design: radar centric
(p32.0) We begin by discussing a "radar-centric" approach in which the radar function is considered primary, while unlicensed users are allowed to transmit in partial spectral overlap on the same bandwidth. Following [9], [10], we assume N I interferers of the form (3). Their presence is acknowledged by limiting the amount of interference the radar produces on the shared bandwidths. The focus is on the design of the radar system, assumed to employ a single coded pulse according to Classic collocated MIMO radar processing traditionally includes the following stages: 1) Sampling: At each radar RX 1 ≤ j ≤ M R , the signal r j (t) is projected onto the orthonormal system {ψ(t − mT r )} Pr−1 m=0 and sampled at its Nyquist rate B = 1 Tr , creating the samples r j (m), 0 ≤ m ≤ P r − 1. 2) Matched filter: The sampled signal is convolved with the transmitted radar codes c i , 1 ≤ i ≤ M T . The time resolution attained in this step is 1/B. 3) Beamforming: The correlations between the observation vectors from the previous step and the steering vectors corresponding to each azimuth on the grid defined by the array aperture are computed. 4) Doppler detection: The correlations between the resulting vectors and Doppler vectors, with Doppler frequencies lying on the grid defined by the number of pulses, are computed. The Doppler resolution is 1/N T . 5) Peak detection: A heuristic detection process, in which knowledge of the number of targets, targets' powers, clutter location, and so on, may help in discovering targets' positions. For example, if we know there are κ targets, then we can choose the κ-strongest points in the map. Alternatively, constant false alarm (FA) rate detectors determine a power threshold, above which a peak is considered to originate from a target so that a required probability of FA is achieved. situation 1) of the previous section, designed so as to guarantee the maximum possible Signal to Interference-plus-Noise Ratio (SINR) at the radar RX. Assume that the radar RX is equipped with a single antenna and the interference is dominated by the direct path between the radar and the communication: the subscript j can thus be removed from the variables in (4). Thus, r j (t) becomes r(t), and u CR

(p32.1) dictated by the distance between the i-th communication TX and the radar RX. Such a model holds for narrowband systems where the flat fading assumption is valid [14], and can be extended to more sophisticated situations by using different forms of channel responses [34]. For simplicity, we assume there is only one target and let the target delay be τ = 0.
## (s33) C. Uncoordinated design: communication centric
(p33.0) The approach of optimizing radar waveforms, although theoretically well established, is not always applicable, mainly due to the fact that governmental and military agencies are unwilling to make major changes in their radar deployments, which may impose huge costs. Thus, coexisting communication systems must be equipped with proper counter-measures to guarantee required Quality of Service (QoS) when the radar system(s) do not modify their transmission policy. Attention is thus shifted back to the communication transceiver, which explains the name "communication-centric" design. The approaches so far available in the literature focus either on the receiver [11], when prior information on the radar signals is not available, or on the transmitter [13], when the structure of the radar transmitted waveform is known.

(p33.1) Assume first the scenario considered in [11], wherein a multiplicity of radars may be potentially active in full spectral overlap with a communication system. Each radar is allowed to transmit a sophisticated waveform, but no prior knowledge as to the number of active systems, their distance from the communication receiver or the channel gains is available. The scenario is thus akin to the one outlined in situation 3) of the list of Sec. II-A, wherein M T now plays the role of the maximum number of potentially active emitters. The antennas of such a "multiple input" system are widely spaced, so that the delays with which their signals arrive at the communication receiver are all different and unknown.

(p33.2) As to the communication signal, the scenario assumed in [11] is fairly general. The transmitted symbols are assumed to undergo suitable pre-coding, where the choice of the precoding matrix dictates the type of system, ranging from Code-Division Multiple Access (CDMA) to Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing (OFDM). In particular, suppose the communication and radar systems have the same bandwidth, i.e., L = 1, T c = T r and ψ L (t) = ψ(t). The signal transmitted by the communication system in the interval [0, P r T r ] is assumed to have the form
## (s34) D. Coordinated design
(p34.0) The major drawback of the previous approaches is that they rely on a simplified scenario wherein several important phenomena are not accounted for: -The radar system, especially when operating in search mode, generates reverberation from the surrounding environment, the so-called clutter, which impairs not only its own performance, but also the performance of the communication system. -The scattering centers generating clutter could have radial motion with respect to both the radar and the communication receivers, thus generating Doppler shifts that should be accounted for if slow-time coding is considered.

(p34.1) Cooperation between the active systems, possibly operating in full spectral overlap, in order to negotiate the respective transmit policies and adjust the corresponding detection/demodulation strategies is the idea underlying co-design, first introduced in [3], and further developed in [14], [16], [17]. It is generally assumed that the radar and the communication system may exchange information. The availability of large data-bases accurately mapping the scattering characteristics of large areas has allowed the development of cognitive systems (see, e.g., [36], [37]): joint design of the radar waveform(s) and the communication system codebook thus appears as a natural means to allow co-existence by preserving the performances of both. Consider an N T × N R communication system co-existing in full spectral overlap with an M T × M R MIMO radar with closely spaced antennas and co-located transmitter and receiver. We denote by D the space-time code matrix of the radar: if fast-time coding is adopted, then D = C, with C defined in situation 3). If, instead, slow-time coding is undertaken, then D = G and situation 4) occurs. Denote by V the signal matrix of the communication system, composed of the N T spatial codewords emitted in successive epochs.
## (s36) A. Environment sensing techniques
(p36.0) The idea of knowledge-based design is central for spectrumsharing systems [4], [7], [14], [17]- [19], [39]. The communication and/or the radar system undertake suitable "environment sensing" phases in order to determine the transmit policies. Inspired by cooperative methods in cognitive radio networks, [14] uses pilot signals to estimate the channels and feed back the channel information between the subsystems, possibly assigning to one of them a functional priority, like, e.g., in [40], [41], where the radar is considered primary. These approaches rely on a centralized architecture, namely on a strict coordination between the active players in order to allow co-existence.

(p36.1) More recently, approaches wherein the radar and/or the communication system are able to "learn" the environment without transmitting pilots or avoiding the need for coordination have been proposed. These advanced approaches are discussed in the following two scenarios: 1) Environment sensing at the communication RX: A communication system shares its spectrum with an ensemble of potential interferers, i.e., a set of radar/sensing systems. The interfering waveforms from the radars lie in the subspace of a known dictionary, and impinge on the communication RX with unknown, possibly time-varying delays and coupling coefficients. 2) Environment sensing at the radar RX: A sparse target scene is assumed, allowing to reduce the radar sampling rate without sacrificing delay and Doppler resolution. The Xampling framework can be adopted, where the system architecture is designed for sampling and processing of analog inputs at rates far below Nyquist, whose underlying structure can be modeled as a union of subspaces [24]. The former situation has been described in Sec. II-C. The communication RX must be made adaptive, in order to accomplish jointly the two tasks of interference estimation/removal and data demodulation. For the latter situation, the SpeCX system (shown in Figure 5) was proposed in [4], and combines sub-Nyquist multi-band sensing with sub-Nyquist radar so as to enable the radar to sense the communication channel at very low rates. Compared to the other works, SpeCX presents a complete solution that shows recovery of both the radar and communication signal with minimal known information about the spectrum.
## (s38) B. Knowledge-based design
(p38.0) In this subsection, we survey knowledge-based radar transmission designs based on environment sensing. For example, in some settings, the radar interference can be eliminated by forcing the radar waveforms to live in the null space of the interference channel between the radar transmitters and the communication receiver [18]. This idea is well studied in the cognitive radio research community, and also applied to spectrum sharing systems. Typical approaches include exploiting the spatial degrees of freedom granted by a MIMO radar [7], [18], [19], [39] and adaptive transmit/receive strategies to test the occupancy of the frequency bands [4].
## (s40) A. Embedding data into radar waveforms
(p40.0) A fairly natural evolution of radar and communication coexistence is to use radar to perform communication, also known as Dual Function Radar Communication (DFRC) [47]. This approach is illustrated in Figure 6, wherein radar and communication systems are combined in the same hardware platform, usually with the same waveform or transmitter, which should be designed so as to guarantee the performance of both systems. As echoed by the name itself, in these  architectures co-existence is basically "functional" and no spectrum overlap or resource negotiation takes place. This philosophy relies on the strategy of "information embedding". Consider a joint radar communication platform equipped with M T transmit antennas arranged as a uniform linear array (ULA). The radar receiver employs an array of M R receive antennas with an arbitrary linear configuration. Without loss of generality, a single-element communication receiver is assumed to be located in the direction θ c , which is known to the transmitter.
