# Professional characteristics of an educator: A survey of literature

CorpusID: 201544788 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54ea103ad2b53057187e9f55d11fc354e2c9b7a5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54ea103ad2b53057187e9f55d11fc354e2c9b7a5)

Fields: Education, Psychology

## (s5) Journal of Management and Development Studies 24(1) 10
(p5.0) A critical review of the literature on collegiality and collaboration depicts that healthy collegial relationship is developed through various initiatives in the institution environment, including internal rewards, teacher leadership, success of a beginning teacher, achievement through collaborative decision making, effective working relationship with all school personnel, enhance critical thought about teaching, sharing of ideas, reflection and respect for other's view points. Collaboration, consensus, compromise, collective expertise, communication skills and access to students/ peers results in higher levels of achievement of both colleagues and students.

(p5.1) Educators with enhanced collegiality recognize that collective expertise offers the possibility of generating optimal solutions to the complex problems of teaching and learning. They demonstrate strong communication skills and position themselves to be purposefully accessible to their students and peers which results in high levels of achievement among colleagues and with student community. Greater teacher collaboration in a culture of trust and accountability is required to face the challenges in professionalism in terms of educational reform, societal and economic development (Tan and Ng, 2012).
## (s24) Concluding remarks
(p24.0) Based on literature review, the important and repeated professional characteristics of educators were identified as subject knowledge, teaching prowess, updating knowledge, collegiality, commitment, teacher student relationship, empowerment, self development and remuneration. In depth analysis of each of the individual characteristic was made and presented.

(p24.1) As per Blewitt (2010), the higher education sector has to respond to the new economic and environmental imperatives in the business scenario. It is certainly encouraging a need for flexibility and adaptability, new multidisciplinary and trans-disciplinary research approaches and new pedagogies that address the new learning ecologies. Apart from such improvements in the approaches and curricula of the management education sector, it is highly desirable for efficient and efficacious teachers with desired professional characteristics to sustain any fruitful realisation. A graduate attribute is needed that suggests in a changing world individuals, and groups should learn not only to accommodate changes but enjoy them, go with them and in so doing shape them according to values and principles. And educators play a major role in achieving the same. Of the many ways, enhancing the professional characteristics of the educators will provide effective solutions for desirable student development. 
