# Review of AdS/CFT Integrability: An Overview

CorpusID: 20470441 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bc80a41e800e58c4bbf965cf6fa89b3a6985cdfa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bc80a41e800e58c4bbf965cf6fa89b3a6985cdfa)

Fields: Mathematics, Physics

## (s3) Outline
(p3.0) The review collection consists of the above introduction and 23 chapters grouped into 6 major subjects. Each chapter reviews a particular topic in a self-contained manner. The following overview gives a brief summary of each part and each chapter, and is meant to tie the whole collection together. It can be understood as an extensive table of contents.

(p3.1) Where possible, we have put the chapters into a natural and meaningful order with regards to content. A chapter builds upon insights and results presented in the earlier chapters and begins roughly where the previous one ended. In many cases this reflects the historical developments, but we have tried to pull loops straight. Our aim was to prepare a pedagogical and generally accessible introduction to the subject of AdS/CFT integrability rather than a historically accurate account.

(p3.2) While the topics were fixed, the design and presentation of each chapter was largely the responsibility of its authors. The only guideline was to discuss an instructive example in detail while presenting the majority of results more briefly. Furthermore, the chapters give a guide to the literature relevant to the topic where more details can be found. Open problems are also discussed in the chapters. Note that we did not enforce uniform conventions for naming, use of alphabets, normalisations, and so on. This merely reflects a reality of the literature. However, each chapter is meant to be self-consistent.

(p3.3) Before we begin with the overview, we would like to point out existing reviews on AdS/CFT integrability and related subjects which cover specific aspects in more detail. We can recommend several reviews dedicated to the subject [13]. Also a number of PhD theses are available which at least contain a general review as the introduction [14]. It is also worthwhile to read some of the very brief accounts of the subject in the form of news items [15]. Last but not least, we would like to refer the reader to prefaces of special issues dedicated to AdS/CFT integrability [16] and closely related subjects [17]. 
## (s26) V Integrability for Scattering Amplitudes c 2010 Niklas Beisert
(p26.0) The most conservative application of quantum field theories is to compute scattering cross sections (to be compared to particle scattering experiments). With old blades sharpened and new ones developed, the charted territory of tree and loop scattering amplitudes in N = 4 SYM has increased dramatically, see e.g. the recent reviews [18] and the special issue [19]. It was soon noticed that something special was going on in the planar limit which makes amplitudes much simpler than originally thought. It does not take much imagination to conjecture a connection to integrability. This part reviews scattering amplitudes and what integrability implies in this context. This topic is under active investigation, many advances have been and are being made, but a lot remains to be understood. Here, one can expect that integrability will enable a similarly simple solution as in the case of the planar spectrum.
