# materials Optimal Design of Plated/Shell Structures under Flutter Constraints-A Literature Review

CorpusID: 209408596 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/16ddf1894c821f5f610372ec6dfcb6927a42192e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/16ddf1894c821f5f610372ec6dfcb6927a42192e)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s2) Remarks on the Formulation of Optimization Problems
(p2.0) of the critical aerodynamic pressure that corresponds to the loss of stability. The values of the critical aerodynamic pressures are different for various vibrational modes. As it is shown in Figure 1 the mechanical (material) properties may change drastically both the pre-flutter and post-flutter behavior-the modes of frequency coalescence may be totally different for isotropic and anisotropic structures.  The flutter characteristics, demonstrated schematically in Figures 1 and 2, are functions of many parameters. Their effects will be discussed later in view of the optimal design. Early reviews, dealing particularly with parametric investigations, on plate/shell flutter are presented by Fung [18], Dowell [19]. Recent, more comprehensive review of researches in the area of flutter behavior of structures can be found in Pettit [20] and Kouchakzadeh et al. [21]. The flutter characteristics, demonstrated schematically in Figures 1 and 2, are functions of many parameters. Their effects will be discussed later in view of the optimal design. Early reviews, dealing particularly with parametric investigations, on plate/shell flutter are presented by Fung [18], Dowell [19]. Recent, more comprehensive review of researches in the area of flutter behavior of structures can be found in Pettit [20] and Kouchakzadeh et al. [21].
## (s9) Reliability Analysis
(p9.0) In the aeroelastic analysis the reliability based design optimization problems constitute a special class of optimization tasks that are formulated in quite different manner that the deterministic objective functions discussed, previously including also the problem (18). The general approach to this class of problems can be found in Refences [37,38].

(p9.1) The combined use of sophisticated measurement techniques, computational simulations, and a numerical identification tool for the model parameters may result in a powerful method for material characterization of mechanical properties and damage analysis. However, in such an analysis the knowledge of a great number of various factors is required and the validity of a pure deterministic modeling is always not complete because of the scatter of experimental data. Thus, many engineering problems connected with the use of composite materials are (or may be) too complex and ill-defined to be modeled by conventional deterministic procedures. On the other hand, the use of statistical analysis is also limited to: (1) The number of experimental data (the extension of random fields of variables); (2) the definition of covariance matrices since the majority of random variables are correlated in an arbitrary manner; and (3) computational efforts in the analysis of multidimensional statistical (stochastic) problems.
## (s15) Functionally Graded Materials and Nanocomposite Structures-Thermal Protection
(p15.0) Since 2000, numerous investigations were devoted to the study on flutter analysis of structures made of functionally graded materials (FGMs) [32],  and of nanocomposites (NC) . In this area the parametric investigations (not always optimal search for solutions) dealt with the analysis of flutter characteristics of structures especially in view of thermal protection.
## (s23) Numerical (Finite Element) Packages
(p23.0) The numerical (finite element) study on supersonic panel flutter has received much attention in literatures. Finite element method to panel flutter analysis by Olson [271] in 1967 and then the review of existing works was presented by Bismarck-Nasr [272,273]. Many of the researchers have built their own procedures to analyze flutter problems. The flutter analysis can be also investigated with the use of commercial FE packages as e.g., Ansys, Nastran, Abaqus, or Nisa II Family of Programs (Nisa/Areo). Recently, the package ZEUS (ZONA) [274,275] is a new proposal for aeroelastic design/analysis.
