# Repercussion of medium and long treatment period with continuous positive airways pressure therapy in heart rate variability of obstructive sleep apnea REVIEW

CorpusID: 203824287 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f76951750459f489d83486e37c635a68658ecc8f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f76951750459f489d83486e37c635a68658ecc8f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) is a sleep-related breathing disorder that occurs through the occlusion of the upper airways 1 , resulting in greater arousal and reduction of oxygen saturations during the sleep period 2 .

(p0.1) It is a frequent pathology, the prevalence of which may vary between 10% and 50% depending on the population, considering age group or gender 2 . The largest epidemiologic study on sleep undertaken in Brazil showed that 32.80% of 1042 volunteers researched had obstructive sleep apnea syndrome 3 .
## (s4) Main autonomic alterations through CPAP therapy
(p4.0) The literature shows that CPAP therapy produces changes in the OSA patients' autonomic nervous system at short, medium and long treatment period. These alterations demonstrate changes in sympathetic and parasympathetic activity, during sleep and vigil. The main parameters changes, in the analysis of time domain and frequency domain, can be observed on Table 3.

(p4.1) In the frequency domain analysis, some parameters did not behave the same way after treatment. Low Frequency was lower in 1,2 months 11,12 and 6 months 13 . Contradictorily, after 3 months 13,14 and 1 year it was elevated 15 . The same happened to HF, which was lower after 1 and 3 months 11,13,16 , but showed itself to be higher after 1 and 2 months, and 1 year 12,15,17 . The sympathovagal balance after CPAP tends to reduce after therapy 12,14,16 , although the change is not statistically significant in one study 17 .

(p4.2) In the Time domain analysis, the SDNN 13,16 , pNN50 15,18 , and parameters showed an increase after treatment. Square root of mean squared difference of successive normal-to-normal R-R intervals (rMSSD) showed a change too 15,18 .
## (s5) DISCUSSION
(p5.0) The main finding in this review was that CPAP therapy induces change in OSA patients' parasympathetic tone, through changes in the HF, SDNN and pNN50. Patients with OSA tend to have a higher vagal tone, as expressed in HRV when compared to the control group 18 . In these patients, the influence of the vagal tone can be observed through the high frequency domains and components of pNN50 and rMSSD in HRV analysis. There is an indication that CPAP therapy produces significant change in these domains.

(p5.1) At the same time, it is not possible to observe alterations in time domain parameters during the day, although the pNN50 and rMSSD parameters are significantly reduced at night after therapy.

(p5.2) The decrease in sympathovagal balance through the LF/ HF ratio during the sleep seems to be related to the decrease in HF. The LF/HF ratio reduced during the day and, as opposed to nighttime, was associated with an increase of HF 16 . The studies show that even when facing other comorbidities, such as polycystic ovarian syndrome 12 or arterial rigidity 14 , CPAP produces change in HRV, as in other findings related to these diseases.

(p5.3) Conversely, in comparison to other therapies, whereas the weight loss provoked by 1 year of sibutramine 15 , in 24h analysis, rMSNN and pNN50 increased more during CPAP. During the day, the vagal component (HF) was higher for the CPAP group, as SDNN and SDANN when compared to the first month of therapy. The sibutramine group had no alteration in the LF, HF power and LF/HF ratio components.

(p5.4) Another finding in this review was the decrease in sympathetic activity through LF. It has been observed that in apnea episodes, oxygen decrease results in greater sympathetic nervous system activity at nighttime. These alterations persist at daytime, accompanied by higher nervous tone and higher concentration of sympathetic neuromodulators 19 .

(p5.5) The method of HRV analysis could provide different results. As observed in Table 1, some analyzed their patients for 24 hours and others for shorter time periods during sleep or daytime with different breathing methods. Considering that apnea episodes happen at nighttime, during sleep, the autonomic alterations can also be more significant during this period. As observed, abnormal breathing culminates in sympathetic activity peaks higher than the vagal ones 20 .

(p5.6) The review showed that the repercussion on HRV of CPAP treatment for OSA patients has moderate evidence. It demonstrated improvement in Apnea-Hypopnea Index and it also restore patients autonomic function in medium and long treatment time. Although theses benefits, could not be extend to men and women or patients in different age range due the studies characteristic.

(p5.7) The main limitation of this review was that there were few robust studies. It's important to acquire better scientific evidence of CPAP's effect in HRV. In this study, only 1 article was randomized 11 and 2 with control groups 17,18 . Furthermore, the different parameters and measurement units adopted by the authors made difficult result comparison.

(p5.8) The studies presented HRV analysis of different period of day and were used different methods of analysis. Also, a third confounding characteristic was de range of apnea hypopnea index. These points could compromise the quality of data and show bias.
