# Microtia epigenetics An overview of review and new viewpoint

CorpusID: 208173988 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d1ccd957f30828c8d5ffa321396f5fff1e9a9426](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d1ccd957f30828c8d5ffa321396f5fff1e9a9426)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Microtia is a congenital malformation of the external and middle ear caused by the abnormal development of the first and second arch, and the first sulcus in the embryonic stage; it may be accompanied by hearing loss, and also mandibular and facial soft tissue dysplasia. [1,2] It can be unilateral or bilateral, and the degree of auricular deformity can range from mild structural abnormalities to complete absence of the ear. Epidemiological prevalence surveys carried out both in China and abroad indicate that the prevalence of microtia varies depending on region, [3,4] race, [5,6] sex, and even altitude. [5] Risk factor analysis suggests that parental status and pregnancy issues, such as age and education level of the mother, [7] diabetes of the mother, early pregnancy infection, multiple births, taking medicine, [8] smoking, or drinking during pregnancy, [9] have a major impact on the incidence rate. Insufficient folic acid intake during early pregnancy can also increase the risk of microtia. [10] Thus, microtia is a multifactorial disease in which environmental and genetic factors, and also interactions between the 2, may be involved. Researchers have tried to identify the genetic factors in the development of microtia and their mechanism of action; however, no clear disease-causing genes have been found, and there is no consensus on the mechanism of action of microtia.
## (s2) Identification of key candidate genes by bioinformatical analysis
(p2.0) Eleven miRNAs reported in a study by Li et al [56] were analyzed and their target genes predicted by searching 5 databases: MicroCosm, miRanda, miRDB, TargetScan, and PicTar. All analyses were based on previous published studies, thus no ethical approval and patient consent were required. The only miRNA in this group of 11 that contained experimentally verified target genes was hsa-miR-140-3p. A total of 94 predicted target genes was identified (Fig. 1). Gene ontology (GO) analysis results (Fig. 2) show that genes in the biological process (BP) group were principally enriched by cellular process, single-organism process, biological regulation, and regulation of BP. In the cellular component group, genes were mainly enriched in cell, cell part, organelle part, and membrane. In the molecular function (MF) group, genes were mainly enriched in binding, catalytic activity, MF regulator, and signal transducer activity. The ranking of enriched GO terms in Fig. 3 shows that most genes were significantly enriched in protein kinase binding, kinase binding, cellular response to growth factor stimulus, and axon. The KEGG classification results showed that genes were mainly enriched in cellular processes, environmental information processing, genetic information processing, human diseases, metabolism, and organismal systems (Fig. 4). The top 30 signaling pathway results showed that genes were mainly enriched in cell cycle, pyrimidine metabolism, and RNA polymerase (Fig. 5).    Through integrated bioinformatical analysis, we identified candidate genes for microtia, and also key pathways. These findings improve our understanding of the etiology and occurrence of microtia, and also microtia molecular events. The candidate genes and pathways can therefore be used as therapeutic targets.

(p2.1) Eleven miRNAs reported in a study by Li et al [56] were analyzed and their target genes predicted by searching 5 databases: MicroCosm, miRanda, miRDB, TargetScan, and PicTar. All analyses were based on previous published studies, thus no ethical approval and patient consent were required. The only miRNA in this group of 11 that contained experimentally verified target genes was hsa-miR-140-3p. A total of 94 predicted target genes was identified (Fig. 1). Gene ontology (GO) analysis results (Fig. 2) show that genes in the biological process (BP) group were principally enriched by cellular process, single-organism process, biological regulation, and regulation of BP. In the cellular component group, genes were mainly enriched in cell, cell part, organelle part, and membrane. In the molecular function (MF) group, genes were mainly enriched in binding, catalytic activity, MF regulator, and signal transducer activity. The ranking of enriched GO terms in Fig. 3 shows that most genes were significantly enriched in protein kinase binding, kinase binding, cellular response to growth factor stimulus, and axon. The KEGG classification results showed that genes were mainly enriched in cellular processes, environmental information processing, genetic information processing, human diseases, metabolism, and organismal systems (Fig. 4). The top 30 signaling pathway results showed that genes were mainly enriched in cell cycle, pyrimidine metabolism, and RNA polymerase (Fig. 5).    Through integrated bioinformatical analysis, we identified candidate genes for microtia, and also key pathways. These findings improve our understanding of the etiology and occurrence of microtia, and also microtia molecular events. The candidate genes and pathways can therefore be used as therapeutic targets.
## (s3) Outlook
(p3.0) The latest research in the field of epigenetics sheds new light on a range of vital processes, challenging "genetic determinism." A deeper understanding of microtia epigenetics will not only shed light on the occurrence of this defect, but also facilitate more accurate assessment and evaluation of pregnant women at risk of giving birth to babies with microtia. This will lead to better prevention and better treatment of microtia.

(p3.1) 6. Compliance with ethical standards (1) No financial support or benefits have been received by any coauthor, by any member of our immediate family or any individual or entity with whom or with which we have a relationship from any commercial source which is related directly or indirectly to the scientific work which is reported on in the article. We have no financial interest or commercial association with any of the subject matter or products mentioned in our manuscript. (2) This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors. (3) For this type of study formal consent is not required.

(p3.2) The latest research in the field of epigenetics sheds new light on a range of vital processes, challenging "genetic determinism." A deeper understanding of microtia epigenetics will not only shed light on the occurrence of this defect, but also facilitate more accurate assessment and evaluation of pregnant women at risk of giving birth to babies with microtia. This will lead to better prevention and better treatment of microtia.

(p3.3) 6. Compliance with ethical standards (1) No financial support or benefits have been received by any coauthor, by any member of our immediate family or any individual or entity with whom or with which we have a relationship from any commercial source which is related directly or indirectly to the scientific work which is reported on in the article. We have no financial interest or commercial association with any of the subject matter or products mentioned in our manuscript. (2) This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors. (3) For this type of study formal consent is not required.
## (s9) Introduction
(p9.0) Microtia is a congenital malformation of the external and middle ear caused by the abnormal development of the first and second arch, and the first sulcus in the embryonic stage; it may be accompanied by hearing loss, and also mandibular and facial soft tissue dysplasia. [1,2] It can be unilateral or bilateral, and the degree of auricular deformity can range from mild structural abnormalities to complete absence of the ear. Epidemiological prevalence surveys carried out both in China and abroad indicate that the prevalence of microtia varies depending on region, [3,4] race, [5,6] sex, and even altitude. [5] Risk factor analysis suggests that parental status and pregnancy issues, such as age and education level of the mother, [7] diabetes of the mother, early pregnancy infection, multiple births, taking medicine, [8] smoking, or drinking during pregnancy, [9] have a major impact on the incidence rate. Insufficient folic acid intake during early pregnancy can also increase the risk of microtia. [10] Thus, microtia is a multifactorial disease in which environmental and genetic factors, and also interactions between the 2, may be involved. Researchers have tried to identify the genetic factors in the development of microtia and their mechanism of action; however, no clear disease-causing genes have been found, and there is no consensus on the mechanism of action of microtia.
## (s11) Identification of key candidate genes by bioinformatical analysis
(p11.0) Eleven miRNAs reported in a study by Li et al [56] were analyzed and their target genes predicted by searching 5 databases: MicroCosm, miRanda, miRDB, TargetScan, and PicTar. All analyses were based on previous published studies, thus no ethical approval and patient consent were required. The only miRNA in this group of 11 that contained experimentally verified target genes was hsa-miR-140-3p. A total of 94 predicted target genes was identified (Fig. 1). Gene ontology (GO) analysis results (Fig. 2) show that genes in the biological process (BP) group were principally enriched by cellular process, single-organism process, biological regulation, and regulation of BP. In the cellular component group, genes were mainly enriched in cell, cell part, organelle part, and membrane. In the molecular function (MF) group, genes were mainly enriched in binding, catalytic activity, MF regulator, and signal transducer activity. The ranking of enriched GO terms in Fig. 3 shows that most genes were significantly enriched in protein kinase binding, kinase binding, cellular response to growth factor stimulus, and axon. The KEGG classification results showed that genes were mainly enriched in cellular processes, environmental information processing, genetic information processing, human diseases, metabolism, and organismal systems (Fig. 4). The top 30 signaling pathway results showed that genes were mainly enriched in cell cycle, pyrimidine metabolism, and RNA polymerase (Fig. 5).    Through integrated bioinformatical analysis, we identified candidate genes for microtia, and also key pathways. These findings improve our understanding of the etiology and occurrence of microtia, and also microtia molecular events. The candidate genes and pathways can therefore be used as therapeutic targets.

(p11.1) Eleven miRNAs reported in a study by Li et al [56] were analyzed and their target genes predicted by searching 5 databases: MicroCosm, miRanda, miRDB, TargetScan, and PicTar. All analyses were based on previous published studies, thus no ethical approval and patient consent were required. The only miRNA in this group of 11 that contained experimentally verified target genes was hsa-miR-140-3p. A total of 94 predicted target genes was identified (Fig. 1). Gene ontology (GO) analysis results (Fig. 2) show that genes in the biological process (BP) group were principally enriched by cellular process, single-organism process, biological regulation, and regulation of BP. In the cellular component group, genes were mainly enriched in cell, cell part, organelle part, and membrane. In the molecular function (MF) group, genes were mainly enriched in binding, catalytic activity, MF regulator, and signal transducer activity. The ranking of enriched GO terms in Fig. 3 shows that most genes were significantly enriched in protein kinase binding, kinase binding, cellular response to growth factor stimulus, and axon. The KEGG classification results showed that genes were mainly enriched in cellular processes, environmental information processing, genetic information processing, human diseases, metabolism, and organismal systems (Fig. 4). The top 30 signaling pathway results showed that genes were mainly enriched in cell cycle, pyrimidine metabolism, and RNA polymerase (Fig. 5).    Through integrated bioinformatical analysis, we identified candidate genes for microtia, and also key pathways. These findings improve our understanding of the etiology and occurrence of microtia, and also microtia molecular events. The candidate genes and pathways can therefore be used as therapeutic targets.
## (s12) Outlook
(p12.0) The latest research in the field of epigenetics sheds new light on a range of vital processes, challenging "genetic determinism." A deeper understanding of microtia epigenetics will not only shed light on the occurrence of this defect, but also facilitate more accurate assessment and evaluation of pregnant women at risk of giving birth to babies with microtia. This will lead to better prevention and better treatment of microtia.

(p12.1) 6. Compliance with ethical standards (1) No financial support or benefits have been received by any coauthor, by any member of our immediate family or any individual or entity with whom or with which we have a relationship from any commercial source which is related directly or indirectly to the scientific work which is reported on in the article. We have no financial interest or commercial association with any of the subject matter or products mentioned in our manuscript. (2) This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors. (3) For this type of study formal consent is not required.

(p12.2) The latest research in the field of epigenetics sheds new light on a range of vital processes, challenging "genetic determinism." A deeper understanding of microtia epigenetics will not only shed light on the occurrence of this defect, but also facilitate more accurate assessment and evaluation of pregnant women at risk of giving birth to babies with microtia. This will lead to better prevention and better treatment of microtia.

(p12.3) 6. Compliance with ethical standards (1) No financial support or benefits have been received by any coauthor, by any member of our immediate family or any individual or entity with whom or with which we have a relationship from any commercial source which is related directly or indirectly to the scientific work which is reported on in the article. We have no financial interest or commercial association with any of the subject matter or products mentioned in our manuscript. (2) This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors. (3) For this type of study formal consent is not required.
