# A Review of Low-Frequency Active Vibration Control of Seat Suspension Systems

CorpusID: 202098672 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0a038a513cb7613d15988d4317c0ad31606535d4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0a038a513cb7613d15988d4317c0ad31606535d4)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Modern research has shown the potential hazards of whole-body vibration (WBV). Based on previous studies, Krajnak (2018) [1] summarized the various diseases that may be caused by whole-body vibration, including back and neck pain, neuropathy, cardiovascular disease, digestion disorders, and even cancer.

(p0.1) As a risky occupation, the drivers of heavy commercial vehicles are prone to prolonged exposure to low-frequency whole-body vibrations generated from road excitation, which could influence drivers' comfort or even adversely affect their health. According to [2], the long-term operation of heavy commercial vehicles with low-frequency vibration can cause diseases of the muscles, bones, digestive system, and even the visual system. This is because low-frequency vibrations might cause resonance of the organs and tissues in the human body, and this kind of vibration energy must also be absorbed and dissipated by the body. According to [3], due to the high social cost of musculoskeletal diseases caused by working environments with low-frequency vibrations, Europe has issued regulations requiring that the vibration level of a working vehicle must be evaluated to provide a healthy and safe operation environment, where the max accelerations of 0.5 and 1.5 m/s 2 are, respectively, set for 8 hours action and limit values. In [4], it was proved that the WBV affects the posture control of the human body and may cause health risks to the muscular system and spine. In [5], it was shown that if the exposure to low-frequency vibrations produced by commercial vehicles were more than 8 hours every day, conventional vehicle seating with passive suspension could not protect the driver's body from the effects of WBVs. According to a medical research report by Johanning (2011) [6], low-frequency vibrations may cause resonances of human organs and tissues. There, it was claimed that back pain disease is one of the most common occupational injuries because the lower back of the human body is sensitive to low-frequency vibrations of 4-10 Hz. Therefore, long-term exposure to large amplitude low-frequency vibrations can cause back pain disorders, especially common diseases of the lumbar joints. These diseases include degenerative spinal changes, lumbar disc herniation, and sciatic nerve injuries, and according to ongoing medical reports, these diseases are common among tractor drivers, truck drivers, bus drivers, and other commercial heavy machinery operators who are often exposed to vibrations throughout the body.
## (s4) Hydraulic Actuator
(p4.0) Stein and Ballo (1991) [56] developed an active seat suspension ( Figure 10) using a hydraulic actuator. In this system, the hydraulic actuator is controlled by a solenoid valve to control the direction of the force generated by the actuator. The control system generates a corresponding compensation force to reduce the vibration based on signals collected by two acceleration sensors and a displacement sensor. A PI controller was designed for the active seat suspension. Since the acceleration sensor and amplifier are integrated for the displacement of the positioning system, the system can be simplified using only one accelerometer placed on the chassis. This structure greatly simplifies the control system. This structure can also be achieved by connecting two first-order low-pass filters in series or by using a second-order analog circuit to adopt a very low resonant frequency ( Figure 11).
## (s7) Simulation
(p7.0) In the study of active seat suspension of vehicles, in addition to using a prototype to verify the control algorithm, conducting simulations with professional software is also a common method to verify the feasibility of the controller design. Du et al. (2013) [65] proposed a model combining automotive chassis suspension, active seat suspension, and the driver's body to analyze and achieve integrated vibration control. A static output feedback controller considering driver weight changes and actuator saturation was designed for an active seating system. The simulation results showed that this integrated control strategy for an active seat suspension system could improve comfort and robustness.

(p7.1) Different controllers are always compared to find out the most suitable control method for the active vibration control of the seating system. Wang and Kazmierski (2005) [66] developed a Very High Speed Integrated Circuit Hardware Description Language that Includes Analog and Mixed-Signal Extensions (VHDL-AMS) model for vibration control of a car seating system, including an active electromechanical actuator. In that study, five different controllers were compared and analyzed, and the optimal control (OC) algorithm was identified as providing the best results for vibration control. In another study, Al-Junaid et al. (2006) [67] proposed a seating system model ( Figure 20) under active vibration control by the SystemC-A modelling technique. Four control algorithms were compared with the OC algorithm for vibration mitigation performance. Gan et al. (2015) Electromagnetic linear actuator (XTA-3086) ×2 
## (s8) Simulation
(p8.0) In the study of active seat suspension of vehicles, in addition to using a prototype to verify the control algorithm, conducting simulations with professional software is also a common method to verify the feasibility of the controller design. Du et al. (2013) [65] proposed a model combining automotive chassis suspension, active seat suspension, and the driver's body to analyze and achieve integrated vibration control. A static output feedback controller considering driver weight changes and actuator saturation was designed for an active seating system. The simulation results showed that this integrated control strategy for an active seat suspension system could improve comfort and robustness.

(p8.1) Different controllers are always compared to find out the most suitable control method for the active vibration control of the seating system. Wang and Kazmierski (2005) [66] developed a Very High Speed Integrated Circuit Hardware Description Language that Includes Analog and Mixed-Signal Extensions (VHDL-AMS) model for vibration control of a car seating system, including an active electromechanical actuator. In that study, five different controllers were compared and analyzed, and the optimal control (OC) algorithm was identified as providing the best results for vibration control. In another study, Al-Junaid et al.   [68] proposed a parameter identification method to identify the system parameters of a 5-DOF discrete spring-mass-damper seating system model of a truck-based on truck field test data. The parameter identification method is based on trial and error to match the measured natural resonant frequencies and vibration acceleration amplitude at the selected frequencies with the simulated ones of the 5-DOF discrete spring-mass-damper seating system model. The disadvantage of the trial and error method is the inefficient parameter identification process, which requires much time and effort. The 5-DOF discrete spring-mass-damper seating system model can be used to simulate the vibration response of the human body. A sensitivity analysis was conducted  [68] proposed a parameter identification method to identify the system parameters of a 5-DOF discrete spring-mass-damper seating system model of a truck-based on truck field test data. The parameter identification method is based on trial and error to match the measured natural resonant frequencies and vibration acceleration amplitude at the selected frequencies with the simulated ones of the 5-DOF discrete spring-mass-damper seating system model. The disadvantage of the trial and error method is the inefficient parameter identification process, which requires much time and effort. The 5-DOF discrete spring-mass-damper seating system model can be used to simulate the vibration response of the human body. A sensitivity analysis was conducted using the Monte Carlo method based on the 5-DOF model. In that paper, primary and secondary PID controllers were applied to the seating system for active vibration control ( Figure 21). The secondary PID controller produces a desired output control force signal according to the acceleration feedback signal of the mass oscillator.

(p8.2) The primary PID controller uses the relative displacement feedback signal and the signal generated from the secondary PID controller as input error signals. Then, the primary PID controller generates a final output control force signal to drive the actuator to provide control to mitigate vibrations of the seating system. The advantages of the PID control from that research are that it is simple and practical, but it also has the disadvantage of poor robustness.
## (s9) ANN Control
(p9.0) Unlike a model-based controller, the ANN controller is data-based. It can be used to identify complex nonlinear objects that are difficult to accurately model and can be used as a controller for adaptive control. Compared with traditional controllers, ANN controllers have many features. They have powerful nonlinear processing capabilities and are well suited for dealing with problems with a large number of input variables, as well as multivariable output. In addition, the ANN can learn unknown information autonomously. However, for active vibration control of a seating system, the ANN system has not been widely accepted.

(p9.1) An ANN controller ( Figure 26) was proposed by Guclu and Gulez (2008) [73] to control a nonlinear vehicle model having 8 DOF. In this study, the active seat suspension system control was combined with an active vehicle suspension system control. The ANN controller could solve the nonlinear problem caused by the vehicle system under excitation disturbances. The ANN model was trained with errors between actual and expected output results by using backpropagation. The results demonstrated that the ANN controller performs well at controlling seating system vibration. 
## (s10) ANN Control
(p10.0) Unlike a model-based controller, the ANN controller is data-based. It can be used to identify complex nonlinear objects that are difficult to accurately model and can be used as a controller for adaptive control. Compared with traditional controllers, ANN controllers have many features. They have powerful nonlinear processing capabilities and are well suited for dealing with problems with a large number of input variables, as well as multivariable output. In addition, the ANN can learn unknown information autonomously. However, for active vibration control of a seating system, the ANN system has not been widely accepted.

(p10.1) An ANN controller ( Figure 26) was proposed by Guclu and Gulez (2008) [73] to control a nonlinear vehicle model having 8 DOF. In this study, the active seat suspension system control was combined with an active vehicle suspension system control. The ANN controller could solve the nonlinear problem caused by the vehicle system under excitation disturbances. The ANN model was trained with errors between actual and expected output results by using backpropagation. The results demonstrated that the ANN controller performs well at controlling seating system vibration. The control system for an active seat suspension combining an ANN module, the active force control (AFC) method, and a PID controller (Figure 27) was proposed by Gohari and Tahmasebi (2015) [74]. In the design of the ANN model, a hidden layer structure of 10 neural units was considered to have the best performance. Reverse learning was used to train the ANN model to estimate the mass of the seat-occupant system. In addition, the PID controller was designed to work with minimal disturbance and at low speed, and the AFC controller was used to improve the robustness and vibration control performance of the control system. In this controller, the system error was taken as the input, and the estimated mass was set as the output. The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm was used to provide numerical solutions for nonlinear minimization. After comparison with the PID controller, the ANN control performed better than the other controllers. The control system for an active seat suspension combining an ANN module, the active force control (AFC) method, and a PID controller (Figure 27) was proposed by Gohari and Tahmasebi (2015) [74]. In the design of the ANN model, a hidden layer structure of 10 neural units was considered to have the best performance. Reverse learning was used to train the ANN model to estimate the mass of the seat-occupant system. In addition, the PID controller was designed to work with minimal disturbance and at low speed, and the AFC controller was used to improve the robustness and vibration control performance of the control system. In this controller, the system error was taken as the input, and the estimated mass was set as the output. The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm was used to provide numerical solutions for nonlinear minimization. After comparison with the PID controller, the ANN control performed better than the other controllers. The ANN controllers mentioned here are summarized in Table 3.
## (s13) Our Contributions
(p13.0) Our group has been working on the active vibration control of a seating system since 2016. A 5-DOF seat-occupant biodynamic model was developed and applied in vibration control simulation research [68]. A new active vibration controller for a seating system that combines a traditional rotating and a scissor-like structure was designed and built to reduce low-frequency vibration and increase ride comfort [57]. The PID and H-infinity controllers were designed and applied to the active vibration control seating system in [57,68]. An analysis of the parameter sensitivity of a 5-DOF modelbased Monte Carlo simulation was performed [68]. The measurement data and results recorded from four actual trucks in a field test were applied in the research to identify the 5-DOF system parameters of the human body seating system [68]. The relevant active vibration control of the seating system was simulated in the Simulink software [68].
## (s15) Our Contributions
(p15.0) Our group has been working on the active vibration control of a seating system since 2016. A 5-DOF seat-occupant biodynamic model was developed and applied in vibration control simulation research [68]. A new active vibration controller for a seating system that combines a traditional rotating and a scissor-like structure was designed and built to reduce low-frequency vibration and increase ride comfort [57]. The PID and H-infinity controllers were designed and applied to the active vibration control seating system in [57,68]. An analysis of the parameter sensitivity of a 5-DOF model-based Monte Carlo simulation was performed [68]. The measurement data and results recorded from four actual trucks in a field test were applied in the research to identify the 5-DOF system parameters of the human body seating system [68]. The relevant active vibration control of the seating system was simulated in the Simulink software [68].
