# Medical graduate views on statistical learning needs for clinical practice: a comprehensive survey

CorpusID: 209516527 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ef68930a51caeb5b369db4a6333a9c7200b063e3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ef68930a51caeb5b369db4a6333a9c7200b063e3)

Fields: Education, Psychology, Mathematics, Medicine

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) The potential impact on clinical practice of a collaborative approach between statisticians and medical graduates in improving the quality of learning in statistics within the undergraduate medical curriculum is evident from existing literature. For example, findings dating back to the 1980s report that practicing physicians struggle to interpret, or evaluate the interpretation of, clinical findings in medical literature because they lack a working knowledge of statistics [1].

(p0.1) The latter finding is particularly troublesome given the recognized demand on practicing physicians "to demonstrate that they can reach correct diagnoses using both clinical and statistical data" [2]. Furthermore, Horton and Switzer provide evidence for a continued increasing trend, previously reported in 1992, in level of complexity of statistical methods used to report clinical research findings in the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM). Indeed, they note that this includes use of methods "not typically included in introductory or second-level statistics courses". In turn, they express the concern that difficulty in comprehending statistical content in such cases may hinder disemination of study findings among clinicians [3]. In seeking to carry over statistical techniques to the analysis of their own patient data, clinicians who lack the prequisite training to test model assumptions may generate misleading results, while duped by the ease of use of the available software.

(p0.2) The legitimacy of this concern has been confirmed by Altman and Bland through their reflections on the statistical errors in the medical literature, where they also note that "Statistics is much more subjective (and difficult) than is usually acknowledged (this is why statisticians have not been replaced by computers)." and identify the long-standing problem of "frequent misuse of medical statistics" as being a concern to statisticans [4]. The latter problem, which has been identified in high-ranking clinical journals [5], among others [6], is compounded by an "increasing pressure" on "physcicians to make use of techniques that they do not fully understand" [4]. As Altman and Bland note, this increasing pressure, which is particularly evident at the early stages of clinical careers in general, is influenced by the requirement to publish for career advancement and prestige. It is also influenced by a lack of funding resources to support input from a statistician, as is frequently the case for specialist registrars, and more generally, from the fact that demand for medical statisticians exceeds supply. Medical graduates in this position cannot reasonably be expected to identify misleadingly analysed data unless they have been trained in assumptions testing using their own statistical calculations and analyses. The alternative is that through overreliance on published clinical findings, physcians may arrive at "wrong diagnostic or therapeutic decisions and so put patient health or even lives at risk" [4].
## (s5) Data preparation
(p5.0) For the survey question pertaining to nature of employment, we merged response categories to form all possible combinations of choices made by respondents, including single categories and multiple categories. This resulted in the seven categories Academic Research; Academic Teaching; Clinical Practice; Academic Teaching & Academic Research; Clinical Practice & Academic Research; Clinical Practice & Academic Teaching and Clinical Practice, Academic Teaching & Academic Research. This was in order to more fully capture an individual's employment status. For the purpose of summarizing our key findings and aligning these with our intended mixed model analyses, we also merged a) the option comprising carry out the procedure or calculate the statistic(s) using appropriate data as a sole competency with b) the option both of the above, comprising both the latter competency and understand the theory. We then assigned the abbreviated title includes practice to the resultant category. Also, we merged the remaining response categories to form the complementary category does not include practice. We in turn defined the response variable for our mixed model analyses as a binary variable with categories includes practice and does not include practice.

(p5.1) The classification of clinical specialisms provided by respondents (Q. 12) was informed both by a previous study involving medical graduates [11] and by a thematic approach whereby new specialisms ("the codes") were derived retrospectively from responses (Additional file 2).
## (s17) Observations from mixed model analysis
(p17.0) The statistically significant odds ratios, ranging from 1.91 to 6.64 in Table 4, are supportive of a strong employment effect. It is particularly noteworthy that, by comparison with indiviuals who opted for Clinical Practice only, respondents from other employment categories tended to be more likely to choose a response option which included pratice. This suggests that aspects of a respondent's employment other than their own clinical practicenamely, academic teaching and academic researchinfluenced them to favour practical training in statistics or probability as an aspect of the learning needs of medical students in preparation for clinical practice. This is consistent with the preliminary findings prior to mixed model analysis on comparing choices of competencies by respondents from clinical practice only with those of all other respondents. Table 4 also reveals more specifically that the above relationship was most prominent for respondents who identified academic research as at least a component of the nature of their employment. Candidates falling under the employment category Academic Teaching & Academic Research, with the highest odds ratio, may have used their own research in their teaching to prepare medical undergraduates for clinical practice. This is particularly plausible, given the increased popularity of research-informed teaching within higher education over recent years.

(p17.1) However, it is important to acknowledge the small group sizes (Table 2) and correspondingly wide CIs  Fig. 2 Odds ratio and corresponding 95% CI for the binary dependent variable with categories includes practice and does not include practice according to topic in statistics and probability. '*' denotes 'p < 0.05' and '**' denotes 'p < 0.0005'. The corresponding variable reference categories are does not include pratice and critical appraisal, respectively. The abbreviated topic names listed in parts a-e of this figure correspond to those listed in parts a-e, respectively, of Table 3 ( Table 4). These reflect low accuracy in the estimation of the true odds ratio and are unsupportive of sub-group analyses. By contrast, Clinical Practice, Academic Teaching & Academic Research is a dominant category (38.1% of respondents) relative to all the other nature of employment categories, which may explain the elevated level of statistical significance relative to the other employment categories for which odds ratios are listed. Nevertheless, from hypothesis testing, it is also clear that overall, nature of employment (as defined by the response categories in Table 2) is a highly significant predictor of choice of the binary response category includes practice.

(p17.2) For those topics which are close to Critical appraisal in rank (Table 3), there is a lack of evidence using mixed model analysis that they are significantly less or more important than critical appraisal as candidate topics for the development of student competency in the practice of statistics and probability (Fig. 2). Such topics include those falling under Software used for statistics (last two categories in Fig. 2a) and Presenting the findings and conclusions of statistical hypothesis tests and Statistical significance, statistical power and some facts about p-values (first two categories in Fig. 2c), with the corresponding odds ratio being close to 1 in each case. By contrast, the two most highly ranking topics in Table 3, Graphical presentation of data and Arranging data in spreadsheets for statistical analysis, are estimated, respectively, to be over six times and almost five times more important than Critical appraisal, with a high level of statistical significance (Fig. 2a). The remaining topics which are found to be significantly more important than critical appraisal are Sensitivity, specificity and positive and negative predictive values (diagnostic statistics), Simple descriptive (or summary) statistics (Fig. 2b) and Understanding the proper meaning of an audit (Fig. 2e). The importance of descriptive and diagnostic statistics from the perspective of medical graduates is consistent with Simpson's viewpoint, who in addition to placing a strong emphasis on diagnostic statistics in her own teaching of medical undergraduates to reflect the needs of clinical practice, recommends that, "Any introductory course should start with descriptive statistics… Without an understanding of variability, the rest of the course will be meaningless" [22]. Additionally, in considering clinically relevant content to include within the scope of descriptive statistics, it is helpful to note Sahai and Ojeda's reference to the practical importance of percentiles for establishing cut-offs for defining normal ranges for biochemical and physiological measurements in patient diagnosis [18]. The latter example is a welcome reminder of the principle held more generally by teachers in service courses, that students must see the relevance of statistics to their chosen discipline [23] and, we would add, to their chosen profession.

(p17.3) More generally, our findings suggest that, while critical appraisal ought to have a prominent place within the undergraduate medical curriculum in teaching the practice of statistics, there are statistical topics which may need to take greater priority or be afforded equal priority in order to meet recognized needs for clinical practice.
