# What is Green Manufacturing? A Quantitative Literature Review

CorpusID: 204626888 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ce2e79da5920a2eaa3b4e2ca28af50690b2506e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ce2e79da5920a2eaa3b4e2ca28af50690b2506e)

Fields: Engineering, Business, Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The topic of GM emerged in the early 1990s, and was driven by human concerns about the environment [1]. Initially, GM's focus was only on process-oriented, reducing waste in the production process. This focus then develops into product-oriented, reducing resources, polluting material, and energy [1]. Green manufacturing (GM) has a variety of word similar, such as cleaner production or green practices [2]. This topic growth rapidly in this last decade. The term of green become an important and interesting topic discussion for several reason, such as the increasing of pollution and waste, the limitation and decreasing of natural resources, and global warming effect [3].
## (s1) Literature Review
(p1.0) The literature review research on GM was examined by Rehman and Shrivastava in 2013 in sufficient detail [1]. They concluded that research on GM was classified into 12 branches, namely green design, design for environment, green technologies, life cycle assessment, green process planning, green supply chain, reverselogistic, green purchasing/marketing, green organization culture, green regulation, green productivity, green economics, and green disposal. Their paper concludes that GM includes a comprehensive set of processes in all activities in business that have an impact on the environment. Research in past, present and probably future have same direction but different focus. In the past, researchers highlighted industrial behavior that paid more attention to the final process, 'end of pipe' process, how to reduce waste or pollution. At present, researchers assess that the company's focus shifts to the 'pressure' of government or the environment to adopt GMs. Whereas in the future, it is estimated that research will focus on the life cycle and product design that are still a little highlighted [1].
## (s3) Discussion
(p3.0) PoP software helps researcher to gain the appropriate journals. We analyze 78 journals, that spread from 2009 to February 2019.  After 2016, this trend increased significantly. this means that this topic is becoming a concern in society and researchers.

(p3.1) The most popular Journal Publication that published this topic is Journal Cleaner Production (Table 5). This is consistent with previous research, bibliometric analysis with Google Scholar data sources only [9]. Other journals that contribute one article each and not listed in the Table 5  Others 20
## (s4) Total 78
(p4.0) Vosviewer software that was created and explained by Van Eck and Waltman [10] was used to analyze the final data, to see the distribution of data patterns. VOSviewer shows, there are 2342 terms words that appear more than once in the title and abstract. Then the vosviewer analyzes the words, which appear above 10 times, in the 78 titles and abstracts of the papers and found 48 threshold. If we want more rigid results, we can change this amount. We can replace it with a larger number, 15 or 20 times. Figure 4 shows density visualisation mapping from VOSViewer. The red colors presentes the largest number of items and the highest weights of elements, followed by yellow and green ones. The red colors means that these words, such as 'practice', 'model', 'process', 'performance', ' industry' are widely used by researchers. Our consideration is in the words inside green colours, such as 'energy', and ' environmental regulation'. In the middle between red and green colours, is yellow colours. The words such as 'adoption', 'survey', 'gscm', 'smes', 'cost', gives researchers an opportunity to be further investigated. Researchers can conduct future research on research topics based on these words inside green and yellow colour of density visualisation mapping.
