# Online Fair Division: A Survey

CorpusID: 208202112 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/154fdde98065cc84c3e99edac4767bc7a11c5418](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/154fdde98065cc84c3e99edac4767bc7a11c5418)

Fields: Economics, Computer Science

## (s5) Formal background
(p5.0) We suppose there are n agents being allocated m items. Allocations may be whole (e.g. in the case of indivisible items), fractional (e.g. in the case of divisible items), or randomized (e.g. in the case of indivisible items, this represents a probability distribution over whole allocations). Often, as in many other areas, we will assume additive utilities. Additive utilities offer a compromise between simplicity and expressivity. However, some work in this area has considered more general utilities (e.g. (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019a) studies the more general class of monotone utilities). We consider a number of classical normative properties such as Pareto efficiency and envy-freeness. An allocation is Pareto efficient iff there is no other allocation where all agents have as much utility, and at least one agent has strictly more. An allocation is envy-free iff no agent has strictly greater utility for the items allocated to another agent than the utility for their own items. Envy-freeness is a desirable but often unachievable fairness property (consider two agents and one indivisible item that they both like). Therefore, we also consider a relaxation that can be always achieved: envy-free up to one item (EF1). An allocation is EF1 iff no agent has envy for another agent's bundle, supposing we can remove one item from this bundle. EF1 can be achieved with a simple roundrobin mechanism that allocates the most desired item left to the next agent in a round-robin fashion. We say that a mechanism is Pareto efficient / envy-free / EF1 iff it only returns allocations that are Pareto efficient / envy-free / EF1. See (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b) for more details.
## (s8) Online properties
(p8.0) Another technique to deal with the challenges of online fair division is to consider relaxed normative properties that are applicable to the online setting. For example, (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b) relax the definition of strategy-proofness to suppose past decisions are fixed while future decisions could still be strategic. A mechanism is strategy-proof if, an agent cannot improve their (expected) utility by bidding insincerely, supposing the entire information (i.e. the items, their arriving order and the mechanism) about the allocation process is available to each agent. That is, for each problem and agent a i , u(u i1 , . . . , u im ) ≥ u(v i1 , . . . , v im ) for any (possibly strategic) bids v i1 , . . . , v im of agent a i for the m items. On the other hand, we can relax this definition to a weaker online version of strategy-proofness. We say that a mechanism is online strategy-proof if, for each problem and round j ∈ [1, m], u(u i1 , . . . , u i(j−1) , u ij ) ≥ u(u i1 , . . . , u i(j−1) , v ij ) for any (possibly strategic) bid v ij of agent a i for the final jth item.

(p8.1) Online strategy-proofness is less onerous to achieve than strategy proofness. It supposes all earlier decisions are now fixed and the agent can only be strategic about the current decision. It is not hard to see that a strategy-proof mechanism is further online strategy-proof but the opposite may not hold. Indeed, whilst the only online mechanisms that are strategy-proof are rather unresponsive mechanisms such as the random mechanism which just allocates items randomly irrespective of the bids of agents, the class of mechanisms that are online strategy-proof is far larger and can be responsive to the bids of agents. In fact, Theorem 2 in (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b) characterizes the class of online mechanisms that are online strategy-proof as "step" mechanisms that allocate items uniformly between agents that bid over some threshold of utility for an arriving item.

(p8.2) Stronger normative properties can also be useful in the online setting. For instance, (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b) introduce shared envy-freeness which requires that each pair of agents are envy-free of each other over only the items that both agents in the pair like in common. If you get an item that I don't like, it does not cause me any envy. Shared envy-freeness implies envy-freeness but not the other way around. Shared envy-freeness is one of the normative properties that distinguishes between the LIKE and BALANCED LIKE mechanisms. Table 1, which is taken from (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b), summarizes many of the differences in normative properties of the different online mechanisms discussed in the previous section.
## (s9) Impossibility results
(p9.0) Another approach to understand the challenges of online fair division is to identify normative properties which are impossible to achieve in the online setting which can be achieved in the offline setting. For example, in offline fair division, Pareto efficiency and envy-freeness ex ante are possible to achieve simultaneously, e.g. the allocations returned by the probabilistic serial mechanism are Pareto efficient and envyfree ex ante (Bogomolnaia and Moulin 2001). In online fair division, these two normative properties are also possible to achieve simultaneously with 0/1 utilities, For instance, the LIKE mechanism, allocating each next item uniformly at random to any agent who declares strictly positive utility, is Pareto efficient and envy-free ex ante. But, with general (i.e. non-0/1) utilities, there is no online mechanism that can be both Pareto efficient and envy-free ex ante (proved first in (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b)).
## (s12) Asymptotic guarantees
(p12.0) Another response to the challenge of online fair division is to try to achieve properties asymptotically. Even in the offline setting, desirable fairness property such as envy-freeness cannot be guaranteed. Consider, for instance, two agents and one indivisible item that both agents like. Envy-freeness is even harder to guarantee in the online setting. Suppose two agents both like the next indivisible item. If we want to ensure envy-freeness, we cannot allocate this item fairly without ultimately knowing what items will arrive next, that might compensate the agent not allocated the current item.

(p12.1) However, we can look for online mechanisms that limit how envy grows over time. For example, (Benade et al. 2018) consider whether mechanisms can achieve vanishing envy. That is, after m items have arrived in an online fashion, if the maximum amount of envy an agent has for any other agent is envy m , can we design mechanisms so that the ratio of envym m goes to zero as m goes to infinity? This is indeed possible and, in fact, easy to achieve. (Benade et al. 2018) show that randomly allocating items gives envy that vanishes in expectation. Unfortunately, it is not possible to do better than such a "blind" mechanism. Indeed, the random mechanism is asymptotically optimal up to logarithmic factors.
## (s13) Reallocating items
(p13.0) A final technique to deal with the online nature of fair division is to consider allocations that can be adjusted once subsequent items are revealed. By re-allocating items allocated in the past when new items arrive, we can perhaps restore desirable normative properties. For example, with two agents, additive valuations and m online items, (He et al. 2019) prove that any uninformed algorithm requires Θ(m) items to be re-allocated to ensure an EF1 allocation. Unsurprisingly, an informed algorithm requires no re-allocations to ensure EF1. For the case of three or more agents, (He et al. 2019) prove that even informed algorithms require Ω(m) items to be reallocated to ensure an EF1 allocation, and design an uninformed algorithm that makes do with O(m 3/2 ).

(p13.1) These results leave open the question of whether there is a separation between the number of items that informed and uninformed algorithms must re-allocate in order to achieve EF1 (like the strict separation proven in the case of two agents) in the general case of three or more agents.
## (s14) Conclusions
(p14.0) Online fair division is a promising and active research area that looks to take account of the online nature of many resource allocation problems. Whilst recent work has identi- Figure 1: Summary of results about online mechanisms satisfying (combinations of) properties such as strategy proofness (SP), envy-freeness ex ante (EFA), Pareto efficiency ex ante (PEA) and Pareto efficiency ex post (PEP). Any part of the Venn diagram marked "∅" is impossible (e.g. no mechanism is envy-free ex ante and Pareto efficient ex post). Any part of the Venn diagram marked "∞" represents a combination of properties which an infinite number of different mechanisms can satisfy (e.g. any probabilistic combination of the LIKE and ORP mechanisms returns a probability distribution of allocations that is envy-free ex ante). OSD* represents any probability distribution of online serial dictator (OSD) mechanisms. MEM STEP is any "memoryless step" mechanism where the current item is allocated irrespective of the past (i.e. memoryless), and whether an agent is feasible is simply a step function of their bid. This figure is taken from (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b). fied many important features of such problems, there are many research directions still to be considered. For example, how do we extend recent results such as (Aziz et al. 2015b;2015a;Aziz, Schlotter, and Walsh 2016;Aziz et al. 2017;Gerding et al. 2019;Aziz et al. 2019;Aleksandrov and Walsh 2018) about the (offline) fair division of goods and bads to the online setting? As a second example, the preferences of agents are often highly correlated. How can we exploit this fact in an online setting? As a third example, we can apply online mechanisms like those discussed here to an offline setting by imposing an "artificial" arrival order to the agents or items. Can this help achieve desirable normative properties? And, as a fourth example, can we extend these ideas to the online versions of other problems in social choice such as capacitated facility location (Aziz et al. 2020) or peer assessment (Walsh 2014b).
