# String C-group representations of almost simple groups: a survey

CorpusID: 204801117 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/27e650d13940a01a86eeeb7819fef6634707993f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/27e650d13940a01a86eeeb7819fef6634707993f)

Fields: Mathematics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Polytopes, and in particular regular polytopes, have been studied by mathematicians for millenia. The recent monograph of McMullen and Schulte [45] came as the first comprehensive up-to-date book on abstract regular polytopes after more than twenty years of rapid development and it describes a rich new theory that benefits from an interplay between several areas of mathematics including geometry, algebra, combinatorics, group theory and topology. In recent years, abstract regular polytopes whose automorphism groups are (almost) simple groups have been studied extensively. This survey paper aims to give the state of the art on the subject, and to give paths for further research in that field.

(p0.1) The project surveyed in this paper started in 2003 when Michael Hartley contacted us about an abstract regular polytope he had found, of type {5, 3, 5}, whose automorphism group is the first Janko group J 1 , one of the 26 sporadic simple groups. It turned out we knew the existence of that polytope since 1999 when we published an atlas of regular thin geometries for small groups [35]. Unfortunately (or in fact fortunately), that polytope was not mentioned in this atlas as, at the time, we had computed all thin regular residually connected incidence geometries whose automorphism group is J 1 but there were too many of them (almost 3000) to list them in the paper. That polytope was the start of a very fruitful collaboration with Hartley and changed our research life as we then decided to focus on polytopes.
## (s6) Projective linear groups
(p6.0) Several projective linear groups were analyzed in [42]. The observation of the data collected permitted, over the years, to obtain classification results that we summarize in this section. P SL(2, q). The values of q for which a P SL(2, q) group has rank three polytopes were determined by Sjerve and Cherkassoff. For the groups P SL(2, q), we quickly observed that the maximal rank of a string C-group representation for these groups is 4 as they do not possess subgroups that are direct products of two dihedral groups of order at least 6 each, obtaining the following theorem.
## (s10) 5.4.
(p10.0) Open problems on groups with socle P SL(2, q). Enumeration of Cgroup representations of rank three for groups P SL(2, q) and P GL(2, q) can be found in [13]. Even though their results are for hypermaps, all the hypermaps they give satisfy the intersection property by [12, Corollary 4.2] as none of P SL(2, q) or P GL(2, q) possesses a non-trivial cyclic subgroup that is normal. String C-group representations of rank four for P SL(2, q) and P GL(2, q) are known thanks to Theorems 5.3 and 5.5.

(p10.1) Problem 3. Enumerate the non-isomorphic string C-group representations of rank three and four of PSL(2, p 2k )⋊ β where β is a Baer involution of PΓL(2, p 2k ).
## (s13) Groups with socle P SL(4, q).
(p13.0) In [3], with Brooksbank, we showed that the groups P SL(4, q) have string C-group representations if and only if q is odd. Moreover, we showed that for each odd q, there is at least one string C-group representation of rank four.

(p13.1) Theorem 5.8. [3, Theorem 1.1 and Corollary 4.5] If q = p k for odd p, then P SL(4, q) has at least one string C-group representation of rank 4. If q is even, then P SL(4, q) has no string C-group representation.
## (s16) Small Ree groups
(p16.0) The small Ree groups R(q), defined over a finite field of order q = 3 2e+1 and e > 0, were discovered by Rimhak Ree [57] in 1960. In the literature they are also denoted by 2 G 2 (q). These groups have a subgroup structure quite similar to that of the Suzuki simple groups Sz(q), with q = 2 2e+1 and e > 0. Suzuki and Ree groups play a somewhat special role in the theory of finite simple groups, since they exist because of a Frobenius twist arising from a special automorphism of the field over which they are constructed. They have no counterpart in characteristic zero.

(p16.1) The Ree group G := R(q), with q = 3 2e+1 and e ≥ 0, is a group of order q 3 (q − 1)(q 3 + 1). It has a natural permutation representation on a Steiner system S := (Ω, B) = S(2, q + 1, q 3 + 1) consisting of a set Ω of q 3 + 1 elements, the points, and a family of (q + 1)-subsets B of Ω, the blocks, such that any two points of Ω lie in exactly one block. This Steiner system is also called a Ree unital . In particular, G acts 2-transitively on the points and transitively on the incident pairs of points and blocks of S.
## (s17) Orthogonal and symplectic groups
(p17.0) With Brooksbank and Ferrara, we decided to investigate the orthogonal groups and to look for string C-group representations of large rank. Indeed, apart from the symmetric and alternating groups, as well as some crystallographic groups studied by Barry Monson and Egon Schulte (see [46,47,48]), no other family of groups was known to have possible large ranks that could grow linearly depending on one of its parameters, being the permutation degree or the dimension of the group or the size of the field on which the group is defined. We obtained the following theorem for orthogonal and symplectic groups. Given the way we had to choose the involutions to construct the string C-group representations mentioned in Theorem 8.1, we have good reasons to believe that no higher rank can be achieved for these groups.
