# Hydrogen sulfide regulates insulin secretion and insulin resistance in diabetes mellitus, a new promising target for diabetes mellitus treatment? A review

CorpusID: 213032989 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/01c639f8aac2c923967c20ea30942e4b2ae31ea9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/01c639f8aac2c923967c20ea30942e4b2ae31ea9)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s1) H 2 S in islet b cells
(p1.0) Endogenous H 2 S production in islet b-cells An endogenous generation of H 2 S via CBS and/or CSE was identified in pancreatic b-cells from several species (Table 1). A different H 2 S dominant synthase was identified in the pancreatic b cells depending on the species. A small amount of CBS was expressed by HIT-T15 Syrian hamster pancreatic b-cells with no CSE mRNA transcripts shown [17]. Both CBS and CSE were detected in mouse pancreases, mouse and rat pancreatic islets and MIN6 mouse islet b cells [18][19][20][21]. INS-1E rat insulinoma cells expressed CSE [22]. CSE inhibition by CSE siRNA or DL-propargylglycine (PPG) significantly depleted H 2 S production from cultured INS-1E cells [22]. PPG also significantly reduced H 2 S production in rat pancreatic islets [18]. These results suggested that CSE was the dominant enzyme catalyzing H 2 S production in INS-1E rat insulinoma cell and in rat islet b cell. The distribution patterns of the two enzymes in the mouse pancreas are not identical. In immunohistochemistry results of the pancreas taken from male ICR mice, CBS existed in pancreatic exocrine and endocrine islet cell cytoplasm. CSE was primarily expressed in exocrine cell cytoplasm and showed faint levels in the islets [20]. No protein expression of 3-MST was detected by Western blot in mouse pancreases [21], but the contribution of 3-MST to H 2 S production in pancreatic b-cells from other species has not been investigated. These studies indicated that H 2 S dominant synthases in pancreatic b cells are species-specific.
## (s2) Hyperglycemia regulates endogenous H 2 S in pancreatic b-cells
(p2.0) How high glucose regulates CSE/H 2 S pathway is controversial. High glucose (20 mmol/L) was found to suppress H 2 S production in INS-1E cells by downregulating CSE promoter activity and mRNA level, as glucose activates p38-MAPK/specificity protein 1 (SP1) pathway [22,23] (Fig. 2). Insulin secretion was promoted in high glucose-stimulated INS-1E cells [22], indicating that high glucose (20 mmol/L)-induced H 2 S/CSE inhibition might lead to stimulating a long-term insulin release. On the contrary, high glucose (10 or 20 mmol/L) was observed to induce H 2 S production in MIN6 cells by upregulating CSE expression. Similar phenomenon occurred in mouse islets [20]. The difference of the effect of glucose on H 2 S/CSE pathway between mouse pancreatic b-cells and INS-1E cells may be explained in part by different glucose levels during the pre-incubation period before treatment, different H 2 S responses based on animal species or cell types, and other experimental conditions. Therefore, further studies will be needed to explore the effect of hyperglycemia on endogenous H 2 S in pancreatic b-cells and its mechanisms.
## (s3) H 2 S inhibits insulin secretion from pancreatic b-cells
(p3.0) Absolute or relative deficiency of insulin secretion caused by the loss or dysfunction of pancreatic b-cells contributes to the occurrence and development of diabetes mellitus. Several studies investigated the effects of H 2 S on insulin secretion by pancreatic b-cells (Table 2).

(p3.1) Wu et al. [18] demonstrated that compared with control rats, impaired insulin secretion, reduced serum insulin level, elevated pancreatic CSE protein levels and H 2 S production, hyperglycemia and insulin resistance were showed in Zucker diabetic fatty (ZDF) rats. Intraperitoneal injection of PPG to inhibit CSE activity and pancreatic H 2 S production could restore normal pancreatic insulin secretion, upregulate the serum insulin, and improve high blood glucose as well as decrease hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) in ZDF rats. These findings indicated that abnormally increased pancreatic H 2 S production might lead to the occurrence of impaired insulin secretion in diabetes. After the overexpression of CSE with adenovirus to increase H 2 S production in INS-1E cells, insulin secretion at low glucose (5 mmol/L) did not change, whereas insulin secretion induced by high glucose (16 mmol/L) was significantly reduced [22]. Similar effects were observed in Syrian hamster pancreatic b-cells (HIT-T15) treated with exogenous (sodium hydrogen sulfide, NaHS) or endogenous (CBS overexpression) H 2 S [17]. Additionally, NaHS inhibited high glucose-induced insulin release by mouse pancreatic islets and MIN6 cells. However, NaHS failed to regulate insulin release induced by 3 mmol/L glucose [19]. High glucose caused more insulin release by freshly isolated pancreatic islets of CSE-deficient mice than that by littermate wild-type mouse islets [24]. H 2 S donor suppressed high glucose-induced insulin release in wild-type islets [24]. These data suggest that both endogenous H 2 S generated from pancreatic b-cells and exogenous H 2 S inhibit insulin secretion in the presence of high glucose, while the inhibition of pancreatic H 2 S synthesis promotes insulin secretion, suggesting that abnormal H 2 S synthesis is the cause and impaired insulin secretion is the effect.

(p3.2) Such inhibition involves several mechanisms as follows (Fig. 2). First, H 2 S decreases insulin release in islet b-cells via ATP-sensitive potassium (K ATP ) channels activation [17,18,22]. H 2 S at 100 lmol/L elevated K ATP channel currents in islet b-cells from both ZDF and Zucker lean (ZL) rats, which were abolished by gliclazide, a K ATP channel antagonist. Under resting conditions, K ATP currents intensity was lower in ZDF islet b cells than in ZL b cells [18]. Patchclamp whole-cell recording assay showed that treated INS-1E cells with high glucose (16 mmol/L) decreased K ATP currents compared with cells by 5 mmol/L glucose treatment. H 2 S (100 lmol/L) application of INS-1E cells did not affect whole-cell K ATP currents induced by 5 mmol/L glucose, but markedly upregulated K ATP channel currents stimulated by 16 mmol/L glucose. Application of PPG or CSE siRNA to lower the cell H 2 S content reduced K ATP currents, which was abolished by H 2 S donor supplementation. It was also found that H 2 S facilitated K ATP channel activity in INS-1E cells by upregulating single-K ATP -channel open probability, but not the  HIT-T15 cells [17] mRNA was detected (low levels) Rat pancreatic islets [18] mRNA was detected MIN6 cells [19] mRNA and protein were detected Mouse pancreatic islets [19] mRNA and protein were detected (mRNA was moderately expressed) Mouse pancreatic islets [20] protein was detected Moue pancreases [20,21] CSE No mRNA expression was detected HIT-T15 cells [17] mRNA and protein were detected (H 2 S dominant synthase)

(p3.3) INS-1E cells [22] mRNA and protein were detected (H 2 S dominant synthase) Rat pancreatic islets [18] mRNA was detected MIN6 cells [19] mRNA was detected Mouse pancreatic islets [19] mRNA and protein were detected (low levels)
## (s4) H 2 S regulates apoptosis of islet b-cells
(p4.0) Impaired islet b-cell survival arising from an imbalance between cell proliferation and death constitutes one of the major pathogenic factors for diabetes. The pattern of islet b-cell death in the development of diabetes is mainly apoptosis. H 2 S regulation of islet b-cell apoptosis is controversial ( Table 2). Endogenously produced H 2 S by CSE overexpression or exogenously produced H 2 S (100 lmol/L, within physiologically relevant concentration [15]) incubation for 12 h induced INS-1E cell apoptosis, which may not be associated with the changed redox status [25]. The study further indicated that H 2 S increased the phosphorylation of p38-MAPK, and then enhanced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, demonstrated by increased expression of Bip, CHOP and SREBP-1c, thus inducing apoptosis of b-cell. (Fig. 2). The phenomenon of H 2 Sinduced INS-1E cell apoptosis suggests a suppressive effect of H 2 S on insulin secretion by decreasing b-cell mass. Type 1 diabetes was formed in wild-type mice 24 days after the first intraperitoneal administration of streptozotocin (STZ), while CSE knockout delayed it. CSE inhibitor PPG treatment protected against hypoinsulinemia and hyperglycemia in mice subjected to STZ. Moreover, STZ markedly promoted CBS mRNA expression, H 2 S generation and islet b cell apoptosis in pancreatic tissue of wild-type mice, while CSE knockout partly abolished STZ-induced islet bcell apoptosis [26,27]. Treatment of INS-1E cells with STZ increased H 2 S generation and decreased the viability of the cells, while PPG co-treatment partially reversed the decreased cell viability. Mechanistically, STZ induced K ATP channel currents in wild-type islet b cells, which was blocked by PPG treatment or CSE knockout. Glucose intolerance, hyperglycemia as well as low insulin secretion were observed in the wild-type mice with NaHS administration [26]. Collectively, the results demonstrated that the H 2 S produced by CSE accelerated diabetes in STZ mice through inducing b-cell apoptosis and activating K ATP channels. Inhibition of the CSE/H 2 S pathway is thought to be a novel strategy for protection against diabetes mellitus.

(p4.1) In contrast, several studies reported a protective role of H 2 S in regulating pancreatic b-cell apoptosis. NaHS (100 lmol/L) inhibited high glucose (20 mmol/L)-stimulated cell apoptosis and elevated the glutathione concentration in mouse islet b cell line MIN6 [20,28], indicating that H 2 S might protect pancreatic bcells from glucotoxicity. The inhibitory effect of H 2 S on pancreatic b-cell apoptosis was also confirm in cultured islets [28]. Interestingly, H 2 S suppressed fatty acid-, cytokines-or H 2 O 2 -induced bcell apoptosis, while H 2 S did not prevent mouse islets and MIN6 cells from apoptosis stimulated by thapsigargin and tunicamycin, both of which led to ER stress. It indicates that the anti-oxidative capacity and the activation of Akt signaling but not ER stress may be involved in H 2 S-mediated prevention from b-cell apoptosis (Fig. 2). In addition, Thioredoxin binding protein-2 (TBP-2) plays an important role in b-cell apoptosis and the onset and development of diabetes. TBP-2 expression was increased in the pancreas from high fat diet (HFD)-fed CSE-deficient mice which showed elevated b-cell apoptosis, decreased pancreatic insulin contents, and glucose intolerance [21]. The administration of the H 2 S donor NaHS abolished 20 mmol/L glucose exposure-enhanced TBP-2 expression in CSE knockout pancreatic b cells. These data suggested that the CSE/H 2 S pathway protected against the occurrence of HFDinduced diabetes mellitus by inhibiting TBP-2-mdidated b-cell apoptosis (Fig. 2). However, CSE knockout delayed the onset of STZ-induced type 1 diabetes, decreased hypoinsulinemia and hyperglycemia, and reduced islet b-cell apoptosis [26]. These findings put forward the possibility that H 2 S induces apoptosis of extremely impaired b-cells and inhibits apoptosis of not extremely impaired b-cells. While, the effects of the endogenous H 2 S on b-cell functions may depend on the age or stage/type of diabetes.
## (s5) Hydrogen sulfide regulates insulin sensitivity
(p5.0) Insulin resistance acts as a fundamental pathology of type 2 diabetes [5]. Insulin resistance means that the responsiveness of target tissues to insulin is reduced, leading to reduced glucose uptake to skeletal muscle and adipose and elevated hepatic glucose output. Previous studies have shown that H 2 S is important for regulating insulin sensitivity in the liver, adipose and skeletal muscle.
## (s8) Hydrogen sulfide and adipose tissue function
(p8.0) Adipose tissue serves as the main energy storage organ. Adipocytes uptake and storage much triglycerides under the energy sufficiency conditions, but consume them during fasting or energy insufficiency conditions. During fasting or stress conditions, triglycerides undergo lipolysis by lipases including adipocyte triglyceride lipase (ATGL), hormone sensitive lipase (HSL) and monoglyceride lipase (MGL). The products of triglyceride hydrolysis, glycerol and free fatty acids (FFA), are released into the blood and taken up by other tissues. For example, FFA is transported to skeletal muscles and heart to provide energy for these organs. They serve as energy substrates while glycerol is taken up by the liver. Adipose tissue is also thought to be an active endocrine organ. Cytokines and FFA released from adipocytes regulate systemic metabolic process. Several adipokines are produced and released from adipocytes, such as leptin, adiponectin and resistin. Maintaining normal adipose tissue function helps to maintain systemic metabolic homeostasis. Adipose tissue dysfunction is an important cause of metabolic diseases, such as diabetes, obesity and atherosclerosis [40,41]. How H 2 S modulates adipose tissue function is discussed below (Table 4).

(p8.1) Hydrogen sulfide exists in adipose tissues H 2 S was first reported in 2009 to be produced in rat adipose tissues, such as epididymal adipose, perirenal adipose, and brown Promoted [39] adipose tissues [42]. RT-PCR analysis showed that epididymal adipose, perirenal adipose and brown adipose tissues all expressed the mRNA of CSE and CBS, the two H 2 S-producing enzymes. CSE protein expression was also detected in these adipose tissues. After the adipose tissues were pretreated with the CSE inhibitor PPG, endogenous H 2 S generation was decreased to less than 20%, indicating that CSE was a key enzyme to catalyze this gasotransmitter generation from adipose tissues. In addition, CSE/H 2 S pathway existed both in pre-adipocytes and adipocytes [42,43]. The study also demonstrated that in rat visceral adipose, CSE/H 2 S level increased with age [42].
## (s11) H 2 S inhibits lipolysis in adipocytes
(p11.0) Lipolysis causes triglyceride hydrolysis to release glycerol and FFA. Lipolysis increases in obesity and excessive FFA are released into the bloodstream, contributing to local oxidative stress, inflammation and ectopic fat deposition in target tissues, which leads to insulin resistance and diabetes [52][53][54]. Lipolysis is regulated by multiple endogenous factors, including catecholamines, insulin, and cytokines [55,56]. Studies have investigated whether H 2 S regulates lipolysis. Geng and colleagues studied the effect of H 2 S on lipolysis in adipocytes. The CSE inhibitor PPG elevated lipolysis, while H 2 S precursor L-cysteine and H 2 S donor GYY4137 inhibited lipolysis in adipocytes. PPG upregulated phosphorylation of PKA substrate and HSL as well as perilipin 1 expression, while H 2 S donor GYY4137 reduced these protein expressions. Results from in vivo studies indicated that PPG upregulated lipolysis and GYY4137 suppressed adipose lipolysis in HFD-fed mice. However, both PPG and GYY4137 improved insulin sensitivity in HFD mice. These findings suggested the CSE/H 2 S pathway inhibited lipolysis through PKA-perilipin/HSL signaling pathway and improved insulin sensitivity [57].

(p11.1) Lipolysis inhibition by H 2 S was confirmed by Tsai et al. They reported that both GYY4137 and NaHS inhibited CL-316, 243 (b-adrenoceptor agonist)-stimulated lipolysis in mature 3T3-L1 adipocytes, while the CBS inhibitor AOAA or CSE inhibitor PPG pro-moted it, suggesting that endogenous and exogenous H 2 S inhibit lipolysis [49].
## (s13) H 2 S and skeletal muscle
(p13.0) Skeletal muscle serves as one of the chief insulin responsive organs and regulates systemic glucose metabolism. CBS and CSE are abundant in human skeletal muscles similar to their expressions in human kidney and liver [61][62][63]. CBS, CSE and 3-MST were detected in rat skeletal muscle, but their expressions were much lower than those in rat kidney and liver tissue [64]. The levels of three H 2 S synthases as well as H 2 S production capacity were also detectable in mouse skeletal muscle [65]. Skeletal muscles in both ovine and bovine expressed very little 3-MST. Therefore, the expression of the H 2 S synthases in skeletal muscle varies between species.

(p13.1) H 2 S might promote glucose uptake in the muscle. Administration of NaHS to L6 myotubes promoted glucose uptake and upregulated phosphorylated insulin receptor (IR), PI3K and AKT levels, which were blocked by the IR inhibitor [45]. Either PI3K inhibitor or IR knockdown attenuated NaHS-induced upregulation of glucose uptake. Moreover, NaHS could directly activate IR. Chronic NaHS administration improved insulin resistance accompanied by elevated phosphorylated PI3K and Akt levels in the muscles from Goto-Kakizaki (GK, a spontaneous type 2 diabetic model) diabetic rats. The same phenomenon was found in Wistar rats [45]. These results indicated that H 2 S might promote glucose uptake in skeletal muscles through sensitizing the IR-PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, thus ameliorating insulin resistance. Moreover, the promotion of glucose uptake by H 2 S was further confirmed in C 2 C 12 mouse myotubes [66]. NaHS administration (10 or 20 lM; 6 h) increased glutathione (GSH) biosynthesis, glucose uptake and utilization, but decreased ROS generation. In contrast, inhibition of endogenous H 2 S in C 2 C 12 myotubes by CSE knockdown reduced GSH biosynthesis, GLUT4 level and glucose uptake, but increased ROS generation [66]. Persistent hyperglycemia is one of the main causes of oxidative stress. NaHS treatment improved diaphragm contractility and ultrastructural damage in diabetic rat, which might be related to the inhibition of oxidative damage and cell apoptosis in diaphragmatic muscle [67]. These results indicated that H 2 S might be crucial for maintaining glucose homeostasis in the muscle. H 2 S regulates circadian clock in the skeletal muscle. Disruption of core clock genes (CCG) contributes to the progression of metabolic disorders [68]. H 2 S synthesis enzymes (CBS, CSE and 3-MST), antioxidant genes, CCG and clock-controlled genes were all decreased in muscle of HFD-induced mice, but markers of oxidative stress and expression of oxidative stress related genes were increased [65]. In cultured mouse myoblast cell line C 2 C 12 , high glucose or palmitate treatment decreased CSE/H 2 S level and CCG expression, but increased oxidative stress. TNF and MCP-1 treatment displayed similar effects. Inhibiting CSE and glutamate cysteine ligase catalytic subunit (GCLC) with siRNA or pharmacological inhibitors decreased H 2 S production, Bmal1 and Clock mRNA expression, and increased oxidative stress. Application of H 2 S donor NaHS or GSH precursor improved expression of CCG [65]. These results suggest that H 2 S may be an important endogenous regulator of the circadian clock and metabolic disorder.
## (s14) H 2 S and hypothalamus
(p14.0) CBS and 3-MST are the major endogenous enzymes in the brain that produce H 2 S [69][70][71][72][73]. CBS/H 2 S pathway in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN) was found to improve obesity and insulin sensitivity via the brain-adipose interaction [74]. CBS was detected in thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) and CRH producing neurons. Hypothalamus CBS protein levels was downregulated in HFD-induced obese rats and in db/db obese mice. Overexpression of PVN CBS decreased food intake and improved obesity and insulin sensitivity in high-fat-diet rats. Moreover, CBS overexpression in PVN upregulated pre-TRH level and downregulated adrenocortico-tropic-hormone (ACTH) and corticosterone content in the blood. The activation of mTORC1 signaling pathway is involved in the upregulation of CBS/H 2 S in pre-TRH level. Further results [74] indicated that leptin activated FOXO3a to increase CBS expression and H 2 S production in the hypothalamus, regulating neuroendocrine hormone (TRH and ACTH) to impact systemic glucose metabolism and energy homeostasis. However, the roles of H 2 S in regulating glucose metabolism control by the hypothalamus and its mechanism need to be further studied.
## (s15) Roles of H 2 S in glucose metabolism in vivo
(p15.0) Endogenous H 2 S plays vital roles in regulating pancreatic bcells, liver, adipose, skeletal muscle and hypothalamus function to modulate glucose metabolism. How H 2 S regulates glucose metabolism in vivo has attracted great attention. Guangdong and colleagues found that CSE knockout mice showed a delayed onset of STZ-induced diabetes and the reduced apoptotic b-cell death. STZ upregulated pancreatic H 2 S generation, and the treatment of PPG improved glucose metabolism disorder in STZ wild type mice. But NaHS injection impaired glucose metabolism [26]. The inhibition of H 2 S production with PPG upregulated serum insulin levels, and decreased blood glucose in Zucker diabetic fatty (ZDF) rats, indicating that inhibiting H 2 S production improved hyperglycemia [18]. In contrast, other studies reported that middle-aged CSEdeficient mice showed increased blood glucose levels and impaired glucose intolerance [21]. Xue et al. showed that chronic NaHS administration improved glucose metabolism disorder in Goto-Kakizaki diabetic rats. Application of NaHS (60 lmol/kgÁday, 10 weeks) improved insulin sensitivity in Wistar rats [45]. Guo et al. indicated that CSE knockout promoted HFD-induced mouse obesity and insulin resistance and increased hepatic gluconeogenesis. A low dose of NaHS treatment (25 lmol/kg/d, intraperitoneally for 12 weeks) improved HFD-induced obesity and insulin resistance but a high dose of NaHS treatment (50 lmol/ kg/d, intraperitoneally for 12 weeks) promoted HFD-induced obesity and insulin resistance [35]. Treatment with H 2 S gas buffer, or the H 2 S donor GYY4137 improved insulin resistance in HFD-induced obese mice [43]. Geng et al. reported that both upregulation and downregulation of H 2 S level could improve insulin resistance in HFD mice [57]. Therefore, the roles of H 2 S in glucose metabolism in vivo are not consistent, and need to be further investigated.
## (s16) H 2 S in humans
(p16.0) Most studies indicated plasma H 2 S levels decreased in diabetic patients. Compared with lean subjects, overweight and type 2 diabetes patients had decreased blood H 2 S concentrations. The median plasma H 2 S levels (25th, 75th percentiles) in lean, overweight and type 2 diabetes subjects were 38.9 (29.7, 45.1) lmol/L, 22.0 (18.6, 26.7) lmol/L and 10.5 (4.8, 22.0) lmol/L, respectively [12].
