# Citation COMPLEXITY FACTORS IN MEGA PROJECTS: A LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 214230892 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fa9f7aaae31bd04512d29cbf7cc7b243aa71dad](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fa9f7aaae31bd04512d29cbf7cc7b243aa71dad)

Fields: Engineering, Sociology, Business

## (s2) Attributes of complexity
(p2.0) In recent years, researchers have focused on the identification of complexity attributes more than any other issues in the field of mega project complexity (Dao, Kermanshachi, Shane, Anderson, & Hare, 2016). The Forda Institute first used the concept of stakeholders in 1963; they used this concept for all groups and individuals who were involved in the project and affected the project output (Freeman, 1994).
## (s7) Findings
(p7.0) In recent years, complexity factors of the project are gathered and used in numerous scientific and practical research. However, there is no such criterion, and as a result, the complexities of mega projects are very vague and varied. In general, these complexities depend on the operational and situational conditions of the mega project. Nevertheless, many factors in different groups affected on complexity in mega project. In other words, complexity factors in mega projects are very numerous (Dao et al., 2016).

(p7.1) To help further research and understanding about the complexity of mega projects, it is important that these factors define a specific framework. After analysing and scrutinising literature, the distinction between their views is inevitable. Although many of the important features of considering the complexity of mega projects considered in different perspectives, at the end the dominant elements have been categorized in three groups to classify complexity dimension in mega projects. In our view, the distinction
