# Cholesterol Oxidation Products (COPs) in Ruminant Meat: A Biological and Pathological Approach: A Review

CorpusID: 213662227 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b799e4249cc4a8b17e80d539f1deeb6a901b34b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b799e4249cc4a8b17e80d539f1deeb6a901b34b)

Fields: Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s2) Enzymatic oxidation of cholesterol
(p2.0) The enzymatic oxidation of cholesterol is performed by several enzymes that are mainly from the cytochrome P450 family of oxygenases, such as monooxygenase, dioxygenase, dehydrogenase, and oxidase. Enzymatic oxidation begins with the formation of specific hydroxycholesterol (OHCh) molecules, as shown in Table 1.

(p2.1) Because certain enzymes are specific to particular tissues, there is considerable variation in oxysterol distribution across organs. For example, a primary product of enzymatic oxidation is 7α-OHCh, which is an important intermediate in the biosynthesis of bile acids and is produced in the liver by the action of cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase (CYP7A1), which has a critical role in cholesterol homeostasis (Gill et al.,2008). However, it is also formed by the non-enzymatic oxidation of cholesterol (Niki et al.,2005). The enzymatic reaction is under strict regulatory control, and any circulating 7α-OHCh represents leakage from the liver.
## (s8) Illumination
(p8.0) Various COPs are formed through the oxidation of cholesterol during illumination, and their quantity increases with an increased illumination time. In addition, COPs are more concentrated at the surface of the meat than throughout the rest of it during illumination. The COPs produced include free radicals formed by triplet sensitizer-reducing substrate interaction (Hwang and Maerker, 1993). Hwang and Maerker (1993) have reported that the irradiation of raw beef and veal at ten kGy increased the COP content, and the increase in COPs in those meats during storage was greater in the irradiated meat than the non-irradiated meat. The same results have been reported for other meat species Lee et al., 2001).
## (s10) Lipid content and composition
(p10.0) The composition and content of fats in meat play an important role in the oxidation rates of lipids and cholesterol . As a general rule, the more unsaturated a fatty acid is, the faster and more intense the formation of COPs is (Vicente et al., 2012). For example, Li et al. (1996) and Min et al. (2015) have reported that a high level of PUFAs leads to increased production of COPs. In addition, the synergistic decrease in the levels of cholesterol, and PUFAs provides evidence that cholesterol oxidation is promoted by the oxidation of PUFAs.

(p10.1) PUFA content varies considerably across animal species and decreases in the following order: fish > poultry > pork > beef > lamb. Therefore, the susceptibility to lipid oxidation and the consequent formation of COPs decreases in the same order (Hur et al., 2007).

(p10.2) The environmental conditions promoting the production of COPs have not yet been determined. However, it is reasonable to suspect that the oxidation of cholesterol is accelerated in the presence of peroxidized lipids (Li et al., 1996). Xu et al. (2011) have investigated the interactions of stearic, oleic, linoleic, and α-linolenic acids during the oxidation of cholesterol, and concluded that surrounding fatty acids affect cholesterol oxidation. They also reported that the fatty acids accelerated the oxidation of cholesterol for the first 60 minutes at 180° C, after which their pro-oxidant activity became weaker, with the exception of α-linolenic acid, which exerted an inhibitory effect after 120 minutes.
## (s12) metAbolIsm o F coPs
(p12.0) Cholesterol oxidation products (COPs), or oxysterols, tend to be more polar than cholesterol and can be absorbed in the human intestinal tract and distributed to tissues by a mechanism similar to that of cholesterol absorption. The absorption of COPs is lower than that of cholesterol, likely due to the lower solubility of COPs in micelles, the lower susceptibility to esterification in enterocytes, and the cytotoxic effects in mucosal cells (Osada et al., 1994). In addition, each type of COP is absorbed to different degrees; 7β-OHCh, 7-keto, and 5α, 6α-epoxycholesterol are detected in greater amounts than 5β, 6β-epoxycholesterol, and 25-OHCh (Vine et al., 1998). Notably, in contrast to 7β-OHCh, 7-keto is slightly absorbed and rapidly metabolized by the liver (Schweizer et al., 2004).

(p12.1) Oxysterols are able to pass through lipophilic membranes much faster than cholesterol (Linseisen and Wolfram, 1998). They can enter the blood circulation with dietary cholesterol and biliary cholesterol (endogenous cholesterol) as part of the chylomicron structure (Savage et al., 2002;Shazamawati et al., 2013) and lipoprotein, primarily low density lipoprotein (LDL) and, to a lesser degree, high density lipoprotein (HDL) (Staprans et al., 2003). 7α/β-OHCh and 7-keto are the most abundant oxysterols in lipoproteins (Linseisen and Wolfram, 1998;Vine et al., 1998). Recent studies have shown that unesterified cholesterol oxides associate readily with serum albumin (Lin and Morel, 1995).
## (s15) Sterol regulatory element binding proteins SREBPs
(p15.0) Oxysterols have been described as modulators of cholesterol metabolism through their influence on the sequestration of SREBPs in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), thereby limiting the expression of genes involved in cholesterol synthesis. The insulin-induced gene (Insig), an oxysterol sensor, is another key regulator in the ER membrane. It can inhibit the function of the SREBP by trapping and retaining the SREBP cleavage activating protein (SCAP) complex in the ER. Thus, several oxysterols such as 22(R)-OHCh, 25-OHCh and 24(S), 25-epoxycholesterol are able to attenuate cholesterol biosynthesis and the expression and activity of the LDL receptor in a macrophage (Shao and Espenshade 2012).
## (s17) Oxysterols in immune cell function
(p17.0) Oxysterols, acting through transcription factors such as LXRs, SREBPs and the Epstein-Barr virus-induced G-protein coupled receptor 2 (EBI2), have been implicated in regulating the differentiation and population expansion of cells of the innate and adaptive immune systems, their responses to inflammatory mediators. They have also been implicated in phagocytic functions of macrophages and in antiviral activities and immune cell migration (Spann and Glass, 2013). For example, the 7α, 25-dihydroxycholesterol oxysterol is a potent and selective agonist of the G-protein-coupled receptor EBI2, which is required for humoral immune responses (Hannedouche et al., 2011).
## (s18) Oxysterols as developmental process regulators
(p18.0) The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is indispensable for normal patterning of multicellular embryos and also functions in postembryonic development and adult tissue homeostasis, including the regulation of stem cell physiology (Jacob and Lum, 2007). Corcoran and Scott (2006) have ROR, retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor; Bcl-2, B-cell lymphoma 2; IgA, immunoglobulin A; CNS, central nervous system. reported evidence that cholesterol or certain oxysterols are required for Sonic Hh pathway signal transduction and proliferation of medulloblastoma cells. Additionally, Dwyer et al., (2007) have demonstrated that naturally occurring oxysterols exert osteoinductive effects through the activation of the Hh signaling pathway. Similarly, Kim et al. (2007) have provided evidence that the inhibition of bone marrow stromal cell differentiation into adipocytes by 20(S)-OHCh occurs through an Hh-dependent mechanism.
## (s20) Oxysterols as pro-apoptotic and cytotoxic factors
(p20.0) Apoptosis is genetically programmed cell death that has been conserved throughout evolution and used to maintain normal cell numbers in the organism, including during growth. It is a coordinated and active process characterized by specific morphological changes: chromatin condensation and nuclear fragmentation, membrane blebbing, and apoptotic body formation. Apoptosis is triggered through both an extrinsic, or death-receptor-mediated, pathway and an intrinsic, or mitochondrial, pathway. Both pathways appear to be activated by a variety of biologically relevant oxysterols that exert strong pro-apoptotic effects. Some findings support the involvement of death receptors in oxysterolinduced apoptosis. 27-OHCh and 22-OHCh induce tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) in macrophagic cells (Gargiulo et al., 2015), and upregulation of TNF receptors has been observed in human aortic smooth muscle cells after challenged with 7-keto (Lee et al., 2005). With respect to cytotoxic activities, several routes have been proposed for COPs: perturbation of intracellular calcium levels, intracellular ROS overproduction, mitochondrial and lysosomal membrane modifications, and polyamine metabolic perturbations (Sottero et al., 2009).
## (s22) Oxysterol and atherosclerosis
(p22.0) Atherosclerosis is a progressive disease of the arterial blood vessels and a principle contributor to the pathogenesis of myocardial and cerebral infarction. As such, it is the leading cause of human mortality. Many studies have detected oxysterols in human atherosclerotic plaque, especially 27-OHCh. Following 27-OHCh, 7-keto is the most abundant oxysterol in advanced atherosclerotic lesions, followed by 7β-OHCh and 7α-OHCh (Iuliano et al., 2003). Together, these four oxysterols comprise 75-85% of the nine oxysterols detected in plaques.

(p22.1) The other oxysterols are 5, 6-epoxycholesterol, 25-OHCh, and 24-OHCh. Although there is no direct evidence in humans that oxysterols contribute to the development of atherosclerosis, these oxysterols are thought to play an active role in plaque development due to their cytotoxicity (Shibata and Glass, 2010).
## (s23) Oxysterol and neurodegenerative disorders
(p23.0) Oxysterols also present interesting targets in various neurodegenerative disorders, such as multiple sclerosis, Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease (Kulig et al., 2016), specifically in the form of 24-OHCh, or cerebrosterol. Therefore, 24S-OHCh plasma levels can potentially be used as an early biochemical marker for altered cholesterol homeostasis in the central nervous system (Lütjohann et al., 2000). Another study has reported that 24-OHCh in concentrations of 10-50 μM induces apoptosis in T-lymphoma Jurkat cells and necroptosis in neuronal cells (Yamanaka et al., 2015).
## (s24) Oxysterol and cancer
(p24.0) The 27-OHCh oxysterol is the most abundant oxysterol in plasma, and its involvement has been demonstrated in the pathogenesis of several cancers, including breast and prostate cancer. For example, in breast cancer, oxysterols are important navigators that stimulate bone metastasis formation (Silva et al., 2006). 27-OHCh has been found to accumulate in breast tissue and stimulate tumor growth via the oestrogen receptor. Although most tissues express CYP27A1, its highest levels are in macrophages. Therefore, more attention has been given to the production of 27-OHCh in subendothelial macrophages as part of reverse cholesterol transport (Javitt, 2015).

(p24.1) In men, 27-OHCh may influence prostate carcinoma by stimulating the proliferation of prostatic cells, enhancing the expression of prostate-specific antigen, and increasing androgen receptor transcriptional activity (Raza et al., 2016). However, its role in colorectal cancer has not been investigated. Warns et al. (2018) treated Caco2 and SW620, two well-characterized colon cancer cells, with low, physiological, and high concentrations of 27-OHCh, and found that 27-OHCh reduced cellular proliferation in these cells.
## (s25) conclusIon
(p25.0) Cholesterol oxidation products (COPs) have crucial physiological functions, serving as metabolic intermediates, modulators of cell permeability, and regulators of cholesterol homeostasis and the expression of genes and receptors in cell signaling. Elucidating the role of oxysterol interactions with human receptors, such as oestrogen receptors and Insig, has opened new avenues for better understanding lipid metabolism, Alzheimer's disease, cancer, atherosclerosis, and other pathologies.

(p25.1) Additional studies on oxysterols are needed to facilitate the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of these disorders. These studies should use genomic, proteomic, and metabolomic profiling of a series of blood samples and target tissues from patients with different pathologies. In addition, further research is needed to determine the most effective way to apply antioxidants to prevent the oxidation of cholesterol. This task is a challenge for biochemists, food chemists, food engineering engineers, and processing technologists.  (Gargiulo et al., 2016) 
