# Drug-induced Acute Angle-closure Glaucoma: A Review

CorpusID: 214099556 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed6c11dc43346a2f98e978aaa75302c9aeab901d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed6c11dc43346a2f98e978aaa75302c9aeab901d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Pathophysiology of AACG
(p0.0) Acute angle-closure glaucoma occurs when there is an obstruction of aqueous outflow through the trabecular meshwork, leading to increased IOP. The mechanism of AACG could be divided into the following four groups: pupillary block, crowded angle, anterior lens subluxation, and PIS. 4 Pupillary block is the most common mechanism of AACG and occurs when the functional obstruction between the anterior and posterior chambers takes place at the pupillary segment of the iris and lens. Pupillary block is typically accompanied by the characteristic iris bombe, during which the iris bows forward due to the increased pressure in the posterior chamber.

(p0.1) Crowded angle occurs in patients with thicker iris tissue at the base, resulting in less space for the trabecular meshwork to drain. With mydriasis, the iris dilator muscles contract and the iris is pulled peripherally and crowded into the iridocorneal angle. This crowding of tissue can result in blockage of the trabecular meshwork; interestingly, pupillary block often occurs as the iris is returning to its undilated state after being dilated.

(p0.2) In anterior lens subluxation, the lens is displaced anteriorly which comes into contact with the iris or enters the anterior chamber. This can occur as a result of intrinsic laxity in the zonules that hold the lens in place. Conditions that contribute to zonular laxity can all contribute to this phenomenon, and these include pseudoexfoliation syndrome, Marfan syndrome, homocystinuria, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and Weill-Marchesani syndrome. Similar to pupillary block, the connection between the anterior and posterior chambers is obstructed, and aqueous humor is unable to drain through the trabecular meshwork.

(p0.3) Plateau iris syndrome is characterized by a flat iris, relatively normal anterior chamber depth, and a crowded angle. Plateau iris syndrome occurs due to an anatomical variation in which the peripheral iris base inserts more anteriorly on the ciliary body. This results in a narrower iridocorneal angle that is susceptible to obstruction during mydriasis. As a result, patients with PIS are still at risk of AACG even with a patent iridotomy.
## (s2) Alpha-adrenergic Agonists
(p2.0) Alpha-adrenergic agonists are found in a wide variety of medications, including mydriatic agents, vasoconstrictors, and over-the-counter (OTC) flu remedies. [5][6][7][8] Mydriatic agents (e.g., phenylephrine eye drops) are often used by ophthalmologists and optometrists to dilate the pupil for routine fundus examinations.

(p2.1) Over-the-counter flu medications (e.g., Theraflu) often contain phenylephrine (α 1 -agonist) for its use as a nasal decongestant (Table 1). 6 In addition to their vasoconstrictive and decongestant effects, α-1 agonists also cause mydriasis via contraction of the iris dilator muscles. In patients with anatomical risk factors, mydriasis may precipitate AACG via two mechanisms. First, mydriasis causes thickening at the base of the iris which may result in iridotrabecular adhesions and closure of the iridocorneal angle. Second, at middilation the lens is brought in close proximity to the iris, which may result in pupillary block. 2 Treatment for α-agonist-induced AACG includes acetazolamide, mannitol, topical timolol, topical pilocarpine, and Nd:YAG laser peripheral iridotomy (LPI). 6,7,9 The strategy for treatment is targeted toward relieving the pupillary block and decreasing the IOP. Laser peripheral iridotomy is an effective treatment option for managing AACG caused by pupillary block because it equalizes the pressure differential across the iris and flattens the iris. 2
## (s3) Beta 2 -adrenergic Agonists
(p3.0) Beta 2 -adrenergic agonists (e.g., albuterol and salbutamol) are most commonly used for the treatment of asthma because of their bronchodilatory effects. Salbutamol is often nebulized or aerosolized for optimal delivery through the respiratory tract. However, nebulized medications have been reported to inadvertently enter the unprotected eye and exert its effects. 10,11 When stimulated, β 2 -receptors induce ciliary muscle relaxation, mydriasis, and increased aqueous humor production from ciliary epithelium. Despite the increase in aqueous humor production, salbutamol also increases uveoscleral outflow to an overall net effect of lowered IOP. 12 Ultimately, Coakes' work suggests that exposure to β 2 -agonist alone will not cause an increase in IOP nor trigger AACG. However, there is a report of exposure to nebulized albuterol alone that triggered mydriasis and subsequent AACG. 10 This patient was successfully treated with Nd:YAG LPI, prednisolone acetate, brimonidine tartrate, and acetazolamide (Table 1).
## (s4) Anticholinergic Agents
(p4.0) Anticholinergic medications have applications that span across nearly all specialties of medicine. Overall, drugs with anticholinergic properties cause mydriasis in the eye. Atropine and tropicamide are commonly used as mydriatic agents in ophthalmology and optometry. Benztropine and trihexyphenidyl are antiparkinsonian medications used to decrease dyskinetic and spastic movements. Glycopyrrolate is used to decrease airway secretions and reverse neuromuscular blockade (NMB) in combination with neostigmine. Ipratropium and tiotropium are useful in relieving bronchoconstriction in patients with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Oxybutynin and tolterodine are used by urologists to decrease bladder spasms in urge incontinence. Scopolamine is available for the treatment of motion sickness and postoperative nausea (Table 1). Each medication is described in further detail subsequently.

(p4.1) One of the most commonly used eye drops in the ophthalmology office are anticholinergic drops (e.g., atropine, tropicamide, and cyclopentolate) to induce mydriasis for fundus examination. The risk of AACG after using mydriatic agents in the clinical setting has been reported to be 3 in 10,000. 13 Anticholinergic mydriasis occurs by antagonism at the muscarinic receptors on the iris sphincter muscle. On the contrary, adrenergic mydriasis occurs by stimulation at the α 1 -receptors on the iris dilator muscle. Although the targeted muscles are different between α-adrenergic agonists and anticholinergic agents, the end results of mydriasis, iridocorneal angle closure, and pupillary block are the same. Given their subtly different mechanisms, applying both adrenergic and anticholinergic agents to the eye results in a synergistic effect on pupillary dilation. 14 Benztropine and trihexyphenidyl are used to quell the dyskinesia symptoms from antipsychotics' extrapyramidal side effects and Parkinson's disease. Trihexyphenidyl had a mydriatic effect that is one-third as potent as atropine. 15 In certain studies, investigators did not elicit an increase in IOP or trigger AACG with the use of benztropine and trihexyphenidyl. 16 However, there are case reports of prolonged use of trihexyphenidyl that has led to AACG. 15 These patients did not present with acute angle closure, but rather a chronic AACG that occurred after 1-2 years of continued use of trihexyphenidyl.

(p4.2) Glycopyrrolate is an antimuscarinic agent that is used for reduction of airway secretions and to block the muscarinic effects of neostigmine during NMB reversal. There is report of bilateral AACG 12 hours after glycopyrrolate use for NMB reversal after surgery. 17 The patient had undergone cervical spine surgery, requiring him to be in the prone position for 5 hours and 30 minutes. In conjunction with mydriasis and hyperopia, the gravitational effect of the prone position may have contributed to the IOP spike and AACG.

(p4.3) In the treatment of asthma, β 2 -agonists are frequently combined with anticholinergics (e.g., ipratropium and tiotropium) for an additive effect in bronchodilation. As described earlier, there are differing reports in the literature regarding whether β 2 -agonist alone will cause AACG or an increase in IOP. 10,12 However, there are numerous reports of AACG occurring in patients exposed to a combination of both nebulized ipratropium and salbutamol. 11,18 These two medications act synergistically to precipitate AACGipratropium causes pupillary dilation and salbutamol causes increase in aqueous humor production. Inadvertent exposure to the eye can be avoided with the use of goggles during nebulizer treatments.
## (s6) Sulfonamides (Topiramate)
(p6.0) Sulfonamides are a class of medications defined by a particular sulfur-based functional group found in the drug's molecule. Sulfa drugs were initially used for their antifolic properties as an antibacterial agent. Since then, medicinal chemists have discovered a wide variety of clinical uses for the sulfonyl functional group including antidiuretics, anticonvulsants, diabetes medications, and many more. 35 With sulfa drugs permeating through every specialty of medicine, general physicians and ophthalmologists have the difficult task of remaining vigilant when scanning patients' medication lists for AACG triggers. Sulfa-based medications implicated in AACG include topiramate and less commonly acetazolamide, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, zonisamide, chlorthalidone, and hydrochlorothiazide. [36][37][38][39] Topiramate, commonly prescribed for seizures and migraines, is classically associated with AACG 32 (Table 1). Angle closure typically occurs within 2 weeks of starting topiramate, but reports have ranged between 1 days and 262 days. 31 The proposed mechanism is ciliary detachment and ciliary body edema, which causes relaxation of the zonules and thickening of the lens. As the lens enlarges, the lens-iris diaphragm is displaced anteriorly, and the anterior chamber becomes more shallow and increasingly susceptible to angle closure. These anatomical changes have been confirmed with ultrasonography and UBM. 40 It is important to emphasize that obstruction is not a result of pupillary block, but rather due to anterior rotation of the lens-iris diaphragm resulting in a closed angle.

(p6.1) Treatment for topiramate-induced AACG is immediate discontinuation of medication, cycloplegia, topical corticosteroids, and mannitol. 41 By paralyzing and relaxing the ciliary body, the tension on the zonules is increased and the lens-iris diaphragm is pulled posteriorly. 36 Ultimately, this increases the ciliary body diameter, deepens the anterior chamber, and allows the angle to reopen for aqueous drainage. Notably, the mechanism of topiramate-induced AACG does not involve pupillary blocktherefore, peripheral iridectomy and cholinergic agents (e.g., pilocarpine) will not ameliorate angle closure. In addition, cholinergic agents may actually worsen the angle closure by inducing further anterior rotation of the lens-iris diaphragm and exacerbate preexisting intraocular inflammation. 31,32 It is important to note that in clinical encounters, a history of topiramate use may not be elicited or reliable, and that LPI should be performed when topical medications fail to break the angle closure. In other words, the pupillary block mechanism should always be ruled out first by performing LPI.
## (s7) Serotonergic Medications
(p7.0) Serotonin [5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)] receptors are found throughout the central nervous system, blood vessels, gastrointestinal tract, and the eye. Serotonergic medications are used to treat depression, obsessive compulsive disorder, and many other psychiatric disorders. Common serotonergic drug classes include selective serotonergic reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRI), monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, and triptans. 5-HT 1A and 5-HT 7 receptors are found on the ciliary body, choroid, trabecular meshwork, and iris sphincter muscle. 42 Stimulation of the 5-HT 7 receptors causes relaxation of the iris sphincter muscles, mydriasis, and increased production of aqueous humor. In addition to 5-HT receptor activity, SNRIs also affect adrenergic and dopaminergic receptors-causing mydriasis and increased aqueous humor production, respectively 42 (Table 1).

(p7.1) In a large study conducted in Taiwan, researchers found a 5.80-fold increase in risk of AACG in patients taking SSRIs daily. 43 They found that patients who were older, female, and taking a daily SSRI dose greater than 20 mg were also at increased risk of AACG. Numerous reports of AACG occurring with SNRIs (e.g., venlafaxine and duloxetine) have been documented. 44,45 The mechanism of AACG in most SNRI-induced cases is attributed to mydriasis and closure of the iridocorneal angle-which resolves with peripheral iridotomy. Other medications with serotonergic properties (e.g., triptans and aripiprazole) have also been reported to cause AACG via this aforementioned mechanism. 46,47 However, like topiramateinduced AACG, not all serotonergic-induced AACG can be treated with pilocarpine and peripheral iridotomies. Selective serotonergic reuptake inhibitors and SNRIs (e.g., escitalopram and venlafaxine, respectively) have been reported to cause uveal effusions, which results in anterior rotation of the lens-iris diaphragm and obstruction of the iridocorneal angle. 48 In these cases, miotic agents and iridotomies are not effective-instead, offending drugs should be discontinued and patient should be treated with corticosteroids, topical aqueous suppressants, and cycloplegia. 36,48 Supplements Supplements have been used to complement or replace conventional medical treatments in many common illnesses. Glaucoma is no exception; supplements have been used with the intention of reducing IOP or improving ocular blood flow. Some studies have shown that flavonoids and gingko biloba extract improve ocular blood flow and forskolin significantly reduces IOP. 49,50 However, not all supplements are beneficial or even benign. Consuming supplemental oxidants (e.g., iron and calcium) above a certain threshold is associated with glaucoma. 51 Some studies have found high levels of caffeine consumption to be associated with increased IOP in susceptible patients. 52 Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) is a nutritional supplement that is commonly found in detox products (e.g., cortex and basic detox nutrients). Methylsulfonylmethane is used as an antiinflammatory, antioxidative, and anti-histamine medication. 53 There is a report of AACG associated with MSM use as a detox supplement. 54 Methylsulfonylmethane has a sulfonyl moiety that is similar to that found on other sulfa-based drugs (e.g., topiramate and hydrochlorothiazide). Like topiramate-induced AACG, MSMinduced AACG is due to uveal effusion and anterior rotation of the lens-iris diaphragm 54 (Table 1). Similarly, treatment with peripheral iridotomy and miotic agents is likely to be ineffective and can worsen the situation.

(p7.2) concLusion Drug-induced AACG is a feared complication of prescribing certain medications to at-risk patients. The two major mechanisms of drug-induced angle closure are pupillary block with iridocorneal angle closure and anterior displacement of the lens-iris diaphragm.
