# Blockchain Consensus Algorithms: A Survey

CorpusID: 211066631 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/330ed3413bd1ae096a5171271f246bf3abf72e8e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/330ed3413bd1ae096a5171271f246bf3abf72e8e)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s2) BACKGROUND: DISTRIBUTED CONSENSUS
(p2.0) Consensus mechanisms in distributed systems have been a well studied research problem for nearly three decades. Such mechanisms enable consensus to be achieved regarding a shared state/data among a set of distributed nodes. The need for a shared state originated the notion of replicated database systems in order to ensure resilience against node failures within a network. Such database systems ensure that data is not lost when one or more nodes fail to function in an excepted fashion. The notion of the replicated database can be generalised with the concept of State Machine Replication (SMR) [11]. The core idea behind SMR is that a computing machine can be expressed as a deterministic state machine. The machine accepts an input message, performs its predefined computation, and might produce an output/response. These actions essentially change its state. SMR conceptualises that such a state machine, with an initial state, can be replicated among different nodes. If it can be ensured that all the participating nodes receive the same set of input messages in the exact same order (the phenomenon known as atomic broadcast), then each node would be able to evolve the states of its state machine individually in exactly the same fashion. This can guarantee consistency and availability regarding the state of the machine (as well as data it holds) among all (applicable) nodes even in the presence of node failures. Once this occurs, it can be said that a distributed consensus has emerged among the participating nodes. It is imperative that a protocol is defined to ensure timely dissemination and atomic broadcast of input messages among the nodes and, in many ways, dictates how a distributed consensus is achieved and maintained. Hence, such a protocol is aptly called a consensus protocol.
## (s17) Proof of Work (PoW)
(p17.0) A Proof of Work (PoW) mechanism involves two different parties (nodes): prover (requestor) and verifier (provider). The prover performs a resource-intensive computational task intending to achieve a goal and presents it to a verifier or a set of verifiers for validation that requires significantly less resource. The core idea is that the asymmetry, in terms of resource required, between the proof generation and validation acts intrinsically as a deterrent measure against any system abuse. Within this aim, the idea of PoW was first presented by Dwork and Naor in their seminal article in 1993 [33]. They put forward the idea of use PoW to combat email spamming. According to their proposal, an email sender would be required to solve a resource-intensive mathematical puzzle and attach the solution within the email as a proof that the task has been performed. The email receiver would accept an email only if the solution can be successfully verified.

(p17.1) Within the blockchain setting, a similar concept has been adopted. Each PoW mechanism is bound to a threshold, known as the difficulty parameter in many blockchain systems. The prover would carry out the computational task in several rounds until a PoW is generated that matches the required threshold, and every single round is known as a single proof attempt.

(p17.2) PoW has been the most widely-used mechanism to achieve a distributed consensus among the participants regarding the block order and the chain state. In particular, a PoW mechanism in a blockchain serves two critical purposes:
## (s26) 3) LYRA2RE.
(p26.0) Lyra2RE is a class of chained PoW which utilises five hash functions: BLAKE, Keccak, Lyra2, [13] Skein, and Grøstl. It has been developed by the developers of Vertcoin, a currency based on Lyra2RE. It was designed to be CPU friendly, however, it was discovered in 2015 that the majority of the hashing power utilised for mining VertCoin in its network was facilitated by a botnet stealing CPU cycles from a large number of infected computers. This motivated the Vertcoin developers to release Lyra2REv2, which utilises six hash functions, BLAKE, Keccak, Cube-Hash, Lyra2, Skein, and Blue Midnight Wish with GPU only PoW. Currently, there are only three currencies utilising Lyra2REv2 according to CoinGecko as of 31 December 2017 which are presented in Table 11.

(p26.1) Lyra2RE is a class of chained PoW which utilises five hash functions: BLAKE, Keccak, Lyra2, [13] Skein, and Grøstl. It has been developed by the developers of Vertcoin, a currency based on Lyra2RE. It was designed to be CPU friendly, however, it was discovered in 2015 that the majority of the hashing power utilised for mining VertCoin in its network was facilitated by a botnet stealing CPU cycles from a large number of infected computers. This motivated the Vertcoin developers to release Lyra2REv2, which utilises six hash functions, BLAKE, Keccak, Cube-Hash, Lyra2, Skein, and Blue Midnight Wish with GPU only PoW. Currently, there are only three currencies utilising Lyra2REv2 according to CoinGecko as of 31 December 2017 which are presented in Table 11.
## (s63) DISCUSSION
(p63.0) As per our analysis in different sections, it is clear that PoW consensus algorithms have major limitations, specifically in terms of power consumption and scalability. Many regard PoS, and it is variant DPoS, to be the most suitable alternatives. To understand the applications of these algorithms in public blockchain systems, we have analysed the top 100 crypto-currencies, as reported on CoinMarketCap 4 as of 18 July, 2019.

(p63.1) In the first analysis, we have calculated the number of consensus algorithms used in these (top 100) cryptocurrencies. The distribution of consensus algorithms is presented in Figure 15 . As per our analysis, PoW is still the most widely used (57%) consensus algorithms to date, whereas DPoS is the second most with 11%, and PoS is the third most with 6% used consensus algorithms. All other consensus algorithms represent the remaining 26%. This means that, even though many consider that PoS and DPoS are the best alternatives to PoW, their adoption is still far behind PoW.
## (s113) BACKGROUND: DISTRIBUTED CONSENSUS
(p113.0) Consensus mechanisms in distributed systems have been a well studied research problem for nearly three decades. Such mechanisms enable consensus to be achieved regarding a shared state/data among a set of distributed nodes. The need for a shared state originated the notion of replicated database systems in order to ensure resilience against node failures within a network. Such database systems ensure that data is not lost when one or more nodes fail to function in an excepted fashion. The notion of the replicated database can be generalised with the concept of State Machine Replication (SMR) [11]. The core idea behind SMR is that a computing machine can be expressed as a deterministic state machine. The machine accepts an input message, performs its predefined computation, and might produce an output/response. These actions essentially change its state. SMR conceptualises that such a state machine, with an initial state, can be replicated among different nodes. If it can be ensured that all the participating nodes receive the same set of input messages in the exact same order (the phenomenon known as atomic broadcast), then each node would be able to evolve the states of its state machine individually in exactly the same fashion. This can guarantee consistency and availability regarding the state of the machine (as well as data it holds) among all (applicable) nodes even in the presence of node failures. Once this occurs, it can be said that a distributed consensus has emerged among the participating nodes. It is imperative that a protocol is defined to ensure timely dissemination and atomic broadcast of input messages among the nodes and, in many ways, dictates how a distributed consensus is achieved and maintained. Hence, such a protocol is aptly called a consensus protocol.
## (s128) Proof of Work (PoW)
(p128.0) A Proof of Work (PoW) mechanism involves two different parties (nodes): prover (requestor) and verifier (provider). The prover performs a resource-intensive computational task intending to achieve a goal and presents it to a verifier or a set of verifiers for validation that requires significantly less resource. The core idea is that the asymmetry, in terms of resource required, between the proof generation and validation acts intrinsically as a deterrent measure against any system abuse. Within this aim, the idea of PoW was first presented by Dwork and Naor in their seminal article in 1993 [33]. They put forward the idea of use PoW to combat email spamming. According to their proposal, an email sender would be required to solve a resource-intensive mathematical puzzle and attach the solution within the email as a proof that the task has been performed. The email receiver would accept an email only if the solution can be successfully verified.

(p128.1) Within the blockchain setting, a similar concept has been adopted. Each PoW mechanism is bound to a threshold, known as the difficulty parameter in many blockchain systems. The prover would carry out the computational task in several rounds until a PoW is generated that matches the required threshold, and every single round is known as a single proof attempt.

(p128.2) PoW has been the most widely-used mechanism to achieve a distributed consensus among the participants regarding the block order and the chain state. In particular, a PoW mechanism in a blockchain serves two critical purposes:
## (s137) 3) LYRA2RE.
(p137.0) Lyra2RE is a class of chained PoW which utilises five hash functions: BLAKE, Keccak, Lyra2, [13] Skein, and Grøstl. It has been developed by the developers of Vertcoin, a currency based on Lyra2RE. It was designed to be CPU friendly, however, it was discovered in 2015 that the majority of the hashing power utilised for mining VertCoin in its network was facilitated by a botnet stealing CPU cycles from a large number of infected computers. This motivated the Vertcoin developers to release Lyra2REv2, which utilises six hash functions, BLAKE, Keccak, Cube-Hash, Lyra2, Skein, and Blue Midnight Wish with GPU only PoW. Currently, there are only three currencies utilising Lyra2REv2 according to CoinGecko as of 31 December 2017 which are presented in Table 11.

(p137.1) Lyra2RE is a class of chained PoW which utilises five hash functions: BLAKE, Keccak, Lyra2, [13] Skein, and Grøstl. It has been developed by the developers of Vertcoin, a currency based on Lyra2RE. It was designed to be CPU friendly, however, it was discovered in 2015 that the majority of the hashing power utilised for mining VertCoin in its network was facilitated by a botnet stealing CPU cycles from a large number of infected computers. This motivated the Vertcoin developers to release Lyra2REv2, which utilises six hash functions, BLAKE, Keccak, Cube-Hash, Lyra2, Skein, and Blue Midnight Wish with GPU only PoW. Currently, there are only three currencies utilising Lyra2REv2 according to CoinGecko as of 31 December 2017 which are presented in Table 11.
## (s174) DISCUSSION
(p174.0) As per our analysis in different sections, it is clear that PoW consensus algorithms have major limitations, specifically in terms of power consumption and scalability. Many regard PoS, and it is variant DPoS, to be the most suitable alternatives. To understand the applications of these algorithms in public blockchain systems, we have analysed the top 100 crypto-currencies, as reported on CoinMarketCap 4 as of 18 July, 2019.

(p174.1) In the first analysis, we have calculated the number of consensus algorithms used in these (top 100) cryptocurrencies. The distribution of consensus algorithms is presented in Figure 15 . As per our analysis, PoW is still the most widely used (57%) consensus algorithms to date, whereas DPoS is the second most with 11%, and PoS is the third most with 6% used consensus algorithms. All other consensus algorithms represent the remaining 26%. This means that, even though many consider that PoS and DPoS are the best alternatives to PoW, their adoption is still far behind PoW.
