# A Review: Application of Building Information Modelling (BIM) over Building Life Cycles

CorpusID: 214148288 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4378133d3e70800cb83d025d00107f46293c767](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4378133d3e70800cb83d025d00107f46293c767)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science, Physics

## (s5) Project Execution Plan Use for BIM Projects
(p5.0) Execution Plan (PEP) has specified the implementation of BIM throughout the project life [65]. The greatest benefits of using BIM is at the design, planning, construction, operation and maintenance stage of a project. The construction teams are already familiar with the tasks related to BIM implementation in the working drawing by ensuring that this plan specifies the whole program. When the plan is established, the growth against this plan can be observed to reap the maximum benefit of using BIM. It is a key success factor in the implementation of BIM to produce an advanced level of project performance.
## (s14) Successes of BIM implementation
(p14.0) The data obtained in this study suggests that BIM is a valuable tool in enhancing specific key areas of project delivery. Cost have the most positive effect in the implementation of BIM, then time, communication, coordination improvement and quality [96]. Based on this comprehensive reviews, it can be deduced that financial gains can be achieved through the adoption of BIM. Moreover, the significance of BIM adoption is rapidly rising and becoming recognised in the AEC industry. Software like Vicosoft is designed to support full lifecycle services more than other competitive products.
## (s17) Conclusion
(p17.0) Results from this study shows the implementation of BIM throughout the project life cycle. It was also observed that BIM implementation in the AEC industry is still premature, but is receiving rapid attention. Nonetheless, "the formal standards on BIM, such as the Industry Foundation Class (IFC) are complex and have not had the resources for rapid development and promotion that their potential deserved [19]", as such has a long way to go. BIM is emerging as an advanced way of designing and managing projects digitally. The full potential benefits of BIM can be seen at every construction stage. As the adoption rate of BIM increases, teamwork among team members should increase thereby leading to reduction in project cost, time saving, customer satisfaction and improved performance. BIM presents a new concept in the in the AEC industry, that enhances collaboration between stakeholders of a project. This collaboration is capable of enhancing efficiency and unity among stakeholders who most of the time see themselves as rivals within the AEC industry. The reviewed journal publications and general statement from professionals within the AEC industry suggest the emergence of BIM as the most recognized performance analysis tool in building concept, planning, and design. The literature findings also suggests that lack of expertise within the project team and external organisations are the major barriers hindering the implementation of BIM, which could be the reason why the advantages of BIM and 3D modelling have not been attained in the AEC industry in a related manner seen in other industries like machinery design and car manufacturing industry. It is envisaged that the AEC industry through continued professional training and increased awareness, that the maximum financial gains of BIM will be achieved. The future of BIM is both bright and stimulating because the full benefits of BIM implementation is gradually been seen in the AEC industry.
