# A Review of Shaped Charge Variables for its Optimum Performance

CorpusID: 214388446 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f13b48f0f9286960309f2be8a74c4f25fd70c21c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f13b48f0f9286960309f2be8a74c4f25fd70c21c)

Fields: Engineering, Physics, Materials Science

## (s0) www.etasr.com Naeem et al.: A Review of Shaped Charge Variables for its Optimum Performance
(p0.0) A detailed study of the sintered and non-sintered Cu liners with particle size below 20μm is given in [72]. Examination showed that the sintered powder liner of Cu is having higher purity, density, lower wall thickness, and better penetration compared to the non-sintered one. To get reactive liner, Al powder was sprayed over Cu [73]. Reactivity was confirmed by the recovered jet. Phase transformation also took place as traces of γ -alumina α -alumina were found. Cu liner was sprayed with Al-Ni powder using a kinetic spray deposition method for enhanced reactive liner in [74]. Formation and penetration of jet composed of polymeric based reactive liner were studied numerically and observed by FXR in [75]. The liners were made by cold isostatic pressing at a pressure of 250MPa. The numerical results were in good agreement with the experiments. A straight and continuous jet was formed from the reactive liner. Jet formation and particulation time for polymeric reactive liners is less than Cu liners due to lack of ductility. The hole produced by reactive liners had a bigger diameter and less depth compared to the one produced by Cu. Penetration of a jet having variable density distribution was studied in [76]. A jet having variable density was produced from an un-sintered Cu-W powder liner. A new analytical model was presented to describe this variable density jet phenomenon by incorporating modifications in the earlier established virtual origin model. An analytical model was validated by numerical and experimental results. The behavior of reactive liners and its demolition power was investigated in [77]. Experiments, numerical simulation, and theoretical analysis were carried out for this purpose. Liners manufactured by pressing and sintering of Al-PTFE in 26.5/73.5 weight per cent gave much better collateral damage to the target due to the release of chemical energy contained in reactive materials. The effect of density variation on the penetration was studied in [78]. To achieve different densities of the same material, liners were manufactured by cold isostatic and uniaxial pressing. Liners produced by the former technique have no density variation whereas those produced by the later have it along the liner height. Autodyn was utilized to study the effects of metal powder liner density. It was numerically found and experimentally confirmed that liners produced by uniaxial pressing are more efficient than isostatic pressed against RHA targets. New manufacturing techniques and new alloys were employed with the development of metallurgy. The new techniques are robust and reproducable in comparison to previous techniques like machining, rolling etc. and the new alloys perfrom better. The grain size was controlled for better performance. Currently, graphene powder is pressed to get shaped charge liners [79]. Isostatic and die pressed liners were compared and it was found that higher density is achieved by the former while the latter is more suitable for liner mass production. Sintered powder metal liners need to be further investigated as there is room for improvement.
