# Short-Term Traffic Flow Prediction Methods: A Survey

CorpusID: 218782998 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8fdf652e9f7a0a1c952f9dd89504447c04b08fc6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8fdf652e9f7a0a1c952f9dd89504447c04b08fc6)

Fields: Engineering, Mathematics, Computer Science, Physics

## (s2) 2.1ARIMA model
(p2.0) In contrast to ARIMA and the Multilayer Arti-Neural Network (MLanN), Zeng, Dehui et al. [1] suggested a hybrid prediction model. ARIMA is best for linear forecasts and for non-linear forecasts MLFNN is suitable for use. It explored the manner in which a modern algorithm could be used to estimate short-term flux time using the weight of the MLFNN and the ARMAs device parameters. Lippi, Marco et al. [2] proposed a detailed empirical analysis of many methods of numerical and machine learning for short-term traffic flow forecasts. They also suggested 2 different SVR designs for the seasonal kernel to measure the sim.

(p2.1) The data found include both linear and non-linear sections because of the complexities of historical data traffic and the random nature of many unknown variables. The selection of the prediction model is important to improve prediction accuracy. While ARIMA can be used to handle the linear portion of historical load data, and an ANN model can be used to deal with the non-linear portion of the historical load data, Huang, Hongqiong et al. [3] proposed ARIMA-ANN which is a combined model. As seasonal synchronized moving average systems, Williams et al. [4] provided the conceptual foundation for modeling of univariable data streams for traffic conditions. This is based on the Wold decomposition theorem and the assumption that a one-week deferred first seasonal differential for discreet interval conditions results in a somewhat steady transition.

(p2.2) In order to combine the automotive regressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) and genetic programming (GP) models, Xu, Chengcheng et al. [5] have developed a simple and efficient system of hybrid for traffic prediction. Various aspects of the underlying traffic patterns can be captured by combining different models. The dimensional component of time series traffic flow was modelled by ARIMA. The prototype GP was then used for the selection of the nicht linear component by modeling the residues of the ARIMA model.
## (s3) 2.2RNN based model
(p3.0) Wang, Xiangxue et al. [14] proposed an urban road network traffic forecast framework that would mainly include two modules using data-driven approach. A collection of data processing algorithms are included in the first module. The second section deals with the short-term multi-stage projection. The time series is first split into a variety of averages, with clear understanding of traffic patterns and randomness. Once two time series have been recovered, template learning and avoidance based on a neuronal long-term memory recuperation network (LSTM-RNN). Yang, Bailin et al. [15] suggested an enhanced method that links the significantly long series of times to the current time stage with the high-impact quality and the attention mechanism collects these high-impact traffic flow values. We simultaneously smooth certain information beyond the standard range in order to obtain better results. The experimental results demonstrate that in short-term traffic flow forecasts the proposed prediction model is certainly competitive.

(p3.1) The  Networks). Prediction of precise flow of traffic at any given time interval, which is essential to assist and to manage road conditions in intelligent cities. The applied system uses profound learning technology for precise predictions at any given time of traffic flow. In order to achieve more effective traffic speed reduction than existing solutions, Lv, Zhongjian et al. [18] suggested the new LC-RNN design. The RNN and CNN models were used in a logical integration to learn more concrete patterns of time series which can respond to the traffic dynamics in the area.

(p3.2) Huang, Bohan et al. [19] used the BRNN traffic prediction model to improve traffic forecasts and to have a better effect in comparison to the LSTM and GRU models. The data indicate that the MAE and RMSE are both the lowest, that is to say, the prediction accuracy is the highest model and an efficient model of traffic forecast if the BRNN model predicts speed within three, speed in six and speed in 12 phases.
## (s4) 2.3Sparse Autoencoder (SAE) model
(p4.0) Jin, Yinli et al. [26] presented a new combination of the model and method of dropout with a deep learning stacked self-encoder (SAE). The role and pattern in the data is modeled and the output date is not linear. The greedy layering approach is also used to optimize that layer's parameters and to achieve ISCME 2019 Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1486 (2020) 052018 IOP Publishing doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1486/5/052018 5 the best prevention performance, the network is done. The short-term traffic forecasting approach for deep learning was proposed by Zhao, Xinran et al. [27]. A nominee has been chosen for the traffic information from the Second Ring Road, Beijing, China, and microwave detectors. A stacked auto encoder neural network (SAE-DNN) model is deployed to forecast short-term traffic conditions.

(p4.1) A new combination of deep learning SAE model and dropout process is proposed by Jin, Yinli, et al. [28] to boost forecast accuracy. The historic flow of the Xi'an, Shaanxi, Chinese city ring road was collected from the K27+ 000 vehicle detector every 5 minutes. The possible function, pattern and input date are modeled with a nonlinear algorithm.
