# Molecular epidemiology of antimicrobial resistant microorganisms in the 21th century: a review of the literature R e v i e w

CorpusID: 218679058 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2d8e4aaa04470b43422947c5aea69c6e394d5cf4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2d8e4aaa04470b43422947c5aea69c6e394d5cf4)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) R e v i e w Background
(p0.0) Healthcare-associated infections (HAIs) are the most frequent and severe complication acquired in healthcare settings with high impact in terms of morbidity, mortality and costs. Many bacteria could be implicated in these infections, expecially multidrug resistance bacteria (1), which had the capability to efficiently spread from patient to patient and to easily acquire antibiotic resistance determinants (2).
## (s5) Other Staphylococcus spp
(p5.0) The gold standard for genotyping of S. epidermidis is pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (76), which could also be utilized to characterize other species of Staphilococcus. Genotyping methods used in studies on the molecular epidemiology of CoNS are mainly based on two different techniques: DNA banding pattern analysis and DNA sequencing and recently, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry and Raman spectroscopy (77).

(p5.1) In a large study conducted in Iran the molecular epidemiology of Staphylococcus epidermidis and the comparation with a previously characterized collection of isolates origin from Northern Europe, Australia, and USA was perfomed. The study documented the dissemination of three MDRSE clones within and between hospitals in Iran and revealed an intercontinental spread of two clonal multidrug-resistant lineages (ST2 and ST5) in the hospital environment. Isolates of the predominant clones were significantly more frequently associated with multidrug-resistance and biofilm formation compared to nonclonal isolates. In particular three predominant PFGE clones were found. The PFGE patterns of the most common sequence type (PFGE type 040-ST2) showed 80% similarity to multidrug-resistant S. epidermidis (MDRSE) clinical isolates from eight hospitals in Northern Europe. The second most common (PFGE 024-ST22) showed a unique PFGE pattern, whereas the third most predominant genotype (PFGE 011-ST5) proved indistinguishable to the PFGE Co-ST5 identified in five hospitals in Northern Europe (78).

(p5.2) Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus lugdunensis (MRSL) is increasingly recognized in healthcare and community settings. A study perfomed in China highlighted the diversified structures of SCCmec elements among MRSL strains and their close relationship with SCCmec elements harboured by CA-MRSA; the sequence type was in descending order ST3-SCCmec V, ST27-SCCmec V, ST3-SCCmec IV and ST42-SCCmec V with CC2described such as dominant clonal complex in both community and hospital settings (79).
## (s7) Enterobacteriacee
(p7.0) The prevalence of carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE) is increasing worldwide. Regarding the resistance determinants, SHV, TEM, OXA-1-like and CTX-M-gp1 were predominant enzymatic variants, whereas CTX-M-gp9, CTX-M-gp2, KPC, VIM, GES, OXA-48-like, NDM and OXA-23-like were considered emerging enzymes (84) Also, some association between several risk factors and ESBL-KP infection such as length of hospitalization, use of cephalosporins, use of quinolones, presence of a nasogastric tube, presence of an intravenous catheter, mechanical ventilation and cerebrospinal fluid drainage were found .
## (s9) Klebsiella pneumoniae
(p9.0) Klebsiella pneumoniae is an opportunistic pathogen and leading cause of HAIs infections. The main clones described were ST258, ST101, ST147, ST 48, ST 512, ST 15 and ST 14 (99,103-107). Some exceptions could be observed. In a multicentre prospective cohort study in Spain K. pneumoniae ST405 predominated (108,109). On November 2015, a KPC-producing Enterobacteriaceae outbreak occurred in a general hospital in South Korea due to a clonal spread of K. pneumoniae ST307 carrying a self-transferable IncX3type plasmid harboring bla KPC-2 . Sporadic emergence of K. pneumoniae ST697 and a ST11 isolate were observed (110).
## (s10) Other Enterobacter ssp and miscellaneous
(p10.0) In UK a new E. cloacae complex isolate belonged to a novel ST (ST829) highliting the importance of phenotypic tests to detect carbapenemase activity when molecular assays are negative for the 'big 5' carbapenemase families to understand the possible circulation of rarer carbapenemases in clinical settings (119) In a Spanich study a high number of OXA48KP isolates showed multidrug resistance (ST 15 and ST 29) and was associated with a high mortality and mainly hospital-acquired (120,121).

(p10.1) A hospital-wide point prevalence study and active surveillance were performed by Forde C. et al. to assess the prevalence of CRKP infection/colonization. During the surveillance period K. pneumoniae was the most frequently occurring species, followed by Enterobacter spp. All isolates involved in both outbreaks harboured the blaKPC gene, as demonstrated by PCR (122).

(p10.2) A multicenter study showed that in pediatric patients the ST 131 was the most prevalent sequence type among all resistant E. coli isolates (30%), and the CG 258 was the most prevalent allele among all resistant K. pneumoniae isolates (10%) (123).

(p10.3) Carbapenemase producing Citrobacter freundii infections are still uncommon in European countries, In a study were identified ST11, ST18, ST22 and ST64 and 6 new STs (ST89, ST90, ST91, ST92, ST92 and ST94). In this study of Villa J et al the dissemination of the bla VIM-1 gene among various clones suggests a successful horizontal transfer of integron carrying elements that play a dominant role in the development of multidrug resistance in Enterobacteriaceae (124).
## (s11) Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(p11.0) Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a leading cause of HAIs and often shows MDR phenotypes. It could be related also to a wide variety of clinical syndromes in neonatal intensive care unit patients, including sepsis, pneumonia, meningitis, diarrhea, conjunctivitis and skin infections. In these cases, molecular investigation and WGS provided detailed information without the need for further typing and could be useful to understand outbreak situations rapidly and with certainty (125)(126). The most frequent isolates belong to ST235, ST111, ST175, ST 233, ST 244, ST 395, ST 277 and ST 274 (2,(125)(126).
