# micromachines State-of-the-Art and Perspectives on Silicon Waveguide Crossings: A Review

CorpusID: 214785108 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/52f5cc3cd91d174f39786cbe192b168663c5a750](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/52f5cc3cd91d174f39786cbe192b168663c5a750)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Physics

## (s1) The Key Technologies of Silicon Waveguide Crossing
(p1.0) Silicon waveguide usually consists of a 2 µm silica lower cladding, 220 nm silicon core and silica upper cladding on the 200 mm (8 inch) wafers, as shown in Figure 1a. It is fabricated by the deep ultraviolet (DUV) lithography and this technique can provide fast and reliable patterns. The refractive indexes of silicon and silica are 3.45 and 1.44, respectively, at 1550 nm, and the high refractive index contrast between the core and cladding results in strong optical confinement and ultra-small bending radius for fundamental modes [21]. The dimension of silicon core fulfills the optical single-mode condition and the experimental propagation losses of the fundamental mode are 2.4 ± 0.2 and 0.59 ± 0.32 dB/cm for transverse-electric (TE) and transverse-magnetic (TM) modes, respectively [22,23]. For the low refractive index contrast structure, such as optical fiber, direct waveguide crossings are just a minor perturbation of the straight waveguide [24]. However, side effects of the direct waveguide crossings cannot be ignored in the SOI platform for the beam is dramatically diffracted in the silicon intersection region, as shown in Figure 1b. suddenly disappears and the optical power begins to scatter in all directions, resulting in severe effects of insertion loss, crosstalk and back-reflection. This section is organized to introduce several silicon waveguide crossing designs and explains their principles for improving the crossing performance. 
## (s2) Shaped Taper Method
(p2.0) Shaped taper waveguide crossing is to tailor the width of the silicon channel towards the center region, which decreases the diffraction effects by avoiding the shape mutation between the channel waveguide and crossing region. Shaped taper design includes different mathematic types, such as linear taper, parabolic taper, exponential taper and Gaussian taper [26]. With the shaped taper structure, the guided modes are expanded and the wide-angle spatial components are reduced, since the widths of waveguides are smoothly getting larger [27]. The diffraction side effects can be greatly controlled when the optical modes have fewer wide-angle spatial components.

(p2.1) The elliptical taper profile is used to get a narrow angular spectrum of the expanded mode, as shown in Figure 2a. The insertion loss and crosstalk of the device are <0.1 and <−30 dB with a footprint of 7.2 × 1.5 μm 2 , respectively [18]. For the nonadiabatic taper, the higher-order leaky optical modes will be excited and a sizable fraction of the power will be radiated away in the core region. The adiabatic taper can smoothly expand the guided modes, while the large taper footprint is not preferred for highly integrated PICs. As a result, a trade-off between its optical performance and footprint needs to be carefully considered. The double etching scheme consists of the high-contrast photonic wires in the upper level and the shadow-etched parabolic tapers in the lower level, as shown in Figure 2b. The confinement of the high refractive index contrast is maintained in the upper part and the lower parabolic expanded tapers play a role to adjust the optical phase fronts. The double DUV etching scheme waveguide crossing can greatly shrink the footprint to 6 × 6 μm 2 and the insertion loss and crosstalk are 0.16 and −40 dB, respectively [28]. However, the additional DUV stepper lithography increases the fabrication complexity and cost of the dual-etching device are much higher than that of the conventional single DUV etching process, which are the main limitations of this kind of waveguide crossing design. Different from the assumed mathematical taper profile with only a few parameters to be determined, a numerical optimization method has more degrees of freedom by separating the entire taper into many spaced segments with different widths, as shown in Figure 2c. The shaped taper can be formed by connecting all the segments with the spline function and the optimization process is implemented to minimize the insertion loss and crosstalk by tuning the widths of all the segments with the help of advanced algorithms. The insertion loss and crosstalk are <0.2 and <−40 dB, respectively. The footprint is 6 × 6 μm 2 for the silicon waveguide crossing designed by genetic algorithm (GA) [29]. For particle swarm optimization algorithm (PSO) assisted silicon waveguide crossing design, the insertion loss and crosstalk are −0.0278 ± 0.0092 and <−37 dB, These phenomena can be approximately explained by the mode-conversion relationship between ray angle of the light and horn angle of the waveguide [25], as shown in Figure 1c. The silicon waveguide allows a total internal reflection of over 60 • incidence angle due to the large refractive index contrast, while the horn angle jumps abruptly to 90 • at intersection region for the direct waveguide crossing design. Huge mismatch between the projection angle and horn angle cannot maintain a smooth power transition. The large portions of light are excited into leaky higher-order modes and propagate into the vertical waveguides at the core region, resulting in the side effects of crosstalk and large insertion loss. From another point of view, the light is kept well confined in the silicon waveguide channel due to high refractive index difference before entering the "dangerous" core section. Once entering the intersection region, the horizontal silica cladding suddenly disappears and the optical power begins to scatter in all directions, resulting in severe effects of insertion loss, crosstalk and back-reflection. This section is organized to introduce several silicon waveguide crossing designs and explains their principles for improving the crossing performance.
## (s3) Shaped Taper Method
(p3.0) Shaped taper waveguide crossing is to tailor the width of the silicon channel towards the center region, which decreases the diffraction effects by avoiding the shape mutation between the channel waveguide and crossing region. Shaped taper design includes different mathematic types, such as linear taper, parabolic taper, exponential taper and Gaussian taper [26]. With the shaped taper structure, the guided modes are expanded and the wide-angle spatial components are reduced, since the widths of waveguides are smoothly getting larger [27]. The diffraction side effects can be greatly controlled when the optical modes have fewer wide-angle spatial components.

(p3.1) The elliptical taper profile is used to get a narrow angular spectrum of the expanded mode, as shown in Figure 2a. The insertion loss and crosstalk of the device are <0.1 and <−30 dB with a footprint of 7.2 × 1.5 µm 2 , respectively [18]. For the nonadiabatic taper, the higher-order leaky optical modes will be excited and a sizable fraction of the power will be radiated away in the core region. The adiabatic taper can smoothly expand the guided modes, while the large taper footprint is not preferred for highly integrated PICs. As a result, a trade-off between its optical performance and footprint needs to be carefully considered. The double etching scheme consists of the high-contrast photonic wires in the upper level and the shadow-etched parabolic tapers in the lower level, as shown in Figure 2b. The confinement of the high refractive index contrast is maintained in the upper part and the lower parabolic expanded tapers play a role to adjust the optical phase fronts. The double DUV etching scheme waveguide crossing can greatly shrink the footprint to 6 × 6 µm 2 and the insertion loss and crosstalk are 0.16 and −40 dB, respectively [28]. However, the additional DUV stepper lithography increases the fabrication complexity and cost of the dual-etching device are much higher than that of the conventional single DUV etching process, which are the main limitations of this kind of waveguide crossing design. Different from the assumed mathematical taper profile with only a few parameters to be determined, a numerical optimization method has more degrees of freedom by separating the entire taper into many spaced segments with different widths, as shown in Figure 2c. The shaped taper can be formed by connecting all the segments with the spline function and the optimization process is implemented to minimize the insertion loss and crosstalk by tuning the widths of all the segments with the help of advanced algorithms. The insertion loss and crosstalk are <0.2 and <−40 dB, respectively. The footprint is 6 × 6 µm 2 for the silicon waveguide crossing designed by genetic algorithm (GA) [29]. For particle swarm optimization algorithm (PSO) assisted silicon waveguide crossing design, the insertion loss and crosstalk are −0.0278 ± 0.0092 and <−37 dB, respectively. The device has a footprint of 9 × 9 µm 2 [30]. However, DUV steppers are not designed for high resolution purposes and the performance begins to degrade for small designs. The small numerical optimized shaped taper can be fabricated with single etch process, while the fabrication tolerance is small since the performance is sensitive to the device geometry. The design performance varies greatly in terms of the fabrication errors in DUV technology and this is the main drawback for this crossing design. For the conventional silicon waveguide crossing, the crossing angle is 90 • and the device is consisted of two perpendicular arms. Researchers find that the crosstalk can be improved by more than 10 dB without degrading transmission losses where the crossing angle is set to be 60 • for the direct waveguide crossing. For the double-etched waveguide crossing, the crosstalk can be reduced by 3.7 dB without degrading transmission losses by titling waveguide crossing angle to be 60 • [31], as shown in Figure 2d. The offset crossing with a small angle of 20 • is also proposed and proves to be beneficial for further reducing the crosstalk [32]. respectively. The device has a footprint of 9 × 9 μm 2 [30]. However, DUV steppers are not designed for high resolution purposes and the performance begins to degrade for small designs. The small numerical optimized shaped taper can be fabricated with single etch process, while the fabrication tolerance is small since the performance is sensitive to the device geometry. The design performance varies greatly in terms of the fabrication errors in DUV technology and this is the main drawback for this crossing design. For the conventional silicon waveguide crossing, the crossing angle is 90° and the device is consisted of two perpendicular arms. Researchers find that the crosstalk can be improved by more than 10 dB without degrading transmission losses where the crossing angle is set to be 60° for the direct waveguide crossing. For the double-etched waveguide crossing, the crosstalk can be reduced by 3.7 dB without degrading transmission losses by titling waveguide crossing angle to be 60° [31], as shown in Figure 2d. The offset crossing with a small angle of 20° is also proposed and proves to be beneficial for further reducing the crosstalk [32]. 
## (s4) Multimode Interference Method
(p4.0) The structure of the multimode interference (MMI) device is such that single-mode waveguide connects to both sides of a multimode waveguide, and there exists the self-imaging phenomena that an input signal pattern is replicated, at periodic intervals, once or multiple times along the direction of propagation along the waveguide [33]. If the light is launched at the center position of the waveguide, only the even symmetric modes will be excited and a symmetric field profile is obtained by the linear combinations of the even modes [34]. For the symmetric field interference, the light from the single-mode waveguide firstly diverges in the first half and focus at the middle-central position where the replicated optical spot size from the single-mode waveguide is much smaller than the MMI waveguide cross-section. Then the light diverges in the next half of the MMI section and recouples to 
## (s5) Multimode Interference Method
(p5.0) The structure of the multimode interference (MMI) device is such that single-mode waveguide connects to both sides of a multimode waveguide, and there exists the self-imaging phenomena that an input signal pattern is replicated, at periodic intervals, once or multiple times along the direction of propagation along the waveguide [33]. If the light is launched at the center position of the waveguide, only the even symmetric modes will be excited and a symmetric field profile is obtained by the linear combinations of the even modes [34]. For the symmetric field interference, the light from the single-mode waveguide firstly diverges in the first half and focus at the middle-central position where the replicated optical spot size from the single-mode waveguide is much smaller than the MMI waveguide cross-section. Then the light diverges in the next half of the MMI section and recouples to the single-mode waveguide. The self-imaging property in the MMI structure proves to be robust where the lateral confinement is relieved in the silica waveguide crossing design, which is quite suitable for the waveguide crossing design [35].
## (s8) Holey Subwavelength Grating Method
(p8.0) In recent years, numerical optimization methods are becoming more and more powerful and the single-layer inverse-designed structure is popular because the device can be easily divided into m × n pixels. Each pixel can have the assumed shapes, like square or circle, and the topology optimization process is to decide the presence or absence of these silicon pixels [57]. Figure 5a depicts the conventional inverse designed silicon waveguide crossing. To prevent the optical power diffracting into the transverse ports, the center of the intersection region and four arms are occupied 
## (s11) Vertical Directional Coupler Method
(p11.0) Different from the previous methods of realizing the efficient silicon waveguide crossing in a single layer, the vertical directional coupler method is used to couple light from the base silicon channel to the upper or lower optical waveguide and transfer the power back into the original silicon waveguide without coming through the "dangerous" crossing region. The vertical directional coupler method, also named the waveguide bridge method, has the lowest crosstalk in theory and the key consideration for this design is to realize the efficient power coupling in the limited device footprint together with an acceptable fabrication cost.

(p11.1) For the silicon and silica-based waveguides, the large difference in propagation constants is difficult for transferring the optical power between these two layers [63], which results in the inefficient direction coupler and causes a large device footprint. Vertical optical waveguide coupler consisting of SOI and amorphous silicon is proposed to solve this issue, and it has the insertion loss of 0.2 dB [64] in reasonable transition length while the fabrication cost is unacceptable. For the integration of silicon and polymer layers, the optical power is coupled up and down when passing through the silicon waveguide crossings and the performances are much better with 0.08 dB insertion loss and −70 dB crosstalk [65], as shown in Figure 6a. However, the dimension of polymer waveguide is much larger than the silicon waveguide due to the weak optical confinement and the bridge waveguide crossing takes up more space compared with the crossings in a single layer. The main drawback is that the laterally stacked three silicon optical waveguides are very complicated to fabricate and these fabrication techniques are not wildly used in the mature CMOS process. Silicon nitride (SiN) is probably the most promising material for the integration with the SOI platform due to its excellent CMOS fabrication compatibility and low propagation loss in the optical communication band. The SiN over Si bridge waveguide crossing has an extremely low insertion loss of −49 dB and crosstalk of −65 dB [66], as shown in Figure 6b. For multilayer SiN-on-Si integrated photonic platforms, bilevel and trilevel grating couplers are used in these three layers platforms and they have been demonstrated to have low-loss interlayer insertion loss and ultralow-loss crosstalk. The low-loss, low-crosstalk, compact and low-cost integrated silicon waveguide crossings are designed to satisfy the increasing demands of PICs in the coming era of the "BIG DATA" and the "Internet of Things" [67,68]. Table 1 summarizes the typical results of different silicon waveguide crossing design methods and includes the key information about the insertion loss, crosstalk, device footprint, silicon platform thickness and fabrication cost. These sophisticated silicon waveguide crossings are proposed to fulfill all these figure of merits (FOMs) and each structure has its unique advantages and disadvantages in these FOMs. For example, the vertical directional coupler waveguide crossing has probably the best crosstalk and insertion loss performance but is not popular for its expensive fabrication cost. In addition, the MMI waveguide crossing is widely acknowledged for its fabrication tolerance and moderate insertion loss and crosstalk performances, while it is limited by its relatively large device footprint. Different silicon waveguide crossing designs are employed in different PICs.  The low-loss, low-crosstalk, compact and low-cost integrated silicon waveguide crossings are designed to satisfy the increasing demands of PICs in the coming era of the "BIG DATA" and the "Internet of Things" [67,68]. Table 1 summarizes the typical results of different silicon waveguide crossing design methods and includes the key information about the insertion loss, crosstalk, device footprint, silicon platform thickness and fabrication cost. These sophisticated silicon waveguide crossings are proposed to fulfill all these figure of merits (FOMs) and each structure has its unique advantages and disadvantages in these FOMs. For example, the vertical directional coupler waveguide crossing has probably the best crosstalk and insertion loss performance but is not popular for its expensive fabrication cost. In addition, the MMI waveguide crossing is widely acknowledged for its fabrication tolerance and moderate insertion loss and crosstalk performances, while it is limited by its relatively large device footprint. Different silicon waveguide crossing designs are employed in different PICs. 
## (s12) The Future Trends of Silicon Waveguide Crossing
(p12.0) As there is an increasing demand for ultra-high capacity optical interconnects, different silicon-based multiplexing technologies have been investigated to achieve a high-data rate [69,70]. Polarization-division-multiplexing (PDM) and mode-division-multiplexing (MDM) technologies are becoming hot research topics, because they make it possible to increase the optical link capacity by introducing dual polarization states as well as several mode states in the optical channel [71]. Polarization dependent loss (PDL) and the mode dependent loss (MDL) become additional FOMs for the silicon waveguide crossing design. Polarization and mode insensitive silicon waveguide crossings are the future trends and have great potential to be employed in the dense photonic integrated systems. Table 2 summarizes the FOMs of silicon waveguide crossing designs with multiplexing technologies and detailed characteristics will be discussed in the following paragraphs. Table 2.
## (s14) Polarization-Division-Multiplexing Technology
(p14.0) TE mode is general used in silicon channel application due to its ultra-small bending radius as small as 2.5 μm, while a few tens of micrometers are needed for TM-like mode [86]. Polarization splitters and rotators (PSRs) are used in the polarization diversity systems [87][88][89]. For the previously Figure 7. (a) Schematic of the mode-multiplexed silicon waveguide crossing with Y-junction mode splitter for fundamental transverse-electric (TE 0 ) and first-order transverse-electric (TE 1 ) mode; (b) top view of the mode-multiplexed silicon waveguide crossing with multimode interference structure for fundamental transverse-magnetic (TM 0 ) and first-order transverse-magnetic (TM 1 ) mode.
## (s15) Polarization-Division-Multiplexing Technology
(p15.0) TE mode is general used in silicon channel application due to its ultra-small bending radius as small as 2.5 µm, while a few tens of micrometers are needed for TM-like mode [86]. Polarization splitters and rotators (PSRs) are used in the polarization diversity systems [87][88][89]. For the previously proposed waveguide crossing designs, they are more focused on TE-like mode while TM-like mode has not attracted much attention. It is intuitive that PDM technology with dual polarizations is capable of doubling the link capacity in silicon waveguide, since optical polarization states can be intrinsically divided into two perpendicular polarization states, TE and TM polarizations [90]. However, the high structural birefringence of SOI platform introduces a large effective refractive index gap and an imbalanced performance of TE and TM polarizations in the previous proposed silicon waveguide crossing designs.

(p15.1) For the MMI silicon waveguide crossing design, the length of the MMI section is mainly determined by the optical beat length which depends on the effective refractive index of the optical mode. Unfortunately, the beat lengths for TE and TM polarizations are not the same and a trade-off needs to be made by expanding the device into the position near the LCM to get a good transmission performance for dual polarizations, as shown in Figure 8a. The polarization-insensitive silicon MMI crossing is proposed and has the insertion loss of 0.73 dB (0.65 dB) and crosstalk of −30 dB (−45 dB) for TE (TM) polarization with the device length of 23 × 23 µm 2 at 220 nm SOI platform, which is a relatively large device footprint in the modern PICs. The polarization-insensitive silicon shaped taper waveguide crossing is demonstrated by using the numerical inverse design method and the device can achieve insertion loss of 0.08 (0.07) dB and the crosstalk of −32 (−35) dB for TE (TM) mode with the device length of 6 µm at 250 nm SOI platform. Previously, we have explained the theoretical principle of tuning the effective refractive index with the subwavelength grating method. However, the taper will introduce the additional insertion loss. We proposed a SWG-assisted MMI crossing and reduced the MMI-based device footprint by narrowing the refractive index gap between TE and TM polarizations with the SWGs structure [91]. The device has the insertion loss of 0.69 (0.61) dB and crosstalk of −45 (−35) dB for TE (TM) polarization at the moderate footprint of 12.5 × 12.5 µm 2 on 220 nm SOI platform. For the holey SWG silicon waveguide crossing, the PDL is also taken into consideration as another designing targets, as shown in Figure 8b. The device can achieve the insertion loss of −0.67 (−0.69 dB) and less than -20 dB for TE (TM) mode at the extremely small footprint of 3.6 × 3.6 µm 2 at 340 nm SOI platform. The designing principle and process keep roughly the same whether the waveguide crossing is polarization sensitive or not. The polarization-insensitive waveguide crossing adds another design constraint since the TM polarization mode is also needed to be considered.

(p15.2) Micromachines 2020, 11, x 11 of 16 needs to be made by expanding the device into the position near the LCM to get a good transmission performance for dual polarizations, as shown in Figure 8a. The polarization-insensitive silicon MMI crossing is proposed and has the insertion loss of 0.73 dB (0.65 dB) and crosstalk of −30 dB (−45 dB) for TE (TM) polarization with the device length of 23 × 23 μm 2 at 220 nm SOI platform, which is a relatively large device footprint in the modern PICs. The polarization-insensitive silicon shaped taper waveguide crossing is demonstrated by using the numerical inverse design method and the device can achieve insertion loss of 0.08 (0.07) dB and the crosstalk of −32 (−35) dB for TE (TM) mode with the device length of 6 μm at 250 nm SOI platform. Previously, we have explained the theoretical principle of tuning the effective refractive index with the subwavelength grating method. However, the taper will introduce the additional insertion loss. We proposed a SWG-assisted MMI crossing and reduced the MMI-based device footprint by narrowing the refractive index gap between TE and TM polarizations with the SWGs structure [91]. The device has the insertion loss of 0.69 (0.61) dB and crosstalk of −45 (−35) dB for TE (TM) polarization at the moderate footprint of 12.5 × 12.5 μm 2 on 220 nm SOI platform. For the holey SWG silicon waveguide crossing, the PDL is also taken into consideration as another designing targets, as shown in Figure 8b. The device can achieve the insertion loss of −0.67 (−0.69 dB) and less than -20 dB for TE (TM) mode at the extremely small footprint of 3.6 × 3.6 μm 2 at 340 nm SOI platform. The designing principle and process keep roughly the same whether the waveguide crossing is polarization sensitive or not. The polarizationinsensitive waveguide crossing adds another design constraint since the TM polarization mode is also needed to be considered. 
