# Nature-inspired optimization algorithms in knapsack problem: A review

CorpusID: 214198082 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f68fa8466960e4bd0699906c7894fb5a98c00ec7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f68fa8466960e4bd0699906c7894fb5a98c00ec7)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s4) Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)
(p4.0) Particle swarm optimization is one of the meta-heuristic algorithms which was proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart [1995] for "solving continuous optimization problem. Particle swarm optimization is inspired by swarm behavior in nature like birds and fish schooling. The particle swarm optimization algorithm started with number of particles N which fly in the search space to search the best solution. Each particle i has a position   12 , ,.......,
## (s5) Algorithm 2: The pseudo code of the particle swarm optimization algorithm
(p5.0) Particle swarm optimization has been firstly "proposed for continuous optimization problems where velocity and position are real values. Therefore, it is not able to tackle a binary optimization problem such as knapsack problem. Kennedy and Eberhart [1997] developed a new version of particle swarm optimization, called binary particle swarm optimization (BPSO) to deal with problems with binary search space. In BPSO the position of particles takes the values 0 or 1. The velocity updating remains as defined in Eq. (4), then sigmoid function is used to transform the real values to the binary values according to the following equations [Haddar et al. 2016]:
## (s10) Migration Operator
(p10.0) The migration process can be described as follows: x at generation t , that is the newly generated position of the monarch butterfly 2 r . Monarch butterfly 2 r is randomly selected from subpopulation 2, where r can be computed as follows:

(p10.1) * r rand peri  (22) where peri represents the migration period and rand is a random number in   0,1 . Based on the above analyses, the migration operator can be expressed in" Algorithm 5 , Wang et al. 2016].
## (s13) max
(p13.0) St   (27) where max S is the max walk step that a monarch butterfly individual can move in one step and t is the current generation. The butterfly adjusting operator" can be described in Algorithm 6 , Wang et al. 2016]. The standard monarch butterfly optimization algorithm was proposed to "handle a continuous optimization problem. In discrete optimization problems the standard method cannot be applied directly to deal with such a problem. Therefore, the sigmoid function is used to convert the continuous values into binary:

(p13.1) Where r is a random number   0,1  ,   Sxis the sigmoid" function.  Table (1) shows the comparison results among four meta-heuristic algorithms" (PSO, FA, FPA and MBO) . The computation results for the four algorithms are presented in Table 1. The best solution, mean iteration (average number of iteration for obtaining the optimal solution for all run times of the same instance) and average executed times are used to measure the performance for these algorithms. The average executed times for all algorithms (BPSO, FA, BFPA and BMBO) are (1.53815, 1.52495, 1.1269 and 1.30795 respectively). In order to analyze the results in Table 1 and based on mean iteration and average executed times we can infer the order of the algorithms as follows: (BFPA, BMBO, FA and BPSO). Therefore, the binary flower pollination algorithm gives performance better than other algorithms (BPSO, BFA and BMBO) for solving 0-1 knapsack problem instances. All algorithms (BPSO, BFA, BFPA and BMBO) succeeded in finding the optimal solution for all 0-1 KP instances but BFPA has the least mean iteration and least average executed times compared to other algorithms".
## (s15) Conclusion
(p15.0) In this paper, four meta-heuristic algorithms for solving knapsack problem have been reviewed. Table (1) shows that the BFPA has fast convergence and stability better than other used algorithms. It may be appropriate to suggest that the best algorithm for solving 0-1 knapsack problem is BFPA. Future work includes using this algorithm for solving other combinatorial optimization problems and hybridization with other algorithms.
