# Underwater Optical Wireless Communications: Overview

CorpusID: 216074550 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dbac9981cdbdcfc14d653288b8c7e099907871ef](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dbac9981cdbdcfc14d653288b8c7e099907871ef)

Fields: Medicine, Physics, Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s3) Water Types
(p3.0) In Equation (4), c(λ) represents the cumulative attenuation coefficient as defined in Equation (1), while h is a constant. Unfortunately, the Beer's Law disregards the indirect paths and, obviously, with the increase of the distance, the multiple scattering conditions the channel losses while, some photons that run through these non-line of sight paths may arrive to the receiver causing errors of interpretation. Respect to the Beer's Law model, a function with two exponentials more accurately approximates the power loss for long distance underwater channel. A first exponential considers the attenuation Sensors 2020, 20, 2261 5 of 14 loss length less than the diffusion length and another one greater than the diffusion length. Therefore, Equation (4) can be rewritten as [71]:
## (s7) The Transmitter (TX)
(p7.0) The transmitter consists of four principal components: a modulator and pulse shape circuit, a driver circuit, that converts the electrical signal to an optical signal suitable for transmission and a lens to realize the optical link configuration.

(p7.1) The modulator and pulse shape are critical points of the system. Recent UOWC studies have tried to characterize the performance of communication systems using different modulation techniques in order to increase together the data transmission rate and the link distance [85][86][87].
## (s8) The Transmitter (TX)
(p8.0) The transmitter consists of four principal components: a modulator and pulse shape circuit, a driver circuit, that converts the electrical signal to an optical signal suitable for transmission and a lens to realize the optical link configuration.

(p8.1) The modulator and pulse shape are critical points of the system. Recent UOWC studies have tried to characterize the performance of communication systems using different modulation techniques in order to increase together the data transmission rate and the link distance [85][86][87].
## (s9) The Receiver (RX)
(p9.0) In many applications it is important to select a specific wavelength that impacts on the light detector [116]. The light reaching the receiver should have no noise introduced by sunlight and avoid the presence of other light sources [117]. To try to solve this problem, the wavelength band (the one transmitted) is selected by using a narrow optical band-pass filter [118].

(p9.1) When the receiver receives the transmitted optical signal, it transforms it into an electric signal by using photodetectors. Many different types of photodetectors are currently commonly used, e.g., photodiodes. These devices, for their characteristics of small size, suitable material, high sensitivity and fast response time, are commonly used in optical communication applications. There are two types of photodiodes: the PIN photodiode and the avalanche photodiode (APD).
