# molecules Toxicity Effects of Functionalized Quantum Dots, Gold and Polystyrene Nanoparticles on Target Aquatic Biological Models: A Review

CorpusID: 21687885 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0440b9cf7408f67b8c476bbbf3c1f73f971961dd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0440b9cf7408f67b8c476bbbf3c1f73f971961dd)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The broad applications of nanoparticles (NPs) in industry and common-use products are progressively introducing them into our environment. Engineered nanomaterials are created and used in various industrial and commercial sectors and applied for their peculiar features, such as their size which ranges between 1 and 100 nm for at least one dimension, their high surface area to volume ratio compared to their bulk forms and their capacity for agglomeration or dispersion [1][2][3].

(p0.1) NPs have recently attracted an enormous attention because of their potential applications in chemical, catalytic, electronic, optical, mechanical, magnetic and medical fields [4][5][6] and most of them are considered non-toxic, bio-safe and have been extensively used as drug carrier cosmetics, fillings in medical materials, antimicrobial materials, and contaminated land and sediment remediation agents [7].

(p0.2) The specific characteristics of NPs can promote their transfer into environmental compartments, which renders fundamental the knowledge of the bioavailability, degradability, reactivity and toxicity could potentially accumulate within ecosystems and ultimately damage 'top-level' species, trophic accumulation and dietary transfer of NPs through the food chain are important issues that need to be studied too. An important question is the contribution to toxicity of dissolved ions; in fact, the total toxicity results from the toxicity of the NPs themselves (Tox part ) and that of solubilized ions (Tox ion ).

(p0.3) Xiao et al. [27] measured the acute toxicity of ZnO NPs in Daphnia magna and concluded that it was only 31% was due to Tox ion and that the Tox part played a dominant role, even if the total internal concentration of ZnO was proportional to the concentration of ZnO NPs administrated to daphnids. They concluded that this fact was due to the internalization of NPs and consequent dissolution of ions. Similarly, Bacchetta et al. [28,29] concluded that after a chronic exposure of daphnids to ZnO NPs and ZnSO 4 toxicity is due both to accumulation and persistence of NPs into tissues and to ion dissolution.

(p0.4) Exposure of organisms to sublethal concentrations of toxic NPs has been observed to terminate in changes at cellular and biochemical levels. When NPs enter into an organism, their interaction with target sites or receptors can determine an increase in oxidative stress that can produce a proteomic or non-proteomic response [11]. These responses could involve the antioxidant defense system to protect the organisms against reactive oxygen species (ROS) (e.g., catalase (CAT), superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GPX) or general detoxification enzymes like glutathione-S-transferse (GSTs) or stress proteins like metallothioneins (MT)). The presence of NPs can disturb steady-state conditions, leading to an increase of ROS production, a lack of defense capacity resulting in inactivation of some enzymes, oxidation of proteins, damage of DNA or some other molecules such as lipids. The use of oxidative stress biomarkers has become a promising tool to evaluate the toxic effects of NPs; in fact, they may disrupt the balance of biological oxidant-to-antioxidant ratio in aquatic species, leading to elevated levels of ROS and resulting in oxidative stress that can be revealed by transcription genes related to antioxidant system [30].

(p0.5) This review provides an overview of most recent studies about the impact of quantum dots (QDs), gold (AuNPs), and polystyrene-cored (PSNPs) NPs, evidencing the role of NP functionalization in toxicity definition. Particularly, our attention focused on some key biological models like Saccharomyces cerevisiae, fresh-(F) and saltwater (S) microalgae (Raphidocelis subcapitata (F), Scenedesmus obliquus (F) and Chlorella spp. (F), and Phaeodactylum tricornutum (S)), Daphnia magna, and Xenopus laevis as target biological models constituting a potential full battery of toxicity tests.
## (s3) Gold Nanoparticles (AuNPs)
(p3.0) AuNPs have received great attention because of their unique characteristics that make them suitable for a series of application in the biomedical field such as diagnostics and therapeutics [36], drug delivery and cancer treatment [37]. This increased use has led to a diffusion of AuNPs into the environment, which represents a hazard for aquatic ecosystems. Cytotoxic effects of AuNPs were identified in several mammalian cell lines, and different toxic effects have been reported and correlated to size, shape and coating but also to cell lines or murine models used [38,39]. The results are conflicting and some reports suggest that in vivo and in vitro effects are not comparable. In fact, some authors state that AuNPs are toxic to certain organisms, while others that they are not toxic to the same organisms [40,41]. Thus, it is important to investigate the ecotoxicity of AuNPs both in their functionalized and non-functionalized forms using toxicity tests to provide a background for ecotoxicological hazard assessment. Functionalized AuNPs have attracted attention for imaging, diagnosis and delivery of antibacterial drugs because NPs not only protect the drug from the external environment, but will also concentrate it at the desired infection site with doses higher than those reachable with the administration of free molecules. AuNPs can be easily functionalized with a great variety of AMPs with an improvement of their activity and a decrease of environmental toxicity.
## (s4) Polystyrene Nanoparticles (PSNPs)
(p4.0) Recently, PSNPs, incorporating fluorescent dyes and polymer matrixes with size ranging from 50 to 300 nm, have attracted much interest because of their special properties, namely their nanoscale size, uniform shape, and narrow size distribution. Therefore, they find a wide range of applications in various fields such as in optical sensor, biomedicine, food, textiles and paint coating.

(p4.1) Polystyrene is known to be one of the most heavily used polymers in our routine daily activities. Amongst others, it is commonly used in various food industries as food containers, storage, and carriers as the USDA has approved its use. PSNPs could be potentially strong pollutants of aquatic environments that act as a sink for NPs. The potential toxic effects of PSNPs on aquatic organisms deserve full attention [42]. PSNPs may in fact constitute a serious danger, not only for these organisms, but also for their consequent domino effects, in particular along the aquatic food chain [43]. These NPs can be divided into three main groups according to their effective surface charge: cationic, anionic or neutral (unmodified) PSNPs. Their surface charge will depend on the surface coating, the most common functional groups used being NH 2 − for cationic, and COOH − for anionic surfaces.

(p4.2) This allows them to pass more easily through the cell membrane, as they share a similar molecular structure to proteins, rendering them a potential tool for drug delivery. However, some studies have shown that, while the neutral and negatively charged PSNPs are considered to be not toxic, the positively charged PSNPs induce some toxicity [44]. Positively charged NPs adsorb more on cell membranes and show higher level of internalizations when compared with negatively charged or neutral NPs. NPs encounter a large variety of biomolecules in vivo, where non-specific adsorptions can potentially alter the physicochemical properties of the NPs [45]. Studies with model polystyrene latex NPs of varying nanosizes (50 and 100 nm) and surface chemistry-unmodified, amine-modified and carboxyl-modified-have shown that they are able to induce platelet aggregation in vitro, suggesting a poorly defined potential mechanism of increased cardiovascular risk upon NP exposure [46,47]. Hardy et al. [48] investigated the immunological imprints of uncoated polystyrene NPs of 50 nm and 500 nm, evidencing that these particles imprint a differentially modulated induction of acute allergic airways inflammation, with 50 nm significantly inhibiting adaptive allergen-specific immunity. Recent literature on airway cells [49], intestinal epithelium [50] and blood coagulation [51] concluded that their activity and different ways was dependent on the PSNPs' size and surface chemistry and this should be taken in account before using PSNPs for medical treatments. Tiago dos Santos et al. [52] investigated NP uptake mechanisms in a range of representative human cell lines, including HeLa (cervical cancer), A549 (lung carcinoma) and 1321N1 (brain astrocytoma). They performed uptake experiments using carboxylate PSNPs of 40 nm and 200 nm diameters, as model NPs of sizes comparable to typical endocytic cargoes. Their results clearly indicated that, in all cases and cell types, PSNPs entered cells via active energy-dependent processes. They suggested that the same NPs might exploit different uptake mechanisms to enter different cell types. Oral exposure to polystyrene NPs affects iron absorption [50]. PSNPs of 44 nm accumulate rapidly and more efficiently in the cytoplasm of adenocarcinoma cells compared to PSNPs of 100 nm; both PSNPs showed an energy dependent mechanism of internalization and a clathrin-mediated endocytosis pathway. Dose response treatments revealed a non-linear curve. PSNPs also affected cell viability, inflammatory gene expression and cell morphology. PSNPs of 44 nm strongly induced an up-regulation of IL-6 and IL-8 genes, two of the most important cytokines involved in gastric pathologies [53]. Studies carried out on embryos showed that fluorescent PSNPs up to 240 nm were able to cross the placental barrier [54] 17 and 20 nm carboxylic PS distribute in the embryonic and extra-embryonic germ layers of ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. When the particles are bigger than 100 nm, they accumulate in extra-embryonic tissue. A growth inhibition was observed in the embryos containing NPs [55]. In contrast the studies of Bosman et al. [56] showed that exposure to polystyrene-based NPs at the concentration tested are not associated with embryonic loss. However, it should be mentioned that the observations made on contact embryos where the PSNPs might have been modified through the transport process from the extracellular to the intracellular environment may represent more valid information for environmental studies than observations made through directly injected PSNPs [57]. Guarnieri et al. [58] showed that the fate of the gH625functionalized PSNPs depend on the mechanism of translocation of gH625 a membranotrope peptide that have a relevant impact on the nanotoxicological profile of positively charged NPs reducing NPs toxicity. Finally PSNPs are used as carriers for antimicrobial peptides. Polystyrene NPs modified with vancomycin-antibody were produced to highlight the power of utilizing small molecule probes for the capture of biomolecules [59]. Moreover polystyrene sulphonate assembled with polymyxin B was utilized for the delivery of this antimicrobial peptide currently used in the clinic as a last resort antibiotic against multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria [60].
## (s6) Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(p6.0) The unicellular eukaryote Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a well-established model organism in basic research and a workhorse in traditional and innovative biotechnological processes, has been used in ecotoxicology as an alternative to other more commonly used bioindicators, due to its lack of pathogenicity, relative simplicity, possibility to be easily cultured in controlled conditions, availability of experimental tools, protocols, database, and genome-wide-methodologies [61].
## (s7) Microalgae
(p7.0) Morelli et al. [83] studied the potential toxicity of QDs on the marine microalga P. tricornutum because the stability of NPs in sea water is an important requisite for efficient interactions with living organisms. They found no toxicity at low concentrations while at high concentrations a dose dependent inhibition of growth rate and a concomitant increase production of ROS and SOD and CAT activities were found.

(p7.1) Worms et al. [84] studied the effect of carboxyl-functionalized polymer coated CdSe/ZnS QDs on three different green algae with different cell wall characteristics (Chlorella kesslerii, C. reinhardii and a cell wall-less strain of C. reinhardii) concluding that carboxyl-QDs could influence metal bioavailability due to the interactions of NPs with cell wall.

(p7.2) Oukarroum et al. [85] showed that toxicity and uptake of nitrogen oxide NPs (NO-NPs) on C. vulgaris increased for the formation of agglomerates that adsorbed at the surface of algal cells entrapping them and causing a reduction of availability of light and nutrients necessary for photosynthesis and cellular division. Similar results were also found when algal cells of R. subcapitata, Chlorella sp. and Scenedesmus sp. were exposed to SiO 2 and TiO 2 NPs.

(p7.3) Toxicity increased with a direct correlation to the increasing exposure concentration of NPs suspension. The release of Ni 2+ from NiO-NPs represents one possible mechanism of toxicity because TEM analysis confirmed that Ni 2+ were released from NiO-NPs inside the cell after bioaccumulation.

(p7.4) Nolte et al. [86] investigated the influence of polystyrene and AuNPs surface functionalization on green alga P. subcapitata utilizing a combination of method that allow a detailed evaluation of the algal toxicity by NPs. They showed an increased adsorption of functionalized PSNPs to the algal cells explained by change in cell wall and zeta potential.

(p7.5) Hoecke et al. [87] reported the ecotoxic effect of two types of polymer-coated AuNPs on P. subcapitata. In aquatic environments, agglomeration/aggregation of AuNPs is a common fate that does not indicate a decrease of toxicity but sometimes the aggregation could facilitate ingestion. Gilroy et al. [88] established potential transfer of AuNPs in the food webs and they stated that most NPs remained in the digestive tract did not affect reproduction and was eliminated with ejection.

(p7.6) Iswarya et al. [89] explored the impact of Zn 2+ present in the freshwater environment at an average concentration of <0.05 mg/L, on the toxicity of AuNPs with different size and different surface-capped (citrate and PVP) on the green alga Scenedesmus obliquus. They found that as the concentration of AuNPs increased, the relative toxicity of algal cells was also found to increase for all the types of AuNPs tested with respect to the control. Differences were found only in different capping agent on the surface with more toxicity in citrate-capped AuNPs, and in this case also size depending. It is also confirmed that zinc ions showed an antagonistic ability to interfere with the toxicity caused by AuNPs on green algae Scenedemus sp. independently from the surface capping, then is difficult to attribute the effective toxicity to them.

(p7.7) Galdiero et al. [90] studied the biological effects of melittin, an antimicrobial peptide well-known, on R. subcapitata showing an inhibition of growth for the algae also at low concentration. As concerns genotoxicity of melittin R. subcapitata showed DNA damage in comparison to untreated control samples.
## (s8) Daphnia magna
(p8.0) Studies on the toxic effects of NPs on aquatic organisms are mainly focused on metal and metal oxides such as silver, copper, titanium and zinc oxides [91][92][93]; nonetheless it is very important to know which are the ligands on their surface because they could change the surface properties of NPs and as a consequence their interactions with the environment. Another important feature is the aggregation, which is key for toxicity because the change of charge of the surface of NPs can promote or prevent aggregation and consequently the uptake by organisms.

(p8.1) To date the effect of QDs on the biological environment is not fully understood. Most studies assess the toxicity of QDs to secondary consumers such as D. magna, a freshwater invertebrate. Studies showed that negatively charged QDs are taken up by daphnids better than neutral or positively charged QDs [94]. In vitro experiments have demonstrated that cell toxicity is due to intracellular QDs localization with consequent release of Cd 2+ into cytoplasm and ROS generation, instead in vivo toxicity has been evaluated by viability and sublethal toxicity in organisms such as algae, crustaceans, amphibians, and zebra fish.
## (s9) Xenopus laevis
(p9.0) Exposing living organisms to NPs is potentially hazardous especially during embryogenesis thus this endpoint deserves full attention [104]. X. laevis is a consolidated biological model used for embryotoxicity studies associated to bioimaging [105].

(p9.1) Uncoated PSNPs of 48 nm administered during early stages of larval development of X. laevis, using either contact exposure or microinjections, are lethal depending on concentration, and affect embryonic development showing toxic/teratogenic effects. These effects may be due either to the amount of NPs that penetrate into the cells and/or the "corona" effect caused by the interaction of PSNPs with cytoplasm components [105]. Symens et al. [106] using the Xenopus nuclear envelope re-assembly assay, found that the nuclear enclosure of NPs were dependent on size and charge of the polystyrene beads. Stylianou and Skourides [107] assessed relatively long-term effects of NIR pulses on embryonic development through the tadpole stage. They developed parameters for near infrared (NIR) pulses that did not affect embryonic viability or morphology and delivered QDs as effectively as manual injection. Higher intensities of NIR pulses caused permanent damage to the targeted cells, and thus NIR pulses may also prove useful for ablation of specific cells within tissues. They are the first to report the use of NIR QD's to image mesoderm migration in vivo with single cell resolution and provide quantitative in vivo data regarding migration rates.

(p9.2) Mogi et al. [108], injected quantum dot nanocrystals and polystyrene beads in X. laevis embryos to study the development of larval brain ventricles and the patterns of cerebrospinal flow via an imaging assay. X. laevis embryos raised in Frog Embryo Teratogenesis Assay (FETAX)-Xenopus containing QDs or gH625-QDs showed that NPs localized in gills, lung and intestine with different distributions, indicating that the uptake of gH625-QDs was enhanced; the functionalized QDs had a significantly lower toxic effect on embryos' survival and phenotypes [101].
