# INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH IN PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCES A Review on Halodule uninervis -A Potent Seagrass Production and Hosted by

CorpusID: 213215533 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/061ffd00d3ae3ff065e56fab609fa1a9e29ee5dd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/061ffd00d3ae3ff065e56fab609fa1a9e29ee5dd)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Nature is being stated to treat, protect and prevent many ailments. In the ancient medical system, naturally derived products have been an integral part. In India, there are many medicinal plants habituated are used as a treatment for various infectious diseases as well as to manage and cure the disorders. Not only the terrestrial plants were used as a medicine, the marine angiosperms also used as a remedy to treat fever, cardiac disease, malaria, cough, skin diseases, early stages of leprosy, and as a paste to treat wounds (Namadevan et al., 2017). Marine angiosperms are the hydrophytes that grows completely submerged saline environment. They are called as seagrass as they resemble the family Poaceae. As they grow and complete their life cycle in a stress environment, they were rich in Phyto protectants that are unique and novel. These phytocompounds are secondary metabolites that can act as an antibacterial, antioxidant and can act as ef icient nutraceuticals. There are a totally 14 species that are grown in southeast coastal regions of India in those predominantly seen are Thalasssiahemprichii, Cymodocea serrulata, Cymodocearotundata, Halodule uninervis, Syringodium isoetifolium, Halophila beccarii, Halophila ovalis and Halophila ovata. Each seagrass is unique in their photo components (Newmaster et al., 2011). This study elaborates the botanical features, morphology, phytocompounds and pharmacological aspects of Halodule uninervis. It is the main diet for dugongs and green turtles as it is rich in calorie and also their smaller leaf structure makes them to easily digest.
## (s6) Morphology
(p6.0) Morphology of Halodule uninervissuper icially resembles the terrestrial grass belongs to the family Poaceae as they have long narrow leaves often form large meadows by extending their rhizome. Halodule uninervis is a thin, lat needle-like seagrass, a perennial lowering plant that grows up to 2-4.5cm with the erect and wiry stem (West et al., 1998).
## (s10) Flowers and fruits
(p10.0) Halodule uninervis is a dioecious plant that has a separate male and female lower as a reproductive part. Flowers were tiny and grown at the base of the leaf sheath; male lowers are borne on a short peduncle and are enclosed in a leaf. They have a tiny red anther. The lowers are solitary and terminal, buried in the sediment emerges only for a short period.

(p10.1) Seeds are produced with a hard seed coat and it is released directly into the sediments so that they are not washed by currents. This unusual habit of Halodule uninervis helps it to reestablish them when parent plants are destroyed (Jupp et al., 1996).
## (s11) Phytocompounds
(p11.0) Generally, seagrass is rich in phenolic substances as they undergo stress. These secondary metabolites act as photoprotectants responsible for selfdefense against pathogens. Such compounds are lavones, condensed tannins, phenolic acids, sulphated phenolic acid and lignin are prominently seen in seagrass than the terrestrial plants. It has been evaluated that the total phenolic content of Halodule uninervis rhizome is 14.96±0.47mg and its leaf is 13.77±0.79mg GAE/g extract, which is signi icant. Halodule uninerviswas found to be rich in phenol and phenylpropanoid derivatives such as pcoumaric acid, caffeic acid, p-hydroxybenzoic acid and vanillic acids (Subhashini et al., 2013).
## (s12) Nutritional value
(p12.0) Halodule uninervis is mostly preferred food for sea dungeons. It is maybe due to needle-shaped leaves, which are easy to digest, or it is maybe due to its high calori ic value, which makes them store energy for the longest time. The complete phytochemical analysis of Halodule uninervis shows the presence of carbohydrate, protein, lipid, tannin and phenol, cardiac alkaloids, lavones, glucosides, saponins, palmitic acid, linoleic acid, phenylethanederivative, (S)-methoxy-(3-,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxyphenyl) ethanediol, 3,4,5-trihydroxy benzoic acid, (E)-3-(4-methoxyphenyl)-2-propenoic acid, syringin (7), 5-hydroxy-3-4 7-trimethoxy lavone, and 4'hydroxy-3',5,7-trimethoxy lavones (Kannan et al., 2010). The calori ic value of Halodule uninervis leaves is determined to be 40.15 kcal g-1 and its rhizomes to be 37.16 kcal g-1. There is a higher content of protein and carbohydrate in rhizomes than the leaves. This suggests that the seagrass Halodule uninervis stores its soluble carbohydrates and protein in the rhizomes and shoots and mobilized for plant growth (Dhawan et al., 1977).
