# coatings Smart, Photocatalytic and Self-Cleaning Asphalt Mixtures: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 210632722 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b6187fe6e0f5bdc788630b23cb0882fa69963ca6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b6187fe6e0f5bdc788630b23cb0882fa69963ca6)

Fields: Engineering, Chemistry, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s4) Photocatalytic Asphalt Pavements
(p4.0) Road pavements are ideal places for reducing air pollution due to their large paved surface areas, which are in close vicinity with the toxic gases emitted by the vehicles circulating there [59]. Figure 3 schematizes the operational mechanism of the asphalt mixtures with photocatalytic ability, one of the most evaluated characteristics in multifunctional road pavements. combination of hydrophilicity and pollutant photodegradation, which significantly helps the cleaning process [58]. The next section presents additional aspects related to the application of TiO2 on asphalt pavements, especially those related to de-pollution purposes.
## (s5) Photocatalytic Asphalt Pavements
(p5.0) Road pavements are ideal places for reducing air pollution due to their large paved surface areas, which are in close vicinity with the toxic gases emitted by the vehicles circulating there [59]. Figure 3 schematizes the operational mechanism of the asphalt mixtures with photocatalytic ability, one of the most evaluated characteristics in multifunctional road pavements. Photocatalytic surfaces are also considered self-cleaning due to their ability to degrade organic pollutants, such as adsorbed oils and greases. In a road safety context, the ability to degrade organic compounds adsorbed on paved surfaces can prevent problems related to vehicle skidding, thus contributing positively to the reduction of road accidents [6].

(p5.1) The number of articles published on topics related to photocatalytic asphalt mixtures has been steadily increasing. When looking for the keywords "photocatalytic" and "asphalt mixtures" (using Google Scholar), it is possible to observe that the research about this topic rose from 2 to 40 occurrences between 2006 and 2018, respectively, excluding citations. When carrying out the same analysis but only searching the keyword "asphalt mixtures", it is possible to count the total occurrences of 904 and 3220 for the same period, respectively. This number means that in 2018, only 1% of occurrences refer to research about the topic of photocatalytic asphalt mixing. On the other hand, for this research topic, the number is increased by about 65% when the word "mechanical" is included in "asphalt mixtures", thus showing that the mechanical behavior of asphalt mixtures is the most important issue related to asphalt pavements. Moreover, it can be concluded that the research in photocatalysis applied to asphalt mixtures is quite innovative and is of great interest to researchers.
## (s8) Testing, Results Analysis of Photocatalytic Asphalt Mixtures
(p8.0) In order to evaluate the photocatalytic ability, the literature presents gas degradation tests, such as NO x and VOCs, most of them according to the standards ISO 22197-1 and JIS TR Z 0018 [60,67,70], and tests of photocatalytic efficiency via the degradation of different organic dyes, such as methylene orange (MO) [61], methylene blue (MB) [6,67] and rhodamine B (RhB) [7,8], which use spectrophotometric techniques ( Figure 4). Both tests can be used to evaluate the photocatalytic gas degradation, considering both air depollution and dye degradation for self-cleaning applications. Nevertheless, both tests are clearly related as they are used for measuring the ability of pollutant photodegradation.

(p8.1) Regarding the first test, some gases have been used: some VOCs: HC [84], benzene, toluene, xylene and trimethylbenzene [59], SO 2 [9] and mainly NO, NO 2 or NO x [68,71,83]. Briefly, the gas flow with a controlled concentration passes into a chamber where the sample containing the semiconductor material resides inside and is subjected to light irradiation (Figure 4a). The gas concentration is monitored at the outlet of the system and the photocatalytic efficiency can be further evaluated. It is possible to control humidity, temperature, light irradiation (wavelength and power), gas flow rate and concentration, and other physical parameters.

(p8.2) Regarding the second test, that is, the organic dye degradation, the asphalt mixture samples under study are dipped into a dye's aqueous solution of known initial concentration. Subsequently, the sample already immersed in the dye's aqueous solution is exposed to light irradiation and, over time, the variation in solution concentration is monitored by spectrophotometry (Figure 4b,c). The photocatalytic efficiency can be calculated from detected variations (decrease) in the maximum absorbance values recorded on the absorption spectrum by using visible spectroscopy. As before, it is also possible to control light irradiation (wavelength and power), the dye's solution concentration, volume, and pH.
## (s11) Photocatalytic Applications in Real Context or Small Road Sections
(p11.0) Regarding the application in real scenario context or small test sections, some first approaches were performed ( Figure 6). Bocci et al. applied a bituminous emulsion containing TiO 2 and cement mortar made of sand, cement, additives, and TiO 2 sprayed over asphalt mixtures onto Highway A14 in Italy. The coatings were applied to the right and emergency lanes of the road and their performance was monitored for 527 days. The most important variables that contributed to the decrease in emulsion efficiency were the low temperatures and rainfall. Its efficiency has been reduced by about 80% in just 100 days. The authors concluded that, for tunnel applications, where weathering would be avoided, the best alternative should consist of the application of a bituminous emulsion, while, for the case of emergency lanes, the best option could fall on the use of cement mortar [73]. Moreover, Chen and Liu also applied a photocatalytic coating composed of TiO2 nanoparticles dispersed in silane on the asphalt mixture of Highway G11 from Tsitsihar to the Nehe River, China. They showed a photocatalytic efficiency from 6% to 12% under real scenery of outdoor road traffic [69].
## (s13) Cost Analysis
(p13.0) Regarding the costs, probably between the known four application methods, those that use the least amount of semiconductor material and also is more efficient, refers to the spraying coating technique. Hassan et al. carried out an economic analysis of a photocatalytic coating of TiO 2 aqueous solution sprayed over the asphalt pavement surface layer. This solution was composed of anatase phase of TiO 2 nanoparticles (2% by volume), and it was applied covering 0.05 L/m 2 . They concluded that the photocatalytic coating costs were about USD 2.25 per m 2 (in 2012). When compared to the application cost around 9 cm asphalt mixture layer, the coating application increased by 11% the initial budget [9]. Fan et al. reported that the fabrication cost of the C-TiO 2 aqueous solution coating applied by spraying is estimated in USD 1-3 per m 2 covering about 7 g/m 2 (in 2018), but the other costs need to be evaluated in further studies. Bocci et al. studied bituminous emulsion containing TiO 2 and cement mortar made of sand, cement, additives, and TiO 2 sprayed over asphalt mixtures. They reported a cost of €6.50 per m 2 (0,067 kg/m 2 ) for the first one and €20 per m 2 (1 kg/m 2 except for water) for the second one, in 2015.

(p13.1) As a typical example related to the costs of raw TiO 2 nanoparticles, one can highlight the case of Evonik Aeroxide P-25, which presents a cost of about USD 45 per kg [90]. Nevertheless, it is well known that TiO 2 nanoparticles are still quite expensive due to very low industrial production. It is predictable that, in the next years, this cost would decrease significantly due to the very high application versatility of TiO 2 nanoparticles. Besides, since these researchers report very small test sections, the application over asphalt roads in a real context that covers much larger areas necessarily requires the acquisition of a large amount of nanomaterials, thus leading to a decrease in the nanoparticles' price. Because there is a lack of information about the cost analysis, this approach could be evaluated by researchers in further studies.

(p13.2) It can be concluded that photocatalytic road pavements are very important since if they are close to the largest emissions, they have a large area, and the pavements are mostly bituminous. As mentioned, there are important references related to the functionalization of asphalt mixtures to impart photocatalytic function. However, there is still limited experience on this topic, thus the surface immobilization techniques of semiconductor materials need further studies. Other aspects also require further investigation, such as the application of semiconductor materials in different substrates (asphalt mixtures), the impact of functionalization on the functional and mechanical characteristics, application costs, and real application analysis.
