# Graph-based Ontology Summarization: A Survey

CorpusID: 21693765 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d66d9b9b8d5f1f7e396aef1e67d19da383f6e275](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d66d9b9b8d5f1f7e396aef1e67d19da383f6e275)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) An ontology provides an explicit specification of a vocabulary for a shared domain [7]. Terms in that vocabulary are mainly classes and properties denoting concepts and their relationships in the domain, respectively, forming a conceptualization of the world that we wish to represent for some purpose. In an ontology, the interpretation and use of terms are constrained by formal axioms. As ontologies can help people and organizations reach consensus on conceptualizations, they have found wide application in knowledge management, information integration, data access, etc. In particular, they play an important role in the recent explosive growth of Semantic Web deployment, where an ontology is frequently used as the schema of a knowledge base.

(p0.1) With the dramatic growth in both size and complexity of ontologies, their comprehension, exploration, and exploitation are becoming increasingly difficult. Summarization, in order to generate an overview or a preview of an ontology, is one possible solution that has received increasing research attention, recently.

(p0.2) Ontology summarization is defined as a technique of distilling key information from an ontology in order to produce an abridged version for different tasks [23]. The output is a compact ontology summary, for a better and quicker understanding of an ontology, which can facilitate and reduce the cost of the next tasks in various applications such as ontology evaluation [1], matching [17], and search.

(p0.3) Compared with an early literature review [9], we have witnessed the emergence of many ontology summarization techniques, in recent years. In this survey paper, rather than providing a comprehensive bibliography, we mainly sort, review, and compare various graph-based methods for ontology summarization. An ontology can be transformed into different graph models to represent the relations between terms and/or axioms. A broad range of measures have been presented to assess the importance of each node, which can be a term or an axiom. A subset of top-ranked nodes form an ontology summary, so the output of an ontology summarization approach is usually a list of ranked terms or axioms. Some approaches further choose paths to connect selected nodes and return a subgraph. Table 1 summarizes the methods that will be reviewed in this paper. We will first compare different graph models, and then discuss measures for assessing node importance including centrality-based, coverage-based, and others. Finally, we conclude the paper with future directions.

(p0.4) Note that our survey focuses on the summarization of terminological definitions in ontologies (i.e., TBox). Methods for summarizing instance data in knowledge bases (i.e., ABox), e.g., [5], will not be addressed. 

(p0.5) An ontology provides an explicit specification of a vocabulary for a shared domain [7]. Terms in that vocabulary are mainly classes and properties denoting concepts and their relationships in the domain, respectively, forming a conceptualization of the world that we wish to represent for some purpose. In an ontology, the interpretation and use of terms are constrained by formal axioms. As ontologies can help people and organizations reach consensus on conceptualizations, they have found wide application in knowledge management, information integration, data access, etc. In particular, they play an important role in the recent explosive growth of Semantic Web deployment, where an ontology is frequently used as the schema of a knowledge base.

(p0.6) With the dramatic growth in both size and complexity of ontologies, their comprehension, exploration, and exploitation are becoming increasingly difficult. Summarization, in order to generate an overview or a preview of an ontology, is one possible solution that has received increasing research attention, recently.

(p0.7) Ontology summarization is defined as a technique of distilling key information from an ontology in order to produce an abridged version for different tasks [23]. The output is a compact ontology summary, for a better and quicker understanding of an ontology, which can facilitate and reduce the cost of the next tasks in various applications such as ontology evaluation [1], matching [17], and search.

(p0.8) Compared with an early literature review [9], we have witnessed the emergence of many ontology summarization techniques, in recent years. In this survey paper, rather than providing a comprehensive bibliography, we mainly sort, review, and compare various graph-based methods for ontology summarization. An ontology can be transformed into different graph models to represent the relations between terms and/or axioms. A broad range of measures have been presented to assess the importance of each node, which can be a term or an axiom. A subset of top-ranked nodes form an ontology summary, so the output of an ontology summarization approach is usually a list of ranked terms or axioms. Some approaches further choose paths to connect selected nodes and return a subgraph. Table 1 summarizes the methods that will be reviewed in this paper. We will first compare different graph models, and then discuss measures for assessing node importance including centrality-based, coverage-based, and others. Finally, we conclude the paper with future directions.

(p0.9) Note that our survey focuses on the summarization of terminological definitions in ontologies (i.e., TBox). Methods for summarizing instance data in knowledge bases (i.e., ABox), e.g., [5], will not be addressed. 
## (s3) Class Graph
(p3.0) In order to directly represent semantic relations between classes, Wu et al. [21] presented a graph model where nodes represent classes and directed arcs represent binary relations between classes, which we call a class graph. Figure 2 illustrates a class graph for the ontology in Fig. 1. Note that some axioms (e.g., owl:Restriction) are not covered by this graph representation. As to the relations between classes, if we only allow rdfs:subClassOf, the resulting graph will be a class hierarchy representing subsumption relations, as considered in [12]. More generally, a relation can also be a property defined in the ontology, connecting from its domain (which is a class) to its range (also a class).

(p3.1) Comments. Class graphs are close to human cognition. As classes are firstclass citizens, class graphs are particularly suitable for approaches to ranking classes. However, the expressivity of class graph is limited. It well supports binary relations between classes but not more complex axioms involving multiple classes, e.g., owl:unionOf.

(p3.2) In order to directly represent semantic relations between classes, Wu et al. [21] presented a graph model where nodes represent classes and directed arcs represent binary relations between classes, which we call a class graph. Figure 2 illustrates a class graph for the ontology in Fig. 1. Note that some axioms (e.g., owl:Restriction) are not covered by this graph representation. As to the relations between classes, if we only allow rdfs:subClassOf, the resulting graph will be a class hierarchy representing subsumption relations, as considered in [12]. More generally, a relation can also be a property defined in the ontology, connecting from its domain (which is a class) to its range (also a class).

(p3.3) Comments. Class graphs are close to human cognition. As classes are firstclass citizens, class graphs are particularly suitable for approaches to ranking classes. However, the expressivity of class graph is limited. It well supports binary relations between classes but not more complex axioms involving multiple classes, e.g., owl:unionOf.
## (s4) RDF Sentence Graph
(p4.0) Zhang et al. [23] proposed an RDF sentence graph. An RDF sentence is a subset of RDF triples, and a set of RDF sentences form the finest partition of the triples in an RDF graph such that each blank node only appears in one block. In many cases, an RDF sentence corresponds to an axiom in OWL, since when mapping OWL ontologies into RDF graphs, blank nodes are introduced when an axiom is transformed into multiple RDF triples.  In an RDF sentence graph, nodes represent RDF sentences, which are adjacent if the terms they describe overlap. Figure 3 illustrates an RDF sentence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1 five axioms. Zhang et al. [23] differentiate between two types of arcs, depending on the structural role of the shared terms, which we will not elaborate. Penin et al. [11] further cluster textually similar RDF sentences into topic nodes.

(p4.1) Comments. Compared with RDF triples, there is a better correspondence between RDF sentences and OWL axioms. In an RDF sentence graph, RDF sentences (or roughly speaking, axioms) are first-class citizens, making this model particularly suitable for ranking triples/axioms. However, terms are not explicitly represented in this model, which may limit its application.

(p4.2) Zhang et al. [23] proposed an RDF sentence graph. An RDF sentence is a subset of RDF triples, and a set of RDF sentences form the finest partition of the triples in an RDF graph such that each blank node only appears in one block. In many cases, an RDF sentence corresponds to an axiom in OWL, since when mapping OWL ontologies into RDF graphs, blank nodes are introduced when an axiom is transformed into multiple RDF triples.  In an RDF sentence graph, nodes represent RDF sentences, which are adjacent if the terms they describe overlap. Figure 3 illustrates an RDF sentence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1 five axioms. Zhang et al. [23] differentiate between two types of arcs, depending on the structural role of the shared terms, which we will not elaborate. Penin et al. [11] further cluster textually similar RDF sentences into topic nodes.

(p4.3) Comments. Compared with RDF triples, there is a better correspondence between RDF sentences and OWL axioms. In an RDF sentence graph, RDF sentences (or roughly speaking, axioms) are first-class citizens, making this model particularly suitable for ranking triples/axioms. However, terms are not explicitly represented in this model, which may limit its application.
## (s5) Vocabulary Dependency Graph
(p5.0) Based on RDF sentences, Zhang et al. [24] propose vocabulary dependency graph, where nodes represent terms, and edges connect terms that co-occur in an RDF sentence. Co-occurrence in an RDF sentence indicates dependency between terms. Figure 4 illustrates a vocabulary dependence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1, derived from Fig. 3. Compared with the class graph in Fig. 2, this new graph covers more terms (e.g., properties), though the edges are unlabeled. Essentially, in a vocabulary dependence graph, each axiom (represented by an RDF sentence) as a complex relation over multiple terms is decomposed into multiple binary relations.

(p5.1) Comments. Compared with the a sentence graph, a vocabulary dependence graph explicitly represents terms in the model, thereby being suitable for ranking terms. Compared with a class graph, a vocabulary dependence graph has both classes and properties as nodes, being suitable for ranking both of them. However, the meaning of an edge in a vocabulary dependence graph is not as explicit as in a class graph.

(p5.2) Based on RDF sentences, Zhang et al. [24] propose vocabulary dependency graph, where nodes represent terms, and edges connect terms that co-occur in an RDF sentence. Co-occurrence in an RDF sentence indicates dependency between terms. Figure 4 illustrates a vocabulary dependence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1, derived from Fig. 3. Compared with the class graph in Fig. 2, this new graph covers more terms (e.g., properties), though the edges are unlabeled. Essentially, in a vocabulary dependence graph, each axiom (represented by an RDF sentence) as a complex relation over multiple terms is decomposed into multiple binary relations.

(p5.3) Comments. Compared with the a sentence graph, a vocabulary dependence graph explicitly represents terms in the model, thereby being suitable for ranking terms. Compared with a class graph, a vocabulary dependence graph has both classes and properties as nodes, being suitable for ranking both of them. However, the meaning of an edge in a vocabulary dependence graph is not as explicit as in a class graph.
## (s6) Term-Sentence Graph
(p6.0) Zhang et al. [22] present a bipartite graph model, where terms and RDF sentences are both represented by nodes, which we call a term-sentence graph. A directed arc connects an RDF sentence to a term if the term is described in that RDF sentence. Figure 5 illustrates a term-sentence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1, derived from Fig. 3. Zhang et al. [22] differentiate between three types of arcs, depending on the structural role of term in RDF sentence, which we will 
## (s10) Coverage-based Measures
(p10.0) Top-ranked nodes in a graph representation of an ontology may not form the best ontology summary. For many applications, a good summary is expected to have a good coverage of the contents of an ontology, to form a comprehensive and unbiased overview. Accordingly, the quality of a subset of nodes forming a summary is to be assessed as a whole.

(p10.1) Coverage (Co) Peroni et al. [12] propose the coverage criterion which aims to show how well the selected set of classes are spread over the whole class hierarchy. For each node v, let N + (v) be the set of nodes covered by v, including v and its neighbors, i.e., its subclasses and superclasses in the class hierarchy. The coverage of a set of selected nodes V is defined as the proportion of nodes in the graph that are covered by V :

(p10.2) where n is the number of nodes in the graph. Further, Peroni et al. [12] consider an interesting measure called balance which is directly related to coverage. It measures how balanced the selected nodes are, i.e., the degree to which each selected node contributes to the overall coverage of the set, which is characterized by standard deviation.

(p10.3) Diversity-based Re-ranking (Di) In [23,22], the coverage of a summary is improved by a re-ranking step after centrality-based ranking. In these approaches, nodes are iteratively selected to form a summary. In each iteration, the next node to be selected may not be the top-ranked one among the remaining nodes, which will be re-ranked such that a node similar to those selected in previous iterations will be penalized. Specifically, let score(v) be the centrality score of node v, and let sim(v, u) be the similarity between nodes v and u. Given a set of nodes V s which are already selected into the summary and a set of candidate nodes V c , the next node to be selected from V c is

(p10.4) Zhang et al. [23,22] use this algorithm to rank RDF sentences, where two RDF sentences are similar if they share terms. The resulting ontology summary is diversified with regard to the terms it contains.

(p10.5) Comments on Coverage-based Measures Coverage-based methods complement centrality-based measures, but their current implementations are suboptimal. Coverage in Eq. (12) considers the neighborhood of each node, not taking the global graph structure into account. Diversity-based re-ranking in Eq. (13) has a greedy nature, and may not find the optimum summary in terms of centrality and diversity.

(p10.6) Top-ranked nodes in a graph representation of an ontology may not form the best ontology summary. For many applications, a good summary is expected to have a good coverage of the contents of an ontology, to form a comprehensive and unbiased overview. Accordingly, the quality of a subset of nodes forming a summary is to be assessed as a whole.

(p10.7) Coverage (Co) Peroni et al. [12] propose the coverage criterion which aims to show how well the selected set of classes are spread over the whole class hierarchy. For each node v, let N + (v) be the set of nodes covered by v, including v and its neighbors, i.e., its subclasses and superclasses in the class hierarchy. The coverage of a set of selected nodes V is defined as the proportion of nodes in the graph that are covered by V :

(p10.8) where n is the number of nodes in the graph. Further, Peroni et al. [12] consider an interesting measure called balance which is directly related to coverage. It measures how balanced the selected nodes are, i.e., the degree to which each selected node contributes to the overall coverage of the set, which is characterized by standard deviation.

(p10.9) Diversity-based Re-ranking (Di) In [23,22], the coverage of a summary is improved by a re-ranking step after centrality-based ranking. In these approaches, nodes are iteratively selected to form a summary. In each iteration, the next node to be selected may not be the top-ranked one among the remaining nodes, which will be re-ranked such that a node similar to those selected in previous iterations will be penalized. Specifically, let score(v) be the centrality score of node v, and let sim(v, u) be the similarity between nodes v and u. Given a set of nodes V s which are already selected into the summary and a set of candidate nodes V c , the next node to be selected from V c is

(p10.10) Zhang et al. [23,22] use this algorithm to rank RDF sentences, where two RDF sentences are similar if they share terms. The resulting ontology summary is diversified with regard to the terms it contains.

(p10.11) Comments on Coverage-based Measures Coverage-based methods complement centrality-based measures, but their current implementations are suboptimal. Coverage in Eq. (12) considers the neighborhood of each node, not taking the global graph structure into account. Diversity-based re-ranking in Eq. (13) has a greedy nature, and may not find the optimum summary in terms of centrality and diversity.
## (s13) Future Directions
(p13.0) We have investigated different graph models and measures for ontology summarization. We believe that other directions to generate more reliable ontology summaries exist, and we are trying to address some of them to conclude our survey.

(p13.1) Although many algorithms for the ontology summarization problem have been proposed, empirical results reported in the literature suggest that none of them consistently generates the best ontology summary. In an ideal case, the ontology summarization technique needs to be more flexible in the way that users or applications are able to tune the model in order to generate different summaries based on different requirements or inputs. In other words, dynamic or adaptive ontology summarization can be viewed as an interesting topic to explore.

(p13.2) Defining new measures, either graph-based or not, is another research activity in the context of ontology summarization. Ideas may come from thorough investigations into human-made "gold-standard" summaries. Research advances in the field of information retrieval and text summarization, as well as recent research on entity summarization (e.g., [15] [14]) which is closely related to ontology summarization, can also provide inspiration. In particular, machine learning techniques have not been extensively used for ontology summarization.

(p13.3) The available approaches apply extractive techniques to generate the final summary. In the extractive scenario, a subset of the terms and/or axioms from the original input ontology are selected as a summary. Non-extractive or abstractive ontology summarization will be a new direction in this area. In that scenario, the key research question is how to define the output of ontology summarization, e.g., as some kind of high-level aggregate representation of terms and axioms.

(p13.4) There is a lack of evaluation efforts. To the best of our knowledge, experiments presented in the literature are all based on a small number of ontologies. No benchmark for ontology summarization is available so far.

(p13.5) Dozens of software systems, libraries, or APIs for text summarization are available, many of which are open-source. By comparison, it is rare to see any software tool support for summarizing ontologies. In fact, if such a tool or an application aims to directly serve ordinary users, it needs to also address the presentation (e.g., verbalization, visualization) of and the interaction with ontologies, in which some other challenges would emerge.

(p13.6) Last but not least, almost all of the methods we have discussed generate ontology summaries to be presented to human users. Summaries may also facilitate computer processing in certain tasks. It would be interesting to explore applications of this kind.

(p13.7) We have investigated different graph models and measures for ontology summarization. We believe that other directions to generate more reliable ontology summaries exist, and we are trying to address some of them to conclude our survey.

(p13.8) Although many algorithms for the ontology summarization problem have been proposed, empirical results reported in the literature suggest that none of them consistently generates the best ontology summary. In an ideal case, the ontology summarization technique needs to be more flexible in the way that users or applications are able to tune the model in order to generate different summaries based on different requirements or inputs. In other words, dynamic or adaptive ontology summarization can be viewed as an interesting topic to explore.

(p13.9) Defining new measures, either graph-based or not, is another research activity in the context of ontology summarization. Ideas may come from thorough investigations into human-made "gold-standard" summaries. Research advances in the field of information retrieval and text summarization, as well as recent research on entity summarization (e.g., [15] [14]) which is closely related to ontology summarization, can also provide inspiration. In particular, machine learning techniques have not been extensively used for ontology summarization.

(p13.10) The available approaches apply extractive techniques to generate the final summary. In the extractive scenario, a subset of the terms and/or axioms from the original input ontology are selected as a summary. Non-extractive or abstractive ontology summarization will be a new direction in this area. In that scenario, the key research question is how to define the output of ontology summarization, e.g., as some kind of high-level aggregate representation of terms and axioms.

(p13.11) There is a lack of evaluation efforts. To the best of our knowledge, experiments presented in the literature are all based on a small number of ontologies. No benchmark for ontology summarization is available so far.

(p13.12) Dozens of software systems, libraries, or APIs for text summarization are available, many of which are open-source. By comparison, it is rare to see any software tool support for summarizing ontologies. In fact, if such a tool or an application aims to directly serve ordinary users, it needs to also address the presentation (e.g., verbalization, visualization) of and the interaction with ontologies, in which some other challenges would emerge.

(p13.13) Last but not least, almost all of the methods we have discussed generate ontology summaries to be presented to human users. Summaries may also facilitate computer processing in certain tasks. It would be interesting to explore applications of this kind.
## (s16) Introduction
(p16.0) An ontology provides an explicit specification of a vocabulary for a shared domain [7]. Terms in that vocabulary are mainly classes and properties denoting concepts and their relationships in the domain, respectively, forming a conceptualization of the world that we wish to represent for some purpose. In an ontology, the interpretation and use of terms are constrained by formal axioms. As ontologies can help people and organizations reach consensus on conceptualizations, they have found wide application in knowledge management, information integration, data access, etc. In particular, they play an important role in the recent explosive growth of Semantic Web deployment, where an ontology is frequently used as the schema of a knowledge base.

(p16.1) With the dramatic growth in both size and complexity of ontologies, their comprehension, exploration, and exploitation are becoming increasingly difficult. Summarization, in order to generate an overview or a preview of an ontology, is one possible solution that has received increasing research attention, recently.

(p16.2) Ontology summarization is defined as a technique of distilling key information from an ontology in order to produce an abridged version for different tasks [23]. The output is a compact ontology summary, for a better and quicker understanding of an ontology, which can facilitate and reduce the cost of the next tasks in various applications such as ontology evaluation [1], matching [17], and search.

(p16.3) Compared with an early literature review [9], we have witnessed the emergence of many ontology summarization techniques, in recent years. In this survey paper, rather than providing a comprehensive bibliography, we mainly sort, review, and compare various graph-based methods for ontology summarization. An ontology can be transformed into different graph models to represent the relations between terms and/or axioms. A broad range of measures have been presented to assess the importance of each node, which can be a term or an axiom. A subset of top-ranked nodes form an ontology summary, so the output of an ontology summarization approach is usually a list of ranked terms or axioms. Some approaches further choose paths to connect selected nodes and return a subgraph. Table 1 summarizes the methods that will be reviewed in this paper. We will first compare different graph models, and then discuss measures for assessing node importance including centrality-based, coverage-based, and others. Finally, we conclude the paper with future directions.

(p16.4) Note that our survey focuses on the summarization of terminological definitions in ontologies (i.e., TBox). Methods for summarizing instance data in knowledge bases (i.e., ABox), e.g., [5], will not be addressed. 

(p16.5) An ontology provides an explicit specification of a vocabulary for a shared domain [7]. Terms in that vocabulary are mainly classes and properties denoting concepts and their relationships in the domain, respectively, forming a conceptualization of the world that we wish to represent for some purpose. In an ontology, the interpretation and use of terms are constrained by formal axioms. As ontologies can help people and organizations reach consensus on conceptualizations, they have found wide application in knowledge management, information integration, data access, etc. In particular, they play an important role in the recent explosive growth of Semantic Web deployment, where an ontology is frequently used as the schema of a knowledge base.

(p16.6) With the dramatic growth in both size and complexity of ontologies, their comprehension, exploration, and exploitation are becoming increasingly difficult. Summarization, in order to generate an overview or a preview of an ontology, is one possible solution that has received increasing research attention, recently.

(p16.7) Ontology summarization is defined as a technique of distilling key information from an ontology in order to produce an abridged version for different tasks [23]. The output is a compact ontology summary, for a better and quicker understanding of an ontology, which can facilitate and reduce the cost of the next tasks in various applications such as ontology evaluation [1], matching [17], and search.

(p16.8) Compared with an early literature review [9], we have witnessed the emergence of many ontology summarization techniques, in recent years. In this survey paper, rather than providing a comprehensive bibliography, we mainly sort, review, and compare various graph-based methods for ontology summarization. An ontology can be transformed into different graph models to represent the relations between terms and/or axioms. A broad range of measures have been presented to assess the importance of each node, which can be a term or an axiom. A subset of top-ranked nodes form an ontology summary, so the output of an ontology summarization approach is usually a list of ranked terms or axioms. Some approaches further choose paths to connect selected nodes and return a subgraph. Table 1 summarizes the methods that will be reviewed in this paper. We will first compare different graph models, and then discuss measures for assessing node importance including centrality-based, coverage-based, and others. Finally, we conclude the paper with future directions.

(p16.9) Note that our survey focuses on the summarization of terminological definitions in ontologies (i.e., TBox). Methods for summarizing instance data in knowledge bases (i.e., ABox), e.g., [5], will not be addressed. 
## (s19) Class Graph
(p19.0) In order to directly represent semantic relations between classes, Wu et al. [21] presented a graph model where nodes represent classes and directed arcs represent binary relations between classes, which we call a class graph. Figure 2 illustrates a class graph for the ontology in Fig. 1. Note that some axioms (e.g., owl:Restriction) are not covered by this graph representation. As to the relations between classes, if we only allow rdfs:subClassOf, the resulting graph will be a class hierarchy representing subsumption relations, as considered in [12]. More generally, a relation can also be a property defined in the ontology, connecting from its domain (which is a class) to its range (also a class).

(p19.1) Comments. Class graphs are close to human cognition. As classes are firstclass citizens, class graphs are particularly suitable for approaches to ranking classes. However, the expressivity of class graph is limited. It well supports binary relations between classes but not more complex axioms involving multiple classes, e.g., owl:unionOf.

(p19.2) In order to directly represent semantic relations between classes, Wu et al. [21] presented a graph model where nodes represent classes and directed arcs represent binary relations between classes, which we call a class graph. Figure 2 illustrates a class graph for the ontology in Fig. 1. Note that some axioms (e.g., owl:Restriction) are not covered by this graph representation. As to the relations between classes, if we only allow rdfs:subClassOf, the resulting graph will be a class hierarchy representing subsumption relations, as considered in [12]. More generally, a relation can also be a property defined in the ontology, connecting from its domain (which is a class) to its range (also a class).

(p19.3) Comments. Class graphs are close to human cognition. As classes are firstclass citizens, class graphs are particularly suitable for approaches to ranking classes. However, the expressivity of class graph is limited. It well supports binary relations between classes but not more complex axioms involving multiple classes, e.g., owl:unionOf.
## (s20) RDF Sentence Graph
(p20.0) Zhang et al. [23] proposed an RDF sentence graph. An RDF sentence is a subset of RDF triples, and a set of RDF sentences form the finest partition of the triples in an RDF graph such that each blank node only appears in one block. In many cases, an RDF sentence corresponds to an axiom in OWL, since when mapping OWL ontologies into RDF graphs, blank nodes are introduced when an axiom is transformed into multiple RDF triples.  In an RDF sentence graph, nodes represent RDF sentences, which are adjacent if the terms they describe overlap. Figure 3 illustrates an RDF sentence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1 five axioms. Zhang et al. [23] differentiate between two types of arcs, depending on the structural role of the shared terms, which we will not elaborate. Penin et al. [11] further cluster textually similar RDF sentences into topic nodes.

(p20.1) Comments. Compared with RDF triples, there is a better correspondence between RDF sentences and OWL axioms. In an RDF sentence graph, RDF sentences (or roughly speaking, axioms) are first-class citizens, making this model particularly suitable for ranking triples/axioms. However, terms are not explicitly represented in this model, which may limit its application.

(p20.2) Zhang et al. [23] proposed an RDF sentence graph. An RDF sentence is a subset of RDF triples, and a set of RDF sentences form the finest partition of the triples in an RDF graph such that each blank node only appears in one block. In many cases, an RDF sentence corresponds to an axiom in OWL, since when mapping OWL ontologies into RDF graphs, blank nodes are introduced when an axiom is transformed into multiple RDF triples.  In an RDF sentence graph, nodes represent RDF sentences, which are adjacent if the terms they describe overlap. Figure 3 illustrates an RDF sentence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1 five axioms. Zhang et al. [23] differentiate between two types of arcs, depending on the structural role of the shared terms, which we will not elaborate. Penin et al. [11] further cluster textually similar RDF sentences into topic nodes.

(p20.3) Comments. Compared with RDF triples, there is a better correspondence between RDF sentences and OWL axioms. In an RDF sentence graph, RDF sentences (or roughly speaking, axioms) are first-class citizens, making this model particularly suitable for ranking triples/axioms. However, terms are not explicitly represented in this model, which may limit its application.
## (s21) Vocabulary Dependency Graph
(p21.0) Based on RDF sentences, Zhang et al. [24] propose vocabulary dependency graph, where nodes represent terms, and edges connect terms that co-occur in an RDF sentence. Co-occurrence in an RDF sentence indicates dependency between terms. Figure 4 illustrates a vocabulary dependence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1, derived from Fig. 3. Compared with the class graph in Fig. 2, this new graph covers more terms (e.g., properties), though the edges are unlabeled. Essentially, in a vocabulary dependence graph, each axiom (represented by an RDF sentence) as a complex relation over multiple terms is decomposed into multiple binary relations.

(p21.1) Comments. Compared with the a sentence graph, a vocabulary dependence graph explicitly represents terms in the model, thereby being suitable for ranking terms. Compared with a class graph, a vocabulary dependence graph has both classes and properties as nodes, being suitable for ranking both of them. However, the meaning of an edge in a vocabulary dependence graph is not as explicit as in a class graph.

(p21.2) Based on RDF sentences, Zhang et al. [24] propose vocabulary dependency graph, where nodes represent terms, and edges connect terms that co-occur in an RDF sentence. Co-occurrence in an RDF sentence indicates dependency between terms. Figure 4 illustrates a vocabulary dependence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1, derived from Fig. 3. Compared with the class graph in Fig. 2, this new graph covers more terms (e.g., properties), though the edges are unlabeled. Essentially, in a vocabulary dependence graph, each axiom (represented by an RDF sentence) as a complex relation over multiple terms is decomposed into multiple binary relations.

(p21.3) Comments. Compared with the a sentence graph, a vocabulary dependence graph explicitly represents terms in the model, thereby being suitable for ranking terms. Compared with a class graph, a vocabulary dependence graph has both classes and properties as nodes, being suitable for ranking both of them. However, the meaning of an edge in a vocabulary dependence graph is not as explicit as in a class graph.
## (s22) Term-Sentence Graph
(p22.0) Zhang et al. [22] present a bipartite graph model, where terms and RDF sentences are both represented by nodes, which we call a term-sentence graph. A directed arc connects an RDF sentence to a term if the term is described in that RDF sentence. Figure 5 illustrates a term-sentence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1, derived from Fig. 3. Zhang et al. [22] differentiate between three types of arcs, depending on the structural role of term in RDF sentence, which we will 
## (s26) Coverage-based Measures
(p26.0) Top-ranked nodes in a graph representation of an ontology may not form the best ontology summary. For many applications, a good summary is expected to have a good coverage of the contents of an ontology, to form a comprehensive and unbiased overview. Accordingly, the quality of a subset of nodes forming a summary is to be assessed as a whole.

(p26.1) Coverage (Co) Peroni et al. [12] propose the coverage criterion which aims to show how well the selected set of classes are spread over the whole class hierarchy. For each node v, let N + (v) be the set of nodes covered by v, including v and its neighbors, i.e., its subclasses and superclasses in the class hierarchy. The coverage of a set of selected nodes V is defined as the proportion of nodes in the graph that are covered by V :

(p26.2) where n is the number of nodes in the graph. Further, Peroni et al. [12] consider an interesting measure called balance which is directly related to coverage. It measures how balanced the selected nodes are, i.e., the degree to which each selected node contributes to the overall coverage of the set, which is characterized by standard deviation.

(p26.3) Diversity-based Re-ranking (Di) In [23,22], the coverage of a summary is improved by a re-ranking step after centrality-based ranking. In these approaches, nodes are iteratively selected to form a summary. In each iteration, the next node to be selected may not be the top-ranked one among the remaining nodes, which will be re-ranked such that a node similar to those selected in previous iterations will be penalized. Specifically, let score(v) be the centrality score of node v, and let sim(v, u) be the similarity between nodes v and u. Given a set of nodes V s which are already selected into the summary and a set of candidate nodes V c , the next node to be selected from V c is

(p26.4) Zhang et al. [23,22] use this algorithm to rank RDF sentences, where two RDF sentences are similar if they share terms. The resulting ontology summary is diversified with regard to the terms it contains.

(p26.5) Comments on Coverage-based Measures Coverage-based methods complement centrality-based measures, but their current implementations are suboptimal. Coverage in Eq. (12) considers the neighborhood of each node, not taking the global graph structure into account. Diversity-based re-ranking in Eq. (13) has a greedy nature, and may not find the optimum summary in terms of centrality and diversity.

(p26.6) Top-ranked nodes in a graph representation of an ontology may not form the best ontology summary. For many applications, a good summary is expected to have a good coverage of the contents of an ontology, to form a comprehensive and unbiased overview. Accordingly, the quality of a subset of nodes forming a summary is to be assessed as a whole.

(p26.7) Coverage (Co) Peroni et al. [12] propose the coverage criterion which aims to show how well the selected set of classes are spread over the whole class hierarchy. For each node v, let N + (v) be the set of nodes covered by v, including v and its neighbors, i.e., its subclasses and superclasses in the class hierarchy. The coverage of a set of selected nodes V is defined as the proportion of nodes in the graph that are covered by V :

(p26.8) where n is the number of nodes in the graph. Further, Peroni et al. [12] consider an interesting measure called balance which is directly related to coverage. It measures how balanced the selected nodes are, i.e., the degree to which each selected node contributes to the overall coverage of the set, which is characterized by standard deviation.

(p26.9) Diversity-based Re-ranking (Di) In [23,22], the coverage of a summary is improved by a re-ranking step after centrality-based ranking. In these approaches, nodes are iteratively selected to form a summary. In each iteration, the next node to be selected may not be the top-ranked one among the remaining nodes, which will be re-ranked such that a node similar to those selected in previous iterations will be penalized. Specifically, let score(v) be the centrality score of node v, and let sim(v, u) be the similarity between nodes v and u. Given a set of nodes V s which are already selected into the summary and a set of candidate nodes V c , the next node to be selected from V c is

(p26.10) Zhang et al. [23,22] use this algorithm to rank RDF sentences, where two RDF sentences are similar if they share terms. The resulting ontology summary is diversified with regard to the terms it contains.

(p26.11) Comments on Coverage-based Measures Coverage-based methods complement centrality-based measures, but their current implementations are suboptimal. Coverage in Eq. (12) considers the neighborhood of each node, not taking the global graph structure into account. Diversity-based re-ranking in Eq. (13) has a greedy nature, and may not find the optimum summary in terms of centrality and diversity.
## (s29) Future Directions
(p29.0) We have investigated different graph models and measures for ontology summarization. We believe that other directions to generate more reliable ontology summaries exist, and we are trying to address some of them to conclude our survey.

(p29.1) Although many algorithms for the ontology summarization problem have been proposed, empirical results reported in the literature suggest that none of them consistently generates the best ontology summary. In an ideal case, the ontology summarization technique needs to be more flexible in the way that users or applications are able to tune the model in order to generate different summaries based on different requirements or inputs. In other words, dynamic or adaptive ontology summarization can be viewed as an interesting topic to explore.

(p29.2) Defining new measures, either graph-based or not, is another research activity in the context of ontology summarization. Ideas may come from thorough investigations into human-made "gold-standard" summaries. Research advances in the field of information retrieval and text summarization, as well as recent research on entity summarization (e.g., [15] [14]) which is closely related to ontology summarization, can also provide inspiration. In particular, machine learning techniques have not been extensively used for ontology summarization.

(p29.3) The available approaches apply extractive techniques to generate the final summary. In the extractive scenario, a subset of the terms and/or axioms from the original input ontology are selected as a summary. Non-extractive or abstractive ontology summarization will be a new direction in this area. In that scenario, the key research question is how to define the output of ontology summarization, e.g., as some kind of high-level aggregate representation of terms and axioms.

(p29.4) There is a lack of evaluation efforts. To the best of our knowledge, experiments presented in the literature are all based on a small number of ontologies. No benchmark for ontology summarization is available so far.

(p29.5) Dozens of software systems, libraries, or APIs for text summarization are available, many of which are open-source. By comparison, it is rare to see any software tool support for summarizing ontologies. In fact, if such a tool or an application aims to directly serve ordinary users, it needs to also address the presentation (e.g., verbalization, visualization) of and the interaction with ontologies, in which some other challenges would emerge.

(p29.6) Last but not least, almost all of the methods we have discussed generate ontology summaries to be presented to human users. Summaries may also facilitate computer processing in certain tasks. It would be interesting to explore applications of this kind.

(p29.7) We have investigated different graph models and measures for ontology summarization. We believe that other directions to generate more reliable ontology summaries exist, and we are trying to address some of them to conclude our survey.

(p29.8) Although many algorithms for the ontology summarization problem have been proposed, empirical results reported in the literature suggest that none of them consistently generates the best ontology summary. In an ideal case, the ontology summarization technique needs to be more flexible in the way that users or applications are able to tune the model in order to generate different summaries based on different requirements or inputs. In other words, dynamic or adaptive ontology summarization can be viewed as an interesting topic to explore.

(p29.9) Defining new measures, either graph-based or not, is another research activity in the context of ontology summarization. Ideas may come from thorough investigations into human-made "gold-standard" summaries. Research advances in the field of information retrieval and text summarization, as well as recent research on entity summarization (e.g., [15] [14]) which is closely related to ontology summarization, can also provide inspiration. In particular, machine learning techniques have not been extensively used for ontology summarization.

(p29.10) The available approaches apply extractive techniques to generate the final summary. In the extractive scenario, a subset of the terms and/or axioms from the original input ontology are selected as a summary. Non-extractive or abstractive ontology summarization will be a new direction in this area. In that scenario, the key research question is how to define the output of ontology summarization, e.g., as some kind of high-level aggregate representation of terms and axioms.

(p29.11) There is a lack of evaluation efforts. To the best of our knowledge, experiments presented in the literature are all based on a small number of ontologies. No benchmark for ontology summarization is available so far.

(p29.12) Dozens of software systems, libraries, or APIs for text summarization are available, many of which are open-source. By comparison, it is rare to see any software tool support for summarizing ontologies. In fact, if such a tool or an application aims to directly serve ordinary users, it needs to also address the presentation (e.g., verbalization, visualization) of and the interaction with ontologies, in which some other challenges would emerge.

(p29.13) Last but not least, almost all of the methods we have discussed generate ontology summaries to be presented to human users. Summaries may also facilitate computer processing in certain tasks. It would be interesting to explore applications of this kind.
