# Local feature extraction based facial emotion recognition: A survey

CorpusID: 218799814 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/baabdf4f6a27d7ab9107eac4ba4a883eb386e14b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/baabdf4f6a27d7ab9107eac4ba4a883eb386e14b)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s1) BRIEF REVIEW OF EXISTING METHODS
(p1.0) The original Local Binary Pattern (LBP) operator proposed by Ojala et al [4] , which consists in coding the pixel-wise information in an image, is a powerful texture analysis descriptor. It aims to search micro-textons in local regions. The value I p of the pixels in a 3×3 grayscale image patch around the central pixel I c are turned into binary values (0 or 1) by comparing them with I c (value of the central pixel). The obtained binary numbers are encoded to characterize a local structure pattern and then the code is transformed into decimal number. Once a LBP code of each pixel is obtained, a histogram is built to represent the texture image. For a 3×3 neighborhood, the definition of the kernel function of LBP operator is given in (cf. Eq (1)), where I p (p ∈ {1, 2, ..., P}) signifies the gray levels of the peripheral pixels, P corresponds to the number of neighboring pixels (P=8) and ϕ(·) is the Heaviside step function (cf. Eq (1)).

(p1.1) Local binary patterns by neighborhoods (nLBPd) operator [5] consists in encoding the relationship between each pair of the peripheral pixels I 0 , I 1 , I 2 , ...,I 7 around the central pixel I c in a 3×3 square neighborhood. The pairs of pixels are compared with sequential neighbors or within neighbors possesing a distance length d. The kernel function of nLBPd code is defined by (cf. Eq. (2)). When d=1, the binary code of the central pixel I c is gotten as below (Eq. (3)):

(p1.2) The procedure of Local Graph Structure (LGS) descriptor introduced by Abusham et al. [6] is to exploit the dominant graph process in order to encode the spatial data for any pixel in the image.

(p1.3) LGS is based on local graph structures in local graph neighborhood. The graph structure of LGS represents more left-handed neighbor pixels than right-handed ones. To overcome this defect, Extended Local Graph Structure (ELGS) operator is proposed [7]. The procedure for ELGS is based on using the LGS texture descriptor to build two descriptions (horizontally and vertically) and then combine them into a global description.
## (s3) EVALUATED STATE-OF-THE-ART LBP VARIANTS
(p3.0) The pioneering LBP work [4] and its success in numerous computer vision problems and applications has inspired the development of great number of new powerful LBP variants. LBP descriptor is adaptable to suit in many different applications requirements. Indeed, after Ojala's work, e.g., Heikkila et al [8], several modifications and extensions of LBP have been developed with the aim to increase its robustness and discriminative power. These extensions and modifications of LBP, developed usually in conjunction with their intended applications (see Table 1), focus on several aspects of the LBP method such as, Quantization to multiple level via thresholding; sampeling local feature vectors and pixel patterns with some neighborhood topology; combining multiple complementary features within LBP-like and with non-LBP descriptors for both images and videos and finally, regrouping and merging patterns to increase distinctiveness. There are several researches reported in the literature that are devoted to surveying LBP and its variants. One can cite: (a) Hadid et al. [42] reviewed 13 LBP variants and provided a comparative analysis on two different problems which are gender and texture classification. (b) The work of Fernandez et al. [43] attempted to build a general framework for texture examination that the authors refer to as histograms of equivalent patterns (HEP). A set of 38 LBP variants and non LBP strategies are executed and experimentally assessed on eleven texture datasets. (c) Huang et al. [44] displayed a survey of LBP variants in the application region of facial image processing.

(p3.1) However, there is no experimental study of the LBP strategies themselves. (d) Nanni et al. [45] examined the performance of LBP based texture descriptors in a fairly specific and narrow application, which consists in classifying cell and tissue images of five datasets. It can be inferred that there is a limited number of state-of-the-art published works which are devoted to survey LBP-like methods in texture and face recognition and in particular facial emotion recognition which is practically nonexistent. Note that, most of these works remain limited in terms of number of LBP-like descriptors reviewed and tested datasets, suffer from lack of recent LBP variants and some of them do not include experimental evaluation. Since no broad assessment has been performed on an incredible number of LBP variations, and considering recent rapid increase in the number of publications on LBP-like descriptors, this paper aims to provide such a comparative study in facial emotion recognition problem and offers a more up-to-date introduction to the area. For that, 46 recent state-of-the-art LBP variants are evaluated and compared over four challenging representative widely-used facial expression databases. The performance of the best texture descriptor on each dataset is also composed to those of state-of-the-art facial emotion recognition systems. Note that for the descriptors, we utilized the original source code if it is freely accessible; otherwise we have built up our own implementation. The evaluated state-of-the-art texture descriptors and their intended applications are summarized in Table 1.
