# Comparison of value of biomarkers in diagnosing lung cancer An overview of systematic reviews protocol

CorpusID: 215719044 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/460095d44a1db9ea09cf2f5f2e9088342f4214a4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/460095d44a1db9ea09cf2f5f2e9088342f4214a4)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Design and registration
(p2.0) This protocol will be reported according to preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P). [25] As a part of our project, this protocol has been registered on international prospective register of systematic review (PROSPERO) (CRD42019125880).

(p2.1) This protocol will be reported according to preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P). [25] As a part of our project, this protocol has been registered on international prospective register of systematic review (PROSPERO) (CRD42019125880).
## (s3) Search strategy
(p3.0) The search strategy has been developed and tested through an iterative process by an experienced medical information specialist in consultation with the review team. [26] A combination of subject terms and keywords was used and make appropriate adjustments of vocabulary and grammar between different databases. We searched PubMed, Embase.com, the Cochrane Library of Systematic Reviews, and Web of Science to identify relevant SRs from inception to February 2019. The search was not restricted by language or publication status. Reference lists of relevant SRs will be searched for potentially eligible studies. Study authors will be contacted for methodological clarifications and provision of missing data. The search strategy of EMBASE was presented in Supplementary 1, http://links.lww.com/MD/ C973.

(p3.1) The search strategy has been developed and tested through an iterative process by an experienced medical information specialist in consultation with the review team. [26] A combination of subject terms and keywords was used and make appropriate adjustments of vocabulary and grammar between different databases. We searched PubMed, Embase.com, the Cochrane Library of Systematic Reviews, and Web of Science to identify relevant SRs from inception to February 2019. The search was not restricted by language or publication status. Reference lists of relevant SRs will be searched for potentially eligible studies. Study authors will be contacted for methodological clarifications and provision of missing data. The search strategy of EMBASE was presented in Supplementary 1, http://links.lww.com/MD/ C973.
## (s7) Assessment of methodological and reporting quality
(p7.0) Assessment of Multiple Systematic Reviews (AMSTAR), a reliable methodological quality assessment tool for SRs of randomized trials, has a good agreement, construct validity, and feasibility. [28][29][30] AMSTAR-2 is a revised revision of the original AMSTAR instrument and can be used to evaluate the quality of SRs based on non-RCTs. [31,32] The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis diagnostic test accuracy (PRISMA-DTA) is an expanded checklist of original PRISMA, which aims to improve the completeness and transparency of reporting of SRs of diagnostic test accuracy studies. [33] Thus, the AMSTAR-2 will be used to assess the methodological quality and the PRISMA-DTA for reporting quality of included SRs. Two review authors will independently assess the quality in each study according to predefined criteria. Disagreements will be resolved by consensus or third-party adjudication if consensus cannot be reached.

(p7.1) 2.7. Data synthesis 2.7.1. Evidence map. We will create a bubble plot according to the biomarkers, methodological and the reporting quality for all included SRs using R 3.4.1 software (version 3.4.1; R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). Each bubble plot will display information in 3 dimensions. The bubble size represents the total number of reviews or the number of primary studies included in the SRs. The x-axis will represent the total number of participants included in each SR or the methodological quality. The y-axis will represent the biomarkers or the reporting quality of each SR. Pairwise meta-analysis. Pairwise meta-analysis will be performed for pooled sensitivity, specificity, DOR, positive likelihood ratio, negative likelihood ratio using the Mantel-Haenszel statistical method with the random-effects model with STATA (13.0; Stata Corporation, College Station, TX). The heterogeneity between each study will be estimated using the P value and the I 2 statistic. The values of 25%, 50%, and 75% for the I 2 will be indicative of low, moderate, and high statistical heterogeneity, respectively. [34] 2.7.3. Adjusted indirect comparisons. We will calculate relative diagnostic outcomes between index tests including relative sensitivity, relative specificity, and relative DOR. Then, we will conduct indirect comparisons using relative diagnostic outcomes. 

(p7.2) Assessment of Multiple Systematic Reviews (AMSTAR), a reliable methodological quality assessment tool for SRs of randomized trials, has a good agreement, construct validity, and feasibility. [28][29][30] AMSTAR-2 is a revised revision of the original AMSTAR instrument and can be used to evaluate the quality of SRs based on non-RCTs. [31,32] The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis diagnostic test accuracy (PRISMA-DTA) is an expanded checklist of original PRISMA, which aims to improve the completeness and transparency of reporting of SRs of diagnostic test accuracy studies. [33] Thus, the AMSTAR-2 will be used to assess the methodological quality and the PRISMA-DTA for reporting quality of included SRs. Two review authors will independently assess the quality in each study according to predefined criteria. Disagreements will be resolved by consensus or third-party adjudication if consensus cannot be reached.

(p7.3) 2.7. Data synthesis 2.7.1. Evidence map. We will create a bubble plot according to the biomarkers, methodological and the reporting quality for all included SRs using R 3.4.1 software (version 3.4.1; R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). Each bubble plot will display information in 3 dimensions. The bubble size represents the total number of reviews or the number of primary studies included in the SRs. The x-axis will represent the total number of participants included in each SR or the methodological quality. The y-axis will represent the biomarkers or the reporting quality of each SR. Pairwise meta-analysis. Pairwise meta-analysis will be performed for pooled sensitivity, specificity, DOR, positive likelihood ratio, negative likelihood ratio using the Mantel-Haenszel statistical method with the random-effects model with STATA (13.0; Stata Corporation, College Station, TX). The heterogeneity between each study will be estimated using the P value and the I 2 statistic. The values of 25%, 50%, and 75% for the I 2 will be indicative of low, moderate, and high statistical heterogeneity, respectively. [34] 2.7.3. Adjusted indirect comparisons. We will calculate relative diagnostic outcomes between index tests including relative sensitivity, relative specificity, and relative DOR. Then, we will conduct indirect comparisons using relative diagnostic outcomes. 
## (s11) Design and registration
(p11.0) This protocol will be reported according to preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P). [25] As a part of our project, this protocol has been registered on international prospective register of systematic review (PROSPERO) (CRD42019125880).

(p11.1) This protocol will be reported according to preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P). [25] As a part of our project, this protocol has been registered on international prospective register of systematic review (PROSPERO) (CRD42019125880).
## (s12) Search strategy
(p12.0) The search strategy has been developed and tested through an iterative process by an experienced medical information specialist in consultation with the review team. [26] A combination of subject terms and keywords was used and make appropriate adjustments of vocabulary and grammar between different databases. We searched PubMed, Embase.com, the Cochrane Library of Systematic Reviews, and Web of Science to identify relevant SRs from inception to February 2019. The search was not restricted by language or publication status. Reference lists of relevant SRs will be searched for potentially eligible studies. Study authors will be contacted for methodological clarifications and provision of missing data. The search strategy of EMBASE was presented in Supplementary 1, http://links.lww.com/MD/ C973.

(p12.1) The search strategy has been developed and tested through an iterative process by an experienced medical information specialist in consultation with the review team. [26] A combination of subject terms and keywords was used and make appropriate adjustments of vocabulary and grammar between different databases. We searched PubMed, Embase.com, the Cochrane Library of Systematic Reviews, and Web of Science to identify relevant SRs from inception to February 2019. The search was not restricted by language or publication status. Reference lists of relevant SRs will be searched for potentially eligible studies. Study authors will be contacted for methodological clarifications and provision of missing data. The search strategy of EMBASE was presented in Supplementary 1, http://links.lww.com/MD/ C973.
## (s16) Assessment of methodological and reporting quality
(p16.0) Assessment of Multiple Systematic Reviews (AMSTAR), a reliable methodological quality assessment tool for SRs of randomized trials, has a good agreement, construct validity, and feasibility. [28][29][30] AMSTAR-2 is a revised revision of the original AMSTAR instrument and can be used to evaluate the quality of SRs based on non-RCTs. [31,32] The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis diagnostic test accuracy (PRISMA-DTA) is an expanded checklist of original PRISMA, which aims to improve the completeness and transparency of reporting of SRs of diagnostic test accuracy studies. [33] Thus, the AMSTAR-2 will be used to assess the methodological quality and the PRISMA-DTA for reporting quality of included SRs. Two review authors will independently assess the quality in each study according to predefined criteria. Disagreements will be resolved by consensus or third-party adjudication if consensus cannot be reached.

(p16.1) 2.7. Data synthesis 2.7.1. Evidence map. We will create a bubble plot according to the biomarkers, methodological and the reporting quality for all included SRs using R 3.4.1 software (version 3.4.1; R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). Each bubble plot will display information in 3 dimensions. The bubble size represents the total number of reviews or the number of primary studies included in the SRs. The x-axis will represent the total number of participants included in each SR or the methodological quality. The y-axis will represent the biomarkers or the reporting quality of each SR. Pairwise meta-analysis. Pairwise meta-analysis will be performed for pooled sensitivity, specificity, DOR, positive likelihood ratio, negative likelihood ratio using the Mantel-Haenszel statistical method with the random-effects model with STATA (13.0; Stata Corporation, College Station, TX). The heterogeneity between each study will be estimated using the P value and the I 2 statistic. The values of 25%, 50%, and 75% for the I 2 will be indicative of low, moderate, and high statistical heterogeneity, respectively. [34] 2.7.3. Adjusted indirect comparisons. We will calculate relative diagnostic outcomes between index tests including relative sensitivity, relative specificity, and relative DOR. Then, we will conduct indirect comparisons using relative diagnostic outcomes. 

(p16.2) Assessment of Multiple Systematic Reviews (AMSTAR), a reliable methodological quality assessment tool for SRs of randomized trials, has a good agreement, construct validity, and feasibility. [28][29][30] AMSTAR-2 is a revised revision of the original AMSTAR instrument and can be used to evaluate the quality of SRs based on non-RCTs. [31,32] The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis diagnostic test accuracy (PRISMA-DTA) is an expanded checklist of original PRISMA, which aims to improve the completeness and transparency of reporting of SRs of diagnostic test accuracy studies. [33] Thus, the AMSTAR-2 will be used to assess the methodological quality and the PRISMA-DTA for reporting quality of included SRs. Two review authors will independently assess the quality in each study according to predefined criteria. Disagreements will be resolved by consensus or third-party adjudication if consensus cannot be reached.

(p16.3) 2.7. Data synthesis 2.7.1. Evidence map. We will create a bubble plot according to the biomarkers, methodological and the reporting quality for all included SRs using R 3.4.1 software (version 3.4.1; R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). Each bubble plot will display information in 3 dimensions. The bubble size represents the total number of reviews or the number of primary studies included in the SRs. The x-axis will represent the total number of participants included in each SR or the methodological quality. The y-axis will represent the biomarkers or the reporting quality of each SR. Pairwise meta-analysis. Pairwise meta-analysis will be performed for pooled sensitivity, specificity, DOR, positive likelihood ratio, negative likelihood ratio using the Mantel-Haenszel statistical method with the random-effects model with STATA (13.0; Stata Corporation, College Station, TX). The heterogeneity between each study will be estimated using the P value and the I 2 statistic. The values of 25%, 50%, and 75% for the I 2 will be indicative of low, moderate, and high statistical heterogeneity, respectively. [34] 2.7.3. Adjusted indirect comparisons. We will calculate relative diagnostic outcomes between index tests including relative sensitivity, relative specificity, and relative DOR. Then, we will conduct indirect comparisons using relative diagnostic outcomes. 
