# A Review on Electrical Characteristics of Nanofluid based Transformer Oil

CorpusID: 210758736 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/10d37f048840e32d344c3b40ee65b6700035b6b3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/10d37f048840e32d344c3b40ee65b6700035b6b3)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s4) AC Dielectric Strength
(p4.0) The dielectric strength of SiO 2 based mineral oil under different ppm of moisture was investigated with different volume fraction of nanoparticles and the reported results are shown in Figure 4 16 . Due to hydrophilic nature, the surface of silicone dioxide can bind the water droplets effectively and thus reduces the effective electrical conduction in liquid. This will help in increasing the AC dielectric strength of prepared nanofluid by dispersing SiO 2 NPs in mineral oil.
## (s5) DC Breakdown Strength
(p5.0) The dielectric strength of TiO 2 dispersed transformer oil under high voltage DC is examined by 23 . The addition of semiconductive nanoparticles can improve 28% value of negative DC breakdown strength. However, the positive DC breakdown voltage was lower than the host oil. Table 3 shows the obtained values during the investigations carried out by them 23 .

(p5.1) In 24 have observed that the dispersed semiconducting NPs can provide the augmentation to the insulation strength under DC voltage due to its trapping and de-trapping nature. The augmentation of dc dielectric strength of nanofluid was 1.27 times more than the host oil. Figure 13 shows the results of investigation conducted by researchers for the influence of dispersing Fe 3 O 4 nanoparticles as a function of gap length 25 . The formation of bubbles due to localized heating and the injection of field-emitted electrons with and without magnetic field can reduce DC breakdown voltage at 2% concentration. Figure 14 represents the influence of nanoparticle's volume fraction on DC breakdown voltage strength of vegetable oil based nanofluid examined by 52 . Due to the polarization of the nanoparticles under applied DC field, the electrons produced by the ionization will trapped by the formulated electrical charge around the surface of NPs and thus helps in reducing the probability of ionization to prevent the breakdown.   To investigate the DC dielectric strength 59 have prepared the fluid by dispersing the single type and multiple type nanoparticles in transformer oil. They noticed that the breakdown strength is decreasing when the Fe 2 NiO 4 nanoparticle is dispersed along with CdS in transformer oil. Increase in nanoparticles concentration would result in reducing the separation between two particles and increase the chance of agglomeration. These clusters lead to distort the electric field extensively and additionally reduce the electron trap surface.

(p5.2) In 61 have inspected the DC strength of vegetable oil based nanofluid prepared by dispersing Boron Nitride (BN) nanoparticles at different volume size as a function of heat range. Figure 15 shows the results obtained by them.

(p5.3) The breakdown voltage is enhanced due to removal of moisture content from the liquid with rise in heat rate. The dispersion of BN nanoparticles at high concentration hinders the progression of dielectric breakdown.  Tables 4 and 5 shows the outcomes for failure of pure oil and TiO 2 based nanofluid studied by applying impulse voltage with positive and negative polarity 26 .
## (s6) Impulse Breakdown Strength
(p6.0) The dispersion of semiconductive nanoparticles effectively changes the scattering of space charge caused     by shallow traps and thus modifies the appearances of streamer transmission and interruption. At the head of streamer during positive polarity, the electrical field is distorted extensively due to induced negative charges that delay the propagation of streamer whereas it speeds up when negative impulse is applied. Wang et al. 27 deliberated the effect of three dissimilar nanoparticles on impulse breakdown strength at different concentrations. Figures 16 and 17 shows the result of failure at applied impulse voltage as a function of size percentage for three dissimilar nanoparticles.

(p6.1) The dielectric strength improves due to the alteration of space charge activity until the critical value of concentration is achieved. The nanoparticles with greater volume in transformer oil can lead to the evolution of the clusters and hence diminish the breakdown voltage.

(p6.2) The 11.2% augmentation in impulse strength of Fe 3 O 4 modified transformer oil was examined by Yang et al. 32 . The electrons crossing the gap at fast velocity were trapped and turned into slow running electrons that hinder the ionization process and thus improve the impulse strength.

(p6.3) The inspection on electrical strength of h-BN nanoparticle based vegetable nanofluid under application of an artificial lightning impulse as per the methodology of IEC 60897 is reported by 52 . Figure 18 shows the results obtained for impulse BDV at positive and negative polarity of applied impulse wave for different densities of nanoparticles.

(p6.4) The impulse breakdown voltage strength of pure vegetable oil can be improved by dispersing the nanoparticles in the host fluid. They noticed 22.0% and 28.8% improvement in positive and negative impulse values respectively. Furthermore, the value of negative impulse was examined lower than the value obtained during application of positive impulse. The difference observed due to reversal of polarity was explained on basis of space charge behavior.

(p6.5) Zhou et al. 64 have demonstrated the test results of conducted impulse voltage test on transformer oil modified by suspending Fe 3 O 4 , TiO 2 and Al 2 O 3 nanoparticles. The dispersed nano-structured particles can modify the beginning and transmission processes of positive streamers in transformer oil.
## (s7) Partial Discharge Inception Voltage (PDIV)
(p7.0) PDIV characteristics before and after aging of pure oil and equivalent nanofluids was studied by 22 . Before aging, the ferrofluid does not modify the PDIV characteristic significantly as compared to tin oxide and SiO 2 based nanofluids. For both AC and DC voltages, silicone dioxide based nanofluids shows the improvement. Additionally, compared to the mineral oil and other nanofluids, aged SiO 2 shows the better response. The enhancement shown by silicon dioxide based nanofluid is due to its hydrophilic property.

(p7.1) The partial discharge test to examine the facts of nanoparticles on inception of partial discharges had been executed 23 . Table 7 shows the results obtained after performing partial discharge test. The positive results are obtained for partial discharge inception voltage and discharge magnitude. The addition of semiconducting nanoparticles diminishes the probabilities of incidence of partial discharge initiation.

(p7.2) The trapping and de-trapping nature of semiconducting nanoparticles improves the PDIV characteristics for both new and aged TiO 2 based nanofluid 24 . The 1.12% enhancement is achieved as compared to mineral oil.

(p7.3) Jin et al. 28 has studied the incomplete discharge performance of fluid produced by disseminating 0.01% of fullerene and silica nanoparticles. Under positive DC voltage, twenty percent improvement was noticed in PDIV value for silica based transformer oil compared to its pure state. Furthermore, the discharge magnitudes for silica and fullerene nanofluid were scaled down to 63% and 33% respectively. The reaction of the nanoparticle's surface with acid in mineral oil leads less effect on partial discharge behavior.

(p7.4) In 75 have developed the magnetite-based nanofluid to investigate partial discharge inception voltage characteristic. The lower concentration of nanoparticles could enhance PDIV characteristic as compared to carrier oil and at higher concentration. The conductive nanoparticles attract the electrons emitted due to ionization and turns into negative ions to quench the avalanche.

(p7.5) In 76 have made an effort to develop the natural ester based nanofluid by dispersing TiO 2 nanoparticles for examining the partial discharge inception performance under applied ac voltages. The negligible enhancement in PDIV of nanofluid has noticed.
## (s8) Critical Characteristics
(p8.0) Critical characteristics include the electrical conductivity, permittivity, dissipation factor, resistivity, flash point and fire point. Several researchers have contributed to identify the effect of nanoparticles on such unavoidable parameters. In 29 have investigated the influence of semi conductive Cadmium Sulfide (CdS) quantum dots on relative permittivity and dissipation factor by preparing the fluid at various concentrations. Figures 23 and 24   shows the effect of nanoparticles' application on dielectric constant and tan delta of modified host oil respectively. The slight increment in dielectric constant of nanofluid was because of the contribution to the net amount of dipoles in mineral oil. In general, due to the defects/ impurities in the insulations during its development, it always possesses the two different kinds of permittivities i.e. real permittivity and imaginary permittivity.

(p8.1) The electrostatic forces exerted between the electrons and positive ions are greatly influenced by real part of permittivity whereas the dissipation factor/dielectric losses depend on imaginary part of permittivity. At small concentrations of nanoparticles, the real part of permittivity was enhanced but at concentration, more than the optimum value increases the electrical conductivity due to rise in its surface area that leads to increase in imaginary permittivity and hence dielectric losses.

(p8.2) In 30 have carried out the research on mixture of MgMnNi NPs and transformer oil to observe the performance of electrical conductivity at diverse volume percentage of nanoparticles. Figure 25 shows the dependency of electrical conductivity on volume fraction nanoparticles. They observed the linear increase in electrical conductivity with increase in concentrations.
## (s9) Modification Mechanisms
(p9.0) The mechanisms by which the nanoparticles can disturb the electrical properties of host oil are still not fully revealed. In 19 have proposed a double layer model to certify the strengthening of the electrical insulation properties     Figure 29 shows the steric stabilization and role of surfactant.

(p9.1) If the surfactant is covered with low surfactant, the agglomeration of nanoparticles may occur due to insufficient coating which do not cover the particle fully and hence unable to oppose the wan der waal attraction force which tend to reduce the electrical performance of the nanofluids developed for insulation purpose.

(p9.2) On the other hand, with excess amount of surfactant, adsorption sites on nanoparticle surface will be rare. Hence, surfactant will form a double chain around the surface of nanoparticles, resulting in a reverse effect

(p9.3) The electrostatic stabilization is achieved by charging the particles with the same polarity as shown in Figure  30. In this model a layer of oppositely charged ions, called counter ions or coions, counter balances the charges. The coions exist in two distinct layers. The inner layer stuck to the nanoparticle surface called stern layer, which is characterized by high concentration of coions. The other layer extends from the stern layer to the zero charging region of the oil called the diffuse layer.   In 26 have proposed a mechanism to explain the significant change happened in the streamer transmission due to modification in space charge scattering when TiO 2 nanoparticles were dispersed in transformer oil.

(p9.4) The ionization probability reduces due to trapping and de-trapping charge transportation in oil as the TiO 2 nanoparticles upturns the shallow trap density in nanofluid and thus builds up the negative ions which modifies the electric field at the head of the streamer transmitting towards the ground electrode.

(p9.5) For positive polarity as shown in Figure 31(a), the electric field at the streamer tip is enhanced while at ground electrode it is weakened. Thus, it is tough for positive streamers in nanofluid to expand which results in increase in positive breakdown voltage. Contradictory, for negative polarity as shown in Figure 31(b), the electric field at the negative streamer tip is weakened as compared to ground electrode. As an effect, the streamers will propagate to the ground electrode at high velocity.

(p9.6) In 29 proposed that the quantum dots of smaller size can increases the surface area and allows more trapping to the electrons that helps in improvement of dielectric properties. The presence of appropriate content of surfactant can improve the morphology of nanoparticles and hinder the physical agglomeration of them 31 -32 projected a model based on space charge inhibition on improvement of dielectric strength. Figure   32 shows the space charge diffusion characteristics in modified transformer oil. The adsorption of free charge by nanoparticles could improve the insulation strength by (1) delaying electron's movement, (2) blocking charge injection in transformer oil, (3) sinking the space charge density and (4) augmenting the uniformity of the electric field.
