# Solid-State Transformers in Locomotives Fed through AC Lines: A Review and Future Developments

CorpusID: 211105412 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/17905555dceac6bb23495d3af9a80b9d385ec8f3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/17905555dceac6bb23495d3af9a80b9d385ec8f3)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s7) Review of Main Conversion Architectures
(p7.0) With the availability of 3.3 kV high-power IGBTs (Insular Gate Bipolar Transistor), many studies were carried out on railway traction at the end of the '90s [10,11], proposing innovative architectures, modular and based on the use of high performance IGBTs. These studies consisted of a four quadrant multilevel converter in a cascade connection of H-bridges, as 1st stage to interface with the 15 kV, 16 2/3 Hz overhead line voltage. As 2nd and 3rd stage, a reversible DC/DC converter composed of a DC/AC with H-bridge, a medium frequency transformer and a AC/DC with H-bridge was proposed. It was hypothesized the use of a series-resonant circuit in the AC-link, in order to reach sufficiently high frequency for transformer operation. Further studies were carried out by the same researchers regarding an architecture which could work both at 15 kV, 16 2/3 Hz and 3 kV DC [69].

(p7.1) Regarding IGBT peak voltage and the required number of stages, it is necessary to observe that the maximum admitted voltage is 29 kV RMS for 25 kV/50 Hz systems and 18 kV RMS for 15 kV/16 2/3 Hz systems. Therefore, the required number of stages is reported in Table 1. 
## (s9) Bombardier Transportation "Medium Frequency Topology"
(p9.0) In 2007 Bombardier Transportation presented a laboratory prototype called "Medium Frequency Topology" [14], which exploits the principle shown in [10,11] and which is designed for 15 kV, 16 2/3 Hz. PET main features are reported in Table 3, whereas PET scheme is shown in Figure  6. Analogously to the eTransformer, it is a 3SC and it is made of eight identical modules cascade connected. Differently from eTransformer, where only one medium frequency transformer is used, in Medium Frequency Topology a transformer is used for each module and the outputs of the modules (LV DC-link) are parallel connected. The 1st stage is a AC/DC full H-bridge, the 2nd stage a full H-bridge DC/AC s.w. (differently from eTransformer that has an half-bridge) and the 3rd stage is again a full H-bridge AC s.w./DC. If one of the modules fails, the Medium Frequency Topology can work with a reduction of power of 1/8; indeed it uses 6.5 kV IGBTs for the 1st stage and therefore 7 modules are sufficient for 15 kV line voltage. The transformers are just 18 kg each and they have 1:1 winding ratio. The main disadvantage of this PET is that a great number of IGBTs, and of course of auxiliary devices, is needed. A reduction of number of components can be performed using half Hbridges, as shown in next solutions.  
## (s10) ABB First Converter Prototype
(p10.0) In 2007 ABB presented its first laboratory prototype [15], whose main features are reported in Table 4 and whose scheme is shown in Figure 7. Differently from the abovementioned PETs, this prototype is a 2SC. It uses all 3.3 kV, 400 A IGBTs in 16 modules, therefore double number of modules, compared to previous PETs, is needed since it uses 3.3 kV IGBTs. A medium frequency transformer with 1:1 ratio is used for each module. The transformer frequency is quite low (400 Hz), therefore it is not possible to exploit a significant transformer size reduction. For this reason, dimensions related to this solution are greater than those of a traditional architecture (line frequency transformer + 4QCs). Regarding the efficiency, even if at medium and high loads the efficiency of the prototype is 3% higher than that of a traditional transformer, at low loads the efficiency is even lower. In additional to these disadvantages, this prototype involves the use of 192 IGBTs. For these reasons it is outdated.  
## (s14) ABB Power Electronic Traction Transformer
(p14.0) ABB PETT (Figure 8) uses two half H-bridges for 2nd and 3rd stage and the LLC resonant circuit allows turn-on ZVS for 2nd stage IGBTs and ZCS turn-on for 3rd stage diodes; 2nd stage turn-off is quasi-ZCS and can be obtained with an opportune choice of component parameters and imposing a very low current during the turn-off (Iturn_off). This current is related to transformer magnetizing current and depends on transformer magnetizing inductance, on switching frequency and on DClink voltage, but is independent from converter load. Therefore, this resonant scheme considers by default switching losses, caused by Iturn_off, which is different from zero (despite it is low and independent from the load) on the input half-bridge IGBTs. The turn-off losses are therefore constant and load-independent, but predominant in comparison to conduction losses; for this reason it is necessary to minimize them. Even if Iturn_off causes turn-off switching losses, it allows IGBT ZVS turnon, therefore an excessive reduction of Iturn_off can cause undesired turn-on switching losses. Moreover, IGBT turn-off losses are related not only to Iturn_off, but they strongly depend also on IGBT dynamic characteristics. Moreover, turn-on ZVS condition is strongly related to dead time, which can be quite high, tens of microseconds, for high power IGBTs. From these considerations, one can notice that switching losses maximum reduction can be achieved with an accurate choice of converter parameters and through the optimization of semiconductor dynamic behavior, as observed before also for Bombardier converter.

(p14.1) In [20], an accurate description of an experimental test regarding the interaction between semiconductor properties and circuit properties is reported. The optimization of IGBT physical structure is investigated, with the redesigning of anodic structure, which has an effect on charge carriers in silicon thickness and can therefore modify the behavior during the switching, potentially improving switching phenomenon and reducing the losses. The aim of the study is to find a structure that could reduce switching losses at high switching frequency (higher than 1 kHz) but that could, at the same time, avoid conduction losses increase. Indeed, previous studies using electron irradiation show a reduction of switching losses but at the cost of conduction losses increase.

(p14.2) ABB studies have been performed on a 225 kW converter. The DC/DC converter has 3.6 kV input voltage and 1.5 kV output voltage; the 225 kW transformer has 2.4:1 winding ratio. On the input halfbridge 6.5 kV-400 A IGBTs are used, whereas 3.3 kV-800 A IGBTs are used for the output half-bridge. Switching frequency is 1.8 kHz, which is just under the resonance frequency of 2 kHz. With this choice of fs and f0, the relation between input and output voltage depends only on transformer winding ratio. For this reason, also this converter works in open loop.
## (s30) •
(p30.0) High number of components. Using 3.3 kV switches and 940 µF-1900 V capacitors, with 12 submodules per each of the four arms, 192 switches (IGBT plus diode) and 48 capacitors are needed [75,76]. Using 6.5 kV IGBTs, 7 submodules can be sufficient thus 112 switches and 28 capacitors can be used, which is still a high number of devices. To this number of devices, components of 4QC should be added, thus the MMC solution has more components than the other solutions.
## (s34) Soft-Switching MMC: Description and Waveform Simulation
(p34.0) One of the main limitations in the use of MMC for railway application is connected to its switching frequency. In order to reduce transformer volume and weight, it should be necessary to have at least a frequency of 7-8 kHz and significant advantages will be obtained with a frequency of 10-20 kHz. Even if the MMC is quite refined and exploit optimally the switching frequency, the features of high power switches (some kV and hundreds of A) limits the MMC frequency at 1-2 kHz. In the first studies [13,76] the switching frequency was 4 kHz for the two-voltage version (18 submodules per arm), with a submodule medium frequency of 350 Hz and an output voltage switching at 2 kHz; 4 kHz switching frequency for the one-voltage version (12 submodules per arm), with an output voltage switching at 1 kHz.

(p34.1) The MMC is intrinsically hard-switching but, being composed by identical submodules, there could be the possibility of increasing the switching frequency using a soft-switching topology [42,54] in the H-bridge; the aim of the study is to investigate this aspect. One has to note that if the switching frequency of the single submodule increases, once the desired output frequency is fixed, the number of submodules can decrease, and therefore the number of devices.

(p34.2) Among the various soft-switching solutions, it is necessary to identify the most suitable architecture for the application in the MMC concept and, in particular, to the use in railway rolling stock. Typically, resonant circuits introduce some problems that have to be taken into account:
