# micromachines Molecule Sensitive Optical Imaging and Monitoring Techniques-A Review of Applications in Micro-Process Engineering

CorpusID: 214749827 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/881fe6678a8c1d022f597241c330063d598e1b66](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/881fe6678a8c1d022f597241c330063d598e1b66)

Fields: Engineering, Physics, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s13) NIR Image Analysis
(p13.0) Analogous to image analysis in the UV/VIS range, charge-coupled device (CCD) cameras are used, and wavelength selectivity with optical filters is utilized either on the emitter or on the detection side. Cameras on silicon-based chips have a limited spectral range and are not sensitive in the NIR wavelength region. Instead, cameras based on indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs) are used, and these are sensitive in the 900-1600 nm range. Exact wavelength ranges may vary depending on the exact InGaAs detector used. In combination with NIR LEDs, acquiring images with wavelength-selected brightness levels according to the absorption bands of fluids for locally-fluctuating concentrations is possible. Acquiring reference images without the presence of any absorbing substances is important. The computer-based optimization of images, like anti-shading methods, can be used to compensate for inhomogeneous illumination problems. Advantage of NIR LED illumination as an alternative to broadband illumination and the use of sequentially used filters include the simplicity of its design and its fast change of wavelengths. Without special equipment, image sequences of 25 full frames/s are achievable, and, thus, moderately fast changing processes are accessible for detection. With individual wavelengths, pulses down to microseconds can also be captured [21]. By mathematically linking the remission at the surface with the absorption of the investigated fluids, extinction data and the resulting layer thickness distributions can be visualized. In Figure 7, you can see the measurement data of water strands.

(p13.1) Micromachines 2020, 11, x 9 of 16 side. Cameras on silicon-based chips have a limited spectral range and are not sensitive in the NIR wavelength region. Instead, cameras based on indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs) are used, and these are sensitive in the 900-1600 nm range. Exact wavelength ranges may vary depending on the exact InGaAs detector used. In combination with NIR LEDs, acquiring images with wavelength-selected brightness levels according to the absorption bands of fluids for locally-fluctuating concentrations is possible. Acquiring reference images without the presence of any absorbing substances is important. The computer-based optimization of images, like anti-shading methods, can be used to compensate for inhomogeneous illumination problems. Advantage of NIR LED illumination as an alternative to broadband illumination and the use of sequentially used filters include the simplicity of its design and its fast change of wavelengths. Without special equipment, image sequences of 25 full frames/s are achievable, and, thus, moderately fast changing processes are accessible for detection. With individual wavelengths, pulses down to microseconds can also be captured [21]. By mathematically linking the remission at the surface with the absorption of the investigated fluids, extinction data and the resulting layer thickness distributions can be visualized. In Figure 7, you can see the measurement data of water strands. A uniform illumination of the examined surface is important for later measurements, especially with curved surfaces (e.g., pipes). Here, the refractive index difference to the gas space causes light deflection, which can lead to the significant misinterpretation of the measurement signals. In the present case, the deflections were already significantly suppressed. This reduction is possible by distributing the light directions via a special dome illumination. The work so far has concentrated on the application of film thickness measurements. In addition, reactive processes, where both the fluid concentration and the film thickness distribution changes, are to be measured [21].
## (s16) Raman Scanning Image Analysis
(p16.0) As explained above, Raman spectroscopy requires high laser power and long exposure times. With precisely focused and installed Raman probe-heads ( Figure 9) 2D Raman scanning is possible [24]. Even 3D Raman scanning seems to be achievable. Figure 9. Raman scanning probe with long working distance mounted on a 3D-displaceable table [24]. 
## (s17) Raman Scanning Image Analysis
(p17.0) As explained above, Raman spectroscopy requires high laser power and long exposure times. With precisely focused and installed Raman probe-heads ( Figure 9) 2D Raman scanning is possible [24]. Even 3D Raman scanning seems to be achievable.
## (s18) Raman Scanning Image Analysis
(p18.0) As explained above, Raman spectroscopy requires high laser power and long exposure times. With precisely focused and installed Raman probe-heads ( Figure 9) 2D Raman scanning is possible [24]. Even 3D Raman scanning seems to be achievable. Figure 9. Raman scanning probe with long working distance mounted on a 3D-displaceable table [24]. In the measurements conducted so far, this method has made it possible to visualize 2D Raman scans in fluids for the molecular quantification of the concentration profiles in microchannels and to perform the fundamental investigation of the mixing processes of different accessible fluids, as shown in Figure 10 [24].
