# acoustics Acoustic Performance-Based Design: A Brief Overview of the Opportunities and Limits in Current Practice

CorpusID: 219053780 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19fde20236f48e324448a161459dc23bc29fae3d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19fde20236f48e324448a161459dc23bc29fae3d)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s1) Performance-Based Design
(p1.0) Architectural problems generally combine a great multitude of objectives, which pertain to different fields, such as cultural, aesthetic, economic, structural and energetic ones. As these objectives often contrast with each other, it is crucial for the design team to find the most favorable solution in overall terms.

(p1.1) According to the classification proposed by Shi [1], architectural objectives can be divided into three categories: structural performance, performance of the physical environment-both of which can be quantified-and aesthetic and cultural performance, which relates to unquantifiable aspects. Digital simulations and measurements on scale-models allow for the evaluation of the quantifiable performances of the design proposals prior to their construction. In common practice, such tools are generally used in late design phases to verify the adherence to the performance requirements prescribed in codes, standards and laws, and evaluate the need for late design adjustments [2][3][4].

(p1.2) However, in the recent years, another approach has gained popularity, according to which performance simulations are used to drive the design process. This approach is known as performance-based design (PBD): pertinent information on one or more performance aspects is gathered since early design phases, and the proposals are iteratively optimized based on the performance feedbacks. The design process follows the loop of generation-evaluation-modification, until a solution that meets the performance goal is achieved. While not discouraging the inclusion of unquantifiable goals and aesthetical considerations, pertinent information on quantifiable performances can greatly support decision-making processes in the conceptual design stages.
## (s2) Performance-Based Design in Acoustics
(p2.0) The implementation of PBD in the architectural acoustics field would allow the designer to better combine acoustic performance objectives with architectural goals. Architectural design and acoustic performances are strictly linked: the emitted sound is altered by the architectural space within which it is deployed, due to sound reflection, absorption and diffusion phenomena occurring over its surfaces. In common practice, however, acoustic concerns are mainly restricted to the design of spaces intended for artistic performances, such as music venues and theatres. In such spaces, the architectural environment is meant to support the sound generated by the artists, and acoustic design is critical for both audience and performers [12].
## (s16) Architecture and APBD
(p16.0) The collection of case studies shows a great degree of variation with respect to their functions and profiles: from world-renowned concert halls to more ordinary architectures, research projects and artistic installations.

(p16.1) Most of case studies are major projects, such as concert halls venues, developed by renowned architectural firms and acoustic consulting groups, or were developed as research projects. In the first case, the resources and specialized expertise that are often available to major architectural firms, along with the reliance on external consultants, enable an innovative approach such as APBD to be effectively applied. However, such resources are generally not available in more ordinary projects, especially when the architectural firms involved have no technical expertise on parametric modeling, acoustics and programming, as it is often the case. This result suggests that this procedure requires specialized expertise and resources, which are not commonly available for ordinary architectural projects.

(p16.2) Most projects are spaces meant to host music performance (16 projects out of 19), while only a small fraction of the projects is developed for other purposes (e.g., artistic installation, meeting room and multipurpose space). This suggest that the application of APBD is in line with the general trend of including acoustic concerns mainly in the development of spaces intended for music performances. However, certain projects, such as FabPod, Resonant Chamber and the Courtyard Enclosure of the Smithsonian Institution, shows the application of APBD for spaces intended for a wider variety of purposes.

(p16.3) Across the collection, APBD has been applied to either major or minor architectural features of the design, ranging from reflectors and pattern textures in concert halls, to the overall shape of smaller architectures, such as acoustic shells or artistic installations. In the design of concert halls, the main structure of the venue is generally based on well-known typologies (e.g., shoe-box, vineyard, etc.), while APBD is applied to reflective surfaces or diffusive pattern. In smaller intervention, such as pavilion and acoustic shells, APBD has been applied also to entirely shape the structures, often combining other goals, such as fabrication criteria. This highlights that PBD approach is often paired with a more conventional approach in large projects to better combine the large number of requirements, which need to be considered.
