# The Significance of Scalp Involvement in Pemphigus: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 21717811 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dcaca82bb7c255ee9fc3055e6f0f97e83f2d7cfb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dcaca82bb7c255ee9fc3055e6f0f97e83f2d7cfb)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Pemphigus is a group of autoimmune bullous diseases, in which anti-desmoglein autoantibodies induce the loss of keratinocyte adhesion, leading to blister formation. Two main types of pemphigus may be distinguished: pemphigus vulgaris (PV) and pemphigus foliaceus (PF). Desmoglein 3 is considered to be the main autoantigen in pemphigus vulgaris. Additionally, anti-desmoglein 1 autoantibodies may be detected in more than half of patients with pemphigus vulgaris [1]. Desmoglein 1 is the main autoantigen of pemphigus foliaceus. Mucosal lesions with or without skin lesions are observed in pemphigus vulgaris, whereas in pemphigus foliaceus only cutaneous involvement is observed. The diagnosis of pemphigus is based on the clinical picture, direct and indirect immunofluorescence, and histopathology as well as anti-desmoglein 1 and 3 enzyme-linked immunoassay.
## (s4) Clinical Manifestations of Scalp Involvement in Pemphigus.
(p4.0) In the course of pemphigus vulgaris and pemphigus foliaceus scalp lesions manifest as erosions and crusted or scaly plaques (Figures 2 and 3). Cases of pemphigus vegetans, a variant of pemphigus vulgaris, with lesions localized on the scalp were also described [15][16][17][18]. In five cases scalp lesions constituted an isolated manifestation of pemphigus vegetans [15][16][17][18]. Unilesional pemphigus vulgaris on the scalp was also described in two cases. In both patients the development of the lesions followed a surgical intervention, in one of the patients a cochlear implantation [19] and a hair transplant in the other [20]. It was hypothesized that trauma may facilitate the overpresentation of epidermal antigens by disturbing the dermoepidermal junction [21]. Scalp erosions limited to the scalp were also reported in the course of pemphigus foliaceus [22,23]. According to our literature search, no cases of pemphigus erythematosus limited to the scalp were reported to date.

(p4.1) Hair Loss in Pemphigus. Scalp lesions in pemphigus may lead to alopecia. Nonscarring alopecia was reported to be an unusual manifestation of scalp pemphigus [24]. Veraitch et al. described 5 patients with pemphigus vulgaris and progressive hair loss with alopecic patches [5]. In this study, apart from characteristic histopathological features of pemphigus, bacterial culture revealed the presence of Staphylococcus epidermidis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Klebsiella pneumoniae. The authors suggested that the combination of anti-desmoglein autoantibody-mediated acantholysis with a concomitant infection may cause the weakening of the hair follicle anchorage and result in alopecia [5]. Hadayer et al. reported a case of a patient with pemphigus vulgaris, in whom alopecia was also accompanied by Staphylococcus aureus infection [24]. Our literature search revealed only one case report of nonscarring alopecia occurring in pemphigus foliaceus [25]. In this publication, the widespread erosions and alopecia were the first manifestations of the disease in a 14-year-old girl. The authors suggested that the occurrence of alopecia in this case could have been associated with an extremely high anti-Dsg1 antibody concentration, equaling 2017 U/ml (cut off value < 14 U/ml). Recently, Yoshida et al. described a case of transition from pemphigus foliaceus to pemphigus vulgaris [26]. The authors observed a correlation between scalp lesions and anti-Dsg3 antibody concentration in enzyme-linked immunoassay [26].

(p4.2) To date, scarring alopecia has been described in 7 patients with pemphigus vulgaris [27][28][29][30][31][32]. Five of them developed tufted hair folliculitis in the course of prolonged scalp involvement [28][29][30][31][32]. In 5 cases bacterial culture was positive, showing the presence of Staphylococcus aureus [30][31][32][33] or Staphylococcus epidermidis [28]. It is unclear whether bacteria may act as an additional factor leading to alopecia. Gaitanis et al. [27] and Lapiere et al. [33] described cases of pemphigus vulgaris in which scarring alopecia was not accompanied by tufting. In both cases the development of cicatricial alopecia was associated with long-lasting and extensive scalp lesions.

(p4.3) Delmonte et al. first observed that in 3 patients with pemphigus vulgaris anagen hairs with intact root sheaths could be easily removed from both lesional and perilesional  scalp by a gentle pull test [34]. The authors of this case report called that phenomenon "normal anagen effluvium." According to Delmonte et al., the loss of anagen hairs with preserved root sheaths is a manifestation of the subclinical involvement of the hair follicle and may be regarded as a hair equivalent to Nikolsky's sign of the skin [34]. According to Daneshpazhooh et al. anagen hair loss is a common feature of active pemphigus vulgaris. In this article, intact anagen hairs covered by root sheaths were obtained by gentle pull test in 59 of 96 (61.5%) patients with pemphigus vulgaris [35]. Lesional anagen hair loss was observed in 51 of 57 (89.5%) patients, whereas nonlesional anagen hair loss was present in 27 of 57 (47.4%) patients. Mean anagen hair count was significantly higher in severe cases (6.83 +/− 7.89 hairs) as compared to patients with pemphigus vulgaris with a moderate course of the disease (1.06 +/− 1.94 hairs). The authors of this study reported that anagen hair loss was an independent predictor of pemphigus vulgaris severity [35]. In a recent study of Fard et al. performed in 52 patients with newly diagnosed pemphigus vulgaris, a significant correlation between anagen hair loss and the concentration of anti-desmoglein 1 antibody concentration as well as scalp and skin Pemphigus Disease Area Index scores was observed [36].
## (s6) Scalp Erosion/blisters or new erythema
(p6.0) Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation or erythema from resolving lesion 0-absent 0-absent 1-one quadrant 1-present 2-two quadrants 3-three quadrants 4-affecting the whole skull 10-at least one lesion > 6 cm methods evaluating pemphigus disease activity, scalp involvement is separately assessed only with Pemphigus Disease Area Index (PDAI) [37]. The following factors are taken into consideration in scalp PDAI: the distribution of the lesions in scalp quadrants and the size of the lesions as well as their quality, such as the presence of blisters, erosions, or new erythema for active lesions and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation or erythema after resolving lesions (Table 1). In Autoimmune Bullous Skin Disorder Intensity Score (ABSIS) the extent of skin lesions is assessed with the "rule of nine," where the head and neck area represents 9% of the body surface area. The percentage of body surface area is multiplied by the weighting factor, depending on the activity of the lesions (factor 1.5 for bullae and erosions, factor 1.0 for dry erosions, and factor 0.5 for reepithelized erosions) [38].

(p6.1) In Pemphigus Vulgaris Activity Score (PVAS) only the presence or absence of scalp involvement is evaluated, whereas the quality and number of lesions as well as the presence of Nikolsky's sign are not evaluated separately for the scalp [39].

(p6.2) According to Rahbar et al. PDAI may be recommended for use in multicenter studies because it has the highest interrater reliability as well as the highest convergent validity as compared to ABSIS and PVAS [37].
## (s7) Histopathological Features of Scalp Involvement in Pem-
(p7.0) phigus. Intraepidermal blister formation due to acantholysis is a characteristic histopathological finding of pemphigus. Acantholysis is located over the basal layer in pemphigus vulgaris and forms the so-called "tombstone" pattern on the floor of the blister [19]. In pemphigus foliaceus, acantholysis is located under the corneal layer [25]. Acantholysis may also be observed in the structures of hair follicles (Figure 4) [24,27,40,41]. Veraitch et al. observed acantholysis between keratinocytes of the outer root sheath extending from the infundibulum to the suprabulbar level in anagen hair follicles of pemphigus vulgaris lesions [5]. A case report of pemphigus foliaceus by Mlynek et al. described acantholysis which was observed in the infundibular outer root sheath, sparing its infrainfundibular part [25]. In our recent study performed on 32 patients with pemphigus, we observed that follicular acantholysis is a common feature of both types of pemphigus occurring in 12/17 (70.6%) patients with pemphigus vulgaris and 12/15 (80.0%) patients with pemphigus foliaceus [42]. We also confirmed that pemphigus vulgaris and pemphigus foliaceus differ as regards the depth of acantholysis. Acantholysis extended down the entire length of the outer root sheath of the hair follicle in pemphigus vulgaris, whereas in pemphigus foliaceus acantholysis was restricted to the infundibulum [42]. Acantholysis was also observed in vellus hair follicles in 12/17 (70.6%) patients with pemphigus vulgaris and 9/15 (60.0%) patients with pemphigus foliaceus [42]. Furthermore, acantholysis was present in sebaceous gland ducts in 3/17 (17.6%) patients with pemphigus vulgaris and 1/15 (6.7%) patients with pemphigus foliaceus as well as sweat gland ducts in 2/17 (11.8%) and 2/15 (13.3%) patients, respectively [42]. We also observed the miniaturization of sebaceous glands, which was seen in 14/17 (82.4%) patients with pemphigus vulgaris and 12/15 (80%) patients with pemphigus foliaceus. Whether this feature is specific for pemphigus or is associated with other comorbidities, for example, androgenetic alopecia, requires further evaluation [42].

(p7.1) Perifollicular infiltrates were observed in long-standing scalp lesions of patients with pemphigus vulgaris [28]. Superficial inflammatory infiltrates consisting of lymphocytes and neutrophils were observed by Veraitch et al. who reported 5 patients with pemphigus vulgaris and progressive hair loss [5]. Interestingly, the infiltrates did not reach the lowermost bulbar region of the hair follicle. Moreover, hair follicle density and hair cycle were unaffected [5].

(p7.2) As regards the course of pemphigus, perivascular inflammatory infiltrates in scalp lesions commonly consisted of lymphocytes [28,30]; in rare cases they were accompanied by eosinophils [15,33]. In our study neutrophils were the most common inflammatory cells observed in the epidermis, occurring in about 40% of patients with pemphigus vulgaris and 60% of patients with pemphigus foliaceus [42]. Mononuclear inflammatory infiltrates were predominant in the dermis, occurring in 82% of patients with pemphigus vulgaris and 93% of patients with pemphigus foliaceus [42]. The presence of keratinization disorders was another common histopathological finding observed in scalp pemphigus [42]. Parakeratosis was observed in pemphigus foliaceus [22]. In our study the hyperkeratinization of follicular ostia was observed in 53% of PV patients and 60% of PF patients [42].
## (s10) 3.7.
(p10.0) Response to the Treatment. Cases of treatment-resistant scalp lesions in the course of pemphigus were reported [19,24,[28][29][30][31][32]53]. Kamphausen et al. [53] reported a case of a 48-year-old man with a severe involvement of the scalp with erosions, crusting, vegetative granulations, and alopecia. The patient was treated with protein A immunoadsorption, intravenous rituximab, intravenous dexamethasone pulses, and oral azathioprine. Complete healing of lesions was observed after 12 weeks [53]. Mlynek et al. reported a case of pemphigus foliaceus not responding to oral prednisolone at the dose of 1 mg/kg daily, with the intolerance of azathioprine, manifesting as a significant elevation of liver enzymes. The patient was treated with oral prednisolone at a dose of 1 mg/kg daily combined with intravenous immunoglobulins at a dose of 2 g/kg over 5 days in two cycles given at a 4-week interval, followed by eight immunoaphereses. After a 5-month followup the healing of scalp lesions with complete hair regrowth was observed. However, new lesions were still, although sporadically, observed [25].

(p10.1) Contrary to the cases above, Tyros et al. reported a successful treatment of pemphigus foliaceus localized on the scalp and the nose in a patient treated with pimecrolimus cream once daily for 4 weeks as monotherapy [22]. Good response to another topical calcineurin inhibitor, tacrolimus, as monotherapy was observed by Termeer et al. [23].

(p10.2) In our recent paper, we described the efficacy of perilesional and intralesional triamcinolone acetonide injections in two patients with residual scalp involvement in the course of pemphigus vulgaris [54]. Complete clearance of scalp lesions was achieved after, respectively, one and two perilesional and intralesional triamcinolone acetonide (10 mg/ml) injections, showing its possible usability in the treatment of recalcitrant scalp lesions in pemphigus [54].
