# The Role of ICT in Social Inclusion: A Review of Literature

CorpusID: 21746691 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54046e3f44580cb2192e122c216fe99bc854cc1c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54046e3f44580cb2192e122c216fe99bc854cc1c)

Fields: Engineering, Sociology, Computer Science

## (s3) Methodology
(p3.0) The methodology adopted was integrated Literature survey research approach [11] in this paper. To identify relevant research and other social inclusion activities, a traditional search was conducted using the key words -social inclusion‖, -social exclusion‖ and -digital inclusion‖. This resulted in identification of key research papers, technical reports and literature related to social inclusion activities both in Africa and abroad, factors influencing inclusion and exclusion both globally and locally. A critical review of the selected literature addressing the study area was then conducted to identify the different way ICT have been used in inclusion activities, its effect and exclusion tendencies that have resulted from use of ICT. This data was analyzed to give a better view of how best to use ICT in social inclusion while still Reducing potential digital exclusion
## (s5) Role of ICT
(p5.0) ICT and related technologies have given rise to new capabilities to the human race. As Smith puts it -… Mobile phones constitute the basis for one of the greatest expansions of human capabilities in known history, and in a remarkably short timeframe. Furthermore, this expansion is expected to continue apace and, more likely, to accelerate…‖ [18] The ICT has continued to increase in capacity, mobility, accessibility and affordability [19]; [20]. The growth of ICT has affected every aspect of human life [19] -…virtually every aspect of our lives has a digital dimension‖ [21].
## (s11) Perceived Model
(p11.0) From the literature available, ICT is clearly an important tool in fighting poverty and exclusion [37]. Literature also shows that one form of exclusion leads to another form of exclusion forming an exclusion chain. To have individuals or groups included, the right links the exclusion in the chain must be identified and each of them mitigated accordingly. A link in the exclusion chain represents a form of exclusion. Each form of exclusion would need a unique set of ICTs and their applications in mitigating it. Educational association may require an e learning platform. Mobile banking would be helpful to a small scale farmer in rural areas.

(p11.1) The Spanner and Nut model envisions the society held together by people just as a system is held together by Nuts. Excluded individuals are seen as loose nuts in the system that requires to be fixed. In this model, the head of the nut is a polygon whose number of sides represents the different forms of exclusions that the individual is vulnerable or exposed to; Sort of the number of links in his exclusion chain. The ICT is the spanner used to screw and tighten back the Nut into the system (enhance inclusion). Each bolt requires the right spanner. The size and type of the spanner is dependent on the size and shape of the Nut's head. Just like the type of ICT and how it is used should be determined by the form of inclusion we want to achieve. Using the wrong spanner in the work may spoil the Nut and even loosen it further. Just as using the wrong technology or using it wrongly may lead to further exclusion. In other words, it's not how the having the spanner that fixes the Nuts, it's how well they are used that does the job and so are the ICTs.
