# ZnO Nanowire Field Effect Transistor for Biosensing: A Review

CorpusID: 210913146 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/680f409690b07de1b37d4e168b8639811577f5cb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/680f409690b07de1b37d4e168b8639811577f5cb)

Fields: Engineering, Biology, Materials Science

## (s2) Native point defects
(p2.0) There are three (3) types of defects in a crystal lattice: point defects, area defects, and volume defects. Point defects which are caused by native elements and impurities are the major problem for ZnO semiconductor. Native point defects for ZnO include the following: zinc interstitial (Zni), zinc antisite (Zno), zinc vacancy (VZn), oxygen interstitial (Oi), oxygen antisite (OZn), and oxygen vacancy (Vo). Over the years, a lot of research advocated them as the major cause for the n-type behaviour. Oxygen defects are seen as the main contributors toward the n-type behaviour [3], [15]. There are some researchers [1]- [4] who hypothesise that impurities (not the native point defects) are the main cause of the n-type behaviour because they tend to be shallow donors whereas Zn and O2 defects tend to be deep donors [1]- [4]. The two theories have not been proven so currently the main cause of the natural n-type behaviour of ZnO [1]- [4] is not certain.  Donor Impurities for the n-type ZnO can either be shallow or deep. Fig 2 shows shallow donors compared to deep donors. Shallow impurities require little energy to ionize (this is energy typically around the thermal energy or less). These donor impurities possess energy close to the band edgethe extra valence electron of these impurities are loosely bound and occupy effective-mass states near the conduction band maximum-CBM-at low temperatures. Deep impurities on-the-other-hand require energy greater that the thermal energy to ionize. These donor impurities possess energy far from the band edge (CBM) making them very hard to ionize. Their presence within the semiconductor tends to contribute only a small fraction of free carriers. Deep donors are also called traps because they act as effective recombination centres in which electrons and holes fall and annihilate each other. Grain boundaries (GB) are main source of deep state impurities and they adversely affect transistor performance. ZnO is a wide Bandgap material and research suggests [3], [4], [16] 
## (s3) Top-down fabrication of ZnO nanowire FETs
(p3.0) There are four main methods capable of producing nanometer features using top-down approaches: UV stepper lithography, e-beam lithography [68], focused ion-beam lithography [69] and spacer method [45], [70]. UV lithography is the standard industrial method for fabricating nano devices. Ebeam and focused ion-beam lithography are often used and can pattern devices down to 5 nm, but the equipment is very expensive and the pattern writing is very slow. These two instruments resemble scanning electron microscope (SEM) in terms of operation. Whereas SEM is used to focus a beam of electrons to image samples within a chamber, these instruments are used to create patterns on the samples. The difference between e-beam and focused ion-beam is that the latter uses an ion beam to pattern wafers and hence does not require photoresist. Their advantage over optical UV lithography is the small features they reach. For low cost applications such as biosensors, the problem with these two methods is that they are expensive.

(p3.1) The spacer technique is a low cost fabrication method for fabricating nanowires. It was first reported in 2005 by H. Ge, et al., [71] and other researchers [41], [72], [73] have since carried it forward. The technique has great potential in shaping nanometer features using conventional, low cost photolithography. Fig. 3 shows the concept of the spacer technique. It uses first anisotropic etch to create a vertical pillar on an insulating layer (SiO2), then after deposition of a semiconductor layer (ZnO) and a second anisotropic etch to create nanowires made up of the semiconductor layer. This method allows nanowire features with controllable dimensions to be developed. The ICP tool is usually used for anisotropic etching and produces surface roughness less than < 1.5 nm. Other tools such as RIE and ion beam etch produce roughness greater than > 5 nm. The fabrication process for the complete ZnO NWFET structure is as outlined in [134]. 
## (s5) ZnO thin film transistors (TFTs)
(p5.0) TFTs have also been fabricated using ZnO, mainly thin film transistors for application in displays. Fig. 4 compares twenty ZnO TFTs fabricated by different authors [44], [46], [48]- [65] using a variety of fabrication methods over the last five years. The graph is a plot of field effect mobility versus subthreshold slope which are two of the main parameters that describe the performance and efficiency of a device. The best device was fabricated by Bayraktaroglu, et al. [64] with a SiO2 insulator and pulsed laser deposited ZnO active channel layer. The device had a field effect mobility 110 cm 2 /Vs and an excellent subthreshold gate voltage swing of 109 mV/decade. This value of mobility is much higher than the value of around 1 cm 2 /Vs that is typically achieved with amorphous silicon TFTs in production displays. It is clear therefore that ZnO TFTs have considerable potential for application in high performance displays.
## (s8) Biosensors
(p8.0) A biosensor is defined by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) as "a self-contained integrated device that is capable of providing specific quantitative or semi-quantitative analytical information using a biological recognition element (biochemical receptor), which is retained in contact direct with a transduction element" [87]. A biosensor is a "more-than-Moore device" because it incorporates functionalities that do not necessarily scale according to Moore's law.
## (s9) Silicon biosensors
(p9.0) Over the past decade, silicon nanowires have been the most researched for application as biochemical sensors [97]- [108]. Silicon nanowires are of interest for a number of reasons, for example, the material is well known and is compatible with CMOS integrated circuits for the development of sensor systems [97]- [108]. The nanowire is expected to have high surface-to-volume ratios which gives high sensitivity and the electrical sensing will give real-time label-free detection without the use of expensive optical components. Mass manufacturing is also a main advantage for silicon and is critically important for nanowire biosensor applications because of the widespread uptake of biosensors in 'point-of-care' settings, the biosensor needs to be disposable [97]- [108].

(p9.1) A number of fabrication methods are well established for silicon nanowires which utilise both bottom-up and top-down methods (These methods are called hybrids). It still remains that bottom-up techniques have the advantage of simplicity [97]- [108]. Bottom-up methods are still limited due to the alignment problem. The hybrid methods require further nanowire technologies to achieve alignment, such as electric field or fluid-flow-assisted nanowire positioning to locate the nanowires between lithographically defined source and drain electrodes. The technique is interpreted as a hybrid between bottom-up and top-down. Top-down methods overcome these problems, and several researchers have used advanced lithography techniques to fabricate single-crystal silicon nanowires on silicon-on-insulator (SOI) substrates. SOI wafers are expensive and to overcome the problem some researchers [109] have devised alternatives to SOI. The electrical output characteristics of silicon nanowires are good and they are well-suited for biosensing applications. The sensitivity range for most silicon-nanowire based biosensors is between 50 and 400 mV [97]- [108].  
## (s10) Comparing ZnO nanowire biosensors
(p10.0) ZnO is investigated as it is expected to be more sensitive than Si due to its wider band-gap [109]. This is observed by comparing Table 2 with Table 3. ZnO devices show results comparable to silicon devices; especially looking at response time and limit of detection. It is required that biosensors should have the liquid reference electrode. There are many different types of ZnO nanostructures being used for sensing application and Table 2 compares the ZnO nanostructures such as nanotetrapods, nanocombs and nanorods used for biosensing [110], [111]. Nanotetrapods [112] are like nanorods but with four single crystalline legs. Most of the ZnO devices were synthesized by vapour-phase method and then transferred on Au electrode to form a multi-terminal network for the sensor receptors. Like all other bottom-up ZnO nanostructures discussed here, they are transferred to a surface of a working electrode to form a thin layer to modify the transducer. The devices have low sensitivity but the nanotetrapods exhibit good detection limit down to ~1.0 nM. The researchers [112] did not explained why the nanostructures possess low sensitivity but its three dimensional features have the potential for multi-terminal communication applications [112].

(p10.1) In nanocombs [113] design, each comb has between 3 to 10 rods connected to one another by a single rod. ZnO nanocombs were used as the channel for sensing glucose [113] and as label-free uric acid biosensor based on uricase [114]. The functionalised ZnO nanorods showed thermal stability, anti-interference capability and direct electron transfer (DET) between enzyme electroactive sites and external electrodes. The activity of the enzyme and the sensitivity can be increased by introducing a lipid film between the channel and the enzyme. Another uric acid biosensor [115] example is based on uricase-functionalised ZnO nanoflakes, which was hydrothermally prepared at low temperatures on Au-coated glass. The sensor produced a sensitivity based on sub-threshold slope of ~66 mV/decade. Bottom-up ZnO nanorods [116] were also used as lactate oxidase (LOD) biosensor using glutaraldehyde cross-linkers. The device had a sub-threshold sensitivity of ~41 mV/decade, with maximum detection of 0.1 µM. To test for cholesterol, porous ZnO mirco-tubes [117] were constructed using 3D assembled porous flakes. ZnO nanorods [118] were grown on Ag electrode to make a cholesterol sensor.
