# Molecular Sciences Somatostatin Analogs in Clinical Practice: A Review

CorpusID: 211831309 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c8068b7fc4e4f2eb8b7291a1f8dd6910b55fe4d6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c8068b7fc4e4f2eb8b7291a1f8dd6910b55fe4d6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Somastostatin (SST) is a cyclic polypeptide derived from an SST precursor protein that is processed into several peptide hormones, including SST-14, SST-28, and neuronostatin. SST-14 is the isoform that was originally characterized [1]. STT is one of the main inhibitors of endocrine and exocrine hormone secretion in humans [2]. Native SST is not useful in clinical practice because it has an extremely short half life of 1-3 min, rapidly degradated by ubiquitously distributed peptidases in plasma and tissues [3]. After the characterization of SST, several SST synthetic analogs (SSAs) with longer half-life were developed. To date, three of them have been approved in clinical practice: lanreotide and octretide are considered first-generation SSAs, and pasireotide is considered a second-generation SSA. Their main clinical use has been evaluated in Phase III clinical Trials, and some other uses have been evaluated in prospective studies.
## (s4) Pituitary Adenomas
(p4.0) The normal pituitary gland expresses a high proportion of SSTR5, lower levels of SSTR2, and very low levels of SSTR3 and SSTR1 [20]. SSTR4 is not expressed in healthy pituitary glands, nor in pituitary adenomas [21]. While SSTR3 is expressed in most pituitary adenomas, independent of the functional type, SSTR5 and SSTR2 (SSTR5 more than SSTR2) are widely expressed in somatotroph, thyrotroph, corticotroph, lactotroph, and gonadotroph adenomas and are probably involved in the regulation of hormonal secretion [22]. 
## (s5) Somatotropinomas
(p5.0) Acromegaly is a rare and severe systemic disease caused by GH-secreting pituitary adenoma (>75% are macroadenomas), which leads to hypersecretion of its peripheral mediator IGF-I. Transsphenoidal pituitary surgery is a first-line therapy, regardless of tumor size, with which biochemical control is obtained in approximately 75-90%, 40-50%, and 24% of the microadenomas, macroadenomas, and invasive tumors, respectively, depending on the learning curve and experience of the neurosurgeons [23][24][25].
## (s6) Thyrotropinomas
(p6.0) Thyrotropinoma is a very infrequent pituitary tumor, which represents 1% of pituitary adenomas, mostly macroadenomas, with locally aggressive behavior and clinical hyperthyroidism. The first therapeutic approach is transsphenoidal surgery or debulking, previous normalization of thyroid function, although it is curative in only 44% of cases [51,52]. Radiotherapy is used when remission is not achieved, but its effect is unpredictable and late, and the rate of remission is low [53].

(p6.1) SSAs constitute a treatment option for thyrotropinomas. In the presurgical stage, SSAs are effective in controlling hyperthyroidism and they improve surgery outcomes by reducing tumor size. As an adjuvant therapy to surgery, SSAs achieve euthyroidism in 75-95% of cases and a reduction in tumor size between 30-50% in the first 3 months of treatment [54][55][56]. For efficacy and safety, it should be noted that long-term treatment with SSAs should be maintained, at the lowest possible dose, to achieve biochemical and tumor control.
## (s7) Corticotropinomas
(p7.0) Cushing's disease appears when a corticotropin (ACTH) secreting pituitary adenoma is present. It represents 10% of pituitary adenomas. The treatment of choice is transsphenoidal surgery, which is curative in 50-90% of cases [57][58][59]. Radiation therapy and adrenolytic agents can be used as adjuvant treatment in case of incomplete surgical resections.

(p7.1) Corticotropinomas express mostly SSTR5, followed by SSTR2. SSTR2 activation inhibits Proopiomelanocortin (POMC) synthesis, while SSTR5 activation inhibits cell proliferation. Corticotropinomas express almost exclusively high levels of POMC [60]. In an in vitro study, it was observed that octreotide exerted, in a shorter period of time, a greater degree of inhibition in a greater percentage of cells and managed to inhibit ACTH more than pasireotide [60]. However, another in vitro study in mice showed a more potent inhibition of ACTH with pasireotide compared to octreotide [19].
## (s10) Gastroenteropancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (GEP-NETs)
(p10.0) Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are a heterogeneous group of tumors that originate in neuroendocrine cells from endocrine glands, endocrine islets, and endocrine cells dispersed throughout the digestive and respiratory tract. The gastrointestinal tract (62-67%) and the lungs (22-27%) are the most common primary tumor sites and the majority are sporadic [88]. GEP-NETs commonly express SSTR [88]. Approximately 80% of NETs of the gastrointestinal tract express SSTR2 [89]. In fact, in patients with GEP-NETs treated with SSAs, expression of SSTR2 is associated with longer progression-free survival (PFS) [90].
## (s11) Functioning Pancreatic NETs
(p11.0) Pancreatic-NETs express SSTR1, 2, 3, and 5. Insulinomas have a heterogeneous expression of STTR, while all somatostatinomas express SSTR5 and all gastrinomas and glucagonomas express SSTR2 [91]. SSAs are the standard therapy in well-differentiated, locally advanced, or metastatic GEP-NETs of any size [92]. The efficacy of octreotide LAR and lanreotide ATG has not been directly compared; however, due to its biochemical similarity, it is assumed that both are equivalent in the control of symptomatic GEP-NETs, as recommended by the guidelines of the National Comprehensive Care Network (NCCN) [93].
## (s12) Antiproliferative Effects in GEP-NETs
(p12.0) Although SSAs were developed primarily for symptomatic control of NETs (antisecretory effect), the results of the PROMID, CLARINET, and CLARINET OLE studies confirmed that SSAs also have a positive impact on the progression-free survival (PFS) in pancreatic and non-pancreatic NETs due to their antiproliferative effects [107][108][109].

(p12.1) The results of the PROMID study ratified the antitumor effect of SSAs and generalized the use of octreotide LAR in the treatment of NETs, regardless of their functionality. The study included 85 treatment-naive patients with well-differentiated (Ki67 < 2%) locally inoperable or metastatic midgut NETs (functioning and non-functioning) and they were randomly assigned to either octreotide LAR (30 mg monthly intramuscularly) or placebo for 18 months until tumor progression or death. After 6 months of treatment, in the octreotide LAR group, the disease remained stable in 66.7% of patients compared to 37.2% of patients in the placebo group. PFS was significantly greater in the octreotide LAR group compared to placebo (14.3 months vs. 6 months, respectively; HR = 0.34). The beneficial effect of octreotide LAR on overall survival could not be established [107].

(p12.2) The CLARINET study included 204 treatment-naive patients with advanced well or moderately differentiated (Ki67 < 10%) non-functioning GEP-NETs, including pancreatic and gastrointestinal tumors, and they were randomly assigned to either lanreotide ATG (120 mg/28 days) or placebo for 96 weeks. The median PFS was not reached for lanreotide ATG in the 96-week study compared to 18 months with placebo (HR = 0.47). The rates of PFS were 65.1% the lanreotide group and 33.0% in the placebo group at 24 months. There were no differences in quality of life or overall survival [108].

(p12.3) The CLARINET OLE study was an extension study that further investigated the safety and efficacy of lanreotide ATG in patients with metastatic pancreatic and nonpancreatic NETs. Eighty-eight patients with stable disease were selected, 41 continued with lanreotide ATG and 47 patients switched from placebo to lanreotide ATG (120 mg/28 days). The median PFS was 32.8 months for patients originally randomized to lanreotide ATG in the central study compared with the 18 months for placebo reported in the CLARINET study [108]. The most common adverse effect was diarrhea. However, among the patients who received lanreotide in both studies, diarrhea improved with greater exposure to treatment [109].
## (s16) Congenital Hyperinsulinism (CHI)/Persistent Hyperinsulinemic Hypoglycemia of Infancy
(p16.0) Congenital hyperinsulinism is characterized by hypoglycemic state secondary to inappropriately elevated insulin levels. CHI is responsible for most cases of persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia in newborns. It can arise sporadically or can be inherited in an autosomal recessive way (more frequently by mutations in the ABCC8 and KCNJ11 genes), and can affect the pancreas in a focal, diffuse, or atypical way. Severe and/or persistent hypoglycemia produces irreversible neurological alterations and severe retardation of psychomotor development [131].

(p16.1) The only drug approved to treat CHI in childhood is diazoxide. However, since 1986, SSAs have been used in the treatment of patients with CHI who do not respond to diazoxide, being considered a second line treatment in CHI [132], over nifedipine or continuous glucagon. SSAs are potent inhibitors of insulin and glucagon secretion by activating SSTR (mainly SSTR2). Octreotide inhibits insulin secretion by binding to SSTR2 and SSTR5. Activation of SSTR5 decreases insulin gene promoter activity, and inhibits calcium mobilization and acetylcholine activity. SST also inhibits the ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) channel, which results in reduced insulin secretion. In a large series, octreotide was found to be a safe and effective treatment for diazoxide-unresponsive CHI patients. The effects on linear growth were found to be clinically insignificant. Monthly injections of long-acting SSAs have been described as an effective option in the management of CHI. Octreotide LAR and lanreotide ATG have been used successfully in children with CHI, even in early infancy. Using long-acting formulations increases treatment adherence and improves quality of life (QoL) [133].
## (s17) Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) and Diabetic Macular Edema (DME)
(p17.0) Although the treatment of choice for diabetic retinopathy (DR) is laser photocoagulation, when the diagnosis is delayed, its evolution is usually torpid. In these cases, intravitreal injection of SSAs is a promising therapeutic alternative for the control of proliferative DR and frequently diabetic macular edema (DME). By combining laser photocoagulation with SSAs, a more powerful and lasting effect is obtained to help stabilize or stop visual impairment [134].

(p17.1) The human retina, especially the pigment epithelium layer, has abundant SST and SSTR [135]. It has been determined that there is a lower concentration of SST in patients with DR and DME compared to controls [136]. The low intravitreal levels of SST in patients with proliferative DR and DME contribute to angiogenesis in response to ischemia characteristic of the proliferative form of DR, as well as to the disruption of the blood-retina barrier involved in the pathogenesis of DME. Experimental studies have shown that SSAs exert a neuromodulator and antiangiogenic effect on the retina, preventing hemorrhagic and proliferative phenomena and improving the integrity of the blood-retina barrier [137].

(p17.2) In addition, GH and IGF-1 levels play an important role in the pathogenesis of DR. GH inhibition is another beneficial effect of SSAs on DR [138,139]. A reduction in the risk of hemorrhages and other retinal vitreous complications has been demonstrated in diabetics with proliferative DR on treatment with SSAs [134,140,141].
## (s18) Graves' Orbitopathy
(p18.0) Graves' orbitopathy is an extrathyroid manifestation of autoimmune hyperthyroidism. SSTR is present in extraocular muscles, lymphocytes, and fibroblasts (Graves' disease target cells), as well as immunoreactivity for IGF-1 in extraocular muscles and adipocytes [142]. Thus, SSAs act on the triggers and perpetuators of the disease by inhibiting cytokines (TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-1, TGF-3) and growth factors (mainly IGF-1) [143].

(p18.1) In vivo studies have demonstrated a relationship between the presence of SSTR and the activity of thyroid orbitopathy, determined by OctreoScan ® [144,145]. However, it remains to be determined whether OctreoScan ® is a parameter of disease activity and a predictor of immunosuppressive therapy outcome better than clinical parameters, MRI, or measurement of glycosaminoglycan in plasma and/or urine.

(p18.2) Several studies in small cohorts and without a control group have shown that octreotide and lanreotide improve symptoms (Soft tissue inflammation, palpebral aperture, intraocular pressure, exophthalmos, diplopia, cornea, and visual acuity), inactivate the disease at 3 months, and reduce the use of systemic corticosteroids. Therefore, SSAs are a diagnostic, therapeutic, and predictive option of the therapeutic response to immunosuppressants of Graves' orbitopathy in active phase [146][147][148][149].
## (s19) Dumping Syndrome
(p19.0) The dumping syndrome is a set of gastrointestinal and vasomotor symptoms. It results from changes in the anatomy and physiology of the stomach. It is a frequent complication of gastric surgery (5-10%), although its frequency is higher after vagotomy with pyloroplasty (20%) and esophagectomy (50%). Dumping syndrome has two phases; early dumping occurs within 30 min after a meal and is due to the rapid transit of hyperosmolar food into the upper small bowel, while late dumping often occurs 2-3 h postprandially and is due to hypoglycemia attributed to hyperinsulinemia secondary to the rapid initial rise of blood glucose concentration [150].

(p19.1) Most patients with mild dumping syndrome feel better after dietary modification (particularly the reduction of carbohydrate intake), and it is considered the first-line approach. However, severe dumping symptoms (5-10%) may continue despite dietary changes [151]. SSAs may play a role in the pathophysiology of dumping syndrome because they can retard gastric emptying rate, retard transit through the small bowel, inhibit the vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, gastric inhibitory peptide, and insulin release, inhibit postprandial vasodilation and splanchnic vasoconstriction, and increase intestinal absorption of water and sodium [152].

(p19.2) Some studies have shown that SSAs relieve symptoms both of early and late dumping syndrome, although the benefit is greater in the former, particularly in postprandial tachycardia [153,154]. Octreotide decreases cardiac frequency, the Sigstad index score, and plasma insulin levels, and minimizes changes in orthostatic blood pressure, packed cell volume, and plasma osmolarity in subjects with dumping [155]. In the long term, octreotide has been shown to maintain its efficacy in patients with refractory dumping [156]. Sandostatin LAR (10 mg/4 weeks intramuscularly for 6 months) was as effective as octreotide in ameliorating severe dumping symptoms, and it was more effective than octreotide in increasing body weight and improving quality of life [157].

(p19.3) The efficacy and safety of pasireotide in late dumping syndrome was evaluated in a single-arm, multicenter, intrapatient dose-escalation, phase II study, which included 43 patients with a history of bariatric surgery or upper gastrointestinal cancer surgery. The proportion of patients without hypoglycemia was 60.5% (26 of 43 patients), 36.4% (12 of 33 patients), and 39.4% (13 of 33 patients) at the end of the pasireotide SC phase (month 3), at the end of pasireotide IM phase (month 6), and at the end of extension phase (month 12), respectively. In addition, pasireotide was associated with an improvement in health-related QoL measured via the 36-Item Short Form Health Survey and the symptoms of both early and late dumping syndrome [158].
## (s20) Digestive and Lymphatic Fistulas
(p20.0) Fistulas are a major complication of surgery and are associated with high morbidity and mortality (10-35%) [159]. The most proximal in the intestine (esophagus, stomach, duodenum, and jejunum) and those that have a high debit (hydroelectrolytic losses) are fistulas of difficult management. SSAs are useful in the treatment of fistulas due to their ability to inhibit digestive secretions (salivary, gastric, intestinal, pancreatic, and biliary) and decrease digestive peristalsis. It is also useful in lymphatic fistulas by reducing thoracic duct lymph flow rate. Several studies have shown the benefit of octreotide and lanreotide, achieving a higher fistula closure rate. With respect to the mortality rate, the results of the studies are contradictory. Most of these studies agree that the greatest benefit occurs in the first 10 days of treatment. Therefore, SSAs are an effective adjuvant treatment in the management of fistulas that do not respond to conventional treatment with intestinal rest and total parenteral nutrition. It is also used prophylactically in pancreatic surgery [160][161][162][163].
## (s21) Acute Bleeding from the Gastrointestinal Tract
(p21.0) Blood vessels express SSTR2. SSAs at therapeutic doses exert a direct vasoconstrictor effect through the potentiation of the effect of other vasoconstrictor agents and indirectly by inhibiting the release of vasodilator peptides (mainly glucagon). The splanchnic vasoconstriction causes a decrease in the portal and portocolateral blood flow with the consequent reduction in portal venous and intravaricose pressure [164].
## (s22) Hepatorenal Polycystosis
(p22.0) Polycystic kidney disease, with or without polycystic liver disease, is an autosomal dominant inheritance condition (PKD1 gen) characterized by renal cysts, liver cysts, and cerebral aneurysm. Cyst formation is mediated by cAMP and adenylyl cyclase agonists because both stimulate the proliferation of epithelial cells of the kidneys [170]. By preventing the formation and growth of cysts, it preserves the original tubular architecture and, therefore, prevents deterioration of renal function. SSAs act on the SSTR2, antagonizing the activity of adenylyl cyclase and, therefore, cAMP, in kidney and liver cells [170].

(p22.1) In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that octreotide achieves a reduction in renal and hepatic cysts with few side effects. SSAs have a good safety profile and can provide effective hepatoprotection and renoprotection [171]. However, long-term studies that include a larger number of patients are required.
## (s23) Refractory Chronic Diarrhea
(p23.0) Refractory chronic diarrhea is defined as a diarrheal episode of more than 14 days that does not respond to specific antimicrobial therapy or nonspecific antidiarrheal therapeutic measures. The effects of SSAs that contribute to their possible antidiarrheal actions are the inhibition of gastrointestinal motility, exocrine digestive secretions, and intestinal absorption. However, the inhibition of pancreatic secretion could cause diarrhea due to fatty malabsorption.

(p23.1) Octreotide studies have been conducted for the treatment of Refractory chronic diarrhea. The most representative studies with octreotide for the control of AIDS/chemotherapy/short bowel syndrome and graft versus host disease-induced diarrhea have demonstrated a response rate between 41-100%, 74-96%, 16-72%, and 50-100%, respectively [172].

(p23.2) Probably, the use of octreotide for long periods of time is associated with a higher response rate. SSAs have also demonstrated a role in the control of refractory diarrhea associated with medullary thyroid cancer. In a patient with metastatic medullary thyroid carcinoma and refractory diarrhea, octreotide (100 µg three times a day subcutaneously), fecal incontinence control, and sustained diarrhea improvement were achieved [173].
## (s24) Non-Endocrine Tumors
(p24.0) Several in vivo and in vitro studies have shown antisecretory and antitumor effects of SST in cancer. The exact mechanism of the antitumor effect of SST is unknown, but some options include: inhibition of proliferation and induction of apoptosis (direct effects), decrease in gastrin, secretin, cholecystokinin (CCK), and IGF-1 levels directly by suppressing of IGF-1 gene expression or indirectly through inhibition of hepatic production (indirect effects), and peritumoral vasoconstriction that causes a decrease in nutritional support [174]. However, the role and therapeutic potential of SSAs in non-endocrine tumors (breast, colon, prostate, lung, exocrine pancreatic, and hepatocellular) are currently unknown.

(p24.1) The most frequent in women and the second most common cancer in the general population is breast cancer. Most breast cancers (50-70%) overexpress SSTR (mostly SSTR2) compared to normal tissues. The presence of SSTR2 is considered a favorable factor in breast cancer, associated with low invasion and proliferation. However, in breast cancers that express truncated variant SSTR5-TMD4, the beneficial function of SSTR2 is compromised. The prevalence of SSTR5-TMD4 mRNA in samples of breast cancers classified as G3 was detected at 28-49%, and their presence is related with the absence of immunoreactivity to p53, estrogen receptor and Her2neu, and lymph node metastases [175]. Therefore, SST5R-TMD4 expression increased malignancy features such as invasion and proliferation. Several studies suggest a significant role of SSAs in breast cancer; however, their full potential has not been revealed because they included a small number of patients and the results are contradictory. Although studies have shown limited success, it should be studied whether efficacy could be improved when combined with other antitumor therapies [176].

(p24.2) The most frequent tumor in older men is prostate cancer. In a rat prostate tumor model, lanreotide was as effective as castration, and therapeutic benefit was also observed in the hormone-resistance phase [177]. Lanreotide (30 mg/week by intramuscular injection) in 30 patients with prostate cancer refractory to metastatic hormones with an average duration of 12 weeks (2-60 weeks) improved functional status (40%) and bone pain (35%), decreased >50% in prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels, and stabilized PSA levels in 20% and 16% of patients, respectively. An annual survival rate of 89% was achieved in the group of patients who responded to PSA levels and 64% in patients with progressive disease [178]. Another study in 10 patients with hormone-resistant metastatic disease with lanreotide plus ethinyl estradiol showed a >50% decrease in PSA levels in 90% of patients and palliation of bone pain in all patients [179].

(p24.3) Colon neoplasms express cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), a key enzyme in the production of prostaglandin E2, which contributes to cell proliferation. SSAs, by activating SSTR3 or SSTR5, modify the expression and function of COX-2 in colon cancer cells, inhibiting tumor cell proliferation [180]. One study showed that three out of four colon cancers were inhibited by SSA administration. Although the exact mechanism of this effect is unknown, it is speculated that a possible mechanism could be the indirect effect of SSAs on the secretion of gastrin or on the modulation of gastrin receptors present in colon cancers, as gastrin receptors were found to be downregulated in these tumors after treatment with SSAs. In vitro studies have shown that when SST is combined with gastrin, there is a decrease in cell proliferation of 34% in cell counts compared to gastrin alone [181].

(p24.4) Several studies suggest a possible role for SSAs in the adjuvant treatment of human small cell lung cancer (SCLC) that expresses SSTR (mainly SSTR2) [182]. In vitro studies have shown inhibition of tumor cell proliferation. In a study including 20 patients (six newly diagnosed and 14 relapsed disease), IGF-1 levels decreased significantly with octreotide (250 µg/day), but tumor burden did not change [183]. Another study reported a significantly better median survival and median time to progression in patients with SCLC in treatment with lanreotide 30 mg and chemotherapy compared to chemotherapy alone [184]. Moreover, SSAs have shown to successfully control the clinical symptoms of ectopic hormone secretion in bronchial carcinoids [185].

(p24.5) Regarding hepatocarcinomas, one trial in 58 patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma treated with octreotide (250 µg subcutaneously twice daily) vs. supportive care showed greater survival for octreotide (median survival of 13 months and 4 months, respectively) [186]. However, the HECTOR trial showed no survival benefit for hepatocellular carcinoma patients treated with Sandostatin LAR 30 mg intramuscularly every 4 weeks compared with placebo [187]. The variability of the results in survival in hepatocellular carcinoma could be explained by the individual differences of each patient and the variations of SSTR.
## (s25) Adverse Events
(p25.0) SSAs are generally well tolerated. Adverse events may begin shortly after the first administration of the drug and may decrease progressively over the subsequent weeks as the treatment continues [188]. The most reported adverse events include injection site discomfort and erythema, gastrointestinal disturbances such as diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, biliary sludge or gallstones, and modest and transient negative impact on glucose homeostasis. Cholelithiasis represents the most serious complication of SSAs, but is generally asymptomatic, and has been reported in 3-56% of patients. Pasireotide has shown a safety profile as expected for an SSA, except for the degree of hyperglycemia [189]. Uncommon side effects include sinus bradycardia, asthenia, headache, pruritus, decreased libido, increased serum bilirubin, and constipation [190]. Alopecia has also been reported [191]. High doses of SSAs have not shown differences in common adverse events when compared to standard doses [192].
