# geriatrics Cannabinoids in the Older Person: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 210333448 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad60a595fe2f1c5d7fb54146c41aba64680781fc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad60a595fe2f1c5d7fb54146c41aba64680781fc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s9) Smoked Cannabis
(p9.0) Although smoked cannabis is widely known to be used by individuals as self-administered analgesia, this route of administration is difficult to study robustly; limited data are therefore available to support this mode of drug delivery. To address this, a 2010 randomized controlled trial was conducted to assess the efficacy of smoked cannabis within a population of patients suffering from chronic neuropathic pain. This study found a dose-response relationship between the potency of inhaled cannabis and pain amelioration, demonstrating a statistically significant improvement in average daily pain scores between the highest potency and control groups [46].
## (s11) Dronabinol
(p11.0) Dronabinol is a synthetic THC analogue that has been approved for pain control in some jurisdictions. Narang et al. reported the effect of dronabinol on pain in a placebo-controlled trial [39]. In this study, dronabinol was used as an adjuvant to opioids with a significant reduction in pain at 8 hours noted in the dronabinol arm. These findings continued into the second open-label phase of the trial, where a statistically significant reduction in the pain score was observed from baseline in the dronabinol arm. However, other trials have not been able to reproduce these results over a longer follow up period [22].
## (s15) Appetite Stimulation
(p15.0) The evidence for appetite stimulation in the context of cancer-induced anorexia is currently limited. A 2002 trial compared the cannabis extract dronabinol to megestrol (synthetic progestin). This study found that dronabinol was less effective than megestrol at appetite stimulation and inducing weight gain [42]. Similarly, a 2006 trial by the Cannabis in Cachexia Study group was terminated due to insufficient differences between the study arms of: (1) cannabis extract, (2) tetrahydrocannabinol and (3) placebo [40]. Currently therefore, there is no evidence to indicate that cannabinoids have any effect upon cancer-induced anorexia.

(p15.1) Anorexia in the elderly is complex, and the mechanisms underlying the anorexia of ageing may be distinct to the anorexia of dementia or cancer. Few trials have evaluated the efficacy of cannabis products for anorexia associated with ageing or dementia. A small placebo-controlled cross-over trial found measurable changes in weight gain and decreased agitation with dronabinol [45]. However, this study was limited by small numbers of patients at its follow-up, and at present the European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism has concluded that there is currently no evidence to support the use of cannabinoids in the cachexia of dementia [51].
## (s20) Smoked Cannabis
(p20.0) We are unaware of any RCTs that assess the safety of smoked cannabis in an elderly population. One observational study has found that cannabis smoking in elderly individuals was associated with emergency department attendance and injury [53]. More generally, smoked cannabis had been linked to an increased risk of psychosis and neurocognitive dysfunction in younger adults and adolescents, though the relevance of these observations in older adults is currently unknown [54]. In the context of reduced neurocognitive reserve, it seems plausible that older adults are likely to be at increased risk of neurocognitive side effects.
## (s21) Nabilone
(p21.0) Nabilone's safety is also poorly documented in an elderly population. A case series observed the side effects of using nabilone in elderly patients with neuropsychiatric symptoms. This study observed sedation as the primary side effect in this population [55].
## (s22) Dronabinol
(p22.0) The safety of Dronabinol in an elderly population has only been observed in two studies [45,54]. These studies found that the most common side effects were sedation, anxiety, emotional labiality, fatigue, somnolence and euphoria. A serious side effect of a single patient experiencing a grand mal seizure was also observed [56].
## (s23) Nabiximols
(p23.0) Currently no studies specifically address the safety of nabiximols in an elderly population. However, adult data indicate more adverse events in the nabiximols group compared to placebo [57]. The most common adverse events reported were: asthenia, vertigo and nausea, and it seems plausible that these side effects may be applicable to older patients
## (s24) Safety and Adverse Effects
(p24.0) Despite numerous small studies describing a modest side effect profile of cannabinoids, we are aware of only one systematic review evaluating the safety profile of cannabis and cannabis products in the elderly [29]. This systematic review found that cannabinoids were associated with a higher rate of adverse events than the control.

(p24.1) The most common side effects experienced by users of cannabinoids included drowsiness, dry mouth, coordination disturbance and headache [30]. However, no severe adverse events were reported in this review, and only 1.4% of participants discontinued treatment due to adverse effects.

(p24.2) A more recent prospective study addressed the safety and efficacy of cannabis specifically in older subjects [11]. This study reported that in the 6-month follow up period, 31.7% of the cohort experienced at least one side effect. The most common side effect experienced was dizziness (9.7%). Others included confusion or disorientation (1.9%) and hallucinations (0.8%). The rate of falls amongst participants receiving cannabinoids was not elevated despite these side effects: 53.4% of the 515 participants reported at least one fall in the 6 months before cannabis treatment, with only 21.9% reporting a fall in the 6 months after initiating treatment. However, there are no data reporting the respective frailty of individuals enrolled in this trial, and the clinical impact of increased dizziness in persons vulnerable to falls is currently unknown.

(p24.3) Notably, the participants of this study smoked cannabis plants with heterogenous THC: CBD formulations. Although there was a predominance of THC-dominant strains used, different formulations reduce the reliability and application of this data to a wider population.
## (s25) Medication Interaction
(p25.0) Cannabinoids including THC and CBD are both metabolized through different isoforms of the P450 enzyme system. Cannabinoids therefore may compete with other drugs which are metabolized through this pathway [16]. Notably, five of the seven P450 isoforms that metabolize CBD also metabolize warfarin. Cannabinoid use may therefore increase serum warfarin concentration and bleeding risk. Despite an in vitro study confirming this interaction, there is currently only one case report citing this; it is therefore currently unclear what the clinical significance of drug interaction may be in recreational users. However, in the context of regular medication for chronic illness, this may become of more clinical importance [35]. Other drug classes that may potentially be influenced by competition for cytochrome P450 metabolism are listed in Table 2.
## (s26) Long Term Safety
(p26.0) The World Health Organization (WHO) recognizes that recreational cannabis use is associated with significant cardiovascular risks. These effects are less well explored in the context of medicinal cannabis. A 2017 systematic review found that in individuals with pre-existing cardiovascular disease, the greatest risks posed by cannabis products were ischemic strokes or myocardial infarctions [34], though wide scale data evaluating this area is currently absent. It has been suggested that cannabinoids may be associated with an increase in the risk of solid tumor neoplasia. At present to our knowledge, no definite data exist to confirm this.

(p26.1) Although it is clear that the side effect profile of cannabinoids is inadequately understood at present, it is likely to be significant, especially in older people who have to date been excluded from clinical trials in this field. Notwithstanding this current clinical uncertainty, it is important to reflect that the side effect profiles of other drug classes necessarily used in older adults (e.g., opiates, NSAIDS, anticonvulsants) are equally problematic. Limited data indicate that cannabinoids may potentially reduce the opiate requirements in some pain settings, or facilitate withdrawal from opiates in their entirety [11]. Further dedicated research in the frail, older patient is urgently warranted to quantify the risks and potential benefits.
