# Two-Way and Multiple-Way Shape Memory Polymers for Soft Robotics: An Overview

CorpusID: 213046150 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6ec55440b8068074ea55d1c15725eae17f5b6f10](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6ec55440b8068074ea55d1c15725eae17f5b6f10)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Materials Science

## (s3) One-Way SMPs
(p3.0) One-way (or dual) thermo-responsive SMPs display the capability of recovering a "permanent" shape (i.e., the shape provided through conventional processing) from a "temporary" shape (i.e., the shape provided through a process named "programming") when heated; such a capability is known as one-way shape memory effect (SME).

(p3.1) The one-way SME is correlated to a transition temperature (e.g., the glass transition, melting, crystallization, or clearing temperature, depending on the polymer type) and results from a combination of an applied thermo-mechanical history (i.e., the shape memory cycle) with polymer macromolecular architecture.

(p3.2) The shape memory cycle is illustrated in the first row of Figure 2 for a SMP featuring the one-way SME and having a transition temperature denoted as T trans . The material is first formed into a permanent shape through conventional processing. Then, the material is subjected to a cycle, called "programming", in order to be "fixed" in a temporary shape. The programming step consists of: (i) heating the material up to a temperature T 1 > T trans , which results in an increase of the mobility of polymer molecular chains; (ii) deforming the material, which induces an orientation of polymer molecular chains and a macromolecular conformation variation, accompanied by a change in entropy, leaving the polymer in a high-energy unstable state; (iii) cooling the material down to T 2 < T trans , limiting molecular mobility, trapping the high-energy state, and fixing the temporary shape; and (iv) removing the applied load. Typically, temperatures T 1 and T 2 are 15-40 • C, respectively, above and below the transition temperature (determined by using differential scanning calorimetry). Finally, heating the material back to T 1 restores the mobility of the chain segments and allows the recovery of the permanent shape from the temporary shape. As it can be observed from the figure, both fixation of the temporary shape and recovery of the permanent shape are determined by T trans . Moreover, the one-way SME is a non-reversible feature: after the permanent shape is recovered, the SMP cannot reverse to its temporary shape through cooling, but a new programming step is needed to re-fix the temporary shape. The shape memory cycle can be indefinitely repeated and is limited only by the possible degradation of the material [44,48]. 
## (s13) Single-Material Mechanism
(p13.0) Soft robots based on one single SMP receive their properties from those featured by the constituent material itself, from their macroscale structure, and from the localization of the thermal stimulus. In general, the realized soft robots are able to perform tasks such as linear stretching/contraction, coiling, twisting, and folding. Such robots have drawn great interest due to their simple manufacturing process that does not require, e.g., post-processing or the use of multi-material 3D printers.

(p13.1) While several examples, such as grippers and drug delivery systems, employ one-way SMPs (see [13,178,218,219] and references therein), applications based on the multiple-way SME are still limited. Among these, Bodaghi et al. [220] combined polyurethane-based SMPs, hot-cold programming, and fused deposition modeling 3D printing technology to engineer dual and triple SMP self-bending grippers and self-shrinking/tightening staples. Yu et al. [197] used the material under the commercial name Gray 60 in the multi-material Polyjet 3D printer (Stratasys, Connex Object) to realize triple SME in trusses or box-shaped structures, capable of linear stretching/contraction. Pandini et al. [221] printed, through stereolitography, auxetic structures capable of hierarchical motion as a consequence of the broad glass transition region of the employed commercial polymer (known under the name Clear FLGPCL02). Auxetic structures were able to perform autonomous sequential in-plane and out-of-plane motions, as shown in Figure 3. All these structures [197,221] can be potentially used to increment the motion capabilities of soft robotics systems. Figure 3. Temperature-memory effect (TME) exploited for achieving hierarchical motion of a 3D printed auxetic cell. The cell is subjected to: (a) a two-step programming consisting of an early out-of-plane bending at T = 100°C, and a subsequent stretching at T = 40°C; (b) shape recovery. Reprinted from [221], copyright 2020, with permission from Elsevier.
## (s17) Conclusions
(p17.0) The present paper has reviewed the current progress on soft robots based on multiple-way and two-way SMPs. Attention has been dedicated to the constituent materials, manufacturing techniques, design strategies, applications, and modeling/simulations tools. According to the reviewed papers, the following concluding considerations can be made:

(p17.1) • Materials: (i) Several routes for the synthesis of multiple-way and two-way SMPs are available from the literature, and they differ in terms of preparation method, reprocessibility, achieved shape memory, and mechanical properties. (ii) SMP properties influence the overall robustness and performance of soft robots. Accordingly, SMPs with tunable transition temperatures, high thermal stability, and good mechanical properties in the operational temperature range are highly desired. For example, soft robots for biomedical applications require a switching transition temperature close to the body temperature, while those used for aerospace applications require high transition temperatures. (iii) Appropriate characterization methods on both macroscopic and molecular/morphological levels should be performed for a comprehensive knowledge of the polymer under investigation. In general, shape memory behavior characterization at the macroscopic level must be chosen and tailored to the specific SMP category and application under investigation. (iv) Two-way SMPs under constant stress or stress-free conditions are very promising for achieving reversible actuation in soft robots and require extensive research to improve actuation strains/forces and their mechanical performances. In particular, material behavior under cyclic loading should be investigated. • Manufacturing: (i) Most of SMP-based components are fabricated through conventional techniques rather than through 3D printing, due to the lack in the variety of SMPs that are usable in 3D printing and the limited applicability of existing 3D printing methods to new SMPs. In fact, polyjet printing and extrusion printing are the most used 3D printing techniques for SMP-based soft robotics: polyjet printing allows for the use of materials with tunable mechanical properties, but has, e.g., high equipment costs, several resin properties' requirements, and limited material choices; extrusion-based printing is versatile, but has, e.g., slow printing speed and relatively low resolution. Extensive research should be dedicated to the development of two-way and multiple-way SMPs for 3D printing and to the analysis of suitable 3D printing methods.

(p17.2) (ii) Composite structures present several advantages to enhance the actuation complexity. However, some 3D printing techniques (e.g., stereolithography) cannot enable multi-material printing. Therefore, modifications to current techniques should be investigated. (iii) Novel inks should be studied to enable 3D printed multi-functional SMPs. • Working mechanisms and applications: (i) Few examples of real-world programmable soft robots, based on both single-material and multi-material working mechanisms, have been proposed in the literature to be used, mainly, for biomedical (e.g., drug delivery systems) and aerospace (e.g., deployable or exploration components) applications. Further efforts should be made to increase the range of application fields. As an example, two-way SMP-based actuators are promising for dynamic building facades and energy savings [289,290]. However, extensive research should focus on material properties, e.g., extension rate, transparency, recovery stress, operational temperatures, and long-term stability. (ii) Several examples of components (e.g., in the form of trusses, periodic structures, compliant mechanisms), capable of programmable motion, have been proposed in the literature. All these components can be potentially integrated into more complex soft robotics systems to achieve advanced capabilities. (iii) Both shape-change speed and response time are key factors for actuation and depend on materials properties, geometrical design, and actuation stimulus. More efforts should be done to improve these two features. (iv) Complex and controllable movements are preferred in advanced robotics applications. Localized heating provides a simple and efficient method to this purpose, and should be investigated in two-way and multiple-way SMPs.

(p17.3) (v) More studies should be dedicated to the combination of two or more stimuli into one single polymer to achieve the two-way or multiple-way SME. In this way, SMPs may adapt better to the overall environmental conditions. Moreover, function or property-shifting features, in addition to shape-shifting, should be investigated in order to increase the autonomy of soft robots. To this end, integrated design and fabrication strategies should be developed, as proposed, e.g., by Wehner et al. [291]. (vi) The application potential for two-way and multiple-way SMPs appears unlimited. However, real examples are still limited due to the lack of standards, especially related to 3D printed SMPs, and of manufacturing techniques that allow the realization of complex components. • Modeling and simulation: (i) Theoretical models and design methodologies are still limited for 4D printed components and are needed to accurately predict and optimize programmable soft robots. (ii) Constitutive models for multiple-way and two-way SMPs are fundamental for the simulation analysis of parts. More efforts should be done in this regard for both viscoelastic and phase transition approaches, especially in the three-dimensional finite strain framework and for two-way LCEs and two-way SMPs under stress-free conditions.

(p17.4) It can be concluded that the realization of soft robots requires interdisciplinary research and technological advances in various fields, including 3D printing, chemistry, material science, as well as novel design and modeling tools. 
