# Conservative treatment in early stage endometrial cancer: a review

CorpusID: 210086659 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ae6368f9fcdc5d93e09f6eac0196bdc72ef5fb9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ae6368f9fcdc5d93e09f6eac0196bdc72ef5fb9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Endometrial cancer (EC) is one of the most common gynecological cancers. More than 90% of cases of endometrial cancer occur in perimenopause women and 25% are premenopausal (1,2). However, 4% of women with endometrial cancer are younger than 40 years old and over 70% of them are nulliparous at diagnosis, due to the fact that in the current era women delay their childbearing. The majority of endometrial cancers are diagnosed early stage (80% in stage I), with 5-year survival rates over 95%. Most endometrial cancer cases are sporadic, with only 10% considered familiar.
## (s2) Selection of patients: stage, grade and histopathology
(p2.0) When considering a conservative management approach, we should consider clinical and pathological characteristics of the tumor for can select the appropriate medical intervention. A conservative management approach could be considered in patients: <40 years old (relative indication), have to intent to preserve fertility and plan to conceive as soon as possible after remission, with no contraindication for medical treatment and with a histological diagnosis of grade I endometrial carcinoma; histotype: endometrioid with positive hormone receptor (tipe I), tumor diameter <2.0 cm, stage IA without myometrial and adnexal involvement, negative lymph-vascular space invasion (LVSI) and diffuse immunohistochemical expression of progesterone receptors on endometrial biopsy. These patients are considered as " low risk" population. According to Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) and

(p2.1) Federation International of Gynecologic and Obstretric (FIGO),the most important prognostic factors (10) for lymph node metastasis in patients with EC were the grade of tumor and the depth of myometrial invasion with the risk of involvement less than 1% and excellent 5-year progression-free survival of 95% if the tumor is grade 1 with an overall survival of 90%. In the absence of risk factors, a conservative approach to surgical staging is feasible, safe and not associated with an increase in cancer-related mortality (11).
## (s4) Selection of drug, dose, length of treatment
(p4.0) The standard treatment for EC is a hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, with or without lymph node dissection with pelvic washing, sometimes combine with adjuvant chemoterapy or radiotherapy is necessary. Although this is a highly effective approach, carrying a 5-year survival rate of 93%, it also results in a permanent loss of reproductive potential which is often unacceptable to younger women who wish to preserve their fertility. Therefore, selected patients with EC, are candidates for a conservative approach (2). Hence, fertility-sparing treatment with progestin is a good compromise for these women. Recently, hysteroscopic resection in addition to hormonal therapy followed by pregnancies in young women have been reported (17,18).
## (s7) Follow-up
(p7.0) In order to assess response, hysteroscopy and imaging at 6 months must be performed and not before. If no response is achieved after 6 months, standard surgical treatment should be performed. In case of complete response, conception must be encouraged and referral to a fertility clinic is recommend. Maintenance treatment should be considered in responders who wish to delay pregnancy. Patients not undergoing hysterectomy should be re-evaluated clinically every 6 months. After completion of childbearing, a hysterectomy and salpingo-oophorectomy should be recommended (30,31). The preservation of ovary can be considered depending on age and genetic risk factors. Hence, the follow-up of these patients under conservative treatment in the first year included serial transvaginal Ultrasonography (TV-US) every three months. A computed tomography scan (CAT) six months after surgery is recommended. Several authors performed check-ups with only TV-US or in association with CAT scans, every six month starting from the second years. A strictly follow-up during the period treatment is recommended (21,32). Hysterectomy should be recommended as the definitive treatment for patients with persistent disease. The need for bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy depends on the risk factor and therefore this possibility must be discussed with the patient. Patients who after 6 months of treatment have a partial response could be offered continuation of treatment for another 3 to 6 months.
## (s9) Outcomes
(p9.0) Primary outcomes are the evaluation of complete response to therapy, defined as the absence of disease on subsequent endometrial biopsy; we define partial response if the disease was downgraded to complex atypical hyperplasia. No response, defined as who have no evidence of response and progression is defined the presence of a higher grade of cancer on biopsy. Secondary outcomes are obstetrical outcomes (44,45).
