# CPU Scheduling Techniques: A Review on Novel Approaches Strategy and Performance Assessment

CorpusID: 218927747 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/96b4204f210373b81dcf23765ddacc0cb28569ea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/96b4204f210373b81dcf23765ddacc0cb28569ea)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s2) II. DEVELOPMENT OF CPU SCHEDULING TECHNIQUES
(p2.0) Scheduling system algorithms come in two basic types: (1) non-preemption, which means that, once the process is running it will continue to run until the CPU is out of control, while (2) preemption involves interrupting the process that is currently running for a certain critical CPU command [9].
## (s6) A. Classification based on scheduling Techniques
(p6.0) Many existing research papers done in the many fields of scheduling techniques in the CPU are discussed briefly. A huge number of researches have been devoted to fixed priority strategies, quantum time and other approaches to work through drawback in scheduling algorithm. This section reviews and categorizes the different CPU scheduling approaches. They can be classified into seven broad scheduling techniques which listed in Table I: FCFS, SJF preemptive and non-preemptive, preemptive priority, non-preemptive priority, RR, MLQS, MLFQS, and other scheduling based on approach strategy [15]. Table I indicates when each of the scheduling techniques has been implemented and the research paper that has been used for various years. Here, we divided the current task scheduling study into three separate periods as follows: 
## (s10) C. Classification based on Criteria Measure Performance
(p10.0) This section identifies the parameters based on the performance assessment used to analyze scheduling techniques. Existing papers also used a variety of applications of criteria measures, such as CPU, performance, turn-around time, waiting-time, response-time, fairness, and others. As we have seen from Table III, is the most metric used for assessing the overall performance of the scheduling techniques that were developed [47,48].   

(p10.1) As we are shown in Table IV, it concerns the efficiency of the various scheduling techniques analysis in this paper and the other techniques that apply to the scheduling algorithms discussed in terms of data set and performance. The most criteria based-measures utilize for performance assessment: turnaround time, waiting time, response time, and context switching are considerably respectively. Improve the efficiency of scheduling by minimizing CPU overhead and allocate it's fair to each process.
