# COLOR FEATURE WITH SPATIAL INFORMATION EXTRACTION METHODS FOR CBIR: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 216621194 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d033dd8f3a463745ef2dd163b17d39199659b46d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d033dd8f3a463745ef2dd163b17d39199659b46d)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) In the last years, the development of the multimedia applications led to widespread off digital images. Also, the developing of then images' sharing unlimited number of images via social media every day. However, managing and organizing these digital images present a problem. Thus, the concepts of indexing and retrieval were introduced to overcome this issue. Indexing relates to "how images are store in database to retrieve them (through querying) more efficient", whereas Retrieval relates to "how to retrieve images that are most relevant to the query image from images in database" [1,2,3]. At the First, Texts-Based Images Retrieval (TBISR) are used to achieve the image retrieval task. It's depend one metadata that related to each image and the retrieving of image task done by using traditional query techniques "using keyword". This method works well with small digital images databases but, it has low efficiency with huge database. The most important problem in TBIR is different users use different words to describe the same image (subjectivity of the human). This problem negatively affects the efficiency of the text-based image search, so, a need for more efficient image retrieval system is appeared. The needed system must perform an automatic indexing and retrieving. Therefore, the second method depending on image content for indexing and retrieving. Therefore, this method is generally known as Contents-Based Images Retrieval (CBIIR) [4]"."
## (s5) Locals Colors Histogram (LCH)
(p5.0) Then most widely used technique for color feature extracting off and image is colors histograms. It represents the image from a different perspective. Its represents them frequency distribution off color's bins inn and image. Its count's simila1r pixe1ls and store's it. There are tw1o types off color's histograms. Globa1l colo2r histograms and loca1l col1or histograms. Co1lor histogr1am is proposed ass and global1 color descriptor which analyze every statistica1l colors frequency inn and images". Local color histogram focuses them colo1rs distributions of regions. The spatial distribution off pixel is taken in calculation when using LCH, which is not calculated when using Global colors histogram. It calculated by segments the image into many segments or fix parts and then, the histogram is calculated these segments. Image will then be represented by whole histograms [4].
## (s6) Color Correlorgram
(p6.0) Spatial information of the extracted feature is the main drawback of the color histogram. For example, all the images shown in figure 2 have the same color proportion but, different spatial distribution Correlation histogram (correlogram) tries to fix this histogram's drawback by taking the spatial correlation of color distribution into account, and shows how them spatial correlation between pairs off colors are changing with distances [13].
## (s10) COMPAWRATIVE ANAHLYSIS
(p10.0) A comparative analysis off them color1 1feature extractions techniques1 with their advantages and disadvantages are shown inn tables1.  [26] An important issue while selecting them colors features extractions methods are storage space required\, scalability1, rotations invariants, computational2 times required and its feasibility, and efficient inn storages spaces and times. complexity parameters". Histograms is easy tow computes, but isn't robust and unique whereas using local color histogram solve a part of the problem since it gives a spatial information about each region of the image, and this approach is also computationally and easy approach. The correlogram solving the problem of histogram but it will increase the size of features' vector and effect the storage, and this will take more time. So, using the auto-correlogram will give approximately similar results and similar effects on the performance of the system with less values. In row sum and column sum the images must have same size in order to produce a same number of rows and columns for each image, these prove that these features are effected by the image size. Color coherence vector solve all the problems the previously discussed but it's computationally cost, to calculate the index vector, all image's pixels must be compared with all of its adjacent pixels to find out whether this pixel is belonging to coherence or incoherence group which is time consuming but success with CBIR systems due to its additional spatial information as mentioned in previous sections.
