# Perinatal depression: A review CLEVELAND CLINIC JOURNAL OF MEDICINE

CorpusID: 218480369 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1baffe997a3abc1d005680c984707431001e5986](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1baffe997a3abc1d005680c984707431001e5986)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s0) ■ DEFINITION AND PRESENTATION
(p0.0) Perinatal depression can occur during pregnancy (prenatally), the year following birth (postpartum), or both. Although feelings of weepiness and labile emotions, called the "baby blues," occur in up to 80% of new mothers within several days of delivery because of regulatory biochemical changes, these symptoms are usually brief and last no longer than 10 days. 2 Perinatal depression, on the other hand, lasts more than 14 days and impairs a woman's quality of life. Table 1 lists common symptoms.
## (s1) PERINATAL DEPRESSION
(p1.0) One of every 7 to 10 pregnant women and 1 of every 5 to 8 postpartum women develop a depressive disorder, which is more than a half million women each year. The mean rate of depression during the perinatal period is 11.5%. 3 Perinatal depression is thought to be the result of a complex interaction involving genetics, epigenetics, the neuroendocrine hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal axis, and environmental and social factors. No race or socioeconomic group is spared. 4,5 Some women are more sensitive to changes in their reproductive hormone levels during pregnancy and after delivery, which may make them more susceptible to perinatal depression. Some may also have an unrecognized underlying mood disorder. 2 Risk factors for perinatal depression include: • A history of depressive, bipolar, or anxiety disorders • A family history of depressive disorders or perinatal disorders • An unwanted or teenage pregnancy • A multiple birth • A diffi cult or traumatic pregnancy or birth • An ongoing health problem with the baby • A lack of social support with low socioeconomic status and fi nancial diffi culties • A history of physical or sexual abuse • A diagnosis of substance abuse disorder. 3,6-8 • American Indian/Alaska and Hawaii Native heritage; these groups have a 30% higher incidence of perinatal depression. Of note, other perinatal mental health conditions such as anxiety disorders, bipolar spectrum disorder, or postpartum psychosis may also occur. Perinatal anxiety disorders are common and can frequently coexist with depressive disorders. 9 In patients with pre-existing bipolar disorder, depressive, hypomanic, and manic episodes can occur, especially in the setting of sleep deprivation. 2 Postpartum psychosis is characterized by a delirium-like presentation with disorganized behavior and psychotic symptoms and is considered a medical emergency, though it is a rare event. It may also, in rare cases, be accompanied by hallucinations that tell the woman to harm herself or her baby. 10 
## (s2) ■ SERIOUS CONSEQUENCES IF UNTREATED
(p2.0) Untreated perinatal depression has serious consequences for mothers, their children and families, and society as a whole. During pregnancy, untreated depression is associated with a higher incidence of preterm delivery, preeclampsia, low birth weight, behavior disturbances in the baby at birth, and maternal suicide. 11,12 Untreated depression during the postpartum period also has repercussions for both the mother and her baby. For the mother, it can lead to intense sadness, marked anxiety, and 
## (s5) Suicide is the second-leading cause of death for women in the postpartum period ■ BIOMARKERS PREDICT
(p5.0) Promising research is focusing on the use of biomarkers to predict which patients will develop perinatal depression. One set of studies identifi ed 2 epigenetically modifi ed genes that can predict with 80% accuracy if a woman will develop depression in the immediate postpartum period. 33,34 While further validation is needed, these studies indicate that in the future, women may be able to be screened for postpartum depression while still pregnant.
## (s6) ■ PERINATAL DEPRESSION CAN BE PREVENTED IN SOME PATIENTS
(p6.0) The USPSTF reviewed 50 scientifi c studies that met their rigorous methodologic criteria and found good evidence that counseling interventions during pregnancy and the postpartum period are effective in preventing perinatal depression in some women. 35,36 Interventions were associated with a 39% decrease in the likelihood of perinatal depression in women who were at risk for depression and had been involved in therapeutic interventions before the onset of depression. Women who received counseling had one of the following risk factors: a personal or family history of depression, a history of physical or sexual abuse, socioeconomic insecurity, or recent negative life events. Two specifi c treatments had the greatest effect: interpersonal therapy and cognitive behavioral therapy, in either an individual or a group setting. Counseling sessions averaged 8 weeks in duration. The USPSTF concluded that counseling interventions can be effective in preventing perinatal depression in pregnant or postpartum women with an elevated risk of perinatal depression. 34 
