# Allometries in Plants as Drivers of Forage Nutritive Value: A Review

CorpusID: 213168665 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99216f514601ae921efd389e73f3da817ea725e5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99216f514601ae921efd389e73f3da817ea725e5)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The nutritive value of forage harvested for feeding domestic herbivores is generally estimated by two characteristics: (i) the concentration in Crude Protein (%CP) that corresponds roughly to N concentration (%N) with %CP = 6.25 × %N, and (ii) the concentration in metabolizable energy, i.e., the fraction of the total energy content of the forage dry mass being potentially digested and metabolized by animals. The fraction of forage mass being digested by animals can be expressed by its digestibility (%D). Digestibility can be measured directly on animals through the dry mass balance between ingestion and feces excretion or more simply estimated by in vitro digestion of forage samples in an artificial rumen (%ivD).

(p0.1) The pioneering works of Van Soest and Wine in 1967 [1] and Chesson in 1993 [2] provide the possibility to relate %D of forages to some chemical characteristics of plant tissues representing their degree of degradation within the rumen. These chemical characteristics are: Neutral Detergent Fiber (%NDF), Acid Detergent Fiber (%ADF), and Lignin (%L) concentrations. The whole forage mass (W) can be separated in a first fraction: W-ADF with highly digestible plant tissues (%D = 100%) corresponding roughly to cytoplasmic components while ADF corresponds to cell wall content; a second fraction, NDF-ADF, corresponds to the cell wall fraction, having a moderate level of degradability, and the third fraction ADF would represent the non-degradable cell wall. So the digestibility of the whole plant is, in the first approximation, determined by the proportion between these three plant tissue fractions. But as the digestibility of the ADF fraction is very variable, the use of these three biochemical fractions for predicting the energy value of forages through chemical analysis is very unprecise.

(p0.2) It is very important for grassland management and livestock farming to develop a fine-tuned model representing the trade-offs between the dynamic of forage accumulation and the correlative decline in forage nutritive value for adapting the best strategy in the timing of grazing or mowing. Coupling forage growth models with nutritive forage models are of great importance for providing farmers and stockbreeders to optimize their production systems. The objective of this review paper is to show the limits and insufficiency of the normative approach relating forage nutritive value to plant phenology for predicting forage nutritive value and to establish the basis for a more functional approach allowing the expression of the causal link between plant biomass accumulation processes and the ontogenetic decline in the nutritive value of forages.
## (s4) Are the Leaf/Stem Ratio or the Leaf Proportion Relevant Indicators of Forage Digestibility?
(p4.0) Several attempts were made to use the Leaf/Stem ratio or the fractional leaf mass within the forage mass (WL/W; WL being the leaf mass) for explaining the variability in forage digestibility [25] or as an indicator of forage digestibility. If we accept that the Wm/Ws ratio or the Wm/W are the main drivers of forage digestibility, the question arises whether or not the Leaf/Stem ratio and the leaf proportion are relevant estimates of the Wm/Ws ratio and the Wm/W ratio, respectively. This assumption is relatively well verified for forage species such as alfalfa and timothy, for which leaf tissues contain very few structural components such as petioles or midribs (Figures 6 and 7).
## (s5) Towards an Integrated Approach of Forage Nutritive Value at the Canopy Level
(p5.0) The different results presented and discussed above demonstrate that plant growth processes, i.e., the increase in plant size through its architectural development, is the main driver of the decline in forage nutritive value. As plants increase in size, their investment in structural tissues proportionally increases, and in parallel, the maturation of these tissues necessary for supporting an increasing plant weight leads to a decline of the digestibility of the whole plant associated with the dilution of its N concentration. Consequently, as well shown above, plant phenology, even if correlatively linked with forage mass accumulation through time, is not directly the driver of forage nutritive value. Drivers of forage nutritive value have to be determined at the plant morphogenesis and architecture level: phytomer (lamina, petiole or sheath, and stem internode) appearance and growth. Moreover, these drivers have also to be analyzed at the canopy level: a collection of individual plants interacting with each other for competition for light.

(p5.1) As shown by Figure 10, the less productive alfalfa cultivar 6328P has a lower stem height population than Europe but has a higher digestibility because the digestibility of stems is mainly determined by stem height. So the stem internode elongation as a determinant of the stem height seems to be the main driver of the decline of forage digestibility with forage mass accumulation.

(p5.2) (A) (B) Figure 10. Distribution of stem height within an alfalfa stand for two cultivars (A) and the relationship between stem height and digestibility of stems (B). Data obtained at Lusignan (46.46° N; 0.07° E; France) and the graph was redrawn from Lemaire and Allirand [25].

(p5.3) As well demonstrated by Vallet et al. [43], stem internode diameter continues to increase after internodes have reached their final length, and this stem diameter enlargement is accompanied by an increasing cell wall deposition in secondary xylem and phloem with an increasing lignin deposition ( Figure 11). During the stem growth process, any new stem internode appearing at the top of the stem, along with its corresponding leaf area, corresponds to highly digestible plant tissues. This production of digestible plant tissues is counterbalanced by the "maturation" of basal stem internodes having less and less digestibility because of an accumulation of more and more lignin components within cell walls during stem diameter enlargement through cambial activity.

(p5.4) As shown in Figure 12, the digestibility of each internode should be determined by its distance to the top of the canopy. So as stem height increases during the growth period, the upper internodes having high digestibility are progressively diluted within an increasing mass of maturing internodes leading to a control of whole stem digestibility by stem height. As demonstrated clearly by Moulia et al. [42], the perception by plants of mechanical constraints leads to the control of both stem internode length and diameter and also cell wall and lignin deposition. As stem height increases, mechanical constraint increases, and the internode cell wall "maturation" is accelerated, leading to the decrease in stem digestibility with stem height. In a similar way, Lemaire et al. [44] have shown that N distribution among leaves within alfalfa canopies follows the light extinction profile. So both digestibility and N concentration decline from the top layers to the bottom layers of alfalfa stands as forage mass increases. Figure 12. Evolution of the structure of an alfalfa stand during a spring growth period showing the length of the successive internodes on the dominant stems. As the digestibility of each internode and the N concentration in its associated leaf area is determined by its relative position within canopy layers, it is then possible to represent the whole canopy as being consisting of a more or less constant "Skin", an upper envelope of young growing internodes and their well-illuminated leaves having high digestibility and a high N concentration, and an increasing "Core", consisting of maturing stem internodes having a decreasing digestibility associated with shaded and senescing leaves with a low N concentration. Adapted from Vallet et al. [45].
