# Do Curriculum-Based Social and Emotional Learning Programs in Early Childhood Education and Care Strengthen Teacher Outcomes? A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 211085727 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f04a7a481e7dc9608d7552dc2cf9a4cdcd35bac](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f04a7a481e7dc9608d7552dc2cf9a4cdcd35bac)

Fields: Education, Medicine

## (s6) Study Aim
(p6.0) Closer examination of the impact of universal curriculum-based interventions (i.e., programs that include explicit SEL skill instruction and are delivered at the class-wide level) on a broad range of teacher-level outcomes is needed to understand the domains in which teachers benefit from SEL programs, and the pathways by which SEL programs can influence children's developmental trajectories [33]. The aim of the present paper, therefore, was to systematically examine the following research questions: (i) what type of teacher outcomes have been evaluated in studies examining universal curriculum-based SEL programs in ECEC settings, and what measures have been used to capture domains of teacher behaviour, practice, and wellbeing?; (ii) what does the literature reveal about the effectiveness of universal curriculum-based SEL programs in ECEC settings for teacher outcomes?; (iii) are certain program characteristics associated with program benefits?; and (iv) what are the methodological limitations of research examining the impact of universal curriculum-based SEL programs on teacher outcomes, and what recommendations can be made for future research?
## (s8) Search Strategy and Study Selection
(p8.0) This systematic review was conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines [34]. Three electronic databases, MEDLINE Complete, PsychINFO and ERIC were searched using combinations of the following key terms: intervention*, program*, curricul* and "early learning centre", "early learning center", preschool, preschool*, "pre school", "pre-school", childcare, "childcare", kinder*, "pre kindergarten", "pre-kindergarten", "pre-K", "pre K", "day care", daycare, "Head Start", HeadStart and social, emotion*, social-emotional, "SEL", "self-esteem", empathy, "emotional intelligence", "conflict resolution", "problem solving", resilien*, aggress*, anxi*, prevent*, externali*, internali*, withdraw* and educator*, teacher*, leader*. Additional articles were identified by scanning reference lists of included studies and relevant systematic reviews. The search aimed to identify peer-reviewed studies that evaluated the impact of universal, curriculum-based SEL programs in ECEC settings on teacher outcomes, published in English between 1999 and 2019. All database searches were carried out between July to August 2019.
## (s12) Review Procedures and Data Abstraction
(p12.0) The systematic search identified 4205 articles after the removal of duplicates ( Figure 1). All titles and abstracts were screened by one author (C.B.), with a second author (A.O.) independently co-screening 10% of the titles and abstracts; agreement for articles to be read in full was 100% after discussion. One hundred and ninety-nine papers were read in full, with 15 included in the review. Two articles that provided data relating to the same study were combined [35,36]. The following pre-specified data were extracted from each study: (i) ECEC setting; (ii) study design; (iii) sample size (number of teachers); (iv) teacher characteristics; (v) type of control group; (vi) SEL program; (vii) program components; (viii) teacher education component where relevant; (ix) outcome, outcome measure and informant (teacher, observer); and (x) findings, including effect sizes where reported by the author. 
## (s18) Effects of SEL Intervention on Teaching Practice and Behaviours
(p18.0) The four studies that examined the impact of the Preschool PATHS curriculum on teaching practice and behaviour reported improvement post intervention [35,38,44,50]. Intervention group teachers outperformed controls who did not participate in a SEL intervention on a measure capturing effective discipline, emotional communication and support, social awareness and problem solving, and behaviour management in Arda and Ocak [38], and a trend towards improvement on the same measure was observed in another study of 29 Turkish teachers [50], who also found enhanced classroom environment quality in favour of intervention group participants.

(p18.1) The emotional climate (assessed as emotion expression, emotion regulation and emotional modelling) and effective classroom management subscales of the TSRS suggested greater improvement in teachers who delivered Preschool PATHS at post-intervention compared to a comparison group in Domitrovich and colleague's study [35]. An intervention effect did not emerge for positive discipline, however intervention teachers scored significantly higher on the proactive/preventive classroom management subscale. PATHS teachers also demonstrated greater emotional support on the CLASS measure. However, this did not reach statistical significance. Analyses of individual subscales however suggested a significant and moderate intervention effect on positive climate, and a borderline significant effect on teacher sensitivity. Improvement in the instructional support scale also reached borderline significance. Groups in this study did not differ on measures of productivity, quality of feedback, concept development or instructional learning formats. Teachers did, however, make more statements and ask more questions than control group peers based on the Classroom Language and Literacy Environmental Observation measure.

(p18.2) Bierman et al. [36] conducted follow-up assessments at one year post-intervention for 82% of the teachers who implemented the Preschool PATHS curriculum in Domitrovich et al.'s [35] study. Teachers who had delivered Preschool PATHS rated higher on the emotional climate scale and all subscales (emotional expression, emotion regulation, and emotional modelling) of the TSRS and the emotional support scale of the CLASS. Intervention effects favouring PATHS teachers were also reported for the positive discipline scale of the TSRS. The classroom management scale reached borderline significance, however there were no meaningful group differences for instructional support assessed by the CLASS measure. Teachers who participated in PATHS also asked children more general questions one year post-intervention, with differences in the number of statements, contextualized talk, ratings of sensitivity and richness of talk appearing marginally significant in favour of the intervention group.

(p18.3) In a cluster-randomised controlled trial, Lonigan et al. [44] compared a literacy and math-focused preschool curriculum including Preschool PATHS lessons (explicit SEL) and a version where teachers were provided with professional development and guidance on behaviour management but these skills were not the focus of any specific classroom activity (implicit SEL), to a business-as-usual condition. Observations showed that both intervention groups (with and without explicit SEL curricula) made significant improvements in classroom community, use of lesson plans, and team teaching compared to controls, albeit the two intervention groups did not differ significantly from each other on these outcomes. The curricula without explicit SEL lessons appeared to improve teachers' use of effective discipline strategies, however this did not emerge for the explicit SEL group. The two SEL groups did not differ from controls on measures of teacher sensitivity or learning centres (the provision of engaging and age-appropriate materials linked to learning themes).

(p18.4) Using a similar research design, another study compared the Responsive Early Childhood Curriculum with and without explicit social-emotional classroom activities to a control group receiving no intervention. Childcare teachers in both intervention groups (with and without the explicit SEL component) outperformed comparison group peers on a measure of teacher responsiveness and instruction. The inclusion of explicit SEL activities did not appear to strengthen the intervention effect [43].
## (s20) Effects of SEL Intervention on Social-Emotional Wellbeing
(p20.0) Only one study considered the impact of SEL on teachers' social-emotional wellbeing. Jackman and colleagues [42] evaluated the OpenMind curriculum, including child, teacher and parent components. Teachers attended a five-day training course focused on meditation, were requested to meditate for 20 minutes per day and facilitate daily practices with children in their classrooms. Authors revealed that intervention teachers were better able to describe their feelings compared with controls, albeit there was no effect on other aspects of dispositional mindfulness: observing, acting with awareness, non-judging and non-reactivity. Results suggested a slight increase in teacher stress in the intervention group, and a slight decrease in the control group; however, this did not reach statistical significance.
## (s25) Program Characteristics Associated with Improvement in Teacher-Level Outcomes
(p25.0) SEL programs shared a common goal to strengthen educators' capability to foster children's social-emotional skills through explicit and active instruction, modelling, reinforcement, and practice, albeit differing in several respects including the SEL competencies targeted, program intensity and duration, and the extent to which educators' own social-emotional wellbeing was addressed. Based on the research currently available, it is difficult to specify SEL program characteristics associated with program success.

(p25.1) A common feature across studies, however, was the professional learning support offered to educators. Many SEL programs paired comprehensive teacher education with regular consultation focused on educators' knowledge of strengthening social-emotional development in the preschool setting. Research suggests behaviour change in early years settings is most likely when specific training is combined with on-the-job coaching, feedback on observed performance, assistance with planning and implementation, and support with challenges and decision-making [63]. It is possible the sustained support offered as part of SEL interventions prompted teachers' continued awareness of their teaching practices and interactions, and strengthened their ability to effectively guide children's attention and behaviour. Specifically, the specialized training prior to SEL intervention may have strengthened teachers' attitudes, knowledge, and skills by allowing for rehearsal (e.g. through practice, role play) and individualized feedback [64], while the coaching and ongoing support may have increased the likelihood that these skills were embedded into educators' everyday practice.
## (s26) Methodological Limitations in the Evidence and Future Recommendations
(p26.0) There are several limitations to the current evidence base that should be acknowledged in interpreting the findings. While many studies were strengthened by the use of controlled designs, validated scales to measure teacher-level outcomes and moderate to high study quality, they varied in the teacher-level outcomes explored, the type of SEL intervention examined, and the form and extent of professional learning offered. Variability in methodologies and measures is indicative of the multi-faceted nature of educational research, and creates complexity when comparing and integrating results across studies, particularly with regards to identifying components of SEL intervention that offer particular benefit for teacher outcomes. The CASEL framework which guided this review emphasizes the importance of a systemic approach to children's SEL, with integrated and coordinated supports and policies across classroom, service, family, and community levels [23]. It was not possible to ascertain the broader supports offered to educators within the included studies, which may have influenced intervention effects.

(p26.1) Furthermore, it is possible that teacher-level outcomes may mediate or moderate teachers' ability to effectively deliver the SEL curriculum. Continued exploration of the linkages between: (i) curriculum-based SEL programs, (ii) professional development and supports, (iii) teacher-level outcomes, and (iv) child outcomes is needed to understand the active ingredients and core components of successful programs. Additionally, investigation into the relative importance and effectiveness of teacher education, SEL curriculum, and the combination of both on teacher and child outcomes would benefit future SEL program development.

(p26.2) Finally, there lacks evidence of the sustainability of improvements in teacher outcomes over time. Only one study included a follow-up assessment [35,36] and the potential benefits of SEL curriculum for ongoing teaching practice is unknown. It is vital that researchers utilise longitudinal methods to better understand the components of SEL program design that lead to social-emotional skill growth, for both teachers and children.
## (s27) Strengths and Limitations of the Current Review
(p27.0) This review is strengthened by the clearly focused and pre-specified research questions, a thorough and systematic literature search and screening process, detailed data extraction, and assessment of study quality using a validated quality assessment tool. However, the exclusion of unpublished literature and dissertations, studies that were reported in languages other than English, and studies published prior to 1999 means it is possible relevant studies have been missed, potentially introducing bias into the results. Furthermore, due to the heterogeneity in study designs and outcome measures, global effect sizes were not calculated and the review relied on a non-qualitative analysis. As more research becomes available, statistical synthesis of effect sizes across domains of teaching practice, behaviour, and wellbeing may provide further insight [65]. Finally, while the randomised controlled trials captured in this review offer high levels of internal validity, the ecological validity of findings in everyday practice may be limited.
