# Stable Isotopes of Water and Nitrate for the Identification of Groundwater Flowpaths: A Review

CorpusID: 213032175 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/658bad03b0a53c53cecae99d32a8a2136dbd2f1f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/658bad03b0a53c53cecae99d32a8a2136dbd2f1f)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Identifying groundwater flowpaths can provide important information regarding the movements of water itself and of contaminants therein via interaction with surface water. For example, contaminants can be discharged directly into the stream water but, if they are recharged into groundwater that then passes indirectly into stream water, the groundwater can contribute significantly to the water quality of the stream [1]. In particular, since nitrate is highly mobile and primarily originates from nonpoint source pollution, it is distributed across a wide area through various groundwater flowpaths and it can be difficult to trace the source [2]. In order to effectively control the spread of contaminants, and to clean up the contaminated stream water, it is therefore important to understand the flowpath of groundwater [3].
## (s1) Hydrograph Separation
(p1.0) Hydrograph separation is the separation of streamflow components into two or more different components that contribute to the stream in a small catchment area or watershed. For example, isotopic hydrograph separation using isotopic tracers was first proposed by Dincer et al. [32], was developed by Sklash and Farvolden [19], and has been evaluated in many studies [33]. The isotopic hydrograph separation technique is based on the assumption that two components contribute to the stream after the precipitation occurs, namely: (1) The runoff caused by the rainwater (new water) and (2) the groundwater (old water). To separate the stream water discharge into rainwater and groundwater components, a two-component mixing model was used. The following mass balance equations introduced by Sklash and Farvolden [19] can be used:

(p1.1) where Q indicates the discharge of each component, C is the concentration of an observed tracer or an isotopic composition, the subscripts t, r, and g indicate total discharge, rainwater, and groundwater, respectively, and is the ratio of stream water contributed by rainwater ( = ).
## (s3) Isotopes in Precipitation
(p3.0) Unlike other tracers, stable water isotopes are added naturally on the scale of the watershed by precipitation (rain or snowmelt events) and, upon entering the watershed, undergo transport according to the natural movement of the body of water through the watershed. Since the stable isotope compositions of the water only change via the above-mentioned mixing and fractionation processes during evaporation and condensation, these environmental isotopes (supplied by meteoric processes) can be used to trace and identify the different air and water masses contributing precipitation to the watershed [5]. Moreover, since precipitation is a major source of water in the hydrological cycle, an understanding of the processes that control the spatial and temporal isotopic composition distributions of precipitation is essential [5].

(p3.1) In general, the fractionation processes of the stable hydrogen and oxygen isotopes are similar; hence, their behavior in the hydrological cycle is also similar [43]. This similarity causes covariance between the stable hydrogen and oxygen isotope concentrations found in most meteoric water, as first observed by Friedman [44].This covariance can be explained by the following relationship, which was defined by Craig [8]:
## (s7) Pretreatment Method for Nitrate Isotope Analysis
(p7.0) Dual isotope analysis of nitrates (δ 15 N and δ 18 O) can be a powerful tool for identifying nitrate sources and nitrate cycling mechanisms in stream water because the different sources have isotopically distinct δ 15 N and δ 18 O compositions [77,78]. Over the past few decades, several pretreatment methods have been developed to concentrate dissolved nitrates for dual isotope analysis. Until recently, almost all nitrates for both δ 15 N and δ 18 O analysis were prepared using modifications of the silver nitrate method, in which samples are concentrated on anion exchange resins, eluted, and purified to produce AgNO3 [78,79]. The AgNO3 obtained from freeze drying is mixed with a catalyst composed of CuO/Cu wire/CaO and heated to 850 °C in a sealed reactor to generate N2 gas for δ 15 N analysis by IRMS. Meanwhile, δ 18 O is analyzed by mixing AgNO3 with graphite (spectroscopic analysis grade) to obtain CO gas by pyrolysis or CO2 gas by complete combustion. The combined techniques have been successfully used and published in studies from Alpine, agricultural, and urban environments [3,80]. The ion exchange method described above has the advantages of easy transport and storage, direct applicability in the field, and minimal isotope fractionation of nitrate during ion exchange. However, disadvantages of the ion exchange method include the long time and large cost of sample preparation, and interference due to the presence of other anions (Cl − , SO4 2− ) in the sample. In addition, a relatively large amount of sample is required for precise analysis.

(p7.1) Another nitrate pretreatment method is denitrification by inoculation with a pure culture of denitrifying bacteria that lack the enzyme to reduce nitrate beyond N2O [81,82]. The gas is then analyzed by IRMS. Microbial denitrification provides a saving in time and cost of sample preparation compared to the silver nitrate method and requires a small amount of sample. Nevertheless, this method involves a long time for culturing the microorganisms and the activity of the microorganisms is affected by toxic substances (antibiotics, heavy metals, pesticides, etc.) in the sample. Moreover, the presence of NO2 − may distort the composition of the N2O gas. In order to solve these problems, an advanced method of chemically reducing nitrate to N2O gas was described by McIlvin and Altabet [83]. In this technique, nitrate (NO3 − ) is converted to nitrite (NO2 − ) using cadmium reduction and then to nitrous oxide (N2O) using a 1:1 azide and acetic acid solution. The N2O gas is analyzed in the same manner as in the microbial denitrification method. This chemical reduction method can significantly reduce the time and cost required for sample preparation and requires a small amount of sample for analysis. In addition, unlike microbial denitrification, it is not affected by toxic substances contained in the sample. However, there is a risk of exposure to dangerous chemicals (cadmium, sodium azide) during the sample pretreatment, and inaccurate data can be obtained due to the NO2 − in the sample, as with microbial denitrification.
## (s10) Implications of the Flowpath of Water and Nitrates
(p10.0) The stable isotope of nitrate (δ 15 N and δ 18 O) can be used to trace the nitrate sources in water bodies because nitrate contaminants usually have distinct isotope compositions [7]. In order to increase the reliability of contaminant tracking, there is a need for a multilateral investigation of precipitation, land-use type and area utilization rates, synthetic fertilizers, animal wastes, the presence of point sources (septic tanks and landfills), and the presence of sewer systems. In addition, hydrogeological data such as groundwater flow rate and direction, aquifer geometry, matrix characteristics, nitrate concentrations, electrical conductivity (EC), redox potential (Eh), and dissolved oxygen (DO) can be used to assess variations in the level of contaminants as well as for tracking contaminant sources.

(p10.1) While isotope analysis is a useful tool for tracking nitrate contaminants, isotope fractionation by nitrification, denitrification, and the presence of multiple contaminants continue to make this difficult. Hence, the use of water stable isotope analysis in combination with the isotopic composition of nitrates may improve the reliability of source identification.
## (s11) Summary and Perspectives
(p11.0) Nitrate contamination of stream water has become an environmental problem of global concern [99]. To identify the nitrate source is an effective approach to controlling discharge and emissions of nitrate contamination of stream water. In recent decades, dual nitrate isotope analysis (δ 15 N and δ 18 O) has been used as a useful tool for identifying the source and flowpath of nitrate contaminants in water bodies. We have tried to demonstrate in this paper an understanding of the identification water sources and flowpaths process, and the proportion of various sources contributing to stream water via water and nitrate stable isotope technique. However, the application of this method has some limitations due to the multiple nitrogen sources and the influence of isotopic fractionation [99]. In details, nitrates are subjected to multiple physical, chemical, and biological fractionation processes during transport from the original nitrate source to water bodies, and these reactions are influenced by such factors as land-use types, climate, and hydrogeological conditions. Besides, the stable isotope values of nitrate vary according to country or region due to the various regional conditions. To enable the quick and accurate analysis of nitrogen contaminant sources for water bodies, it is therefore suggested that data on the stable isotope values of nitrate from various contaminant sources should be collected in order to establish a global and regional isotope database. For identifying the contaminant sources and tracing the flowpath, it is therefore of great significance to study the influencing factors and transformation processes of nitrates.
