# A Review of Concepts, Benefits, and Challenges for Future Electrical Propulsion-Based Aircraft

CorpusID: 216322299 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/07ee16665802aa90c23ee5ad7bd2b48de5c303f2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/07ee16665802aa90c23ee5ad7bd2b48de5c303f2)

Fields: Engineering

## (s2) Electrical Propulsion System Concepts
(p2.0) The idea of electrifying the propulsion system yielded to a realm of propulsion system configurations, falls into three primary domains: 1-fully electric, 2-turboelectric, and 3-hybrid electric. The configurations are characterized as per the extent of usage of the electrical energy source and based on the electrical powertrain arrangement. A fully electric system relies upon a battery or some other means of electrical energy source as a sole means to power the propulsion system. Such design features the advantages of a highly efficient conversion system and is the only configuration which has the potential for zero inflight emission and is much quieter in operation. A few publicized conceptualized designs in the fully electric category are: NASA's SCEPTOR X-57, in the general aviation sector, Bauhaus Luftfahrt's VoltAir [16], and Ce-Liner [17] designs in the regional and single-aisle segments, respectively. The majority of the aircrafts in this category are designed for smaller size, with a few exceptions. Gnadt et al. [13] study presented a survey on fixed wing airframe based fully-electric aircraft conceptualized designs.
## (s4) Distributed Electric Propulsion System Design-Benefits and Challenges
(p4.0) Distributed propulsion is termed for the approach in which the propulsors are distributed effectively across the aircraft body for enhancement of the aero-propulsion integration benefits [47,48]. By adopting such mechanism, the propulsors become an integral part in improving the overall vehicle efficiency. The benefits can be achieved for improved aerodynamic efficiency or in propulsion efficiency. A demonstrator aircraft from NASA, Cruise Efficient Short Take-off and Landing (CESTOL), employed a DP concept to get the benefit of a shorter take-off and landing distance [49]. The design employs twelve small engines that spread across the upper surface of the hybrid wing body. The Distributed Electric Propulsion (DEP) approach expands on the central idea of the DP concept, in which the electrically driven propulsors are connected to a centrally located energy source and transmitted through an electrical transmission system. The DEP enhances the benefits of a DP system leveraging primarily on two attributes of the electrical system. Firstly, due to the inherent flexibility and adaptive capabilities of the electric transmission system, which makes the distribution of the propulsors possible near to the aerodynamic surface of the airframe. Secondly, due to the scale invariance feature in electrical components that makes implementation feasible, for propulsors of any size, without compromising its performance. Aided further, the compactness of the electrical components offers flexibility of placing them y elsewhere in the aircraft body. While the DEP concept can possibly be implemented in conjunction with variety of propulsion configurations, it is believed that a turboelectric configuration with a DEP (TeDP) system holds the largest potential for efficiency improvement [50][51][52]. A large spectrum of aircraft designs has been conceptualized to this effect both on conventional and unconventional airframe designs. Ce-Liner utilizes a C-shape airframe [53], ECO-150 series designs are configured both for tube-and-wing and split-wing airframes s [28]. A blended wing body (BWB) airframe is considered in the N3-X design [23]. Though the common understanding is that a DEP system in serial or turboelectric configuration gives additional aerodynamic benefits, there are few studies made on hybrid electric configuration with a DP approach [54,55].

(p4.1) One of the early designs that established benefits of a DEP system configuration is N3-X aircraft in the 300-passenger capacity (PAX) segment. The design utilizes an array of 14 electrically powered ducted fans spanned across the airframe, supplied from two turboshaft driven generators located on the wingtips. The N3-X concept utilizes BLI distributed propulsion system across a BWB airframe to achieve 50% aerodynamic efficiency improvement. In addition, the turboelectric configuration enables a high effective BPR design, that further yields 4-8% improvement in the propulsion efficiency [23,24].

(p4.2) In the single-aisle narrow bodied segment, the ECO-150 regional airliner employs a TeDP configuration with eight electrically driven propulsors embedded between the upper and lower surface of a split-wing airframe. The split-wing DP system gives the benefit of achieving a high-lift coefficient through super-circulation of redirected jet flow from the exit nozzle. The proposed concept also merits from structural weight and aerodynamic drag reduction benefits with an overall gain in the fuel efficiency [49]. Another conceptual design from ESAero considers an aft-fuselage mounted BLI propulsor alongside the wing embedded distributed BLI propulsors, with a serial/parallel partial hybrid arrangement. The STARC-ABL demonstrator has implemented the simplest approach of DEP by employing a single aft propulsor. The propulsor is supplied with electrical power, generated and transmitted from the underwing mounted turbofan engines. [26]. Figure 2 illustrates few promising DEP designs from NASA under various projects. A DEP system enables many radical design options in the airframe body; those are primarily tailored to make tight coupling of the propulsion system to the wing body surface to get the synergistic aero-propulsion integration benefits. The extent of the benefits out of such an arrangement is dependent on the type of propulsor, e.g., a ducted fan or a propeller and its proximity to the airframe body surfaces such as the wing, fuselage, or tail.
## (s8) Performance Metrics
(p8.0) Aircraft NOx emission is the major source of the atmospheric pollution in the higher altitudes which is currently regulated by Committee on Aviation Environmental Protection (CAEP)-ICAO prescribed certification standards. These standards are defined as Landing and Take-off (LTO) cycles comprising four operating cycles, i.e., approach, LTO, and taxiing. In addition to the LTO cycle, the environmental standards also set forth reduction goals for the cruise NOx emission level, which is majorly established as a function of temperature and pressure at combustor inlet and the combustor mixing zone average temperature [52]. The burgeoning fuel efficiency improvement demand drove the advanced engine design for a higher overall pressure ratio design, which demands high temperature and pressure at the combustor inlet. In order to get a best design, a trade-off to be made between the cycle efficiency, NOx emission, and the material temperature constraints, in which, often a specific fuel consumption (SFC) gain was chosen over the NOx emission aspect [92]. However, a few technologies explored in the present time showed potential for improvement in NOx emission; those are: water/steam injection, rich burn quick quench-lean burn (RQL), lean premix pre-vaporized (LPP), lean direct injection (LDI), and advanced twin annular premixing swirler combustors [52,93]. The Graham et al. NOx emission prediction study [94] showcases that current and future engine designs well comply to the current time ICAO standards. Furthermore, the same study had reached a consensus that NOx emission reduction targets in the N+3 timeframe are achievable with use of a lean-burn combustor technology. The prescribed technology enhances the NOx emission reduction potential, either by reducing the combustion temperature with the increase in the local air to fuel ratio or by adopting means for splitting the fuel flow into different streams to be directly ejected to different combustion locations.
## (s12) Electric Aircraft Sizing Challenges & Developments
(p12.0) The traditional aircraft sizing process is performed based on the premises of balancing the thrust to drag with the fuel flow within the set operational and performance constraints defined by the top-level requirements. It involves a multidisciplinary analysis comprising three major disciplines: aerodynamic, structure, and a fuel-based propulsion system largely based on established correlation-based scaling laws. The methodology involves a great deal of iterations between the engine performance module and the aircraft performance module. The novelty added in recent years for minimizing the iterations is using a multi-point design approach [129]. Hybrid electric configurations deviate from the conventional ones due to the presence of two energy sources with distinct characteristics-a fixed weight battery and variable weight fuel. The sizing of the components is determined based on the degree of hybridization and the operation strategy decides the fuel consumption rate. These characteristic features of hybrid electric propulsion make the performance mission time dependent. The conventional sizing methodology environment does not have the resiliency of capturing the characteristics of a hybrid electric system. Also, this concept entails inclusion of new electrical and thermal system components to the existing propulsion system. There are significant differences that must be accounted for sizing an electric aircraft and to explore the design space, hence, modification in the sizing method are entailed. In the wake of this demand, the existing aircraft sizing tools are being revamped in order to include the unique feature of electric propulsion concepts. The following sections introduce the challenges and requirements of developing an aircraft sizing methodology and modeling framework and ongoing development.
## (s13) Sizing Tool
(p13.0) As an initial development, a sizing methodology for fully electric aircraft is proposed for general aviation applications [130][131][132][133][134], where the Breguet-range equation is modified for a battery sourced propulsion system. In further developments, Nam et al. [135] and Cinar et al. [136][137][138] proposed power-based sizing methods featuring multiple but generalized energy source paths. These are considered as very elementary design environments, with mere modifications in the existing propulsion system, and with added features of electrical energy source. Isikveren et al. [139] methodology considered a simplified graphical based method for sizing the electric aircraft with dual energy sources in the propulsion system, however, the energy sources do not feature the unique characteristics particular to the electrical energy storage. Riboldi et al. [134,140] presented a generalized sizing methodology based on predicting weight fractions using statistical regression methods, albeit applicable to smaller aircraft. The proposed method utilizes the sizing matrix plot which is a function of wing loading and power load, and imposed certification and regulation constraints on top of it for finding the viable design space. These methodologies do not include the sizing and operational impact from inclusion of the newly added propulsion system components and, thus, lack the design versatility stemming from a hybrid electric system.
## (s14) Multidisciplinary Optimization Framework
(p14.0) Besides the introduced design variable for optimizing the energy schedule in a hybrid electric configuration, the attributed aerodynamic benefits of the propulsion concepts like BLI or DEP have to be established based on strong coupled interactions between the propulsion and aerodynamic performance tools. The analysis needs to be done for change in the operational behavior and physical design characteristics of the aircraft. This concept introduces a significantly higher number of operational variables to be considered for the optimization study. Furthermore, the electrical system performance features the coupled interaction with the thermal management system. Other aspects include re-orientation of the propulsion system lay-out for the radial aircraft design associated structural implication. The possible interactions between the different subsystems were considered when estimating the benefits at the global level. A fully-coupled propulsion-aerodynamic model in a multidisciplinary optimization environment is necessary to assess the benefits with more accuracy. In the study presented by Schnell et al. [149], a coupled integration was established between streamline curvature method based BLI aft-fan design and the gas turbine performance tool EVA [150] for a partially turboelectric configuration. Though physics-based models are used, the study lacks an optimization study for the design.

(p14.1) Perullo et al. [151] defined the electric aircraft sizing process with three distinct steps: determining the fidelity level in the system-modeling, selecting the energy management approach, and the optimization technique. A low-fidelity linearized modeling and simulation tool is necessary for the weight and size estimation for the components for the design space exploration, whereas high-fidelity models are necessary for the assessment of the closed coupled interaction between different disciplines such as aerodynamics and propulsion. Martin et al. [152] divided the optimization technique in to two broad categories: monolithic and distributed architecture based. The monolithic architecture considers a single optimization problem. Monolithic architectures become computationally expensive in an environment when the coupling variables between the disciplines grow larger. Most of the optimization studies performed to date are made for single objective monolithic architecture. The distributed approach breaks the optimization problem into a set of sub-problems with subsets of variables and constraints and generally proves to be computationally efficient [153]. The monolithic approach becomes computationally expensive when it involves many disciplines with higher fidelity tools and multiple design variables. Perullo et al. [151] proposed a pre-sizing methodology using the elements from model predictive control (MPC) and concurrent optimization to formulate a new structure for the aircraft sizing. In this, the design problem is classified to two sub-level problems; the high-level optimization problem uses design parameters for the coupled propulsion system-airframe and the low-level optimizer uses the MPC algorithm to optimize the mission adaptive design variables such as the power split. The optimization architecture reduces the number of coupling variables between different disciplines, and thus makes the sizing and optimization procedure efficient and less computationally expensive.

(p14.2) The PEGASUS design analysis uses a low-order multidisciplinary optimization environment created by extending the features of the NPSS and FLOPS tools. The performance of the gas turbine and propeller and the electrical system were built with use of NPSS, whereas the aircraft aerodynamics, sizing, weight, and performance were developed utilizing the FLOPS tool. The split between the electric and mechanical shaft power is discretized and the vehicle performance model outputs the battery sizing. The performance of the propulsion system was imported to the ModelCentre based optimization framework to minimize the MTOW. The optimization environment uses wing area and maximum take-off thrust as the two design variables; however, it lacks the coupled interaction between the aerodynamics and structural disciplines [42,43]. Applicable to thin-haul aircraft, a sizing method with an optimization study for the fuel consumption/take-off thrust is proposed by authors Silva et al. [154] The sizing methodology duly accounts for the aero-propulsive interaction and the impact of power scheduling on the sizing of the energy source.

(p14.3) Trajectory analysis is an important part of the aircraft optimization study, traditionally made for fuel burn or range, but could be utilized for noise prediction and propulsion system sizing and mission performance. The time-varying operational behavior of a hybrid electric aircraft and the imparted impact on the physical design of the aircraft motivates a tighter integration of the trajectory analysis with other disciplines such aerodynamics, propulsion system performance, and weight. This transforms the aircraft optimization problem into an even more complex problem, dealing with significantly larger numbers of design variables along multiple disciplines. The optimization environment tools developed in the past lack any methodology for full mission energy optimization with physics-based models in different disciplines. While many studies claimed the benefits of using BLI on the cruise performance, they are subjected to many simplifications. They largely focus on estimating the BLI profile and its imposed impact on the inlet of the propulsion system [26,74,155]. A fully coupled aero-propulsive analysis enables such study. The work simplified the assumption for electrical system components for the performance assessment study and does not include the optimization study.

(p14.4) OpenMDAO is an open-source multidisciplinary optimization framework developed by NASA GRC which has been explored by many researchers due to its versatile application. This platform enables coupled integration of different discipline models coded in several programming languages with various levels of fidelity into a single analysis tool. The framework uses a gradient based approach with analytic derivatives and uses in-house solvers and optimization methods to address the optimization problem [83,156]. Gray et al. [83] used this platform for coupled aero-propulsive interactions to examine an optimized split ratio in the shaft power for different powertrain drive transmission efficiency values. The platform uses ADFlow computational fluid dynamics (CFD) solver to solve the Reynolds-averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) equations and the PyCycle-1-D propulsion analysis tool for generating the adjoint analytic derivative. The framework enables multidisciplinary optimization based on the Sequential Quadratic Programming (SQP) gradient-based optimization method. Falck et al. [157] used the OpenMDAO with moderate fidelity propulsion and aerodynamic discipline tools to conduct the mission analysis for observing the thermal state in the electrical components.
## (s22) Electrical Power System
(p22.0) Superconducting materials or normal conductors operated in liquid hydrogen temperature offer zero resistance (electrical resistance for pure aluminum or copper can be 1/100th or less of that at the room temperature) to the conduction of electricity and hence stand out in terms of conductivity and ampacity. Use of the superconducting wires in DC transmission systems exhibits very low loss. For machine applications, the superconductors can produce higher magnetic field strengths and can be enabled for higher power density and torque density machines [170]. Power generation is also a big issue for the turboelectric/hybrid or even fully electric configurations. These utilize either fuel onboard or a battery charged from the grid, and do not give emission saving benefits as desired [96]. A possible and promising alternative is to fuel the aircraft with liquid hydrogen (LH 2 ) and possible use of a cryogenic enabled electrical system. The current underlying technology level for the machine power electronics lags substantially from the desired level in the aircraft application. The development and future technology prediction in the non-cryogenic system is equally compelling and competitive [107]. Suitability of the high temperature superconducting (HTS) material for use in airborne applications is large, as they can carry huge amounts of current with negligible loss. These features enable high power density and high torque density machines. However, there is need for a cryo-cooler to cool this machine and a possible candidate in this regard is liquid hydrogen (LH 2 ) superconductivity, an obvious choice for higher power density and torque requirements. A cryogenic cooled propulsion system is highly efficient but there is unlikeliness of reaching sufficient maturity over the next 20 to 25 year [171].
## (s23) High Voltage Architecture and Protection
(p23.0) Propulsion power sized electrical system necessitates lightweight components and a flexible architecture design with components as per the reliability and fail-safe operation standards. That entails boosting the system voltage level and defining appropriate voltage regulation standards for it. Historically, the commercial adoption of electrical system for aircraft application was initiated with the advent of the 'Fly by Wire' concept. The operating voltage was chosen for 115 V AC with a constant frequency at 400 Hz in high power applications and 28 V DC in low power applications [172,173]. The increased demand under more electric aircraft (MEA) applications drove the initial evolution in the electrical power system architecture, transiting to a variable frequency (360-800 Hz) 230 V AC or ±270 V DC system [153,174,175]. Further boost in the voltage level from the current standard of 540 V would potentially lower the cable weight in a propulsion power sized transmission system.
## (s24) I
(p24.0) The efficiency and weight can be traded on the system level. II The AC system at the 6 KV voltage level and operation frequency of 1 kHz is optimum for the weight; however, a DC system above 3 kV is favorable while accounting for the thermal management system (TMS) weight. III Even though a DC system is potentially lighter, it is 2%-3% more inefficient than the AC system.

(p24.1) The paper further highlights that the power electronics and circuit protection components development in the DC system at 3 kV voltage level and above will face certification related challenges due to the low technology readiness level (TRL) of it. In similar line, the sensitivity study performed on STARC-ABL design [177] for a 2.61 MW sized powertrain, AC transmission system was found more efficient than the DC counterpart, with 13% reduction potential for the thermal loss. Moreover, there is also subtle impact from the operating frequency on the system loss that makes an ideal choice of 800 Hz for this design. In a quantitative assessment study by Jones et al. [183] on a cryogenically cooled TeDP configuration AC system showed better performance over DC and AC-DC hybrid systems for weight and efficiency parameters. However, controllability is a major issue for an AC system architecture. It is believed that suitable power electronics with efficient cryo-cooler designs would help bridging the gap between the AC vs. DC architecture.

(p24.2) Despite the implicit benefits of a high voltage system, the industry has not advanced much in developing the insulation material with a high dielectric strength, defying the Paschen's law under high altitude condition. A pragmatic voltage level was rather considered in many of the studies s, appearing in the range of 700-1000 V [31,176,184,185].

(p24.3) The voltage level selection also impacts the size and loss at the component level. While there is a major influence on the converter losses [153], the battery mass is indifferent to the voltage selection. Also, another thought is that a MW-scale power converter with a high conversion ratio could undermine the benefits of a high voltage efficient transmission system. Alternatively, a high voltage with a widely varying frequency range for the transmission system, using both AC and DC architecture, is proposed. Such a design has potential for 10-15% power electronics size reduction over DC system, as shown by NASA convergent aeronautics solutions (CAS) study [177]. A DC power transmission system was considered in the CENTRELINE project to assess the weight and efficiency sensitivity in the electrical system both at the component level and system level with ae voltage variation between a range from 1000 V over to 5000 V [186]. The study illustrated that a high voltage level could be beneficial from overall mass and efficiency point of view. The study promoted that even with an increase in mass and a lowering of efficiency in the electrical machine and converter components, there are still other considerations which could limit the applicability of the high voltage, namely: the semiconductor blocking voltage and associated control complexity.

(p24.4) While the machine performance can be optimized, independent of the voltage level, a coordination is still desired between the generator voltage and the propulsor motor voltage. The converter topology selection and its performance is dependent on the desired voltage gain of power converters, which is driven by the voltage ratio of generator voltage over bus voltage or the ratio of bus voltage over propulsor voltage. This has further impact on the weight and efficiency. Also, the selection and sizing of the protection and fault isolation equipment, machine control, and insulation material are dependent on the operating voltage, thus impacting the overall system performance. An accurate prediction of electrical system weight and volume can be made if the voltage standards are defined. At the same time, an optimum selection of voltage level can be made with a holistic approach, accounting for all the performances of individual components [180]. Additionally, the optimum design should be adopted through an advanced algorithm based approach, considering the thermal stability and power quality in balance with system mass and efficiency [175].
## (s31) Thermal Management System Challenges & Developments
(p31.0) Thermal management systems (TMS) are necessary to pull away the heat in the propulsion system components due to the system inefficiencies. Maintaining the right operating temperature in the electrical components (battery, converter, motor/generator, etc.) ensures optimized performance of it and negates the runaway heat problems. On the downside, the inclusion of TMS components impacts the aircraft weight and causes parasitic drag, affecting the aircraft overall performance for the worse. A study performed on designing the TMS for electric propulsion system application indicates that the TMS weight could be even 5% of the weight of the total electrical system weight even for a low electric power level and could impose an efficiency penalty in the range of 3% thrust loss [28,176]. TMS designs for a conventional aircraft exhausts the waste-heat to the free stream air or to the fan by-pass duct air through a liquid coolant loop [237]. Given a higher order of magnitude of the heat load emanating from the electrification of the propulsion system, it is envisioned that both the conventional approach and existing onboard heat sinks would not be adequate for exhausting the heat load of an electric aircraft. Some novel approaches for dissipating the heat should be worked through [237,238].

(p31.1) Typical components desired in TMS are the heat exchanger, coolant pump, a coolant reservoir, and the piping system. The heat sinks appropriate for the TMS are fuel, fan bypass/ ram air, and coolants, and heat exchanger designs vary as a fuel oil cooler and air oil cooler. The architectural lay out can be made as centralized/decentralized [180], parallel/serial [31] systems, etc., optimized based on the placement and sizing of the head load components. Coolants are typically single phase or two-phase; some of the suitable coolants are listed in the literature [180]. Advanced heat exchanger designs are microchannel based multi-pass tube-fin designs [239] and surface coolers [240].
