# Article 1210 Citation: Romerio A and Peri F (2020) Increasing the Chemical Variety of Small-Molecule-Based TLR4 Modulators: An Overview

CorpusID: 220477998 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8831043ca084a5b8091bf108369a6dfed919d7b4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8831043ca084a5b8091bf108369a6dfed919d7b4)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s0) GLYCOLIPID-BASED TLR4 MODULATORS
(p0.0) Agonists MPLA Monophosphoryl Lipid A (MPLA, compound 2, Figure 3) is a well-characterized TLR4 agonist (45). MPLA is chemically derived from Salmonella minnesota LPS through treatment with mild acidic conditions, as this achieves the cleavage of the lipid A portion from the oligosaccharide core and the hydrolysis of the 1phosphate group. TLR4 requirement for MPLA action has been thoroughly validated by numerous studies involving TLR4 −/− mice (45,49).

(p0.1) MPLA is a potent TLR4 agonist, but it is weaker than LPS, as MPLA's affinity to TLR4/MD-2 is weaker than LPS. It has been also suggested that MPLA-activated TLR4 signal goes only or preferentially through TRIF-dependent and not through MyD88-dependent cascade. TRIF bias has been proposed to be related to the weaker inflammatory power and the reduced toxicity compared to LPS. TRIF bias also switches T-cell immunity to T H 1 helper, better suited for long-lasting immunization (50,51).
## (s3) Trehalose Derivatives (LAM)
(p3.0) While TLR4 plays a pivotal role in innate immunity, particularly protecting against infectious challenges and boosting adaptive immunity, it is not the only factor causing inflammation in the only LPS receptor. Indeed, caspase 4/5/11-mediated NLRP3 inflammasomes, activated by cytosolic LPS, is a crucial pathogenic factor in a variety of acute and chronic immune related diseases (67).
## (s6) Cationic Monosaccharide-Based TLR4 Antagonists
(p6.0) IAXO compounds are a class of cationic amphiphiles active as TLR4 antagonists. They are formed by a glucopyranose or a benzylamine core linked to two C14 lipid chains through ether bonds (compounds 12 and 13, Figure 6) (38).

(p6.1) IAXO's TLR4 antagonism is very likely the combination of two effects: in the form of cationic liposomes, these molecules form stable co-aggregates with LPS and make it less available for binding with CD14 and MD-2 (82). On the other hand, mechanism studies clearly show the ability of IAXOs to bind CD14 and MD-2, competing with LPS and displacing it from receptors (83)(84)(85).

(p6.2) In a new study on the role of TLRs in Placental Malaria (PM) by Barboza et al., IAXO 101 was used to assess the involvement of TLR4 in infant morbidity and mortality in a group of pregnant mice affected by Plasmodium berghei NK65 GFP , and its effect was compared with a group of TLR4 −/− mice. While TLR4 −/− mice did not show PM, and their fetuses did not show differences in body weight compared to non-infected WT mice, experiments demonstrated that mice treated with IAXO 101 2 weeks after infection showed a partial reverse in placental malaria, and their fetuses had an intermediate body weight between infected and non-infected WT mice. In addition to demonstrating the involvement of TLR4 in PM, this study also highlights the viability of IAXO 101 as a treatment for this pathology, which causes high neonatal mortality (86).

(p6.3) Another recent application of IAXOs has been the prevention of blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruption after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Okada et al. aimed to study the linkage between TLR4 activation and inflammatory BBB disruption (39). In an animal study, SAH was induced in C57BL/6 male mice, which were eventually treated with two different dosages of IAXO 102 (compound 13, Figure 6) after 30 min. This resulted in a significantly improved neurological score and in clear protection from BBB disruption. A control experiment was conducted involving TAK-242, a well-established TLR4 antagonist, providing similar results. Those experiments highlighted for the first time that BBB disruption after SAH is linked to TLR4 activation and can be efficiently reversed by administration of potent TLR4 antagonists as a treatment for post-SAH BBB disruption (39).
## (s9) New Rationally Designed TLR4 Agonists
(p9.0) Michaeli et al. recently projected linear and cyclic peptides with the ability to bind MD-2/TLR4 and CD14/TLR4 by computerassisted drug design (CADD). They used ab initio methods coupled with machine learning discovery software, which allowed the finding of a higher percentage of active molecule compared with an HTS approach. New cyclic peptide sequence containing also D-amino acids to increase conformational rigidity and drug-likeness were designed to dock with hMD-2 and the N-terminal region of h-CD14 using the CYCPEP program (30). Subsequently, in silico designed MD-2 and CD14 ligand peptides were synthesized and tested for their activity under physiologically relevant conditions by determining IL-1β release upon culture in human whole blood. Out of 27 linear and 26 cyclic peptides, two peptides (PTC-A-40 and PTC-A-83) were shown to be active in stimulating IL-1β production, validating the use of ab initio method to search for TLR4 ligands (30).

(p9.1) Honegr et al. investigated the advantages of in silico drug design in the search for TLR4 agonists, by using Ligand-or Structure-Based Virtual Screening (LBVS or SBVS). A large library of molecules (130,000) was screened in silico for their capacity to bind to a 3D model of hTLR4/MD2 heterodimer (PDB ID: 4G8A, RCSB Protein Data Bank). Two hit compounds were identified that optimized binding score: a N-(2-(1Hindol-3-yl)ethyl)benzamide (LS-like, compound 16 Figure 7) and a anthracene-succinimide hybrid (VS1-like, compound 17, Figure 7). Both compounds were then synthetized and chemically modified for SAR studies. While LS and LS-derived molecules didn't achieve a good activity profile (10% of MPLA activity), VS1 and VS1-derived molecules showed a much more promising efficacy when tested in vitro and ex vivo, scoring 50% of MPLA activation (31,32).
## (s15) Cardiolipin
(p15.0) Cardiolipins (CLs) is a family of tetra-acylated diphosphatidylglycerols naturally produced by animals, plants, bacteria and yeasts, and they have with different fatty chains lengths and saturations (33). Unsaturated CLs showed activity as TLR4 antagonists although the precise molecular mechanism remains to be studied (103,104). As already mentioned in this review, unsaturated fatty acids are present in natural and synthetic TLR4 antagonist. This suggests that the unsaturation of the acyl chains contributes to enhance TLR4 antagonist behavior. An exhaustive SAR study on CL variants was recently published, and it focused on the influence of chain lengths and saturation degree (105).

(p15.1) The activity on cells of a series of saturated and unsaturated derivatives (compounds 22 and 23, Figure 9) was tested. Results showed that all unsaturated CLs (compounds 23, Figure 9) are active as antagonists on human and murine TLR4 (in HEK-blue cells and murine macrophages), successfully inhibiting receptor signaling with IC 50 ranging from high nM to low µM. Saturated CLs (compounds 22, Figure 9) can activate TLR4, inducing proinflammatory cytokines production (105). The only exception to this empirical rule is saturated C14:0 CL, which acted as agonist in murine cells but as antagonist in human cells, similarly to Lipid IVa (105,106).
## (s16) Alpinetin
(p16.0) Alpinetin (compound 24, Figure 9) is a natural flavonoid extracted from the plant Alpinia katsumadai Hayata. It has been demonstrated to possess anti-inflammatory activity, protecting against LPS-related damages both in vitro and in vivo (107). Subsequent studies clarified that alpinetin exerts its action as an agonist of PPAR-γ, which, in turn, downregulates TLR4 expression, effectively inhibiting receptor signaling (108): it is an indirect TLR4 antagonist. Recent studies proved alpinetin ability to protect mice against kidney damages and endometritis caused by LPS administration. Alpinetin-treated mice showed attenuated LPS-induced histopathological changes; furthermore, alpinetin was showed to inhibit pro-inflammatory cytokines secretion in a dose-dependent manner (43,109).
## (s17) Ferulic Acid
(p17.0) Ferulic Acid (compound 25, Figure 9) is a phenolic compound abundant in various herbs, fruits, and vegetables, and it is extracted from Ligusticum wallichii. It has been recently shown to have various properties, among which antioxidant and antiinflammatory effects in murine cells, but its exact mechanism remained unclear (110).

(p17.1) Two recent studies claim that FA can protect against LPS-induced bovine endometritis in vitro and against LPSinduced acute kidney injury in vivo by suppressing NF-κB and MAPK signaling, which strongly point toward a TLR4-related mechanism of action (111,112).

(p17.2) Indeed, Rehman et al., in a recent study in which they demonstrate FA positive effects against LPS-induced neuroinflammation in mice, were able to elucidate FA Activity. By in silico molecular docking, the authors reported that FA action is exerted by interfering with MD-2 binding site on TLR4, effectively disrupting the TLR4-MD-2 complex and preventing LPS recognition and formation of the activated dimer (TLR4/MD-2/LPS) 2 . However, the proposed mechanism, although intriguing, still lacks experimental proof, as it has only be postulated on the basis of molecular docking (44).
## (s18) CONCLUSIONS
(p18.0) We presented here last advancements in the field of TLR4 modulators, focusing on small molecules of both synthetic and natural origin, as a follow-up of recent reviews on this topic (23,113).

(p18.1) All TLR4 modulators described in this review have been validated or at least evaluated for their capacity to interact specifically with TLR4 and MD-2. For most of the molecules molecular docking calculations and experimental binding studies are available to assess their mechanism of action based on the binding of TLR4/MD-2.
