# membranes Application of Hydrophobic Alkylimidazoles in the Separation of Non-Ferrous Metal Ions across Plasticised Membranes-A Review

CorpusID: 226304320 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f6f06b1bbb6740d81cb3afb38fcc701cb0a3887](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f6f06b1bbb6740d81cb3afb38fcc701cb0a3887)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s10) The 1-Alkyl-2,4-Dimethylimidazole as a Carrier
(p10.0) The addition of two methyl groups into positions 2 and 4 of an imidazole ring highly increases the basicity of the molecule (Table 1). Among all homologous series of alkylimidazoles, 1-alkyl-2,4-dimethylimidazoles are the strongest bases. 1-Octyl-2,4-dimethylimidazole (14, Figure 5) was used to separate Zn(II) ions from a Zn-Cd-Ni mixture [61]. On the other hand, 1-decyl-2,4-dimethylimidazole (15, Figure 6) was used in the separation of Zn(II) from a Zn-Cd mixture [69].  
## (s12) The 1-Alkyl-2,4-Dimethylimidazole as a Carrier
(p12.0) The addition of two methyl groups into positions 2 and 4 of an imidazole ring highly increases the basicity of the molecule (Table 1). Among all homologous series of alkylimidazoles, 1-alkyl-2,4-dimethylimidazoles are the strongest bases. 1-Octyl-2,4-dimethylimidazole (14, Figure 5) was used to separate Zn(II) ions from a Zn-Cd-Ni mixture [61].
## (s13) The 1-Alkyl-2,4-Dimethylimidazole as a Carrier
(p13.0) The addition of two methyl groups into positions 2 and 4 of an imidazole ring highly increases the basicity of the molecule (Table 1). Among all homologous series of alkylimidazoles, 1-alkyl-2,4-dimethylimidazoles are the strongest bases. 1-Octyl-2,4-dimethylimidazole (14, Figure 5) was used to separate Zn(II) ions from a Zn-Cd-Ni mixture [61]. On the other hand, 1-decyl-2,4-dimethylimidazole (15, Figure 6) was used in the separation of Zn(II) from a Zn-Cd mixture [69]. 
## (s15) The 1-Alkyl-2,4-Dimethylimidazole as a Carrier
(p15.0) The addition of two methyl groups into positions 2 and 4 of an imidazole ring highly increases the basicity of the molecule (Table 1). Among all homologous series of alkylimidazoles, 1-alkyl-2,4-dimethylimidazoles are the strongest bases. 1-Octyl-2,4-dimethylimidazole (14, Figure 5) was used to separate Zn(II) ions from a Zn-Cd-Ni mixture [61]. On the other hand, 1-decyl-2,4-dimethylimidazole (15, Figure 6) was used in the separation of Zn(II) from a Zn-Cd mixture [69]. 
## (s33) SEM Studies of PIMs Doped Alkylimidazoles
(p33.0) PIMs doped with alkylimidazole were characterised using the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) technique. A sample SEM image of PIMs doped with alkylimidazoles 3, 8, 12, 14 is shown in Figure 9 [61].

(p33.1) The SEM photomicrographs show that all PIMs had dense and homogeneous structures, and also the roughness of the film could be observed. Carriers (alkylimidazole molecules) could crystallise in the membrane, causing its roughness and porosity [61]. PIMs containing alkylimidazoles 3, 8, 12, 14 are dense and homogeneous.
## (s34) SEM Studies of PIMs Doped Alkylimidazoles
(p34.0) PIMs doped with alkylimidazole were characterised using the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) technique. A sample SEM image of PIMs doped with alkylimidazoles 3, 8, 12, 14 is shown in Figure 9 [61]. The SEM photomicrographs show that all PIMs had dense and homogeneous structures, and also the roughness of the film could be observed. Carriers (alkylimidazole molecules) could crystallise in the membrane, causing its roughness and porosity [61]. PIMs containing  alkylimidazoles 3, 8, 12, 14 are dense and homogeneous.
