# Anthropological analysis of trauma in throat bone and cartilage: A review-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

CorpusID: 221457023 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c0c67f00426bf49214e8747cdfe2fb182cad0fb7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c0c67f00426bf49214e8747cdfe2fb182cad0fb7)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) In 1992, the first author published a literature review focusing on the association of strangulation with hyoid fracture [1]. This effort was stimulated by a forensic case involving recovered remains of a child and suspected trauma. The hyoid had been recovered but displayed no evidence of trauma. As the trial on this case approached, investigators inquired about the probability of detecting trauma to the hyoid bone if manual strangulation had taken place. The literature review at that time suggested that if manual strangulation had occurred, it was unlikely to produce hyoid fracture since due to the young age of the decedent the greater horns (cornua) of the hyoid had not united to the body. The literature suggested that although in general hyoid fracture was most common in manual strangulations (about 34% of all cases), it is rare in children.

(p0.1) Since the 1992 review, a vast literature has emerged on the impact of throat trauma on structures of the throat [2,3]. This article reviews key aspects of that literature presenting the diverse types of neck trauma that can fracture the hyoid, thyroid, and cricoid and impact related tissues. Emphasis is placed on research published since the 1992 review article cited above.
## (s1) The structures
(p1.0) The primary throat structures affected by trauma are (in descending anatomical order) the hyoid bone and thyroid and cricoid cartilage. Note however, that varying degrees of ossification of the thyroid and cricoid cartilage can occur. Although there is some debate about the embryologic development of the hyoid [4,5], most recognize considerable age variation in the union of its anatomical components. Throat structures demonstrate some anatomical variation that must be considered in evaluation [6]. A small triticeous cartilage structure also can occur [7].
## (s3) Clinical treatment
(p3.0) Although non-fatal fractures of throat structures, especially the hyoid, are rare they have been noted clinically [63e65]. Clinical symptoms of hyoid fracture include neck and throat pain, dysphagia (difficulty swallowing), odynophagia (painful swallowing), hemoptysis (airway bleeding), swelling and neck tenderness. Although such fractures usually are benign, some can lead to serious complications and even death [66]. The non-fatal injuries are similar to the fatal ones [67].
## (s4) Causes
(p4.0) As noted above, throat trauma can result in fracture of the hyoid bone, and thyroid and cricoid cartilage and/or bone [69,70]. Of these three structures, the hyoid and thyroid are most commonly affected. Sharma et al. [71] studied deaths due to constriction of the neck, finding hyoid fracture in 21% of cases and thyroid cartilage fracture in 17%. Fracture was also more likely in individuals of advanced age, also noted by Cl ement et al. [72].

(p4.1) Green et al. [73] examined cases of suicidal hanging with respect to fracture of throat structures. They found that the highest incidence of fracture occurred with only thyroid cartilage (22.5%), followed by only the hyoid (10%) and both structures (15%). Lack of fusion or congenital absence of the greater horns in the hyoid were factors limiting fracture.

(p4.2) Z atopkov a et al. [74] published an autopsy-based study of deaths due to suicidal hanging. They found laryngohyoid fractures in 72.5% of the sample with fracture of the thyroid cartilage being most common (33.7%). Jayaprakash and Sreekumari [75] reported similar results (but with smaller values) in their study of autopsies following hanging (thyroid 5.3% and hyoid 2.7%). Thyroid cartilage fracture was associated with advancing age as well as the position of the ligature knot. In contrast, in an Istanbul study of 761 fatal suicidal hangings, Üzün et al. [76] found a higher frequency of fractures in the hyoid followed by the thyroid and then both structures.

(p4.3) Godin et al. [77] reported that fracture of the cricoid is rare in suicidal hangings but common in homicidal strangulation. In cases of possible simulated hanging following homicidal strangulation [78], cricoid fracture may be a significant finding. Charoonnate et al. [79] found in Thai suicidal hangings, 25% presented fracture of the hyoid and thyroid. Knot location was not a factor, but age was associated. Regarding knot location in hangings, Nikoli c et al. [80] found only a weak correlation with hyoid fracture but a stronger relationship with fracture of thyroid cartilage.

(p4.4) Most of the published literature focuses justifiably on fracture of throat structures resulting from hanging [81] and strangulation (manual and ligature) [82e84] but other forms of neck trauma can be involved as well. These include direct blunt force trauma to the anterior neck sustained in an automobile crash [85,86], gunshot injury [87], fist blows associated with fights [88] and incised wounds and explosions [89]. Bockholdt et al. [90] found that fractures of the upper thyroid horns can be produced by indirect whiplash and that the extent of ossification was a key factor. In such cases, the fracture location usually was found at the base of the horns. Experimental investigations suggested that a weight of 3 kg was required to produce thyroid horn fracture [90].

(p4.5) Neck trauma sustained in falls, even short distance, can produce laryngohyoid fractures [91,92]. Healed fractures of these structures have been detected in chronic alcoholics who experience frequent falls [93]. Jehng et al. [94] reported hyoid fracture produced by a fall from only 1.5 m.

(p4.6) Diverse other causes of throat structure fracture have been reported. Erdogan et al. [95] indicated that an isolated hyoid fracture resulted from an individual being struck with a metal rod during a fight. Hyoid fracture also has been produced due to excessive external laryngeal pressure during intubation or transoesophageal echocardiogram administration.

(p4.7) Sports injury has produced hyoid fracture. Chowdhury et al. [96] described a 16-year-old athlete who was struck in the neck by a hockey puck producing fracture of the body and right greater cornu. Multiple collegiate American football players have sustained similar injuries [97]. Porr et al. [98] reported traumatic hyoid fracture in a 13-year-old taekwondo athlete who was kicked in the anterior neck region.

(p4.8) Other forms of neck trauma resulting in hyoid fracture include induced vomiting [99,100], the helmet strap in motorcycle crashes [101,102], whiplash in crashes [90], and resuscitation [103]. Sustained microtrauma can produce alterations of thyroid cartilage. Age represents a key factor in all neck organ fractures [104].

(p4.9) Eckhardt et al. [105] reported healed fracture of the superior horn of thyroid cartilage resulting from autoerotic asphyxia. The investigating team employed three-dimensional surface scanning and printing, coupled with histologic analysis to detect the alteration.
