# Model Uncertainty in Climate Change Economics: A Review and Proposed Framework for Future Research

CorpusID: 221690350 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d9f053ce4fc925a56367a1b57fedf88a31dbc41c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d9f053ce4fc925a56367a1b57fedf88a31dbc41c)

Fields: Economics, Environmental Science

## (s1) Setup
(p1.0) An important challenge for environmental policy makers is choosing a suitable mitigation strategy. Put simply, policy makers need to decide how much GHG emissions should be allowed to avoid the climate system to reach damaging temperature levels. Reducing GHG emissions is costly but helps to limit the damages of global temperature increases. The cumulative level of GHG emissions that an economy can reach over a given period (e.g., the twenty-first century) is called the "carbon budget". It is a variable that is supposed to be directly under the control of the policy maker and is strictly related to global warming and climate targets (Meinshausen et al. 2009;Drouet et al. 2015). So, this decision (or control) variable-an action in the decision theory terminology-represents a policy that the policy maker can perform.

(p1.1) At this point, it may be useful to better structure the decision problem under uncertainty. Formally, the problem that the decision maker (in particular, a policy maker) faces is to choose an action a among a set A of possible alternatives, whose material consequences c (within a consequence space C) depend on the realization of a state of the environment s (within a state space S), which is outside the decision maker's control. The relationship among consequences, actions and states is described by a consequence function ∶ A × S → C such that
## (s3) Decision Under Uncertainty
(p3.0) We now go back to the decision problem facing our policy maker, who must choose the action-represented by the level of emissions, i.e., a = E-knowing that it will affect global temperatures via the carbon-climate Eq. (3), which in turn will affect the economic output through a damage function.

(p3.1) To simplify the computation, we assume that damages have the quadratic form (4). As we argued in the previous section, the relevant scientific and socio-economic relationships can be summarized by the following nonlinear system:

(p3.2) States have both random and structural components, so they have the form In our decision problem, the vector = ( T , D ) represents the pair of random shocks affecting the climate and economic systems, while the vector = ( T , D ) specifies the structural coefficients, parametrizing through T a model climate system and through D a model economy. By substitution from the system (6), the damage function has the form

(p3.3) 11 Models used for projections of future temperature increases are those whose results on transient climate response are reported in the IPCC fifth assessment report. The hypothesis that current nationally determined contributions are projected beyond 2030 is made here for these projections. See Bosetti et al. (2017) for more details.

(p3.4) For each policy a, the consequence function specifies the overall monetary outcome in terms of some economic variable of intereste.g., consumption or GDP-given the random components and the monetary cost C(a) of the policy itself.

(p3.5) We assume that scientific and socio-economic information enables the policy maker to posit a set of potential models M describing the likelihoods of the different states. This set of models is taken as a datum of the decision problem: the policy maker behaves as if she knows that states are generated by a probability model m that belongs to the collection M. We thus abstract from model misspecification, which magnifies the issues we discuss.

(p3.6) Shocks where q ( ) is the probability of and is the probability distribution concentrated on . 12 Each model m corresponds to a shock distribution q parametrized by and to a model climate system/economy parametrized by . Uncertainty on reflects a theoretical uncertainty about the correct specification of the consequence function. Uncertainty on is about the statistical adequacy of a such economic specification due to shocks. With this, we write the consequence function as (a, ) to emphasize the structural component over the random one . Moreover, we index models as and denote by M = m , the set of models that the policy maker posits.

(p3.7) To address the uncertainty across models, the policy maker has a subjective prior probability distribution that quantifies beliefs about the correct model. In particular, (m) is the policy maker subjective belief that m is the correct model. Because of the factorization, this belief is actually over the values of and , so has the form This is the policy maker subjective belief that parametrizes the correct model climate system/economy and that is the correct vector of shocks' standard deviations. Now that we have introduced all the elements of the decision problem under uncertainty, we turn to the way they can be combined to make the best possible decision. For this purpose, we describe different decision criteria developed in economic theory that can be used for problems of decision under uncertainty.
## (s6) Unanimity Preferences
(p6.0) One way to deal with uncertainty is to allow preferences to be incomplete. Because of the lack of knowledge about both the science of climate and the impact of climate change on the economy, the policy maker might not be able to rank some pairs of alternative actions. If this is the case, preference ≿ is no longer complete (as so far assumed). Assume, following the classical analysis of Bewley (2002), that the policy maker knows her tastes and is able to rank consequences through a utility function u, yet is unable to rank some pairs of actions because of insufficient information about them. Because of its incompleteness, preference ≿ cannot be represented by a numerical decision criterion V, but only by a nonnumerical unanimity rule:

(p6.1) In other words, action a is preferred to another action a ′ if and only if, according to all the probability models m , , the expected reward associated with action a is higher than that associated with action a ′ . 15 In our emission example, this would be the case if and only if policy a is better than policy a ′ according to all the different climate/economy models.

(p6.2) An unanimity criterion is often unable to specify what the policy maker should do. This is the case, for example, if a policy (e.g., a low level of emission policy) performs better than another policy (e.g., a high level of emissions policy) according to some models, but performs worse according to other models. Nevertheless, if a decision must be made, a policy maker needs to "complete" the criterion when it remains silent. A possibility is to adopt (11) ( , ) = ( ) ( ).
## (s11) Other Approaches
(p11.0) The approaches discussed so far have a normative motivation. They assume that policy makers must cope with uncertainty without expecting to reduce everything to risk, a pretension that tacitly presumes better information than they typically have. Making decisions under a fictitious, even delusional state of information seems hardly a rational way to proceed. That said, research has proposed other approaches with a descriptive motivation. These include, for example, prospect theory (see Wakker 2010). However, their descriptive motivation makes them less relevant for the climate policy problem that we consider.

(p11.1) Finally, another criterion known as minmax regret, due to Savage (1951), is also sometimes used in the environmental literature. Because it violates the independence of irrelevant alternatives, a basic rationality tenet, we do not discuss this criterion here and refer interested readers to Marinacci (2015).
