# A Survey of Multimodal Fusion for Identity Verification

CorpusID: 225403700 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9d9539ffa8d247c6b1b88908003742782e3004ab](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9d9539ffa8d247c6b1b88908003742782e3004ab)

Fields: Computer Science, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) With the development of network technology and the popularization of intelligent devices, there are more and more application scenarios of biometrics in life today, such as mobile payment, station gates, check-in systems, access control systems, and mobile phone unlocking. Biometric technology has become an indispensable part of people's daily life. It brings convenience to people and also brings some hidden dangers to information security. Although the single-modal biometrics already has high accuracy, it still has problems such as low security, and being easily restricted by the environment. In order to effectively solve this series of problems, multi-modal identity verification technology has begun to attract more and more attention [1].
## (s4) Decision Layer Fusion
(p4.0) Decision layer fusion can also be called fractional layer fusion. Each single-modal classifier performs preprocessing, feature extraction, recognition or judgment, etc. to obtain several preliminary conclusions, and then makes decision layer fusion decisions by correlating each result [7].
## (s7) DBN-Base Multimodal Fusion Model
(p7.0) The Bayesian network (BN) is composed of a directed acyclic graph with nodes representing variables and directed line segments connecting the nodes. Each node represents a random variable. The directed line segments between nodes represent the mutual relationship between random variables. In the network, the conditional probability is calculated to describe the strength of the relationship between random variables. If a node does not have a parent node, Then use prior probability to express it. We regard it as a dynamic Bayesian network(DBN) is the expansion of the Bayesian network in the time dimension [6]. Dynamic Bayesian networks have excellent performance in describing complex random processes with multiple channels. Using the characteristics of the dynamic Bayesian network, we treat each modality as a dynamic Bayesian chain. Multiple dynamic Bayesian chains are aligned by external knowledge, and they are regarded as a whole. It can achieve the fusion of multi-modal data using external knowledge as a benchmark. Several common structures using dynamic Bayesian network for multi-modal fusion are:
## (s8) Sentence-coupled multi-modal joint modeling.
(p8.0) Sentence-coupled multi-modal joint modeling is a common one in the Bayesian network benchmark model. For example, text information is used to align audio and video in audiovisual database to achieve fusion of audio and video data [4]. 
## (s14) Summary and prospect
(p14.0) The authentication of multi-modal fusion is gaining more attention from academia. Multi-modal fusion data effectively makes up for the deficiencies of single-modal data, and can be applied to the development of other tasks, such as lip-reading [1].The accuracy of multi-modal fusion identity verification based on neural network has exceeded the traditional fusion method when the amount of data is sufficient. Later, more work will be done on the end-to-end model and integrated into the attention mechanism. With the deepening of the research on multi-modal fusion identity verification, digital identity verification will become more convenient, and it will continue to approach feeless authentication.
