# Linking microdosimetric measurements to biological effectiveness: a review of theoretical aspects of MKM and other models

CorpusID: 220525925 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6dfb8159543b32d799b612356f19296181ad35aa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6dfb8159543b32d799b612356f19296181ad35aa)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Particle therapy is becoming a well established clinical option for tumour treatment, particularly advantageous for the highly localized dose deposition and for the radiobiological properties [Durante et al., 2017, McNair, 1981. While the first feature is obvious, for the macroscopic energy deposition profile, characterized by the Bragg peak in depth, and also often by a sharper lateral penumbra, due to the small multiple Coulomb scattering of fast and heavy particles, the second one is related to microscopic features of the peculiar ionization pattern induced by particle radiation, for different charge and energy, down to the molecular scale of the biological target (DNA)

(p0.1) The accurate prediction of relative biological effectiveness (RBE) in different positions of an irradiating field is a fundamental requirement, in order to correctly estimate treatment responses [Durante and Loeffler, 2010]. Moreover, particle RBE depends on several factors, of different nature, biological, patient and treatment specific, because of the complexity of the mechanisms of action underlying tumour and normal tissue responses in radiation therapy. A numbers of models have been presented, historically, to predict RBE, attempting to account for such effects. Among these models, four main categories can be identified:
## (s5) Original formulation and general considerations
(p5.0) The MK model computes the cell survival in a way that emphasizes subcellular microdosimetry while abstracting the specific description and modeling of the radiation-induced damage to the cell by using the general categories of lethal and potentially lethal lesions as defined in [Curtis, 1986]. More specifically, the MK model is based on the following funding assumptions [Hawkins, 1994, Hawkins, 1996, Hawkins, 1998]:

(p5.1) 1. the cell nucleus is the sensitive target and it is divided into N d sub-units, called domains, similar to the sites of TDRA. In general domains have a variety of shapes that fit together to fill the nucleus. In the case of mammalian cells, the domain diameter is usually considered to be in the range 0.5 ≤ d d ≤ 1.0 µm and the number of domains per nucleus is in the order of few hundred;
## (s8) Non-Poisson correction
(p8.0) In the approximation introduced in equation (40) it is assumed that the variance of the specific energy z n among cells is sufficiently small. In this assumption the number of lethal events follows the same Poisson distribution in each cells, with average x n,I . However, in general, the specific energy received in the cell is a stochastic quantity, that varies from cell to cell, bringing also a deviation from the Poisson distribution when considering the whole population of irradiated cells. We remark that this deviation is present even if the radiation is perfectly monoenergetic. In this case the variance of the specific energy z n arises from the fluctuation of the number of particles that are hitting the cells. The fluctuations are particularly relevant when the LET of the particle is relatively high since, given a macroscopic dose D, the average number of high-LET particles interacting with the cell is lower than the number of low-LET particles. To account for the non-Poisson distribution of the lethal events a correction to the MK model has been introduced by Hawkins in 2003 [Hawkins, 2003] bringing a deviation from the linear behaviour of the RBE vs. LET, described in equation (49), in the high LET region.

(p8.1) The effect of the non-Poisson distribution of lethal lesions is considered by explicitly evaluating the fraction of hit and non-hit cell nuclei. Considering a very low dose high-LET irradiation, D 1, the probability for a cell to interact with more than one particle is negligible. In this case the population of cells can be subdivided in a fraction Φ of cells that suffer a single particle interaction and a fraction 1 − Φ of cell with zero interactions. We denote with x I,n (z n,D ) the average number of type I lethal lesions in the fraction Φ of cells whose sensitive nucleus has been hit by a single particle imparting exactly a specific energy z n,D in the nucleusThen, recalling equations (40)-(42), we obtain
## (s9) The saturation correction
(p9.0) Kase et al. [Kase et al., 2006] introduced a correction factor in the MK model to account the decrease in RBE due to the overkill effect observed in high-LET radiations (see for example Fig. 6). The correction factor was applied to dose-averaged saturation-corrected specific energy per event, z * 1 , for mixed radiation field with wide-ranging spectra.

(p9.1) In terms of lineal energy, the corrected value of y D (and hence z D ) was obtained by applying a correction for each lineal energy component of the lineal energy spectrum. The correction of the components was obtained by using an empirical saturation parameter y 0 based on the saturation correction method introduced by [Powers et al., 1968] and then used in the TDRA [Kellerer and Rossi, 1978] 

(p9.2) The saturation parameter indicates the lineal energy above which the correction due to the overkill effects became important. The correction to cell survival is then obtained by evaluating the corrected dose-averaged saturation specific energy per event z * D in the domain, which can obtained from the corrected dose-averaged lineal energy (57) using the relationships reported in Eq. (12) and (19):
## (s10) The dependence of the biological effect on the dose-rate time structure
(p10.0) One of the interesting features of the MK model, in contrast to other radiobiological models used in hadrontherapy such as the LEM, is the possibility to account inherently for arbitrary time dependent dose-rates, such as protracted irradiations and fractionations. This feature derives from the explicit description of the time depending response of the cell to the irradiation trough the kinetic equations (Eq. 29).

(p10.1) Different approaches to investigate and to model the dose-rate time effects have been carried out using the MK model as a theoretical base. Some examples of these approaches can be found in [Hawkins, 1996, Hawkins and Inaniwa, 2014, Inaniwa et al., 2015b, Manganaro et al., 2017, Matsuya et al., 2018a. In these studies, the kinetic equations (24) are slightly generalized to account an arbitrary time dependent specific energy deposition ratė z (c,d) in the domains:

(p10.2) where in the second equation, as described in section 3.2, the second order process describing the pairwise combination between type II lesions has been removed since it is considered negligible if compared to the first-order process.

(p10.3) In [Inaniwa et al., 2013] and [Inaniwa et al., 2015b], the effects of dose-delivery time structure on the RBE in a mixed radiation fields of therapeutic carbon ion beams is investigated using by the modified microdosimetric kinetic model introduced by Kase et al. [Kase et al., 2006, Kase et al., 2007, Inaniwa et al., 2010. The study evaluate the biological effect of the irradiation in two different dose-rate conditions: a split-dose irradiation and a protracted continuous irradiation.

(p10.4) In the case of a split-dose irradiation, a population of cells is considered exposed to a macroscopic dose D 1 at time t = 0 and a dose D 2 at time t = ∆T , where a domain absorbs z 1 and z 2 from the two separate irradiation respectively. Evaluating x I in the limit t → ∞ by integrating the equations (24) and using the saturation correction specific energy as given in equation (59), we obtain for the cell survival:

(p10.5) where (z * 1D ) 1 and (z * 1D ) 2 are the saturation corrected dose means of the first and second irradiation and the total dose D = D 1 + D 2 . The time parameters t r indicates the the time after which all sub-lethal lesions that are not still repaired are fixed in lethal lesions, according to assumption (9) introduced in section 3.2. If the quality of the radiation does not change between the two irradiations then (z * D ) 1 = (z * D ) 2 = z * D and Eq. 76 can be simplified as
## (s12) Monte Carlo based evaluations
(p12.0) A method to account in a natural and straightforward way the inherent stochastic nature of the irradiation is to implement a Monte Carlo algorithm in the MK model, as recently shown by Manganaro et al. [Manganaro et al., 2017 in their formulation of the model named MCt-MKM (Monte Carlo temporal microdosimetric kinetic model). The implemented model accounts also the stochastic temporal correlations characteristic of the irradiation process and the cellular repair kinetics by solving explicitly in the MC evaluations the kinetic equations (75) where the time dependent specific energy rateż (c,d) appears explicitly [Inaniwa et al., 2013, Hawkins, 2017.

(p12.1) In the MC approach the irradiation of a complete population of N c cells is simulated, where N c is supposed to be large enough in order to achieve statistical convergence. The irradiation is modelled as an ordered temporal sequence of particles (primaries and secondaries) that interact with the cell nucleus at random spatial coordinates and random times t  The irradiation is hence modelled as a sequence of spikes inż (c,d) (t), each one of them corresponding to the passage of a particle through or nearby the nucleus, delivering a sequence of random specific energies in the domains z (c,d) 0

(p12.2) depending on the particle spectra and track impact positions with respect the cell. A depiction of the temporal evolution of the lesions (x I and x I I) due to the effects of the irradiation as described in equation (82) is reported in panel (b) of figure 2. For a macroscopic dose D and a specific component e of the energy and particle type spectra, the total number of particles N e interacting with the nucleus follow a Poisson distribution with meanN

(p12.3) where LET F is the frequency-mean LET of the radiation, σ is the cross section of the nucleus, ρ is the density of the tissue, and w e is the weight of the component e.
## (s13) The stochastic microdosimetic kinetic model
(p13.0) The analytical computation method proposed by Sato and Furusawa in [Sato and Furusawa, 2012] introduces a correction to the original formulation of MK model, taking into account the stochastic nature of specific energy deposition in both the domain z and the cell nucleus z n , to improve the adherence of the model to the measured survival fractions for high-LET and high-dose irradiation. The new model is named double-stochastic micro-dosimetric kinetic (DSMK) model. In the same study [Sato and Furusawa, 2012], a second model, termed stochastic microdosimetric kinetic (SMK) Figure 12: Linear quadratic α (panel a) and β (panel b) parameters as a function of LET for the irradiation of of V79 cells with different ions. Points represent experimental data taken from PIDE [Friedrich et al., 2013b], different colors/gray levels and shapes refer to H, He, C and Ne ions respectively (the colour/gray level and shape legend refers both to panel a and b). In panel a, solid and dashed lines represent respectively the extrapolation with the MCt-MKM and the original MKM models, while in panel b a comparison between different model is reported (namely MKM, MCt-MKM, LEM-II and RMF). In the case of the MCt-MKM, overlapped to the α and β curves the MC statistical confidence bands (68%) are reported. These bands are small due to the high statistics and they blends with the curves thickness. A saturation effect is observed for both α and β parameters. Plot taken from [Manganaro et al., 2017]. model, is derived to represents the stochastic nature of domain specific energy z by its approximated mean value and variance in order to reduce the computational time.
## (s17) RBE weighting functions
(p17.0) The microdosimetric RBE-weighting function approach has been proposed initially by , Wambersie, 1994] to compare the beam quality of different neutron [Pihet et al., 1990] and proton [Robertson et al., 1994, Coutrakon et al., 1997 therapeutic installations using measured microdosimetric distributions of lineal energy. Based on previous studies on proton beams [Kliauga et al., 1978, Hall et al., 1978, this approach uses measured microdosimetric distributions of lineal energy, y, combined with an experimental derived biological weighting function, for specific cell line and endpoints, r(y), to evaluate the RBE.
## (s18) The Repair-Misrepair-Fixation (RMF) model
(p18.0) The Repair-Misrepair-Fixation (RMF) model combines the RMR and LPL models adding the consideration of intra-and intertrack † binary misrepair to predict the biological effect of LET [Carlson et al., 2008, Frese et al., 2012, Stewart et al., 2018]. The RMF model considers the entire cell nucleus as the volume for pairwise DSB interactions. In the RMF model a coupled system of nonlinear ordinary differential equations is used to model the time-dependent kinetics of DSB induction, rejoining, and pairwise DSB interaction to form lethal (and nonlethal) chromosome damage. The model treats initial DSB formation as a compound Poisson process and postulates a first-order repair term that gives rise to exponential rejoining kinetics for most DSB (> 98%) and a second-order (quadratic) term to account for the small subset of the initial DSB (< 2%) that undergo pairwise DSB interactions to form an exchange.
