# An Overview of International Guidelines Focusing on the Long-Term Management of Coeliac Disease

CorpusID: 225694885 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4c8c690965fe0f2f7ab2a419c319ba0759262671](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4c8c690965fe0f2f7ab2a419c319ba0759262671)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Management of Coeliac Disease
(p1.0) Currently, the only treatment for CD is the lifelong exclusion of gluten from the diet. This involves the avoidance of certain cereals, such as wheat, barley, rye and in most cases, oats from the diet, thereby comprising a gluten-free diet (GFD).

(p1.1) With these cereals being staples in many diets internationally, careful dietary modification must be undertaken to ensure that appropriate substitutions are incorporated into the diet, to ensure ongoing nutritional adequacy, especially in growing children. GFDs lacking these substitutions have been shown to be low in nutrients such as fibre, vitamin D, vitamin B12, folate, calcium and iron, potentially leading to deficiencies [17,19,20]. These dietary inadequacies have been shown in individuals who have just started a GFD and in those well-established on the diet [21].

(p1.2) Conversely, without careful consideration of these substitutions, increased concentrations of heavy metals have been seen in people following a GFD [22]. In particular, increased reliance of monograins in the diet could increase the risk of excessive intakes of certain metals. For example, high arsenic levels have been noted in individuals consuming predominantly rice based products in their diet [23,24].

(p1.3) Gluten free products can be more energy dense than their gluten-containing contemporaries, posing an added challenge to weight management [19,25]. Finally, the cost of gluten free products tends to be higher than gluten-containing alternatives. This is particularly relevant if appropriate, naturally gluten-free products are not well utilised as part of the diet [25,26].

(p1.4) Even small amounts of gluten can be harmful for those with CD meaning that exclusions of all gluten containing products must be strict [16]. Hidden sources or potential sources of contamination in food products with gluten resulting in inadvertent exposure must also be considered. This can add significant stress to people living with CD when it comes to travel and eating out where access to suitable options could be limited and contamination risks are higher [13]. The social implications of following a restricted diet must also be considered, particularly during the adolescent years when independence and social conformity are priorities and during childhood when lack of understanding could challenge adherence [27,28].
## (s2) Adverse Outcomes Associated with Coeliac Disease
(p2.0) The benefits of well-controlled CD are not just limited to symptom resolution in those who are symptomatic. Untreated coeliac disease predisposes the patient to a number of additional risk factors affecting health outcomes.

(p2.1) Villous atrophy as a result of exposure to dietary gluten leads to suboptimal absorption of nutrients and consequent micronutrient deficiencies such as iron and folate. Additionally, the small intestinal changes can also result in secondary lactose intolerance and associated symptoms until mucosal healing and lactase regeneration can occur [36]. Due to the suboptimal absorption of nutrients, bone mineralisation and dental enamel can also be affected, increasing the risk of osteoporosis, fractures and dental caries [37,38]. Untreated CD can also be also associated with elevated hepatic transaminases, which tend to resolve within a year or so of a GFD [39].

(p2.2) In children, untreated CD can result in poor growth with improved anthropometry seen on commencement of a GFD [40,41]. Reproductive health can also be affected with delayed puberty, reduced fertility and increased risk of obstetric complications reported [12,42].

(p2.3) Finally, more generalised symptoms such as increased fatigue are also reported [43]. All of these factors likely contribute to the reduced quality of life seen in those with untreated CD [44].

(p2.4) The overall mortality risk of CD is not fully clear but appears to be slightly elevated [45,46]. Removal of gluten from the diet and strict adherence to a GFD is generally thought to reduce these risks [47]. Further concerns relate to the increased risk of developing Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma [45,46,48]. Conversely, Scandinavian investigators noted a reduced risk of breast cancer, and breast and lung cancers respectively in their cohorts [48,49].

(p2.5) Once non-adherence is ruled out, persistent symptoms or abnormal serology despite a strict GFD is considered non-responsive coeliac disease (NRCD): this is thought to occur in 10-19% people with CD [50]. One study found that the most common cause of NRCD was in fact accidental exposure to gluten (35%) with only 10% of cases being refractory CD, highlighting the importance of robust education on following the GFD [50].
## (s6) BSPGHAN and Coeliac UK
(p6.0) These guidelines focusing on aspects of CD in children were jointly developed by the two organisations and published in 2013 [12]. The first follow-up recommendation was for clinical review by a specialist paediatric dietitian and a paediatric gastroenterologist or a paediatrician with a special interest 6-12 months after diagnosis to review adherence, document symptomatic improvement and to repeat serology. Follow-up was then recommended to be every one to two years with repeat serology on each occasion, with an eventual goal to transition to adult services. Additional comments emphasised the need for access to a paediatric dietitian within one to two weeks of diagnosis, and then as required and encouragement was made to join Coeliac UK for support. None of the recommendations or statements were supported by reference to published research.
## (s7) British Society of Gastroenterology
(p7.0) This guideline focused on the management of adults diagnosed with CD and was based on the opinions of a panel of 21 individuals [13]. A regular review for the first 12 months after commencement of a strict GFD with a dietitian and a gastroenterologist was recommended, with subsequent annual review thereafter. Encouragement was given to join a coeliac support organisation. The regular assessment of micronutrient status, clinical state and serology was detailed along with regular assessment of adherence. Follow-up SBB should be considered but was recommended in those who appeared non-responsive to a GFD. Additional comments included ensuring adequate calcium, screening for osteoporosis and the consideration of inclusion of oats. Recommendations were supported by Grade C and D levels of evidence.
## (s9) Expert Panel
(p9.0) Snyder et al. [51] reported the outcomes of an expert panel focused on aspects of the diagnosis and management of CD in children as informed by available evidence. The authors acknowledged that there was inadequate data to support most of the areas considered. They focused on a number of key aspects, predominantly pertinent to the initial assessment and diagnosis of children with CD. The report was accompanied by an online supplement that provided background information and summaries of the data supporting aspects such as bone health.

(p9.1) The panel strongly supported the introduction of a strict GFD for life after diagnosis, with education and support from an experienced paediatric dietitian. The assessment of growth and routine serologic testing at regular intervals was recommended, but specific details such as frequency of assessment were not considered. A routine periodic assessment of thyroid function and full blood count was also recommended. Other tests such as hepatic transaminases, vitamin D and bone densitometry were suggested to be completed where indicated only. Routine vitamin supplementation was not recommended, however, individualised discussion about calcium and vitamin D optimisation was suggested.
## (s10) NASPGHAN
(p10.0) The North American Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition (NASPGHAN) published a clinical guideline in 2005 and more recently (in 2016) a clinical report on the diagnosis and treatment of CD in children [16,17]. Although the clinical report focused on various gluten-related disorders, it included a section on the management of CD after diagnosis. Commencement of and adherence to a strict GFD after initial education from an experienced paediatric dietitian was emphasised. A regular review was recommended initially, with follow-up by a paediatric gastroenterologist or paediatrician with wide knowledge about CD and a dietitian. The referral to a support group was considered beneficial and psychological support noted for some children.

(p10.1) A recommendation was made for regular repeated assessment of serology after diagnosis to document adherence and to provide a guide of mucosal healing. Upon resolution of symptoms and documentation of normalised serological tests, ongoing follow-up should then be annual with paediatric and dietetic personnel. A baseline assessment of other tests (e.g., thyroid function, full blood count, vitamin D, iron status and others as indicated) and an annual review of thyroid function, full blood count and vitamin D suggested.
## (s11) ACG
(p11.0) The American College of Gastroenterology (ACG) published a clinical guideline focused on the diagnosis and management of CD with relevance to adults and children [18]. The commencement of a life-long strict GFD was strongly recommended, as was the provision of education and support from a dietitian well-versed in CD and the use of the GFD. Regular review by an individual with specific knowledge about CD to detect symptoms, assess adherence and document growth was recommended strongly, with moderate evidence support. There was discussion about the best person to facilitate ongoing review after diagnosis, with comments from published literature. An annual follow-up was suggested, although limited evidence for this recommendation was acknowledged.

(p11.1) Furthermore, a regular assessment of serologic tests was suggested to monitor for adherence along with symptom review. The performance of other investigations (such as measurement of vitamin D levels) was suggested to occur only to document any indicator that was abnormal at diagnosis.
## (s12) AGA
(p12.0) The American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) recently provided a clinical practice update to the diagnosis and management of CD in adults and children, with particular focus on serologic testing [52]. The document strongly supported the use of GFD with management within a team setting including an experienced dietitian. An annual follow-up was suggested, with note made of the importance of anthropometric assessment in children. It was recommended that serology be performed 6 and 12 months after diagnosis, and then annually thereafter.
## (s15) Conclusions
(p15.0) Due to the importance of the adherence to a strict GFD in optimising the outcome of those with CD, it is imperative that quality, evidence-based management strategies are implemented to provide patients with CD with the knowledge, skills and support to effectively manage their condition. A number of different models have been trialled internationally, such as dietitian-or nurse-specialistled clinics and endorsed membership to local coeliac societies to better utilise clinician time and resources and achieve good clinical outcomes [58,59]. Further studies are needed to compare the effectiveness of different management strategies to establish best-practice guidance for the long-term management of patients with CD.
