# INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH IN PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCES Rosehip Neuron -A Review Production and Hosted by

CorpusID: 225289279 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b1d2a4ac1f310d468e4f4b1688235e8adb480c7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b1d2a4ac1f310d468e4f4b1688235e8adb480c7)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) A neuron or nerve cell is an electrically excitable cell that communicates with the other cells through a specialised system called the synapses or synaptic knobs. The neuron is the basic working unit of the brain. These are the specialised one which transmits the information to other nerve cells, muscles or glands (Jourquin et al., 2003). The parts of the neuronal cell are the cell body, axon and dendrites.
## (s4) Signi icance
(p4.0) Rosehip neurons are found in the cerebral cortex; these are histochemical cells and are inhibitory in action (Postnova et al., 2010). Rosehip neuronal cells help in treating disorders like Alzheimer's disease and dementia. In case of increased food intake, this neuron causes obesity, and the development of Proopiomelanocortin neurons will lead to hyperphagia, which is the increased adiposity (Postnova et al., 2010;Garcia-Garcia, 2020).

(p4.1) Rosehip neuron is a speci ic part of the excitatory neuron, which is involved in synaptic membrane fusion. Sometimes mutation occurs in the neurovascular part, which affects the synaptic membrane leads to impairment in neuronal development (Freeman, 2012).

(p4.2) Rosehip neuron cells have GABAergic inhibitory action potentials, expected to treat the neuronal disorders. As it is a spiral type of cell, its action cannot be observed other than humans. This would be a signi icant disadvantage. 
## (s7) 19
(p7.0) ( Innis et al., 1985) Review In these types of cells, the effect of neurotrophin promotes both neuronal differentiation. This study was carried out in a culture of chick retinal cells.
