# fishes The Application of Single-Cell Ingredients in Aquaculture Feeds-A Review

CorpusID: 222129854 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bdeb514e000c252739deae93e280b4f5afb9650f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bdeb514e000c252739deae93e280b4f5afb9650f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s3) Proteins and Amino Acids
(p3.0) In SCPs the main value lies in the total protein content of these resources. There is some value in the specific amino acid profile of these resources as well, but that is arguably a somewhat secondary consideration to the total protein content, as the amino acid balance of feeds can invariably be easily manipulated in practice via the co-use of other protein resources or the inclusion of small amounts of crystalline amino acids. Notably, no protein source is likely to be used as a sole source in any case, with constraints to inclusion levels meaning that the contribution of individual ingredient to the diet's amino acid profile is somewhat also constrained. In SCOs the protein is arguably of secondary importance, but in some resources this protein level is still appreciable [8,78,79].

(p3.1) A wide range of protein levels can be observed within and among the different groups ( Figure 1; Table 2). Microalgal ingredient protein levels ranged from 0% to~60% (mean = 34%), although this was largely dependent on the level of processing used to prepare the ingredient. In some cases, the lower protein levels were associated with higher lipid levels, or even pure oil products, with those products often being touted primarily as an omega-3 (lipid) source. Fungal ingredient protein levels were relatively consistent at between 30% and 60% (mean = 45%), but rarely higher. Protein levels in the bacterial SCP were generally the highest among the different SCP examined, with some products containing protein levels as high as 80% (mean = 60%). Biofloc resources tended to contain the least protein (mean = 27%), with some products containing very low levels of protein (<5%), that were generally not touted as "protein sources" per se, but reputed to deliver other nutritional benefits. Biofloc and microalgal SCIs can have high ash contents when cultured in saline conditions and depending on the process conditions ( Figure 1).

(p3.2) The amino acid composition of microalgal SCP varied depending on the resource used. Among the various microalgal resources examined, the essential amino acid (EAA) levels showed abundant levels of leucine and lysine, although they were relatively deficient in histidine ( Table 2). The amino acid composition of fungal SCP resources from various different genera of yeast; Saccharomyces, Candida and Wikerhamomyces, while not overly rich in protein (range of 33% to 47%), were particularly rich in glutamic acid (except for Candida) and among the essential amino acids were also rich in lysine and leucine, but very low in methionine, tryptophan and arginine. The amino acid composition of the various bacterial SCP resources reported were comparatively high, with a much more uniform level of each of the EAA and also the non-EAA (Table 2). Among the EAA, leucine was typically the most abundant amino acid, followed by lysine and valine. In contrast to the other resources, methionine was relatively abundant in the bacterial SCPs [8,62]. Another notable feature of the bacterial SCP resources was the difference between the two different estimates of protein, with crude protein (N × 6.25) being consistently much higher than the sum of amino acids. In the microalgae, Nannochloropsis gaditana, Tetraselmis impellucida, and Scenedesmus dimorphus the sum of amino acids was, respectively, 77%, 72% and 62% [15]. Teuling et al. [15] demonstrated that different protein isolations steps can alter the ratio between total sum of amino acids and crude protein estimates. Sum of amino acid protein levels in the fungal SCP were typically 85% to 95% of the crude protein estimate, whereas the bacterial SCP were only 79% to 84% of the crude protein estimate. This is likely due to the high nucleotide content of the bacterial SCP which contributes a much higher level of non-protein nitrogen than the other resources [81]. The carbohydrate content (Table 2) is often calculated as dry matter minus crude protein minus ash minus fat. Consequently, the large difference between the sum of amino acids and crude protein (N × 6.25) in various SCI implies that the carbohydrate content is often underestimated. 
## (s7) Microalgal Resources
(p7.0) A wide range of microalgal resources have been developed in recent years as both SCP and SCO resources [78,119]. Their advantage lies firmly in that they can be reasonably efficient producers of biomass and can rely on production inputs that often do not compete with the needs of other food production systems (e.g., salt water). They are also important sources of long-chain omega-3 PUFA, and accordingly are being eagerly sought as a much-needed alternatives to fishoil use in aquaculture feeds [120]. This next section reviews a selection of studies examining the palatability and utilisation (growth) responses of microalgal SCI for key aquaculture species groups.
## (s11) Marine Species
(p11.0) There has also been considerable application of microalgal SCP and SCO in the diets of various marine-fish species [20,[140][141][142][143][144]. Some of the logic behind this is that many of the microalgal sources are quite rich in the important n-3 LC-PUFA that are so important for the nutrition of many marinefish species and, as such, there has been a focus on the use of SCO resources as alternative sources of these n-3 LC-PUFA. Early work by Harel et al. [140] demonstrated that SCO resources made from Crypthecodinium, Chlorella, Schizochytrium and the fungus Mortierella alpina could each be used in various ways as components of either broodstock diets or larval enrichments for a range of marine fish species. Results were variable across the different fish species, with some applications showing no differences among the different SCO resources and others showing an enhanced benefit of Schizochytrium compared to Crypthecodinium.

(p11.1) A series of studies with European (gilthead) seabream (Sparus aurata) have shown some application of Crypthecodinium, Nannochloropsis, Phaeodactylum and Schizochytrium SCO resources in starter feeds [20,142,144]. In the study by Atalah et al. [20], Crypthecodinium and Phaeodactylum SCOs were included in diets at up to 39 and 48 g/kg respectively. There were no differences in growth rate among any of the treatments in the study, although fish fed the Phaeodactylum SCO performed numerically better than fish fed either the fishoil reference or the Crypthecodinium SCO. Survival, however, was significantly better with fish fed the Crypthecodinium SCO. Ganuza et al. (2008) also explored the use of Crypthecodinium, but compared its application against Schizochytrium, another DHA producer in seabream microdiets. In a series of two trials the SCOs were used on both a wholecell biomass basis, as well as homogenised. Inclusion of the Crypthecodinium ranged from 20 g/kg up to 156 g/kg, where as the inclusion of the Schizochytrium ranged from 25 g/kg to 212 g/kg. In the two trials, the first used a protein base of whole squid, whereas in the second trial the diets were based on defatted squid meal. The amounts of each SCO added were modulated slightly to balance the DHA provision in each diet. When added to microdiets based on whole squid there were no significant effects on survival or growth. However, in the second trial with the defatted squid meal none of the SCO treatments performed as well as the squid lipid reference diet. The main difference Isonitrogenous and isoenergetic replacement of fishmeal by a Nannochloropsis SCP resulted in equal feed intake but led to a 9% reduction in growth. By comparison, fish fed a diet containing 80% soybean meal also had better feed intake than the microalgae diet, but growth of the soybean-fed fish was was equal [135]. In this study, the body composition of the tilapia fed with the Nannochloropsis SCP were more enriched with EPA and DHA compared to the fish fed the fishmeal diet and especially compared to the soybean diet, reflecting the differences in the levels of these fatty acids in the diets. Also, the only tilapia study on microalgae SCO [36] showed substantial shifts in EPA and DHA filet content. Isonitrogenous and isoenergetic replacement of 9% fishoil by 16.1% Schizochytrium sp. increased filet DHA content by 81% while EPA content declined by 89%, which reflected the fatty acid pattern of the source of Schizochytrium sp. used. In this study the replaced of fishoil by microalgae SCO resulted in reduced feed intake by 13%. Despite the lower feed intake, weight gain increased by 13% and coincided with an increase in PER from 2.4 to 3.1 g/g.
## (s12) Marine Species
(p12.0) There has also been considerable application of microalgal SCP and SCO in the diets of various marine-fish species [20,[140][141][142][143][144]. Some of the logic behind this is that many of the microalgal sources are quite rich in the important n-3 LC-PUFA that are so important for the nutrition of many marine-fish species and, as such, there has been a focus on the use of SCO resources as alternative sources of these n-3 LC-PUFA. Early work by Harel et al. [140] demonstrated that SCO resources made from Crypthecodinium, Chlorella, Schizochytrium and the fungus Mortierella alpina could each be used in various ways as components of either broodstock diets or larval enrichments for a range of marine fish species. Results were variable across the different fish species, with some applications showing no differences among the different SCO resources and others showing an enhanced benefit of Schizochytrium compared to Crypthecodinium.

(p12.1) A series of studies with European (gilthead) seabream (Sparus aurata) have shown some application of Crypthecodinium, Nannochloropsis, Phaeodactylum and Schizochytrium SCO resources in starter feeds [20,142,144]. In the study by Atalah et al. [20], Crypthecodinium and Phaeodactylum SCOs were included in diets at up to 39 and 48 g/kg respectively. There were no differences in growth rate among any of the treatments in the study, although fish fed the Phaeodactylum SCO performed numerically better than fish fed either the fishoil reference or the Crypthecodinium SCO. Survival, however, was significantly better with fish fed the Crypthecodinium SCO. Ganuza et al. (2008) also explored the use of Crypthecodinium, but compared its application against Schizochytrium, another DHA producer in seabream microdiets. In a series of two trials the SCOs were used on both a whole-cell biomass basis, as well as homogenised. Inclusion of the Crypthecodinium ranged from 20 g/kg up to 156 g/kg, where as the inclusion of the Schizochytrium ranged from 25 g/kg to 212 g/kg. In the two trials, the first used a protein base of whole squid, whereas in the second trial the diets were based on defatted squid meal. The amounts of each SCO added were modulated slightly to balance the DHA provision in each diet. When added to microdiets based on whole squid there were no significant effects on survival or growth. However, in the second trial with the defatted squid meal none of the SCO treatments performed as well as the squid lipid reference diet. The main difference between the reference and the treatment diets was the level of EPA, which was largely deficient in the treatment diets. However, the experiment did also demonstrate that there was nominal apparent nutritional difference between the Crypthecodinium and Schizochytrium SCOs. Another study by Eryalçın et al. [142] examined the use of Crypthecodinium and Nannochloropsis SCO resources. Each SCO was examined individually (at 80 and 110 g/kg inclusion respectively), with a third treatment examining a combination of the two. All three SCO treatments were compared against a fishoil based reference. After 34 days, fish fed the reference diet performed the best and significantly better than both treatments containing the Nannochloropsis SCO. The fish fed the diet containing the Crypthecodinium SCO meal grew poorer than the reference, but not significantly so.

(p12.2) Glencross and Rutherford [141] used a Crypthecodinium SCO meal (rich in DHA) and a Mortierella SCO meal (rich in ARA) in Asian seabass (Lates calcarifer) to define the requirements for DHA in that species and the impacts that supplemental EPA or ARA had on their performance. Significant impacts of the Crypthecodinium SCO meal (including at up to 113 g/kg) on growth were noted, although these cannot be separated from effects of DHA level. Increasing the inclusion of either SCO resource was also concomitant with an increasing redness score, which was not observed in fish fed the EPA treatment (no SCO inclusion). This redness was linked to subcutaneous haemorrhaging. While the inclusion of the Mortierella SCO (included at 75 g/kg) did not impact growth, the FCR was significantly poorer than that of the fishoil reference (EPA) treatment.
## (s13) Fungal Resources
(p13.0) Yeast is an exceptional SCP since it contains a moderate protein level, is abundant in lysine, has low toxic potential, can be cultivated on a wide range of substrates and is relatively easy to produce [146][147][148]. Yeast is a source of many essential B vitamins and has a balanced amino acid profile, except for sulphur-containing amino acids. Methionine is commonly supplemented into diets high in yeast SCP, although recent studies have questioned this necessity since the requirement may be met by a blend of fish and plant protein meals, such as wheat gluten, in aqua-feeds [39,59]. This next section reviews a selection of studies examining the palatability and utilisation (growth) responses of yeast and filamentous fungi for key aquaculture species groups.
## (s15) Shrimp
(p15.0) In our review of the literature, we found that the inclusion level of yeast SCP was typically lower than that for other species, although both yeast and yeast extracts were frequently used, with most studies focusing on the Pacific white shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei). We focused on studies that used yeast as a protein source above 10 g/kg in the diet, although there are several reviews that focus on the use of yeast and fungal polysaccharides (beta-glucans and MOS) as a probiotics and immunostimulant for shrimp [161,162].
## (s16) Tilapia
(p16.0) Inclusion of yeast in diets for tilapia has been more focused on improving growth, feed efficiency, gut health and disease resistance as well as providing a source of protein. This is not a review on the use of yeasts and yeast cell walls (beta-glucans and MOS) at 1-50 g/kg of the diet as immunostimulants, prebiotics or probiotics for tilapia species, as this has been done previously [172]. This section focuses on feeding yeast as a SCP to tilapia at inclusion levels between 50-500 g/kg, mainly as a bulk source of proteins in aqua-feeds.
## (s17) Marine Species
(p17.0) Most of the research on yeast SCP has focused on salmonids, shrimps and tilapias, although a few studies exist that fed yeast to marine fish species. Feeding 548 g/kg of brewer's yeast resulted in similar growth and feed efficiency while feeding a lower inclusion level (329 g/kg), improved FCR, and protein retention for European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) [183]. In addition, there was no effect of methionine supplementation in the highest yeast diet. Feeding 58 g/kg of yeast extract and 230 g/kg of brewer's yeast resulted in increased growth and feed intake in gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata) [184]. For hybrid striped bass (Morone chrysops × M. saxatilis), similar weight gain, feed efficiency and survival were found when fed up to 40 g/kg brewer's yeast, although fish had higher survival after a bath infection with Streptococcus iniae [185]. The tolerance of high inclusion levels of yeast SCP seems to depend on the marine species and more research is needed to determine acceptable feeding levels and benefits to growth performance and feed utilisation.
## (s18) Bacterial Resources
(p18.0) In contrast to the volume of work with microalgal SCI resources, studies that deal with the specific application of bacterial resources in the feeds for aquaculture species have been relatively rare [8,186]. Although work began on bacterial protein production about 50 years ago (even earlier if we consider Spirulina, which has long been used as a feed ingredient [187]), the revival of these resources has attracted some attention in recent years as a de novo source of producing protein, those that are non-competing with human food production based on the production of other plant or animal resources. What we could not find, however, were any studies where bacterial resources had been used to create a viable SCO resource. There has also been some speculation on the environmental credentials of some of the methanotrophic bacterial production systems in terms of their use of greenhouse gases, although whether there is credibility to that argument or not remains another question [188]. However, these resources too are certainly progressing both in terms of becoming reliable sources of protein [8,186]. This next section reviews a selection of studies examining the palatability and utilisation (growth) responses of key aquaculture species groups fed bacterial SCP resources.
## (s20) Shrimp
(p20.0) Of the bacterial SCP studies reported in shrimp, most centre on the application of Spirulina [194][195][196]. Very few studies were found on other bacterial SCP products [197]. By contrast, there were many studies examining the application of microbial bioflocs, which include bacterial biomass, but those will be covered in a later section. There were several studies that reported the evaluation of bacterial fermented plant-products [198,199] but, given that the bacterial component of those is so small, they will not be considered in the context of this review.

(p20.1) A study by Hanel et al. [194] examined the replacement of fishmeal by a lyophylized powder of Spirulina in diets for Pacific white shrimp (L. vannamei). These authors found that by adding powdered Spirulina to a shrimp diet that they were able to significantly improve the performance of that diet to become equivalent to that of a higher-quality diet. Not only were there improvements in growth, but also pigmentation benefits were noted. Other studies have also shown benefits beyond nutrient source provision from Spirulina in shrimp. Silvia-Neto et al. [195] reported improvements in palatability when Spirulina SCP was included, whereas Machias-Sancho et al. [196] found that a small inclusion (100 g/kg) stimulated the production of granular hemocytes in the hemolymph of the shrimp. Good growth performance was also observed in this study up to an inclusion of 300 g/kg, above which there was a significant deterioration in both growth and feed conversion.

(p20.2) The only study found to have examined the use of a non-Spirulina bacterial SCP with shrimp was that by Hamidoghli et al. [197], who examined the use of a Corynebacterium ammoniagenes SCP product (PROTIDE™). In that study the authors trialled a series of five inclusion levels from 0 to 80 g/kg in diets fed shrimp and found that above 40 g/kg inclusion there was a significant decline in growth, although no commensurate decline in feed intake. This suggests that the problem with the Corynebacterium SCP was not due to palatability, but rather the utilisation potential of the ingredient or the presence of some anti-nutrient.
## (s22) Marine Species
(p22.0) There have been relatively few studies on the application of bacterial protein resources in the diets of marine species. In addition to the suite of studies undertaken with rainbow trout and Atlantic salmon on the Methyolocuccus SCP, Aas et al. [201] also evaluated the same SCP resource in Atlantic halibut (Hippoglossus hippoglossus). Performance of the halibut was examined at either of three inclusion levels (0, 90 and 180 g/kg). A negative impact was observed on growth and feed intake at the 180 g/kg inclusion level, but not at the 90 g/kg inclusion level. Of the other studies with marine fish that were identified, both examined the use of a purple phototrophic bacterial biomass when included in diets for Asian seabass, but each comprised a different bacterial species [202,203]. The earlier study by Shapawi et al. [202] examined the use of a Rhodovulum SCP at very low inclusion levels of 3, 6 and 9 g/kg and found no impact on growth or feed intake over the 12-week duration of the study. The later study, by Delamare-Deboutteville et al. [203], examined the use of a mixed culture of purple phototrophic bacterial (PPB) biomass based on Rhodopseudomonas sp. and Rhodobacter sp. In the second study, fishmeal was progressively replaced by the PPB at 0, 100, 200 and 300 g/kg in the diet. After 7 weeks of feeding on the diets there were clear, significant effects on growth and FCR of PPB inclusion at every inclusion level based on a regression analysis of the data. The effects were not linked to palatability effects, with no significant differences in feed intake among the treatments.
## (s23) Biofloc Resources
(p23.0) The heterogenous mix of each of the other single-cell resources, combined with by-products from each, to produce a flocculated bio-aggregate known as a biofloc, presents a greater degree of complexity as a feed ingredient [17,65,204]. Although the characteristics of these SCI are highly diverse depending on the various production parameters employed, most such studies have focused on protein production utilising in situ nitrogenous inputs with added carbon inputs to fuel the microbial productivity [66,72,73]. Notably, several studies have also been reported where nutritional components other than protein were the focus of production [204][205][206]. This next section reviews a selection of these studies examining the palatability and utilisation (growth) responses of key aquaculture species groups fed these resources.
## (s24) Shrimp
(p24.0) Shrimp perhaps represent the main species where biofloc SCI products have been applied with some success in the past decade [75][76][77]206,207]. Various types of harvested microbial bioflocs have been produced, including those from specific pond-based production, sequencing-batch reactors, and recirculated aquaculture systems [75,76,206,207]. Notably, the different systems have reported markedly different compositions of the protein content in the bioflocs, with a 10-fold range in levels from~50 g/kg to 500 g/kg.

(p24.1) Application of a biofloc SCI in the diets of both Pacific white shrimp (L. vannamei) and black tiger shrimp (Penaeus monodon) species have shown some remarkable properties in being to be able to stimulate the growth of shrimp, in some cases by more than 50% [75][76][77]206,207]. Early studies by Ju et al. [206] included whole and various biofloc fractions in diets fed Pacific white shrimp and found that adding an intact biofloc to the diet at 200 g/kg improved the growth rate about 17% and that this bioactive benefit could be attributed to the acetone-soluble fraction, which was suggested to contain carotenoids, bromophenols and other phenolic compounds. Other studies examining the inclusion of bioflocs have also reported growth improvement. Kuhn et al. [75] reported an improvement in growth of Pacific white shrimp of~50% when using a high-protein (490 g/kg) microbial biofloc produced using a sequencing-batch reactor, included at 157 g/kg in the diet. By contrast, Glencross et al. [76,77], who used a low-protein microbial biofloc (~40 g/kg) in two separate studies at 100 g/kg inclusion in diets fed to black tiger shrimp, reported growth improvements of 42% and 50%, respectively. This consistency in performance, despite the vagaries in protein level seem to insinuate that the bioactivity is not linked to the protein content of the biofloc and reinforces to some extent the observations of Ju et al. [206].

(p24.2) The growth stimulation benefits reported by various groups have also been used in various practical applications to compensate for either a reduction in diet protein or the complete replacement of all marine resources (fishmeal and fishoil) in shrimp diets. In the case of compensating for a decrease of dietary protein levels from 480 g/kg protein to 360 g/kg protein a significant improvement in the utilisation efficiency of protein was also observed [77]. Other studies have demonstrated that it is possible to produce shrimp with no losses in growth or feed efficiency when using zero marine resource inclusion (i.e., no fishmeal or fishoil) [76,207]. In both the study by Bauer et al. [204], and the study by Glencross et al. [76], the authors noted an improvement in the FCR with increasing inclusion of the microbial biomass, this was in contrast to the study by Arnold et al. [205] where it was shown that one of the main benefits of the microbial biomass addition was that it stimulated feed intake, with no effect on FCR being observed, but significant effects on growth.
## (s25) Tilapia
(p25.0) Azim and Little [208] demonstrated that Nile tilapia (O. niloticus) production was enhanced if the fish were cultured in situ with a microbial biofloc. The use of a high (350 g/kg) or low (240 g/kg) protein diet did not affect the composition of the biofloc produced, which had a protein content of 380 g/kg. Although produced in situ, the authors did make substantial comment about the nutritional quality of the biofloc as a fish food. In comparison to fish fed the same diet but without biofloc present, a 43% enhancement in growth was noted, along with a 30% improvement in FCR, indicating that there was both an increase in feed intake, as well as nutritional quality. In a second study by these authors, they focused on the production of the biofloc as a separate protein resource based on the discharge from Nile tilapia production and were able to produce a biofloc with 500 g/kg of protein [209]. However, recent work by Simon et al. [210] demonstrated the 100 g/kg inclusion of a microbial biofloc in the diets of Nile tilapia resulted in a significant improvement in growth (~35%) despite the fact that the microbial biofloc (Novacq™) material was almost devoid of protein. The authors noted that the main effect was an improvement in feed intake, with no improvements in FCR observed.
## (s27) Immunological and Health Allied Assessments
(p27.0) Several studies with various SCI have reported positive effects on immunological, microbiome and inflammatory responses in different species through the use of microbial products. In particular, some microbial products are known to contain relatively high levels of certain immunostimulatory molecules such as nucleotides, peptidoglycans, and β-glucans among others. As such their inclusion in feeds brings these accessory molecules in addition to the protein and lipid content of the SCI. In many cases the various microbial products have been secondarily processed to concentrate these bioactive molecules to potentiate their impact [211][212][213][214].
## (s29) Product Quality Influences
(p29.0) One of the primary applications of many of the SCO resources has been to fortify the flesh of target species with an increased level of n-3 LC-PUFA [22,86,114,115]. Consequently, there has been a proliferation of studies assessing aspects of product (flesh) quality influences when fed various SCOs. While most of the work in this area has been with Atlantic salmon, there is a spread of studies on several other aquaculture species as well.

(p29.1) A series of studies by Kousoulaki et al. [86,114,115] has reported benefits to flesh quality from the inclusion of a Schizochytrium SCP in feeds for Atlantic salmon. In addition to an elevated level of both EPA and DHA, improvements to various other in the flesh quality attributes, including pigmentation, reduced gaping, and the absence of melanin spots have also been observed [86,114]. Additionally, the authors found no impacts on the sensory attributes of the flesh from fish fed the Schizochytrium SCP based on the analysis of a trained sensory panel [115]. In addition to reporting enhanced levels of DHA in the flesh of Atlantic salmon fed a different Schizochytrium SCP, Sprague et al. [122] also reported a reduction in the levels of persistent organic pollutants such as polychlorinated biphenyls.

(p29.2) Various flesh quality responses with other microbial SCP and other aquaculture species have been reported [195,219,223]. Lu et al. [223] fed Nile tilapia with raw Spirulina as the sole feed input and found a series of flesh quality traits, assessed both mechanically and sensorially, had improved, making the fish more suitable for sashimi. Also using Spirulina, Teimouri et al. [193] reported improved pigmentation in rainbow trout compared to fish fed a non-pigmented control diet. An improvement in the colour of fillets of Nile tilapia when fed various microbial biomasses (bacterial and fungal), at very low levels (<5 g/kg), was also reported by Grassi et al. [219]. This effect was concomitant with a reduced level of malonaldehyde in the fillets which was used as a measure of antioxidant status.
