# foods The Toxic Impact of Honey Adulteration: A Review

CorpusID: 226031227 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4143b1c3468337e25cabe242e9fc4a737126198](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4143b1c3468337e25cabe242e9fc4a737126198)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The standards of Codex Alimentarius [1] defines honey as the natural sweet substance from the nectar of plants or secretions of living parts of the plants that are stored and dehydrated by honey bees to improve its nutritional properties and become consumable for humans.

(p0.1) Honey, traditionally, is used for its anti-aging properties, enhancing the immune system, killing bacteria, treatment of bronchial phlegm, and relieving a sore throat, cough, and cold [2]. Moreover, according to literature, honey represents various pharmacological properties such as anti-inflammatory [3], antioxidant [4], anti-cancer activities against breast and cervical cancer [5], prostate cancer [6], and osteosarcoma [7]. The therapeutic effect of honey on human health can be adulteration has a major impact on economic loss, not only due to the declining honey quality but also because of the difficulty in the marketing of pure honey. According to Johnson et al. [12], the majority of honey sold on the market is caramelized sucrose that does not have any nutritional value. Since this adulterated material does not have the nutritional value that honey has, consumers have lost sight of the nutritional value of honey.
## (s1) Honey
(p1.0) Honey is defined as the excretions of insects sucking on the living parts of plants. Honeybees are the most well-known plant-sucking insects and can collect and transform honey, and deposit, dehydrate, store and leave honey in the honeycomb to ripen and mature. Honeybees collect pollen and nectar from a variety of flowering plants and convert it into the wax and honey [34]. Only worker honeybees forage for food, consuming as much nectar from each flower as they can. After foraging, worker honeybees return to the hive/comb and pass the collected nectar to the other worker honeybees. This worker holds the nectar on her tongue until the liquid evaporates, creating honey. The honey is then stored in a cell within the hive/comb.
## (s3) Stingless Bee Honey
(p3.0) Among all five genera of the stingless bee, there are the only two types of stingless bees that produce honey, namely, Melipona and Trigona [36]. As a result of the previous study, stingless bee honey, in comparison to sting bee honey, has been shown to be higher in moisture content, acidity, and lower in diastase activity [37]. Furthermore [5], stingless bees can be differentiated from sting bee in terms of morphology (absence of sting) (Figure 1a), collection of nectar, their short harvest distance, and their honeycomb-less hives. These species of bees are not dangerous to humans and are very active as compared to other bees. Among all these species, only two types, named Heterotrigona itama (H.itama) and Geniotrigona thoracica, are kept by beekeepers, as they produce a higher volume of honey as compared to the others. In this regard, Se et al. [16] stated that H. itama honey has significantly higher physicochemical values when it comes to moisture content, water activity, free acidity and color intensity, and better These species of bees are not dangerous to humans and are very active as compared to other bees. Among all these species, only two types, named Heterotrigona itama (H. itama) and Geniotrigona thoracica, are kept by beekeepers, as they produce a higher volume of honey as compared to the others. In this regard, Se et al. [16] stated that H. itama honey has significantly higher physicochemical values when it comes to moisture content, water activity, free acidity and color intensity, and better antioxidant properties in comparison with other types of honey. Furthermore, Bakar et al. [38] mentioned that H. itama honey is less concentrated, with a more sour taste and aroma in comparison with other types of honey. Moreover, stingless bee store honey in a honey pot as opposed to a honeycomb. Among all recognized Apis species, there are only two commercially used by mankind, namely A. mellifera and A. cerana. This is due to the behavioral limitation of other species, such as dwarf and giant honeybees, which practice open-air nesting and cannot be kept in manmade hives. A comparison between these two species, A. mellifera generally is more productive in producing honey compared to A. cerana [3]. Furthermore, honeybees ( Figure 1b) store honey in a honeycomb.

(p3.1) Honey from honeybees is a viscous, high-nutrient food. Its most important contents are fructose and glucose (80% ± 2), water (16% ± 1), ash (0.2%), and amino acids (<0.1%), while enzymes, vitamins, phenolic compounds, and other substances are present in trace amounts [39].
## (s9) Cane Sugar
(p9.0) Cane sugar is sucrose consisting of two sugar molecules monosaccharides (glucose and fructose). Glucose and fructose are monosaccharides with an identical chemical formula (C6H12O6) but a different chemical conformation, linked together by a weak glycosidic bond to produce sucrose (C12H22O11), a disaccharide. Generally, cane sugar is obtained by extracting juice from the sugar cane, a perennial C4 grass, followed by purification by chemical and physical means, evaporation to remove the water and separation of the sugar crystal [56]. Cane sugar originates from plants with a C4 metabolic pathway (Hatch-Slack cycle), while nectar originates from the C3 metabolic pathway (Calvin cycle).
## (s11) Cane Sugar
(p11.0) Cane sugar is sucrose consisting of two sugar molecules monosaccharides (glucose and fructose). Glucose and fructose are monosaccharides with an identical chemical formula (C 6 H 12 O 6 ) but a different chemical conformation, linked together by a weak glycosidic bond to produce sucrose (C 12 H 22 O 11 ), a disaccharide. Generally, cane sugar is obtained by extracting juice from the sugar cane, a perennial C4 grass, followed by purification by chemical and physical means, evaporation to remove the water and separation of the sugar crystal [56]. Cane sugar originates from plants with a C4 metabolic pathway (Hatch-Slack cycle), while nectar originates from the C3 metabolic pathway (Calvin cycle).
## (s13) Palm Sugar
(p13.0) Palm sugar is extracted from the flower buds of the palm. It is a natural sweetener undergoing minimum steps during the chemical-free procedure. One study [62] reported that the major carbohydrates in palm sugar were sucrose, followed by glucose and fructose. The significant advantage of palm sugar is the lack of a blood sugar spiking effect, owing to its low glycemic index (~35). The most popular honey adulterant in India is jaggery syrup, which is prepared by the evaporation of palm tree extraction the evaporation of the sap of palm trees [63]. While sucrose and glucose are the main sugar components of palm sugar, the LD 50 for sucrose is 29,700 mg/kg BW and for glucose 25,800 mg/kg BW for a rat [64].
## (s14) Invert Sugar
(p14.0) Invert sugar (IS) is produced by cleavage of the sucrose into its monosaccharides building blocks, fructose, and dextrose. The inversion procedure is usually performed by heating the sucrose syrup in the presence of acids, alkali, or invertase [58]. The sugar content of IS originates from beet and cane plants, mimicking the pure honey sugar profile [65]. Invert sugar has been widely used in beverages and food industries for making non-crystallized cream, jams, artificial honey, and liquid sugar [16].

(p14.1) Inverted beet syrup is one of the most well-known adulterants, which can be tailored to mimic the natural sucrose (glucose-fructose) profile of honey and, as beet is a C3 plant, it is usually difficult to detect. In one study, various quantities of inverted beet syrup were added to the pure honey samples of clover, orange, and buckwheat [66]. Invert sugar is a generally accepted safe substance and it does not present toxic effects. It is recommended to take precautions in patients that present diabetes mellitus and also in patients with the rare hereditary problems of fructose intolerance, glucose-galactose malabsorption, or sucrase-isomaltase insufficiency [67].

(p14.2) As inverted sugar is a mixture of fructose and glucose, the LD 50 value for this sugar is adopted from its structural sugars; the LD 50 for fructose and glucose are 25,800 mg/kg BW and 29,700 mg/kg BW, respectively [68].
## (s19) Indirect Adulteration
(p19.0) Indirect adulteration of honey is the incorporation of sugars into honey via bee-feeding [77]. In this manner, low-quality honey, chemicals, and industrial sugars were incorporated into the honey during a natural process that happened in the bee's digestive system [78]. During indirect honey adulteration, an extreme amount of sugar syrup was fed to the bee colonies in the main nectar flow period [31].
## (s20) Blending
(p20.0) In this method, high quality (pure and rare) honey is mixed with cheaper honey that has lower quality and nutrition. Adulteration of pure honey with synthetic honey has become much more prevalent in recent years [30].

(p20.1) In China and Venezuela, a well-known fraud in the honey industry consists of blending the costly acacia honey with rape honey (cheaper honey) to increase the marketing profit since the light amber color of rape honey is highly similar to that of the yellow-colored acacia honey [76]. Acacia honey originates from Robinia pseudacacia blossoms and is commonly consumed nectar honey because of its mild aromatic and clear aspect and light yellowish color, and because it does not crystallize [32]. In contrast, rape honey is sweeter, with a light amber color, and easily crystallizes [84]. Hence, as the collection of M. favosa honey has steadily increased since 1985, it is the perfect target for blending with the cheaper honey of A. mellifera [32]. In this study, acacia honey was blended with different concentrations (5-50%, w/w) of rape honey, and the simple method of liquid chromatography-electrochemical detection (LC-ECD) was used to detect the adulteration.

(p20.2) Since the honey adulterants and adulteration methods have been discussed earlier, detection methods to investigate the authenticity of honey become the priority in the food safety of honey. These detections methods must be capable of distinguishing between pure and adulterated honey to assist the authorities in regulating the market and protect the consumer's right.
