# Diatoms recovery from wastewater: Overview from an ecological and economic perspective

CorpusID: 222412713 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a432ded7d7f870f0d89f3991eadbf6400414f6d5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a432ded7d7f870f0d89f3991eadbf6400414f6d5)

Fields: Economics, Environmental Science

## (s4) Preparation for sample collection
(p4.0) The field procedures play a crucial role in the isolation of diatoms, microalgae, or other species. In a riverine environment, small boulders (rocks) and cobbles are the most favored substratum for diatoms screening. Almost all diatom indexed to the eplithion community found here where epilithion`s ecology is recognized better than any other group [63]. Bricks, concrete, bridge supports, canal walls, etc. may be used as an alternative substratum, whereas simulated substrate can be set up into the stream if pebbles, cobbles, boulders, or macrophytes do not exist from the site though sampling should be done if they have been plunged for several weeks [47]. Sampling is an important step towards the collection of diatoms as the whole isolation process depends on it. The collected water sample may contain dead cells or damaged cells, which is not considered good, so it becomes very crucial to ideally collect the sample and isolate the most viable cells at the earliest. Keeping the water sample for longer times is not recommended because environmental conditions change very frequently, which leads to cell death. Some species multiply quickly and suddenly die, in that case, isolation should be done rapidly. Sometimes, a planktonic net can be used to concentrate the sample as it removes other unwanted algal species, microorganisms, or debris but should be avoided as more concentrated sample leads to more damaged cells [47,63].

(p4.1) The collected sample should be kept according to the target species` environmental conditions. For example, several marine species are susceptible to sample concentration. For a sampling of these strains of species, special water bottles can be used. As several factors like water depth, pressure, temperature, or light influence the sample conditions, so instead of using a concentrated sample, a normal water sample taken in sterile containers can provide a better result. The collected sample should always be kept in sterile containers at a stable temperature [63].

(p4.2) Often sample collected from different water bodies contains zooplankton or other species which feed on algae or specifically on diatoms. So, it is essential to remove the unwanted organisms gently by filtering the sample at the sample site. However, sometimes tiny organisms may pass through the filter, which may pose threats to target species, in that case, dilution methods can be used to isolate the target species. The health of species in nature also plays a crucial role as an isolated cell will have successful growth only if they were in a good state at the sample collection time. It is advised to collect the sample carefully. The use of sterile equipment is mandatory, as dirty equipment may lead to contamination. All the isolation techniques should be performed under sterile conditions [64]. A general idea about field procedure, laboratory procedure, culture preparation, and finally aim towards obtaining axenic culture is presented in Fig. 1.
## (s5) Substrata Selection
(p5.0) The identification of a suitable substrate is a pivotal step to recognize the diatom communities in the natural environment. Diatom communities form a slimy layer or thin golden-brown layer on the substratum. It can be more noticeable by feel or touch and can be identified at a specific time depending on species. The substratum can be differentiated into a preferred substrate and an alternative substrate. Diatom attaches to different substrata or facilitates locomotion by releasing mucilage from various structures of the cell wall [65]. Diatom community composition is mainly influenced by chemicals present in water, water turbulence, temperature and light present in water, being eaten by large microorganisms, etc. The most preferred substratum is the solid substratum. It mainly includes cobbles/pebbles and small rocks (Epilithon). Fig. 2 depicts various substrates intended for diatoms sampling. They are widely available in almost every aquatic habitat and throughout the year. In the absence of a solid substrate, submerged or emerging macrophytic plants (epiphyte) should be sampled as it also provides a suitable habitat for diatom communities. It is ideal to note the microhabitat of diatoms species [35].
## (s6) Elimination of contaminants from collected sample
(p6.0) The most effective method to eliminate contaminants is achieved by various techniques such as filtration, sedimentation, and centrifugation as gravity separation. The most successful technique is filtration as it removes all unwanted microorganisms or other zooplankton, which feed on diatoms from the sample. In this, a planktonic net of a specific size is used, which does not allow any other organism to pass through except the target species. In gravity separation, diatoms settle down as sediments while leaving other microalgae in the suspension, which can be discarded further [66].
## (s9) Laboratory procedures
(p9.0) Examination of the collected sample from different substrata should be done as quickly as possible to make sure that diatom assemblage contains live cells and not dead ones. Sample with more dead cells should be discarded, and sampling should be performed again. The environmental conditions of samples collected from various aquatic habitats should be mimicked in a laboratory. It should be noted that all equipment like glass-slide, coverslip, pipette, forceps, inoculating loop, centrifuge tube, glass test tube, watch glass, etc. must be sterilized before use. Uncleaned equipment may lead to contaminations that further result in the death of cells. After examination of diatoms in the collected sample, standard isolation methods should be performed [72].
## (s10) Standard isolation methods
(p10.0) As the collected sample contains various microorganisms and other microalgae, these standard isolation methods play a crucial role in the isolation of target species of diatom. The isolator should focus on finding the target species in the collected sample. Viable cells should be cultured as soon as possible while avoiding contaminants. All the following methods should be performed carefully [72].
## (s13) Isolation using agar
(p13.0) It is probably the oldest and standard method available to isolate microorganisms. Most of the diatom species usually grow well in agar. Isolation using agar can be used with both "streaking" and "spreading" methods. Later single cells or colonies can be picked from the culture plate and observed under the microscope. To study the colony/diatom community characteristics, agar plate method is advantageous. The agar concentration should be between 0.8% to 1.5% and 2.0%. While observing glass slide under a microscope, if it contains a single diatom cell, it can be replicated on the agar plate for culture. Agar pour plate method can also be used to isolate cells that do not grow on the surface of the agar plate [78].
## (s14) Density centrifugation
(p14.0) This is a physical technique for the pre-separation of single cells of diatoms from polluted water. The Centrifugal technique applies gravity settling to isolate more prominent species from the microalgae. Low dense cells, for example, microscopic organisms and others present in the supernatant, are emptied while diatoms species stay at the base as a pellet. The speed and time of centrifugation vary depending upon the target microalgal species. Even though reasonably successful, however, it might harm delicate cells through sheer pressure [79].
## (s16) Membrane filtration
(p16.0) This is a pre-isolation step towards the separation of diatoms. Samples can break into two portions depend upon particle size difference. Sometimes enrichment media can also be utilized for better outcomes while separating fungal cells from diatoms. Bigger species can be held at the membrane however, diatom cells pass through the filter quickly. This strategy is helpful, advantageous, and very adaptable [81].
## (s18) Other methods
(p18.0) There are other different strategies for the isolation of diatom species like anti-microbials, UV radiation. Anti-microbial treatment hinders growth & development by eliminating microorganisms, thus help with getting the confined unadulterated culture of diatoms. UV radiation act as a disinfectant that prevents bacteria and other contaminants since diatoms are better resistant to UV radiation over bacterial cells [81]. Photoinhibition is an immediate strategy that harms biomolecules by engrossing UV light, which prompts the loss of natural capacity of microscopic organisms [17].
## (s20) Micromanipulation
(p20.0) Diatoms are valuable for the aquatic food chain and give significant bioactive compounds to human prosperity. Segregating unadulterated species or getting axenic culture from a polluted water source is a complicated and tedious procedure with the current strategies. Hence, it becomes necessary to search for other advanced isolation techniques. Micromanipulation is one such method permitting refined, confining single species in a more cleansed manner. Prior fine capillary tubes were used focusing on target cells under microscopic observation, which is a laborious task and threat to contamination [83]. With the arrival of a modern, sophisticated micromanipulator exploiting micromanipulator and stereomicroscope, a high level of precision can be achieved for screening and isolation of species of interest [80]. A cell of interest can be captured utilizing a focused laser and transferred to a sterile media of interest. This system is still in its early stages because of the high state of expertise and time required [84].
## (s21) Automated techniques
(p21.0) The requirement for cutting edge new methods push researcher to redesign the flow cytometer coupling FACS (Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorting). The premise of this procedure is light scattering and fluorescence [84]. Cells absorb the laser beam transmit fluorescence and give information on cell size, pigments, and reliability of species, which is identified with the morphology and other characteristics of the species accordingly, thus allowing characterization of up to 10,000 cells in a fraction of second [85]. This technique can be employed to build up an axenic culture and get rid of any bacterial contamination. In some cases, mixed culture or aggregation of cells may make issues in the precise identification of cells, which can be overcome by cell disruption through appropriate sonication under controlled conditions. This technique is generally excellent for quick screening of organisms overproduces metabolites of interest in conjunction with fluorescent dyes. For example, Bodipy or Nile red facilitates the selection of desired mutants from a mixed population [86]. An overview of the main techniques used to establish axenic diatom cultures is presented in Table 3.
## (s24) Preparation of culture media
(p24.0) Although there are several culture media are available, but the most recommended culture media for isolation and growth of diatoms are f/2-Si, PM, and WC media. The composition of each culture media is prescribed according to the selection of diatoms for culturing for the desired application. f/2-Si culture media is widely used as the most effective media, whereas PM media is utilized for culturing diatoms in an acidic environment. WC media is generally used for culturing diatoms existing in an alkaline environment [6]. All these culture media differ in their composition of major and minor nutrients and provide proper nourishment to diatom culture. f/2-Si media is required for marine species while PM and WC media supports the cultivation of freshwater species. For marine, it is advised to prepare both media with seawater and for freshwater prepare media with distilled water [103]. The chemical composition of different culture media for diatoms cultivation are presented in Table 4.
## (s25) Elimination of contaminants from culture
(p25.0) Elimination of contaminants is important to maintain the pure culture of isolated species. As stated, the above contamination can be eliminated with gravity separation, dilution techniques, etc. In the case of bacterial contamination, antibiotics should be used in a specific amount in culture. Every equipment, glassware used in isolation or culture should be sterilized before performing experiments. Culture should be maintained in aseptic and optimum conditions [104].
## (s28) Future perspectives and commercial value of diatoms
(p28.0) Diatoms are very young as compared to other phytoplanktons but have evolved rapidly over some time. A decline return on investment in research and development (R&D) and slow-growing companies accelerating the demand for diatoms cultivation serving as a superfood. The term nutraceutical refers to nutrition that provides physiological benefits coupled with the protection and prevention of disease. These functional foods promote health by adding novel ingredients that are similar to conventional foods but with rich nutrition or bioactive compounds that may target the physiological mechanism of our body as characterized by the US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service [107]. On account of large content of polyunsaturated fatty acids (e.g., PUFAs n3 and n6), essential amino acids (e.g., leucine, isoleucine, and valine) and pigments (e.g., lutein and β-carotene) and vitamins (e.g., B12), the diatoms biomass have gained much popularity across the globe [6].
