# Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), a newly emerged pathogen: an overview One sentence summary: An updated review of emerging cornoaviruses SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, and potential therapeutic and preventive approaches

CorpusID: 221306266 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9bda76640e07331e95b538af5b4d198ca3cd940](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9bda76640e07331e95b538af5b4d198ca3cd940)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) On December 31, 2019, several cases of severe pneumonia were reported from Wuhan, China. The causative agent of the outbreak was identified as Betacoronavirus. Genome sequencing revealed that it is closely related to the SARS-CoV (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus) which had emerged in 2003, and is designated as SARS-CoV-2 (Gorbalenya et al. 2020;Zhou et al. 2020). In a very short duration, more than 80 000 infectious cases including more than 3000 deaths were reported in China as on March 15, 2020. At the time of this review (18 May, 2020), the disease, termed as COVID-19 (Corona Virus Disease 2019), had already become pandemic and spread to more than 216 countries and territories, including community transmissions in countries like the United States, Germany, France, Spain, Japan, Singapore, South Korea, Iran, Italy and India. As on July 19, more than 14 007 791 cases and 597 105 deaths had been reported globally, with the rapid growth of numbers in many countries. For the up-to-date information about COVID-19, visit the World Health organization (WHO) website (https://www.who.int/emer gencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019).
## (s1) CORONAVIRUSES: SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and SARC-CoV-2
(p1.0) Zoonotic coronaviruses are becoming a global concern as there was emergence of earlier two coronaviruses, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV (Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus) which created a havoc and recently emergence of the third highly pathogenic SARC-CoV-2. It has been observed that members of the family Coronaviridae are known to infect a wide range of vertebrates and humans. Before the outbreak of SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome), only two coronaviruses including hCoV-229E and hCoV-OC43 were known to infect humans. However, post-SARS outbreak, the SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV), human coronavirus hCoV-NL63, human coronavirus hCoV-HKU1 and MERS-CoV have been isolated from humans. Similar to SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, the newly isolated SARC-CoV-2 is highly pathogenic in humans and causes severe acute respiratory distress (Shi, Guo and Rottier 2016).

(p1.1) The genomes of coronaviruses consist of a positive and single-stranded RNA genome of about 30 kb. The 5 terminus encodes the enzyme viral replicase/transcriptase, which is involved in virus replication, whereas the 3 terminus encodes viral structural proteins and virus group specific accessory proteins. Functional studies of these viral proteins in detail are essential for antiviral drug screening and vaccine development.

(p1.2) The earliest available genome sequencing data of SARS-CoV-2 made it possible to compare it with the genomes of SARS-CoV and other coronaviruses. Results showed that SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the genus Betacoronavirus and subgenus Sarbecovirus, which also includes SARS-CoV. However, the MERS-CoV belongs to another subgenus, Merbecovirus (Lu et al. 2020;Zhou et al. 2020). The comparison study also showed that there is 79% nucleotide similarity between SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV. The essential surface glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 known as spike (S) protein, essential for host cell receptor binding, showed only 72% similarity with SARS-CoV at the nucleotide level. The genomic organization of SARS-CoV-2 resembles those of other betacoronaviruses, including 5'-ORF1ab-S (Surface glycoprotein)-ORF3a-E (Envelope)-M (Membrane glycoprotein)-N-3' as shown in Fig. 1. Comparative genome analysis of RaTG13, a virus from a Rhinolophusaffinis (i.e. horseshoe) bat sampled from Yunnan province in China in 2013, with SARS-CoV-2, showed that SARS-CoV-2 has 96% similarity at the nucleotide sequence level . Although the SARS-CoV-2 and RaTG13 have high similarity, yet they differ in some genomic features, such as SARS-CoV-2 contains a polybasic (furin) cleavage site insertion (residues PRRA) between the S1 and S2 subunits of the surface glycoprotein S protein (Coutard et al. 2020). Polybasic insertion may increase the infectivity of the virus, as it is absent in other related betacoronaviruses. However, similar polybasic insertions are observed in different human coronaviruses, such as HCoV-HKU1 and highly virulent strains of avian influenza viruses. Therefore, whether polybasic insertion between S1 and S2 subunits of S protein occurs due to the natural evolution in SARS-CoV-2 or by other means is going to be the topic of debate in the future. However, an independent insertion(s) of the amino acids PAA at the S1/S2 cleavage site was also observed in aRmYN02 virus (having 72% similarity in spike protein and 97% similarity in replicase nucleotide) isolated from Rhinolophus bat in Yunnan province in mid-2019, indicating that these insertion events may be a natural part of ongoing coronavirus evolution .

(p1.3) The receptor-binding domain (RBD) of S protein is essential to interact with the ACE2 receptor present on the surface of the target cells of the host. Therefore, comparative sequence analysis was performed and results showed that there is 85% similarity in RBD between SARS-CoV-2 and RaTG13, but they share only one amino acid among the six key amino acid residues. Further, due to the proteinaceous nature of spike, structural comparisons were also performed, suggesting that the RBD domain of the SARS-CoV-2 is well suited to interact with the human ACE2 receptor. Interestingly the same receptor was also utilized by SARS-CoV to cause infection (Wrapp et al. 2020).

(p1.4) The SARS-CoV-2 is closely related to SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV having bat as reservoirs, but there are huge biological differences in the former as compared to the other two. The SARS-CoV-2 is markedly more infectious and has very different epidemiological dynamics. Moreover, the MERS-CoV has never been able to fully adapt to human transmission (Sabir et al. 2016), whereas there is the remarkable local and global spread of SARS-CoV-2.

(p1.5) As in the case of SARS and MERS, the intermediate host including civets and camels, respectively, played an important role and may be considered as a true reservoir host (Sabir et al. 2016). Therefore, due to the ecological separation between a bat (reservoir) and humans, 'intermediate' or 'amplifying' mammalian host is a must to acquire mutations in SARS-CoV-2, and is essential for the efficient human transmission.

(p1.6) To determine the intermediate host, it is essential to perform a wider sampling of animals that live close to human populations or available in wet markets for human consumption. Surprisingly, there was discovery of viruses, closely related to SARS-CoV-2 from the Malayan pangolins (Manisjavanica) that are illegally imported into southern China (Guangdong and Guangxi provinces). It has been observed that RBD domain of Guangdong pangolin viruses are particularly closely related to SARS-CoV-2. There is a 97% amino acid sequence similarity and contain all six critical key mutations that are essential for binding to the ACE2 receptor in these viruses. However, the rest of the genome is highly divergent from SARS-CoV-2.

(p1.7) Hence, the evolution of coronaviruses in animal reservoirs as well as in intermediate hosts is required to explain the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in humans. It might be possible that due to its asymptomatic infection, the virus could have acquired some of its essential mutations during a period the ''cryptic'' spread in humans before it was first detected in December 2019.
## (s3) ROLE OF SPIKE PROTEIN AND ITS IMMUNOGENICITY
(p3.0) SARS-CoV is responsible to cause severe acute respiratory syndrome. SARS-CoV utilizes angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor present on the surface of host cells, as shown in Fig. 3. SARC like-CoVs and SARS-CoVs have identical genetic organizations with high sequence identities. The schematic representation of spike protein (S) from SARS-CoV-2 is shown in Fig. 4. However, there is some important exception at the N' terminus of spike protein (S), essential for receptor binding in CoVs. There is a study to investigate the receptor usage by full-length S of SL-CoV, SARS-CoV and a series of S chimeras. Different ACE2 receptors from human, civet, or horseshoe bat were expressed in cell lines by using human immunodeficiency virus-based pseudovirus system. Several important observations were made in the study. First, the SL-CoV S was unable to use any of the three receptors. Second, the SARS-CoV S was unable to enter the cells expressing bat ACE2. Third, the chimeric S enters the cells with different efficiencies for different constructs via human ACE2. Fourth, a minimal insert region (amino acids 310-518) was sufficient to convert the SL-CoV S from non-ACE2 binding to human ACE2 binding, indicating that the SL-CoV S is largely compatible with SARS-CoV S protein, both in structure and function (Ren et al. 2008).

(p3.1) Detailed structural study of human SARS-CoV RBD complexed with human ACE2 receptors was performed. Results revealed that it is the truncations in the receptor-binding motif (RBM) region of SL-CoV spike protein, which abolished its human ACE2-binding ability (Li 2008)). Therefore, we may hypothesize that the SL-CoV found in horseshoe bats is not the direct ancestor of human SARS-CoV. Moreover, it has been observed that the human SARS-CoV, as well as its closely related civet SARS-CoV spike proteins, were not able to use a horseshoe bat (R. pearsoni) ACE2 as a receptor for cell entry (Ren et al. 2008). These findings highlight a critical missing link (an intermediate host) in the bat-to-civet/human transmission chain of SARS-CoV (Hou et al. 2010).

(p3.2) An earlier study showed that ACE2 from horseshoe bat could not function as a receptor for SARS-CoV. However, changing 3 amino acids (40, 41 and 42 amino acids) from SHE to FYQ was found adequate to convert the nonfunctional bat ACE2 into a fully active receptor for SARS-CoV. Further, an ACE2 molecule from a fruit bat, which naturally has the FYQ motif, supports SARS-CoV entry into the cells thus causing infection. This result indicates that there must be a wide host range for SARS-CoV-related viruses among different bat populations (Yuan et al. 2010).

(p3.3) In the case of SARS-CoV-2, the structural bioinformatics approaches accurately predicted that SARS-CoV-2 spikes bind human ACE2 (Wan et al. 2020b). When cell lines over-expressed the transmembrane protein 'angiotensin-converting enzyme 2' (ACE2) from humans, bats, pig or civet cats and were infected with SARS-CoV-2, results showed that they became hypersensitized to infection, thus indicating that ACE2 is a SARS-CoV-2 receptor . The binding studies also revealed that receptor-binding domains on the SARS-CoV-2 S proteins have a high affinity to human ACE2 (Wrapp et al. 2020) which makes it more virulent. However, apart from ACE2 interaction, the N-terminal domain (NTD) of the SARS-CoV-2 S proteins may show binding to alternative host-cell receptors .
## (s4) DIAGNOSIS AND THERAPEUTICS FOR SARS-CoV-2 INFECTION
(p4.0) Detection of novel coronavirus is done by different molecular biology techniques including real-time reverse transcription PCR (rRT-PCR), reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR), reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP), multiplex nucleic acid amplification, real-time RT-LAMP and microarray-based assays . WHO also recommended a pan-coronavirus assay for characterization and confirmation.). Viral culture and RT-PCR are among the most efficient and reliable methods for the diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infection. These methods are time consuming and generally takes hours to detect the nucleic acid and many days to isolate the virus from the samples. Apart from that, specialized equipments and expertise are also required. To overcome these limitations, rapid diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infection can be done with rapid antigen detection (RAD) tests. In RAD tests, the immobilized SARS-CoV-2 antibody on the device can detect viral antigen in the sample. The results of RAD tests are prompt and interpreted without specialized instrument. Hence, RAD tests could be beneficial reduce the workload in diagnostic laboratories and hospitals (Mak et al. 2020). However, as per the WHO, RAD tests for SARS − COV-2 antigen detection, further needs evaluation and is not recommended for clinical diagnosis (Laboratory Testing Strategy Recommendations for COVID-19: Interim Guidance 2020).

(p4.1) The immune response to SARS-CoV2 in the early weeks of the infection can be detected using Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbant Assay (ELISA), automated chemiluminescence immunoassay (CLIA), and lateral flow immunoassay (LFIA), plaque reduction neutralization tests (PRNT), or a combination of these methods (Espejo et al. 2020). The most commonly antigens used in these assays were the spike glycoprotein S1 including the receptor binding domain (Jin et al. 2020), the nucleocapsid protein or both (Pang et al. 2020).

(p4.2) Application of inhibitor to halt virus interactions with the host may be one of the prophylactic methods. In this direction, an engineered pan-Cov fusion inhibitor has been designed and designated as EK1 peptide. It has shown promising results in mice by inhibiting the infection in five human coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and three bat-SL-CoVs (Xia et al. 2019). It has also been reported that intranasal application of engineered EK1 peptide before or post viral infection showed protection in human DPP4-transgenic mice against MERS-CoV infection, indicating its potential prophylactic and therapeutic effect.

(p4.3) Another approach is designing of neutralizing antibody, which may block the interaction with the host cell. The S proteins of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV are immunogenic. The RBD domains of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV are known to have nonsequential epitopes that induce a more potent neutralizing antibody and give protection against SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV (Du et al. 2009;Zhou et al. 2019). The modification on the structural basis for MERS-CoV S-RBD amino acid has improved the efficacy against MERS-CoV infection (Zhou et al. 2019). Therefore, we may suggest that SARS-CoV-2 S-RBD or modified S-RBD of another related coronavirus could be used as target to develop a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2.

(p4.4) Recently, neutralizing monoclonal antibodies and nanobodies against the RBD domain of S protein showed protection against SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV (Du et al. 2009;Zhou et al. 2019). Although the NTD and S2 unit of S protein from SARS-CoV and/or MERS-CoV was also studied to develop neutralizing antibodies, but the efficacy was found to be very low (Du et al. 2009). Therefore, RBD of S protein SARS-CoV-2 would be a key target for developing neutralizing antibodies as shown in Fig. 5.

(p4.5) Cross protection by the antibodies developed against SARS-CoV, has been observed against bat-SL-CoV-W1V1 and bat-SL-CoV-SHC014 (Zeng et al. 2017). Therefore, the development of cross-neutralizing antibodies can be another possible way for urgent prevention and treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
