# A review of phosphorus homeostasis and the impact of different types and amounts of dietary phosphate on metabolism and renal health in cats

CorpusID: 226276380 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de5a21d7f56e51ab2408917bab820641dde987b4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de5a21d7f56e51ab2408917bab820641dde987b4)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s1) | EVIDENCE FOR PHOSPHORUS' ROLE IN RENAL HEALTH IN CATS
(p1.0) Although there is currently no evidence that P in commercial cat foods induces renal disease in healthy cats, high "ash" content in food might be a risk factor for developing CKD. 86 Ash refers to all the minerals in food, and this includes P but is not specifically correlated to it. In that study, higher intakes of dietary fiber, magnesium and sodium all were associated with reduced risk for CKD. Each of these nutrients can impact dietary P availability. Another small study suggests that increased P and protein intakes might be associated with CKD in cats. 81 Studies in healthy cats show an impact of dietary P, or inverse Ca : P ratios, on markers of kidney function. 19,20,87,88  phosphates. 20 The amount of phosphorus from highly soluble monosodium phosphate was approximately 0.4 g/Mcal ME or 0.17% of diet DM, in a diet with a Ca : P ratio of approximately 0.4 : 1.

(p1.1) A third study compared a diet supplemented with sodium dihydrogen phosphate (SDHP: NaH 2 PO 4 , also referred to as monosodium phosphate) to deliver 4.78 g P/Mcal ME (1.93% diet DM) with a Ca : P ratio of 0.6 to a control diet providing 1.23 g P/Mcal ME (0.52% diet DM) and Ca : P at 1.1. 19 Within 4 weeks after starting on this HP-NaP diet, cats developed changes consistent with renal injury: increased plasma creatinine and urea nitrogen; increased urinary microalbuminuria; decreased GFR; and ultrasound echogenicity changes consistent with altered renal morphology.

(p1.2) GFR also decreased in the control group, but to a lesser extent than the HP-NaP group. A final study evaluated a more moderate diet providing 3.6 g P/Mcal ME (1.5% diet DM), including approximately 1.5 g P (0.6% diet DM) from SDHP, and a Ca : P ratio of 0.9. 19 Urinary albumin excretion was significantly increased in the higher P cats by week 4 and remained elevated throughout the study. Three cats (12.5%) fed this diet developed biochemical evidence of kidney disease and 36% of the cats showed evidence of altered renal morphology. In addition, 15 cats (60%) fed this diet developed renal stones, compared with 6 cats (27%) fed the control diet. 19 Thus, multiple studies show adverse renal effects in cats fed diets containing highly soluble inorganic Pi especially, but not exclusively, in diets with a Ca : P ratio less than 1 : 1-findings consistent with those reported in other species. A key question not addressed in these studies is the applicability of these findings to other P sources.

(p1.3) The studies above did not compare the effects of different P sources on renal biomarkers, however other research evaluated different P sources on other physiologically important parameters. One study compared a mix of dietary P sources (poultry, meat, fish meals, and calcium phosphate) with supplemental inorganic P from mono-and di-basic sodium phosphates, and confirmed significantly greater uptake, along with increases in sPi and uPi in cats fed the more digestible inorganic P. 27 Two studies in cats compared diets providing P only from rice and beef (total P approximately 0.54%-0.64% DM) with high P diets providing additional P from either monosodium phosphate (HP-NaP: total P, 1.7% DM) or monocalcium phosphate (HP-CaP: total P, 1.5% DM). 88 Monosodium phosphate is a water soluble P source whereas monocalcium phosphate is poorly water soluble. 89  have not yet been evaluated in this manner. While limiting the use of highly soluble phosphates, such as sodium-or potassium-phosphates, appears to be important, there are insufficient data to support a specific upper limit for inorganic or soluble phosphates at this time.

(p1.4) Among the additional research needed are studies to identify sensitive markers of renal injury; to identify risk, if any, from current commercial products; and to generate more information about the kinetics, impact of different phosphorus sources, and the physiological adaptations to long term feeding of highly bioavailable phosphates. 
