# Citation Urinary tract infections in the elderly: a review of disease characteristics and current treatment options ACCESS ONLINE

CorpusID: 220666010 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/874367218daeca3c13a5cb8a22205bf487fe9e7b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/874367218daeca3c13a5cb8a22205bf487fe9e7b)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Social and economic burden
(p2.0) Recurrent UTIs carry a substantial social and economic burden, and have a detrimental effect on patients' quality of life (QoL). [15][16][17] The economic cost of UTIs to healthcare systems is considerable. In the United States, the cost of UTIs is estimated to be at least US$2-3 billion per annum. 18 An economic study of 20 hospitals in eight European countries with a high prevalence of multidrug resistant Gram-negative bacteria estimated that the mean cost per case of complicated UTIs was €5700, ranging from €4028 to €7740 per case. Higher patient costs were associated with admission, infection source and severity, comorbidity, and the presence of multidrug resistant bacteria. 19
## (s3) Risk factors for symptomatic UTI and asymptomatic bacteriuria
(p3.0) Risk factors for symptomatic UTI in the elderly differ from those in the younger population. Factors that increase the likelihood of developing UTIs include age-related changes in immune function (immunosenescence), exposure to nosocomial pathogens, and a higher number of comorbidities, 20,21 although the strongest and most consistent risk factor for UTIs, namely a history of UTIs, is common to all age groups. Individuals with previous symptomatic UTIs have a 4-7 fold greater risk for future UTIs compared to those with no prior history. 21,22 Relative to elderly subjects living in the community, institutionalized adults generally have more comorbidities and functional impairments, and a higher incidence of cognitive deficits, which predispose them to higher rates of asymptomatic bacteriuria and UTIs. The presence of a urinary catheter in institutionalized elderly individuals is a significant risk factor for UTIs. 21 In institutionalized elderly women without a urinary catheter, the presence of bowel and/ or bladder incontinence, functional disability, and dementia were significantly associated with persistent asymptomatic bacteriuria. In non-catheterized institutionalized elderly men, the only significant risk factor for persistent asymptomatic bacteriuria was cancer. 23
## (s6) Non-antimicrobial and prophylactic treatment
(p6.0) Cranberry products Cranberry products have been used widely for many years to treat and prevent UTIs, although the mechanism of action is unclear and disputed. A putative mechanism of action is preventing the adherence of P-fimbriated E. coli to uroepithelial cells on the bladder wall by proanthocyanidins contained in cranberries. 25 Collectively, the results from meta-analyses 34 and a subsequent placebo-controlled RCT 35 do not support the use of cranberry products for prevention of UTI. 36
## (s8) Estrogen therapy
(p8.0) A decrease in estrogen is associated with several conditions that may promote recurrent UTIs in postmenopausal women: urinary incontinence, vesical prolapse, cystocoele, and postvoidal residue. As such, estrogen therapy has been used in postmenopausal women to prevent recurrent UTIs. However, a meta-analysis of 4 studies involving 2798 women found that oral estrogens failed to prevent UTIs compared to placebo (RR: 1.08; 95% CI: 0.88-1.33). 38 Two small studies reported ISSN: 1740-4398 REVIEW -Urinary tract infections in the elderly: disease characteristics and current treatment options drugsincontext.com that vaginal estrogen reduced UTIs compared with placebo, with calculated RRs of 0.25 (95% CI: 0.13-0.50) and 0.64 (95% CI: 0.47-0.86), respectively. 39,40 As with OM-89, additional wellcontrolled studies of estrogen in UTI are required before any conclusions can be drawn.
## (s9) Xyloglucan-based medical devices
(p9.0) Xyloglucan is a hemicellulose extracted from tamarind seeds that is used to restore the physiological function of mucosal epithelial cells. By forming a bio-protective film, xyloglucan prevents contact of mucosal cells with pathogens and their products, allergens, and pro-inflammatory compounds. 41 A formulation containing xyloglucan 100 mg, gelatin 50 mg, propolis 100 mg, and extracts of Hibiscus sabdariffa 100 mg (Utipro Plus®; Noventure, Barcelona, Spain) is a class III medical device approved in the European Union for control and prevention of UTIs. In in vitro studies, the device was shown to create a protective physical barrier on human intestinal epithelial cells, which protected against E. coli intracellular invasion. 42 In another in vitro study in intestinal and uroepithelial cell models, the device prevented contact of uropathogenic E. coli strains on cell walls, without altering E. coli cell integrity, and in the absence of demonstrable antibacterial activity. 43 In experimental rat models of acute infectious gastroenteritis and UTI, preventive treatment with oral xyloglucan-gelose prior to induction of infection with Salmonella enterica and Enterococcus hirae significantly reduced associated intestinal morphological changes, tight junctions permeability, and neutrophil infiltration. Treatment with oral xyloglucan-gelose also decreased bacterial growth in the urinary tract, suggesting that it protects against ascending infection of uropathogens from fecal flora to urinary tract and against infection by the hematogenous route. 44 The efficacy and safety of the xyloglucan-gelose medical device has been demonstrated in clinical trials. In a multicenter, double-blind, phase IV study, patients with uncomplicated UTIs were randomized to receive xyloglucan + gelose (n=20) or placebo (n=20) in combination with an antimicrobial agent for 5 days, as monotherapy for 5 days and, from Day 30 of the study, for 15 days per month for 2 months. 45  Increasing microbial resistance is a compelling reason to seek alternative treatment and prevention strategies for UTIs. 6 Utipro Plus shows early promise in addressing this treatment gap. Complementing the protective barrier effect of xyloglucan on mucous membranes, hibiscus and propolis appear to have bacterial anti-adhesive effects at the urinary level. 47,48 The ability of Utipro Plus to transition patients from symptomatic UTI to asymptomatic bacteriuria, which may protect against symptomatic recurrence, is an interesting finding and indicative of its lack of effect on normal microbiota.
## (s10) Other non-antibiotic approaches
(p10.0) A systematic review evaluated a range of non-antibiotic approaches to manage uncomplicated UTIs including cranberry products, Canephron N (a phytodrug), probiotics (Lactobacillus spp.), non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (ibuprofen, diclofenac), D-mannose, estrogens, vitamins (C and D), and immunotherapy. 49 The review captured RCTs and observational studies published from 1999 to 2019, which involved generally healthy adult non-pregnant women with no risk factors for recurrent UTIs. The overall conclusion was that the evidence was insufficiently conclusive to recommend non-antibiotic options in place of antibiotic usage, although incorporating some of these measures in the management strategy of UTIs may contribute to avoidance of antimicrobial resistance. Evidence for the role of these non-antibiotic approaches in the elderly population is currently lacking.
