# The use of chemometrics in combination with molecular spectroscopic and chromatographic methods for authentication of Curcuma species: a review

CorpusID: 224413441 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/62b5f7645d541920948bd26151af3e8aee28153e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/62b5f7645d541920948bd26151af3e8aee28153e)

Fields: Chemistry

## (s6) Authentication of Curcuma using molecular spectroscopies
(p6.0) The application of molecular spectra (UV-Vis, FTIR, FT-NIR, FT-Raman, and NMR) spectroscopies for discrimination and authentication of Curcuma species has been reported in several publications. Ultravioletvisible (uv-vis) spectroscopy in combination with chemometrics of PCA and DA has been proposed as an authentication technique of Curcuma species, namely C. longa, C. xanthorrhiza, C. aeruginosa or black turmeric and C. mangga or mango ginger (Rafi et al., 2018). The powders were subjected to extraction using sonication method with methanol as an extracting solvent for 40 mins. UV-Vis spectra of these four species were obtained in wavelength of 200-800 nm. The spectra were subjected to standard normal variate for spectral preprocessing. PCA and DA were performed using variables of absorbance values at the wavelength of 210-500 nm. The combination of UV-Vis and PCA, as well as UV-Vis and DA, could discriminate four species. DA offered clearer classification according to its species due to its capability to classify samples with an accuracy of 95.5% based on leave-one-out-cross-validation compared to PCA. Gad and Bouzabata (2017) have used molecular spectroscopies, namely uv-vis, FTIR and NMR in combination with chemometrics of PCA and HCA for complete profiling of metabolites in C. longa for assessing the quality control and separating the highgrade samples of C. longa with lower ones by determining the contents of curcuminoids. The results of curcuminoid contents were compared with those using HPLC. The results showed that score plot of PCA using variables of absorbances at the wavelength of 200-800 nm and variables of curcuminoid contents (curcumin, demethoxycurcumin, and bisdemethoxycurcumin) revealed the same discriminatory pattern, in which 30 samples of C. longa from different commercial markets in Algeria and Egypt. The samples based on PC1 and PC2 could be separated into four main groups according to its total curcuminoids levels. However, FT-IR spectra at wavenumbers of 4000-400 cm -1 could not discriminate between the same species. In addition, using 1 H NMR, the variability of samples was more evident based on the regions (0.4-3 ppm) related to the composition of essential oils and fatty acid.
## (s7) Authentication of Curcuma species using chromatography
(p7.0) Due to its capability to separate components of interest present in Curcuma species, chromatographicbased techniques such as thin layer, liquid, and gas chromatography in combination with chemometrics evolved as emerging techniques for authentication studies (Esteki et al., 2018). Chromatographic methods equipped with numerous detectors have been used for identification of adulteration practices by quantification of specipic markers (compouds) present in genuine and adulterated samples (Esteki et al., 2017) Most chromatographic methods intended to Curcuma species authentication are developed for analysis of curcuminoid in C. longa and C. xanthorriza. Rafi et al. (2011) have developed TLC fingerprints for differentiation of three herbs, namely Turmeric (Curcuma longa), java turmeric (Curcuma xanthorrhiza) and cassumunar ginger (Zingiber cassumunar). The visualization of separated zones was performed using visible and UV lights at 254 and 366 nm, respectively. The pattern of TLC fingerprint was different among three herbs evaluated exhibiting specific marker zones respectively. For example, turmeric was characterized by 7 zones at Rf of 0.05-0.97 under UV 254. This result indicated that TLC fingerprint can be used for discrimination and authentication of three herbs tested.

(p7.1) HPLC is a common method used for quantitative analysis of curcuminoid either for authentication or quality control purposes (Siregar et al., 2017). HPLC using fingerprint profiles combined with supervised pattern recognition of DA has been exploited for authentication and discrimination of C. xanthorrhiza from C. longa by determining the contents of curcuminoids. The results showed that curcuminoid contents in C. longa were higher than those in C. xanthorrhiza, as a consequence both species could be  (Windarsih et al., 2018b) discriminated and authenticated based on curcuminoid levels. In addition, the discrimination and authentication of both species were also achieved based on HPLC fingerprint chromatograms using curcuminoid components as marker peaks. Combined with DA, HPLC fingerprint offered excellent result allowing two species to be separated and correctly classified .
