# Manipulation of Lateral Pharyngeal Wall Muscles in Sleep Surgery: A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 220839965 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ecad2e6d310be200648a528097207625f5021991](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ecad2e6d310be200648a528097207625f5021991)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Materials and Methods
(p1.0) A thoughtful review of the English language literature on the surgical procedures targeting LPW for the management of sleep apnea was performed using PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane, and CENTRAL electronic databases. Two searches using (1) pharyngoplasty sleep apnea and (2) palate surgery sleep apnea as keyword clusters were performed, and they were combined with the use of the AND function to better select the research. Each paper included in the study met the following inclusion criteria: (1) the surgical treatment of OSAS patients, (2) the application of surgical procedures designed for structural modification of LPW, (3) the presence of instrumental parameters acquired by PSG during preoperative and postoperative evaluations, (4) reports including patients previously treated with Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP), and (5) reports including patients who did not undergo previous sleep surgery procedures. Articles that were not in accordance with the inclusion criteria were excluded. The subsequent criteria were applied with the aim of excluding inappropriate studies: surgical technique reports without significant outcome data, papers consisting of meta-analyses or literature reviews on surgical procedures, studies relative to ablative techniques, and articles describing animal or cadaveric samples. In order to further reduce the risk of incomplete literature analysis, a manual search through the bibliography of the included papers was carried out.

(p1.1) With the purpose of obtaining an organized and exhaustive review, the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) criteria were applied first to select the papers and, secondly, to stratify them according to their level of evidence [9].
## (s2) Results
(p2.0) In April 2020, the research led to the detection of approximately 2000 articles (from 1980 to 2020), but in accordance with the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 17 articles were enrolled in the present review. As the articles show detailed descriptions of surgical procedures to better clarify their singularities and effects, we grouped each article in accordance to which component of LPW is mostly involved and how deeply its modification occurs. As a result, we found four articles presenting surgical procedures in which SPC is manipulated and/or dissected, while in the remaining papers, PPM is the main structural target. In particular, five studies proposed a total or subtotal section of the muscle, four papers a partial section of the muscular fibers, and in four studies, minimal tissue handling is performed (Table 1, Figure 1).

(p2.1) Data on the efficacy and complications of LPW surgeries are shown in Table 1. The majority of samples included in the study consisted of patients affected by severe OSAS (mean pre-op apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) > 30). A mean reduction of more than 50% of AHI and a mean post-op AHI < 20 were observed in all series except one [10]. Some authors did not specify complications and their rates. 
## (s8) Partial Section of Muscular Fibers
(p8.0) The progressive interest in the treatment of OSAS has led to the elaboration of an increasingly conservative approach, allowing its application to a more delicate population such as pediatrics. On the heels of the excellent outcomes shown first by K. Pang and T. Woodson, and later by G. Sorrenti and O. Piccin, S.O. Ulualp [17] presented a modified ESP, applied to a pediatric population. In fact, in order to reduce tissue removal, after bilateral tonsillectomy, a partial section of the PPM anterior fibers is performed at the junction of the upper third and mid-third. Then, superolateral tunneling of the soft palate is prepared, and the upper portion of PPM is pulled up in the muscular tunnel and sutured to it. Not only the lateral side but also the anterior portion of the soft palate has been reported to be modified during LPW surgery. In this regard, M.J. Kim et al. [18] introduced a modified uvulopalatal flap with a partial LP in order to widen the retropalatal space anteroposteriorly and transversely. The posterior pillar is cut at its junction with the uvula, and once trimmed, it is sutured to the anterior pillar. After having calculated the mucosa and submucosal fat to be removed by measuring the halfway point between the junction of the soft and hard palates and the tip of the uvula, a diamond-shaped area of the soft palate is removed. Then, a suture of the muscular and mucosal rims is performed. In some cases, a bilateral tonsillectomy is performed, and the patients are submitted to concomitant nasal septoplasty and turbinate surgery. Following the interest in conservative approaches, and thanks to material technology improvements, in 2015, C. Vicini et al. [19] introduced an innovative tissue-sparing approach based on the use of barbed knotless bidirectional reabsorbable sutures named barbed reposition pharyngoplasty (BRP). All patients are submitted to bilateral tonsillectomy, and once PPM is demarcated, a partial incision is made at its inferior portion. A triangular-shaped mucosal and submucosal portion of the tonsillar fossa at its apex is removed in order to widen the oropharyngeal inlet. Then, the barbed sutured is utilized to superolaterally add tension to the upper portion of PPM and to stiffen LPW and the palate. In particular, the first pass of the needle is introduced at the center of the palate and passed laterally, reaching the pterygomandibular raphe. Passing around the pterygomandibular raphe, the needle reaches the upper portion of PPM through the tonsillar fossa. In this way, the muscular fibers are pulled up and anchored at the pterygomandibular raphe. The same procedure is applied to the other side. Effective and simple to perform, this technique has shown important results as both a single-stage procedure and a multilevel procedure associated with other upper airway corrective surgeries like base of tongue resection, hyoid suspension, and nasal surgery [26,27]. To minimize mucosal and muscular resection of the uvula, M.A. Babademez et al. [20] suggested some modifications using a monodirectional reabsorbable barbed thread to expand the upper part of the oropharyngeal inlet in a more conservative manner. In fact, in order to pull the uvula forward and superiorly, once PPM is fixed to the pterygomandibular raphe, the suture is passed horizontally through the root of the uvula to reach the opposite tonsillar bed, and then, PPM is anchored to the pterygomandibular raphe in the same fashion.
