# Cell Sources and Influencing Factors of Liver Regeneration: A Review e929129-1

CorpusID: 229173162 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9501c67cb3dd99d063fcb4f42f4115faacf197c1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9501c67cb3dd99d063fcb4f42f4115faacf197c1)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) Liver regeneration (LR) involves complicated mechanisms and a tremendous amount of detail. Even after more than 100 years of extensive studies, the process of LR is not completely understood. Currently, the main points of LR include the following: (1) LR is a complicated process involving numerous intrahepatic and extrahepatic components and a large number of signal molecules in a specific microenvironment. Owing to the extremely important functions of the liver, the interaction modules constituted by the saturated signaling pathways rigidly regulate the initiation, maintenance, and termination of LR to achieve homeostasis even in cases of severe injury [1]. (2) Surprisingly, the human liver can regrow with no or almost no loss of function and can survive after sustaining huge damage. This is because of the extensive cell sources and the cell plasticity of LR. According to the level of liver injury and different intrahepatic backgrounds, such as liver fibrosis and liver steatosis, LR can occur in different patterns [2]. (3) The human body is a complicated organism that participates in all life activities as a whole. Various extrahepatic factors, such as partial hepatectomy (PH), aging, platelets, nerves, hormones, bile acid (BA), and gut microbiota can affect LR, thereby creating difficulties in basic research.

(p0.1) These areas of research in LR are challenges, as well as hotspots and key areas of breakthrough research in the field of LR. Therefore, we have summarized the latest advancements in LR research and proposed our interpretations.
## (s2) Molecules and signals in hepatocyte-mediated LR
(p2.0) In the hepatocyte-mediated LR process, BECs, Kupffer cells, hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), liver sinusoidal endothelial cells, and extrahepatic cells interact. Additionally, blood flow stress signals, immune factors, nerves, hormones, BA, and microbiota are involved (summarized in Figure 2). Under the regulation of various pro-proliferation factors and anti-proliferation factors, the liver initiates and terminates regeneration in a timely way, thus achieving what is called the "hepatostat" [11]. In the classic LR model induced by PH, increased blood flow activates the urokinase plasminogen activator and matrix metalloproteinase to induce the degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Then, the hepatocyte growth factors (HGF) are released from the ECM. Lipopolysaccharides produced by inflammatory response bind with TLR4 receptors on Kupffer cells to release tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and interleukin-6 (IL-6). HSCs and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells can also produce new HGF. Together with the growth factors and cytokines such as the epidermal growth factor (EGF) brought by the portal vein flow, liver mitogens reach a high concentration in the designated site [12]. HGF binds with its receptor C-Met, while TGF-a and EGF bind with their common receptor, EGF receptor (EGFR), to initiate multiple transduction pathways in the hepatocytes, including Wnt/b-catenin, STAT3, and NF-kB [13]. IL-6 can form an excited complex with soluble IL-6R and gp130, which can thereby activate the JAK/STAT, MAPK, and PI3K/AKT pathway in the hepatocytes and regulate the apoptosis-inhibiting nitric oxide synthase to regulate LR [14]. The above pro-proliferation substances induce the sequential formation of complexes between cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) in the hepatocyte nucleus and cyclins (including cyclin D1 and cyclin E) to mediate the initiation and maintenance of LR [13]. Additionally, angiogenesis e929129-2 is an important step in LR. Angiogenin-2 is downregulated in the initial stage of LR but is upregulated at the angiogenesis phase, thereby regulating the vascular endothelial growth factor to promote angiogenesis. Data have also shown liver sinusoidal endothelial cells could regulate the proliferation of hepatocytes through controlling the synthesis of angiopoietin-2 [15].
## (s4) Hepatic progenitor cell-mediated LR
(p4.0) In 1957, Popper et al. [45] first described the ductular reaction, which manifests as the small bile duct activation and reactive dilatation hyperplasia induced by liver injury. It has been e929129-5
## (s6) Factors Influencing LR
(p6.0) Fibrosis A variety of liver parenchymal diseases such as viral, alcoholic, and autoimmune hepatitis can induce fibrosis change. Dubuquoy et al. verified [72] that the efficiency of HPCs to differentiate into mature hepatocytes is low among alcoholic hepatitis patients, in whom LR was damaged. Aravinthan et al. discovered [73] that generally diffused inflammation and hepatocyte death occurred in liver fibrosis, and when the telomeres of hepatocyte were shortened, the proportion of aging hepatocytes arrested at the G1/S stage increased. The current opinion is that liver fibrosis is the reason for impaired LR. However, we believe that it is not a simple causal relationship.

(p6.1) In livers with chronic injury, fibrosis activates HSCs and HPCs to promote LR reaction, and the transient remodeling of the ECM is necessary for LR. However, various chronic stimulating factors eliminate the termination of ECM remodeling, and persistent activated HSCs produce excessive collagen and elastin fibers to form the network. Finally, the progressive network surrounds and replaces functional liver parenchyma, resulting in the failure of LR and functional degradation of the liver [74]. When blocking the Notch pathways in the HPC niche or applying angiotensin receptor blocker anti-fibrosis treatment to reduce the activation of HSCs and remolding of the ECM, HPCs were more effective at differentiating into hepatocytes to accelerate LR [75]. Cordero-Espinoza and Huch suggested that anti-hepatitis treatment could alleviate fibrosis through balancing tissue regeneration, demonstrating that there is indeed the internal mechanism of sclerosis recession in the liver [74]. We believe that liver fibrosis and LR are interdependent processes. The imbalanced LR leads to liver fibrosis. Moreover, various pathological factors that can lead to liver fibrosis also stimulate the initiation of LR. Time is quite important in this process, and knowing the appropriate time for intervention is key to getting the expected clinical outcomes.
## (s8) e929129-7
(p8.0) animals had diet-induced simple fatty liver degeneration [76]. Matsumoto found that different positions of the autophagosome in the fatty liver of mice were correlated with LR damage [77]. Although whether simple fatty degeneration will damage LR remains controversial, most studies show that severe liver steatosis or fatty liver disease leads to defective LR. At present, the global morbidity of fatty liver disease is increasing, and the damage of LR in patients with steatosis has become a more important clinical problem. Gentric et al. found that there was a defect in EGFR expression in a steatosis rodent model, which suppressed cell cycle progression and delayed the mitosis of hepatocytes [78]. After applying exogenous growth hormone or antioxidant treatment, the normal cell cycle in hepatocytes is restored, revealing that abnormal oxidative stress in the fatty liver may be the important factor hindering LR. Li found that mitochondrial impairment in fatty liver disease led to poor LR and that transplanting apolipoprotein A-1 could accelerate the regeneration of small-for-size fatty liver grafts in mice through enhancing mitochondrial function [79]. Alvarez-Sola et al. developed the fusion molecule fibapo, which includes fibroblast growth factor-19 and apolipoprotein A-1. The application of fibapo before surgery helps regulate metabolism and promote the regeneration of fatty liver [80].
## (s9) Partial hepatectomy
(p9.0) In hepatectomy-induced LR, resected volume is closely correlated with the pattern of regeneration. In 90% hepatectomy models, the limited remained resources first meet the liver metabolic function to maintain the homeostasis of the body, resulting in the delay of LR [81]. For 70% hepatectomy models, traditional opinion suggests that almost all residual hepatocytes re-enter the cell cycle for mitosis. However, this is not the case. The adult human liver is comprised of more than 20% polyploid cells, while the number of polyploid cells is as high as 70% in rodents. After PH, polyploid hepatocytes achieve the increase in liver mass through hypertrophy [82].

(p9.1) Many studies have suggested that the volume of LR is significantly negatively correlated with future remnant liver volume (FRLV). However, the removal of a larger volume of liver may cause an increase in the release of mitogens such as TNF-a and IL-6 [83]. Pagano et al. reported that the imbalance between the remaining liver's function and the body's metabolic requirement became the most important factor in the regulation of LR. After determining the safe boundary of FRLV to avoid "small liver syndrome" and other related complications, a lower FRLV can promote LR [84].
## (s10) Aging
(p10.0) It is generally considered that advanced age has an adverse effect on LR. Zhu et al. reported that the LR rate in 26 elderly patients at 6 months after PH was remarkably lower than that in young patients [85]. Based on their study in 198 patients, Imamura et al. suggested that the aging liver would cause impaired liver function and poor LR after transplantation; therefore, donor age should be considered in the case of liver transplantation [86]. The study of Russolillo et al. included 120 patients who underwent PH, and the results showed that elderly patients had a higher risk of hepatic failure after PH than did younger patients, but the level of LR was insignificantly correlated with age. Consequently, advanced age is not an absolute contraindication for PH; however, precise preoperative assessments are necessary [87]. The decline in LR capacity among elderly patients is caused by multiple interacting extracellular and intracellular factors. The reduction in the autophagy program gives rise to the chronic release of proinflammatory factors by the aging hepatocytes, thereby mediating more severe oxidative stress [88]. Due to the influence of aging on metabolism, HSCs enrich lipid droplets, which have an inadequate ability of promoting LR [89]. HSCs in the aging liver can induce neutrophil infiltration through chemokine ligand 7, and neutrophils perform to produce an excessive oxidative reaction to suppress HPC activation. However, the declined HPC activity may also be a protective mechanism in response to potential tumor risk [90]. Chen et al. used fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase gene-knockout mice to investigate changes in ECM composition in the aging liver. They found that liver structure was loosened and degenerated, which provided the space for the cell transplantation, indicating that aging accumulated during liver disease progression was the precondition for the successful application of cell transplantation therapy [91].
## (s11) Platelet count
(p11.0) It was discovered that after resecting 90% of the liver in mice, the group with a higher platelet count had a higher survival rate, while LR was obviously delayed when thrombocytopenia occurred [92]. Numerous studies have demonstrated that the low platelet count following PH or live liver transplantation is related to postoperative liver dysfunction and death [93][94][95].
## (s12) Neural regulation and hormones
(p12.0) Previous studies have discovered that there is a direct feedback relationship between the liver and the brain via the autonomic nervous system [101]. Izumi et al. discovered that LR slowed down when the hepatic branches of the vagus nerve were resected in PH rat models [102]. The mechanism functions when the excessive vagus signal activates macrophages by acetylcholine, and activated macrophages could promote LR through the IL-6/STAT3/FoxM1 pathway. Although only sparse vagus can be observed around the portal vein zone in the liver, the precise multistep regulation constituted by neural cells, immunocytes, and hepatocytes allows the amplification and transmission of an emergency regeneration signal in the liver. Therefore, it can rapidly and precisely regulate LR initiation in the case of acute injury and achieve the survival of the organism. Another study discovered that nerve signals contribute to the release of serotonin in the enterochromaffin cells after PH, thereby facilitating LR indirectly. This suggests that the relay ganglions and organs are vital [103]. Ishtiaq et al. discovered that stress-activated sympathetic nerves induce the elevation of adreno-cortico-tropic hormone and glucocorticoid levels, activate the JAK/ATAT3/NF-kB/IL-6 pathway, and promote LR. At the same time, increased norepinephrine in the plasma can activate the HGF/C-Met and EGF/EGFR pathways in the hepatocytes and antagonize TGF-b in the early stage of LR [104]. Triiodothyronine (T3) hormone can promote mitosis through mediating cyclin D1 in LR [105]. Similar to T3, the thyroid hormone receptor-b-selective agonist can activate Wnt/b-catenin/ cyclin D1 signaling to induce hepatocyte proliferation [106].
## (s13) BA and gut microbiota
(p13.0) BA is an important signal regulator during the LR process, which can participate in regulating LR through multiple pathways. In patients with obstructive jaundice, LR is suppressed after surgery due to the upregulated expression of TGF-b1, while persistent biliary extra-drainage is also bad for LR because of the excessive loss of BA [107]. Such dual functions of promoting and repressing LR indicate that an appropriate concentration of BA is necessary for the homeostasis of LR. Theoretically, the increased concentration of BA caused by PH will initiate the apoptosis and necrosis in hepatocytes. However, the regulation of the BA receptor prevents the above conditions [108]. BA receptors mainly include nuclear receptor farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and membrane receptor G protein-coupled bile acid receptor 1 (GPBAR1/TGR5). Through a negative feedback mechanism, these 2 BA receptors may synergistically act on the regeneration process and protect the residual liver. FXR can regulate the expression of some important cell cycle transcription factors, such as Foxm1b and cyclin D1, and the FXR-FGF15/19-FGFR4-Hippo signaling pathway could benefit liver growth by preventing BA-induced injury [109,110]. TGR5 exists on the surface of bile duct cells, endothelial cells, and Kupffer cells, but it is not expressed on the hepatocyte membrane surface, which may be related to the prevention of BA overload. BA can activate TGR5, stimulate endothelial cells to produce nitric oxide, and thereby regulate the LR. TGR5 knockout mice manifested cholestasis and LR damage after PH [111]. The portal vein can supply 70% of blood in the liver and carries enterogenic products including endotoxin and bacterial components. The gut microbiota refers to the 100 trillion bacteria existing in the human gastrointestinal tract, and their important effect on regulating liver homeostasis and LR is largely neglected. Wu et al. discovered that in a PH mice model in which animals received antibiotic therapy (ampicillin), changes of the gut microbiota resulted in the loss of tolerance of Kupffer cells. The over-activated Kupffer cells damaged LR through the IL-12/NKT cells/ interferon-g axis [112]. In another case, 90% hepatectomy in rats induced excessively high portal vein and systemic endotoxin levels. When gentamicin was used, the excessive lipopolysaccharide level was reduced, LR was recovered, and the rat survival rate increased from 24% to 56% [113]. In addition to regulating LR directly, gut microbiota also constitutes the intestine-liver axis with BA. The intestine-liver axis describes the bidirectional crosstalk between intestinal nutrient absorption and liver synthetic metabolism. Gut microbiota can regulate BA synthesis, metabolism, and the affinity with BA receptors. On the other hand, BA also provides different patterns of microenvironment for gut microbiota, thus inducing distinct microbial characteristics [114][115][116]. Consequently, any factor that affects BA composition or gut microbial diversity can markedly affect liver function and regeneration.
