# Intestinal absorption of BCS class II drugs administered as nanoparticles: A review based on in vivo data from intestinal perfusion models

CorpusID: 229194765 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c350f3a7c9e302e903ac4955ed39c5a72107946c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c350f3a7c9e302e903ac4955ed39c5a72107946c)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s2) Method of in vivo absorption: single-pass intestinal perfusion model and absorption calculations
(p2.0) This review discusses mainly data from the rat and pig single-pass intestinal perfusion (SPIP) models in relation to other relevant in vivo data [50][51][52][53]. The SPIP model has been extensively used in preclinical studies to investigate and determine epithelial effective intestinal permeability (P eff ), as well as other absorption parameters for drugs and drug delivery systems, such as suspensions and lipid-based ones ( Figure 2). Intestinal P eff , absorption flux (J app ), and fraction dose absorbed (f abs ) are the three key biopharmaceutical variables that describe the absorption and transport properties of a drug across the intestinal barrier in the SPIP model [3,54]. This model is used to investigate oral drug delivery and characterize pre-formulations, as part of the development process of a pharmaceutical product. The SPIP model is also useful for investigating regional intestinal permeability and transport mechanisms involved during in vivo-relevant conditions, and for determining the BCS classification of any API [54]. This model is also used to investigate the interplay between in vivo dissolution of various dosage forms, such as nanoformulations and various pharmaceutical excipients, and intestinal permeability, during both fed and fasted conditions [55]. 2) a syringe pump allows coadministration of e.g., enzymes; 3) perfusate is collected after passing through an intestinal segment; 4) blood sampling from the femoral artery; 5) body temperature is monitored using a rectal probe, connected to a heating pad; 6) blood pressure and heart rate are monitored in the femoral artery.

(p2.1) In the SPIP model, absorption parameters can be calculated in several ways. One of the most common is to calculate effective permeability (P eff ), which is based determining the disappearance of an API from the intestinal lumen during single-pass perfusion of a well-defined intestinal segment (Equation 3):

(p2.2) where Q in is the perfusate flow rate, C out (corrected for water flux) and C in are the concentrations of API leaving and entering the intestinal segment, and A is the surface area of the perfused intestinal segment, which is assumed to be a smooth cylinder [56]. The C out is corrected for water flux using an unabsorbable marker and by weighing the luminal perfusates leaving the segment [57].

(p2.3) The disappearance flux (J disapp ) of an API can also be calculated from perfusate data leaving the intestinal segment by correcting for water flux as previously described (Equation 4):

(p2.4) Alternatively, absorption flux (J app ) can be calculated in the SPIP model by monitoring plasma drug appearance using the deconvolution method (Equation 5). However, this requires a separate intravenous injection of the study drug for calculating the disposition PK parameters in the deconvolution. 
## (s6) Danazol and cyclosporine
(p6.0) Intestinal absorption mechanisms have been investigated in fed and fasted states in a pig SPIP model for low solubility APIs as monomers or nanoparticles. Nanoparticle suspensions of two BCS class II model drugs, danazol and cyclosporine (CyA), were single-pass perfused through the pig jejunum in isotonic buffer alone (control) and isotonic buffer with verapamil, a P-glycoprotein (P-gp) inhibitor, or in isotonic buffer containing dietary and intestinal lipids. Co-administration of CyA and verapamil increased the jejunal P eff of CyA from 0.63 ± 0.05 · 10 -4 cm/s to 1.01 ± 0.09 · 10 -4 cm/s [55]. The human jejunal P eff for CyA was 1.65 ± 0.53 · 10 -4 cm/s, when determined with the perfusion method, which classifies CyA as a low solubility-high permeability Class II BCS drug. CyA is well-recognized to have highly variable absorption from approved oral formulations because of poor dissolution [54,79,80]. When dietary lipids were introduced to the perfused segment in the SPIP model, they reduced the jejunal absorption of a CyA as a saturated solution and nanosuspension by approximately 50 % and 83 %, respectively (Table 4). In contrast, dietary lipids increased the jejunal absorption of danazol nanosuspensions more than two-fold. However, f abs was reduced by 60 % when danazol was administered as a solution in the same media (Table 4). This difference for nanosuspensions and monomer solutions of danazol is most likely due to increased dissolution and/or a more efficient transport of the danazol nanoparticles (150 nm) than the CyA (650 nm) through the particle ABL. The difference in the effect of intraluminal lipids may also be explained by different distribution of any of the study drugs to the colloidal structures present in the media. These structures affect the convective and diffusion rates of the drugs differently in the perfused segment. CyA has a higher partitioning (2.5 times) to the colloidal structures than danazol. Based on previous observations, danazol probably partitions primarily to the mixed intraluminal micelles, and to a lesser extent to the lipid vesicles [55].

(p6.1) Despite a lower log P value, CyA most likely partitions into larger lipid vesicles to a greater extent than danazol. It has a larger molecular size, which results in a reduced thermodynamic activity (i.e., lower free concentration available for permeation). Furthermore, there would be an overall slower diffusion and convection in the intestinal lumen. Another plausible mechanism is that the slow and incomplete partitioning from the vesicles to the aqueous-based chime leads to a subsequent rapid intestinal absorption of CyA. A temporarily unsaturated aqueous phase might form along the perfused jejunal segment and reduce thermodynamic activity. It is also clear that drug-solubilization is a more important factor in fed state for CyA than P-gp inhibition for food-drug interaction. Drug partitioning into different luminal CS, and their fate in the lumen and across the ABL, are important processes to consider in designing nano-based oral formulations of poorly soluble drugs.

(p6.2) Both the P eff and f abs were higher for danazol when administered as a nanosuspension in lipid-containing media than in the control buffer. However, due to the rapid dissolution of the nanoparticles, the difference in absorption did not correspond to previously observed increases in bioavailability of danazol administered with food. Administration of danazol in the same media, but as a solution, decreased both P eff and f abs . This shows the importance of the rapid dissolution of the drug nanoparticles. When danazol is administered as a solution, thermodynamic activity may decrease because absorption of the drug might create a state of undersaturation.
## (s8) Fenofibrate and other drugs
(p8.0) In contrast to these absorption-promoting results for nanoparticles aprepitant and danazol in both fasted and fed conditions in the SPIP model, only the fed state reduces the intestinal absorption of nanosized drugs such as fenofibrate, CsA, pafenolol [37,55,83,84]. In a regional absorption study in humans with a site-specific delivery system (Enterion capsule), fenofibrate were given as single, equimolar doses into the stomach, proximal small bowel, distal small bowel, and colon. The bioavailability (related to an intravenous dose of fenofibric acid) in the stomach, proximal small bowel, distal small bowel, and colon was 69 %, 73 [85]. This clearly shows that fenofibrate is absorbed from the small intestine. However, the solubility and dissolution conditions in the colon-less fluid and limited amounts of bile acids and colloidal structures-prevent efficient fenofibrate absorption from this region.

(p8.1) An in vivo study in rats compared in vitro dissolution, solubility and bioavailability of three different oral nanosystems with fenofibrate powder. The three systems included PVP nanospheres, HP-β-CD nanocapsules, and gelatin nanocapsules [86]. the most improved apparent solubility and oral bioavailability in fasted rats was with fenofibrate nanoencapsualted with gelatin at a ratio of 1:8 (w/w). The authors of the study proposed that the improved dissolution rate and subsequent intestinal absorption was due to: (i) a higher solubility of fenofibrate as it converted into the amorphous form or nanocrystalline state; (ii) a large surface area for dissolution of drug; (iii) improved wetting of fenofibrate by the polymeric matrix in the formulation; and (iv) reduction in the crystalline intensity.

(p8.2) A method to investigate in vivo-relevant mechanisms of drug absorption in humans is by GI fluid sampling [52,87]. GI intubation can explore directly the dynamic interplay of drug release, dissolution, precipitation, and absorption of the drug from a dosage form. The dissolved drug and solid-state concentration-time profiles from different segments in the GI tract can be obtained. In addition, direct infusion of a suspension into the duodenum allows patient control of the therapeutic system [88,89].
