# A Review on the Control Parameters of Natural Convection in Different Shaped Cavities with and Without Nanofluid

CorpusID: 225402186 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/257fd36f6fc6621e632540c305b6c06f82fd11f7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/257fd36f6fc6621e632540c305b6c06f82fd11f7)

Fields: Engineering, Physics, Materials Science

## (s9) Effective Parameters on Heat Transfer in Cavities
(p9.0) At the beginning of cavities examination, the researchers examined simple cavities. The geometry of these cavities is either square or rectangular, and the side walls temperature is constant. In these studies, the effective parameters on Nu were low and the influence of Ra on Nu was often investigated. Over time, researchers have tried to improve their studies by adding other effective parameters and changing geometry of the cavities. The following can be considered as simple examples for examining the natural convection in the cavities.

(p9.1) Most of the studies investigated quadratic cavities and the parameters affecting heat transfer include Rayleigh number and thermophysical properties of the operating fluid [49, [58][59][60][61][62][63][133][134][135][136][137][138][139][140][141][142][143]. With the advancement of science, researchers also investigated the natural convection in enclosures by adding other imperative parameters such as the magnetic field, fins, porous medium, etc. In the following, the work done with each of the important parameters is important.

(p9.2) At the beginning of cavities examination, the researchers examined simple cavities. The geometry of these cavities is either square or rectangular, and the side walls temperature is constant. In these studies, the effective parameters on Nu were low and the influence of Ra on Nu was often investigated. Over time, researchers have tried to improve their studies by adding other effective parameters and changing geometry of the cavities. The following can be considered as simple examples for examining the natural convection in the cavities.

(p9.3) Most of the studies investigated quadratic cavities and the parameters affecting heat transfer include Rayleigh number and thermophysical properties of the operating fluid [49, [58][59][60][61][62][63][133][134][135][136][137][138][139][140][141][142][143]. With the advancement of science, researchers also investigated the natural convection in enclosures by adding other imperative parameters such as the magnetic field, fins, porous medium, etc. In the following, the work done with each of the important parameters is important.
## (s10) Inclined Cavity
(p10.0) Some researchers examined the effect of this parameter on Nu, temperature, velocity fields by angling the cavity. By giving angle to the cavity, the gravitational force on the cavity also receives an angle. Hence, momentum equations will be as follows:

(p10.1) In the above equations, γ is the angle of cavity relative to the horizon line. Naturally, due to absence of gravity in the mass and energy conservation equations, no change is made in these two equations. In the study of Goodarzi et al. [144] a constant flux source in the chamber has been studied. They examined the effect of Grashof number on Nu in the range of 400 to 40,000,000. Emami et al. [145] focused on water/copper nanofluid as a two-phase fluid in a cavity. They examined the cavity by adding a porous medium and found that the porous media was beneficial in strong convection, but in poor convection, it may reduce Nu. Raizah et al. [128] studied a porous cavity and found that Nu increased by raising Ra and reducing power-law index.

(p10.2) Kefayati et al. [146,147] reviewed Bingham fluid natural convection through the Finite Difference Lattice Boltzmann (FDLBM) method. They examined the angle effect of the cavity. Sajjadi et al. [148] used the copper/water nanofluid using LBM, they investigated the effect of cavity angles from 0 to 60 degrees. Hosseini et al. [149] used several nanofluids in diagonal cavities. They used nanoparticles, for example, Cu, Ag, Al2O3, and TiO2, in water-base fluid. Sheremet et al. [150] studied alumina/water nanofluid using the FDM in order to the free convection investigation. Ogut [151] examined various angles from 0 to 90 degrees. He used copper oxide, silver oxide, and alumina nanofluids in water base fluid. Abu-nada and Oztop [152] studied influence of cavity angle on Nu by means of the FVM. They used the copper/water nanofluid as an operating fluid and changed the angle of cavity from 0 to 120 degrees. Oztop et al. [59] modified the angle of cavity by studying the heat transfer rate in a cavity with sinusoidal thermal boundary condition by means of the FVM. They changed the angle of cavity from 0 to 90 degrees, and by adding nanofluid of copper and titanium water examined the percentage effects of nanofluids. Table 8 presents a number of articles studied inclined enclosures. 

(p10.3) Some researchers examined the effect of this parameter on Nu, temperature, velocity fields by angling the cavity. By giving angle to the cavity, the gravitational force on the cavity also receives an angle. Hence, momentum equations will be as follows:

(p10.4) In the above equations, γ is the angle of cavity relative to the horizon line. Naturally, due to absence of gravity in the mass and energy conservation equations, no change is made in these two equations. In the study of Goodarzi et al. [144] a constant flux source in the chamber has been studied. They examined the effect of Grashof number on Nu in the range of 400 to 40,000,000. Emami et al. [145] focused on water/copper nanofluid as a two-phase fluid in a cavity. They examined the cavity by adding a porous medium and found that the porous media was beneficial in strong convection, but in poor convection, it may reduce Nu. Raizah et al. [128] studied a porous cavity and found that Nu increased by raising Ra and reducing power-law index.

(p10.5) Kefayati et al. [146,147] reviewed Bingham fluid natural convection through the Finite Difference Lattice Boltzmann (FDLBM) method. They examined the angle effect of the cavity. Sajjadi et al. [148] used the copper/water nanofluid using LBM, they investigated the effect of cavity angles from 0 to 60 degrees. Hosseini et al. [149] used several nanofluids in diagonal cavities. They used nanoparticles, for example, Cu, Ag, Al2O3, and TiO2, in water-base fluid. Sheremet et al. [150] studied alumina/water nanofluid using the FDM in order to the free convection investigation. Ogut [151] examined various angles from 0 to 90 degrees. He used copper oxide, silver oxide, and alumina nanofluids in water base fluid. Abu-nada and Oztop [152] studied influence of cavity angle on Nu by means of the FVM. They used the copper/water nanofluid as an operating fluid and changed the angle of cavity from 0 to 120 degrees. Oztop et al. [59] modified the angle of cavity by studying the heat transfer rate in a cavity with sinusoidal thermal boundary condition by means of the FVM. They changed the angle of cavity from 0 to 90 degrees, and by adding nanofluid of copper and titanium water examined the percentage effects of nanofluids. Table 8 presents a number of articles studied inclined enclosures. 
## (s13) Add Porous Media to the Cavity
(p13.0) Porous material consists of a solid medium that the fluid can pass through its parts. Passage of fluid through the porous medium can have important influences on the pressure difference and the heat transfer in systems. Figure 9 shows a part of a porous environment in which a fluid flow. This environment can in some cases even act as a fin and transfer the heat. In many cases, the porous environment also acts as a filter of fluid flow. In addition, the porous environment leads to intensification in pressure drop and the pumping power because of an enhancement in the shear stress. Therefore, in cases such as closed enclosures where the fluid velocity is slowed down, it can have a high impact on the heat transfer. It should be considered that the porosity value affects the heat transfer rate. Since engineers have to use porous media in some industrial and engineering environments, some researchers have explored the effect of adding porous media to the cavities [217]. By adding a porous medium, the Darcy relationship of the momentum equations has variations which can be seen below. Of course, the energy and mass conservation equations remain unchanged [205].  

(p13.1) Darcy's law has acceptable results for viscous currents. The relationship between the pressure gradient and average volume velocity can be obtained using Forchheimer's modification of Darcy's model. This relation can add the term of nonlinear drag to Darcy's law [218].
## (s15) Eulerian-Eulerian Approach
(p15.0) Different phases are considered as continuous ones in the Eulerian-Eulerian method. The concept of phase volume fraction is presented duo to the fact that phases were not mixed. Concentration is considered as a continuous function, spatially and temporally, and sum of them is equal to unity. Each phase has its conservation equation and obtained separately that have the same structure for all phases [232].

(p15.1) Different phases are considered as continuous ones in the Eulerian-Eulerian method. The concept of phase volume fraction is presented duo to the fact that phases were not mixed. Concentration is considered as a continuous function, spatially and temporally, and sum of them is equal to unity. Each phase has its conservation equation and obtained separately that have the same structure for all phases [232].
## (s16) Volume of Fluid Model
(p16.0) The volume of fluid model is a model used to immiscible suspensions simulation when the interfaces among phases are important. In this model, momentum equations are assumed to the fluid and a volume fraction is solved in computational cells to every volume fraction. This approach is used to model the stratified flow, free-surface flow, filling of a reservoir, movement of the liquid surface due to the turbulence, movement of bubbles and transient or steady tracking of the gas-liquid interface. The method is less commonly used for nanofluids within enclosures. It seems that this model alone is not capable to simulate the two-phase of nanofluids [233].

(p16.1) The volume of fluid model is a model used to immiscible suspensions simulation when the interfaces among phases are important. In this model, momentum equations are assumed to the fluid and a volume fraction is solved in computational cells to every volume fraction. This approach is used to model the stratified flow, free-surface flow, filling of a reservoir, movement of the liquid surface due to the turbulence, movement of bubbles and transient or steady tracking of the gas-liquid interface. The method is less commonly used for nanofluids within enclosures. It seems that this model alone is not capable to simulate the two-phase of nanofluids [233].
## (s17) Mixing Model
(p17.0) This model is used for multi-phase fluids. The mixing model uses a hybrid momentum equation so that the mean properties of the different phases are considered in the equation. For dispersed phases, this model uses relative velocity. Of course, if the model does not consider the movement of the dispersed phase, it models the multi-phase flow as a homogeneous medium. Applications of this model are particle-laden and bubbly flows, as well as cyclonic separators. Many researchers used this method to simulate two-phase nanofluid flows in enclosures [234][235][236][237][238][239][240][241][242].

(p17.1) This model is used for multi-phase fluids. The mixing model uses a hybrid momentum equation so that the mean properties of the different phases are considered in the equation. For dispersed phases, this model uses relative velocity. Of course, if the model does not consider the movement of the dispersed phase, it models the multi-phase flow as a homogeneous medium. Applications of this model are particle-laden and bubbly flows, as well as cyclonic separators. Many researchers used this method to simulate two-phase nanofluid flows in enclosures [234][235][236][237][238][239][240][241][242].
## (s18) Eulerian Model
(p18.0) This model is the most complex multi-phase model in terms of the number of equations and relationships. This model solves the continuity and momentum equations phase by phase, separately. The coupling of these equations is done by the pressure and inter-phase exchange coefficients. The coupling is based on the type of phases so that it is different for fluid-solid flows from fluid-fluid ones. Although this model has the potential of simulating multiphase nanofluid flows, and even predicts nanoparticle deposition, it has received less attention due to the complexity and high number of equations [243][244][245][246][247].

(p18.1) This model is the most complex multi-phase model in terms of the number of equations and relationships. This model solves the continuity and momentum equations phase by phase, separately. The coupling of these equations is done by the pressure and inter-phase exchange coefficients. The coupling is based on the type of phases so that it is different for fluid-solid flows from fluid-fluid ones. Although this model has the potential of simulating multiphase nanofluid flows, and even predicts nanoparticle deposition, it has received less attention due to the complexity and high number of equations [243][244][245][246][247].
## (s19) Eulerian-Lagrangian Approach
(p19.0) In this model, the fluid phase is considered continuously by solving the time-averaged Navier-Stokes equations. However, the discrete phase is solved by tracking the motion of particles, bubbles, or droplets within the fluid. Energy is exchanged between phases. In fact, the trajectory of each particle is determined in this method. Since the particle trajectory is known, this model is suitable for modeling spray dryers, fuel combustion, and flows containing particles, However, it is not suitable for modeling liquid-liquid mixtures, fluidized bed substrates or any other applications where the secondary phase volume fraction cannot be neglected. Due to its many equations and difficulties, this method has been used less frequently in enclosures and is more applicable for combustion or phase conversion problems [248].

(p19.1) Danjie et al. [249] investigated the heat transfer of copper/water nanofluid using the Lattice-Boltzmann method in a square cavity. By considering the Ra ranging between 10 3 and 10 6 and range of the nanoparticles volume fraction between 1% and 5%, they realized that the two-phase model should be used instead of single-phase homogeneous one due to the creation of slip in the nanofluid when Ra or nanofluid concentration are relatively high. Goodarzi et al. [237] examined a shallow rectangular enclosure filled with CuO using a mixture two-phase method. They carried out their study in the range of Grashof number of 10 5 to 10 10 . They considered the effect of the Brownian motion. A summary of some articles presented in the field of two-phase nanofluids indicated in Table  12. 

(p19.2) In this model, the fluid phase is considered continuously by solving the time-averaged Navier-Stokes equations. However, the discrete phase is solved by tracking the motion of particles, bubbles, or droplets within the fluid. Energy is exchanged between phases. In fact, the trajectory of each particle is determined in this method. Since the particle trajectory is known, this model is suitable for modeling spray dryers, fuel combustion, and flows containing particles, However, it is not suitable for modeling liquid-liquid mixtures, fluidized bed substrates or any other applications where the secondary phase volume fraction cannot be neglected. Due to its many equations and difficulties, this method has been used less frequently in enclosures and is more applicable for combustion or phase conversion problems [248].

(p19.3) Danjie et al. [249] investigated the heat transfer of copper/water nanofluid using the Lattice-Boltzmann method in a square cavity. By considering the Ra ranging between 10 3 and 10 6 and range of the nanoparticles volume fraction between 1% and 5%, they realized that the two-phase model should be used instead of single-phase homogeneous one due to the creation of slip in the nanofluid when Ra or nanofluid concentration are relatively high. Goodarzi et al. [237] examined a shallow rectangular enclosure filled with CuO using a mixture two-phase method. They carried out their study in the range of Grashof number of 10 5 to 10 10 . They considered the effect of the Brownian motion. A summary of some articles presented in the field of two-phase nanofluids indicated in Table  12. 
## (s20) Non-Rectangular Cavities
(p20.0) Most scholars have studied rectangular cavities, but in recent years, some researchers have also looked at non-rectangular cavities such as triangular, circular. Rahimi et al. [250] examined SiO2-TiO2/W-EG hybrid nanofluid in an H-shaped enclosure using LBM. Bondereva et al. [251] did similar work on a trapezoidal open enclosure by means of the FDM. Bhowmick et al. [252] studied the transient convection with using the FVM in a triangle cavity. Das et al. [253] examined convection in cavities with different geometries such as triangles and square Dogonchi et al. [186] examined the natural convection copper nanofluids under magnetic field in a triangular cavity. There is a semicircular niche in the lower part. They reported that by growing Ra and decreasing Ha, the thermal characteristics are enhanced. Rashad et al. [212] examined natural convection of the alumina/copper hybrid nanofluid in water using the FDM. The cavity is triangular under the magnetic field. There was a constant thermal flux on the floor of the cavity. They found that the rate of heat transfer raises with increasing the Ra and the part where flux enters the cavity. Aghakhani et al. [132] examined the free convection in power-law model with using a non-Newtonian fluid exposed to a magnetic field in a C-shaped enclosure by means of LBM. They realized that reduction in Nu due to raising the power-law index. Using FVM, Esfe et al. [254] investigated free convection of CNT/water-EG nanofluids in trapezoidal configuration. Esfe et al. [255] studied the T-shaped cavity. There is also Table 13, summarizing of studies along with non-rectangular cavities. Table 14 summarizes some of the other works on free convection in enclosures by some researchers. 

(p20.1) Most scholars have studied rectangular cavities, but in recent years, some researchers have also looked at non-rectangular cavities such as triangular, circular. Rahimi et al. [250] examined SiO2-TiO2/W-EG hybrid nanofluid in an H-shaped enclosure using LBM. Bondereva et al. [251] did similar work on a trapezoidal open enclosure by means of the FDM. Bhowmick et al. [252] studied the transient convection with using the FVM in a triangle cavity. Das et al. [253] examined convection in cavities with different geometries such as triangles and square Dogonchi et al. [186] examined the natural convection copper nanofluids under magnetic field in a triangular cavity. There is a semicircular niche in the lower part. They reported that by growing Ra and decreasing Ha, the thermal characteristics are enhanced. Rashad et al. [212] examined natural convection of the alumina/copper hybrid nanofluid in water using the FDM. The cavity is triangular under the magnetic field. There was a constant thermal flux on the floor of the cavity. They found that the rate of heat transfer raises with increasing the Ra and the part where flux enters the cavity. Aghakhani et al. [132] examined the free convection in power-law model with using a non-Newtonian fluid exposed to a magnetic field in a C-shaped enclosure by means of LBM. They realized that reduction in Nu due to raising the power-law index. Using FVM, Esfe et al. [254] investigated free convection of CNT/water-EG nanofluids in trapezoidal configuration. Esfe et al. [255] studied the T-shaped cavity. There is also Table 13, summarizing of studies along with non-rectangular cavities. Table 14 summarizes some of the other works on free convection in enclosures by some researchers. 
## (s61) Effective Parameters on Heat Transfer in Cavities
(p61.0) At the beginning of cavities examination, the researchers examined simple cavities. The geometry of these cavities is either square or rectangular, and the side walls temperature is constant. In these studies, the effective parameters on Nu were low and the influence of Ra on Nu was often investigated. Over time, researchers have tried to improve their studies by adding other effective parameters and changing geometry of the cavities. The following can be considered as simple examples for examining the natural convection in the cavities.

(p61.1) Most of the studies investigated quadratic cavities and the parameters affecting heat transfer include Rayleigh number and thermophysical properties of the operating fluid [49, [58][59][60][61][62][63][133][134][135][136][137][138][139][140][141][142][143]. With the advancement of science, researchers also investigated the natural convection in enclosures by adding other imperative parameters such as the magnetic field, fins, porous medium, etc. In the following, the work done with each of the important parameters is important.

(p61.2) At the beginning of cavities examination, the researchers examined simple cavities. The geometry of these cavities is either square or rectangular, and the side walls temperature is constant. In these studies, the effective parameters on Nu were low and the influence of Ra on Nu was often investigated. Over time, researchers have tried to improve their studies by adding other effective parameters and changing geometry of the cavities. The following can be considered as simple examples for examining the natural convection in the cavities.

(p61.3) Most of the studies investigated quadratic cavities and the parameters affecting heat transfer include Rayleigh number and thermophysical properties of the operating fluid [49, [58][59][60][61][62][63][133][134][135][136][137][138][139][140][141][142][143]. With the advancement of science, researchers also investigated the natural convection in enclosures by adding other imperative parameters such as the magnetic field, fins, porous medium, etc. In the following, the work done with each of the important parameters is important.
## (s62) Inclined Cavity
(p62.0) Some researchers examined the effect of this parameter on Nu, temperature, velocity fields by angling the cavity. By giving angle to the cavity, the gravitational force on the cavity also receives an angle. Hence, momentum equations will be as follows:

(p62.1) In the above equations, γ is the angle of cavity relative to the horizon line. Naturally, due to absence of gravity in the mass and energy conservation equations, no change is made in these two equations. In the study of Goodarzi et al. [144] a constant flux source in the chamber has been studied. They examined the effect of Grashof number on Nu in the range of 400 to 40,000,000. Emami et al. [145] focused on water/copper nanofluid as a two-phase fluid in a cavity. They examined the cavity by adding a porous medium and found that the porous media was beneficial in strong convection, but in poor convection, it may reduce Nu. Raizah et al. [128] studied a porous cavity and found that Nu increased by raising Ra and reducing power-law index.

(p62.2) Kefayati et al. [146,147] reviewed Bingham fluid natural convection through the Finite Difference Lattice Boltzmann (FDLBM) method. They examined the angle effect of the cavity. Sajjadi et al. [148] used the copper/water nanofluid using LBM, they investigated the effect of cavity angles from 0 to 60 degrees. Hosseini et al. [149] used several nanofluids in diagonal cavities. They used nanoparticles, for example, Cu, Ag, Al2O3, and TiO2, in water-base fluid. Sheremet et al. [150] studied alumina/water nanofluid using the FDM in order to the free convection investigation. Ogut [151] examined various angles from 0 to 90 degrees. He used copper oxide, silver oxide, and alumina nanofluids in water base fluid. Abu-nada and Oztop [152] studied influence of cavity angle on Nu by means of the FVM. They used the copper/water nanofluid as an operating fluid and changed the angle of cavity from 0 to 120 degrees. Oztop et al. [59] modified the angle of cavity by studying the heat transfer rate in a cavity with sinusoidal thermal boundary condition by means of the FVM. They changed the angle of cavity from 0 to 90 degrees, and by adding nanofluid of copper and titanium water examined the percentage effects of nanofluids. Table 8 presents a number of articles studied inclined enclosures. 

(p62.3) Some researchers examined the effect of this parameter on Nu, temperature, velocity fields by angling the cavity. By giving angle to the cavity, the gravitational force on the cavity also receives an angle. Hence, momentum equations will be as follows:

(p62.4) In the above equations, γ is the angle of cavity relative to the horizon line. Naturally, due to absence of gravity in the mass and energy conservation equations, no change is made in these two equations. In the study of Goodarzi et al. [144] a constant flux source in the chamber has been studied. They examined the effect of Grashof number on Nu in the range of 400 to 40,000,000. Emami et al. [145] focused on water/copper nanofluid as a two-phase fluid in a cavity. They examined the cavity by adding a porous medium and found that the porous media was beneficial in strong convection, but in poor convection, it may reduce Nu. Raizah et al. [128] studied a porous cavity and found that Nu increased by raising Ra and reducing power-law index.

(p62.5) Kefayati et al. [146,147] reviewed Bingham fluid natural convection through the Finite Difference Lattice Boltzmann (FDLBM) method. They examined the angle effect of the cavity. Sajjadi et al. [148] used the copper/water nanofluid using LBM, they investigated the effect of cavity angles from 0 to 60 degrees. Hosseini et al. [149] used several nanofluids in diagonal cavities. They used nanoparticles, for example, Cu, Ag, Al2O3, and TiO2, in water-base fluid. Sheremet et al. [150] studied alumina/water nanofluid using the FDM in order to the free convection investigation. Ogut [151] examined various angles from 0 to 90 degrees. He used copper oxide, silver oxide, and alumina nanofluids in water base fluid. Abu-nada and Oztop [152] studied influence of cavity angle on Nu by means of the FVM. They used the copper/water nanofluid as an operating fluid and changed the angle of cavity from 0 to 120 degrees. Oztop et al. [59] modified the angle of cavity by studying the heat transfer rate in a cavity with sinusoidal thermal boundary condition by means of the FVM. They changed the angle of cavity from 0 to 90 degrees, and by adding nanofluid of copper and titanium water examined the percentage effects of nanofluids. Table 8 presents a number of articles studied inclined enclosures. 
## (s65) Add Porous Media to the Cavity
(p65.0) Porous material consists of a solid medium that the fluid can pass through its parts. Passage of fluid through the porous medium can have important influences on the pressure difference and the heat transfer in systems. Figure 9 shows a part of a porous environment in which a fluid flow. This environment can in some cases even act as a fin and transfer the heat. In many cases, the porous environment also acts as a filter of fluid flow. In addition, the porous environment leads to intensification in pressure drop and the pumping power because of an enhancement in the shear stress. Therefore, in cases such as closed enclosures where the fluid velocity is slowed down, it can have a high impact on the heat transfer. It should be considered that the porosity value affects the heat transfer rate. Since engineers have to use porous media in some industrial and engineering environments, some researchers have explored the effect of adding porous media to the cavities [217]. By adding a porous medium, the Darcy relationship of the momentum equations has variations which can be seen below. Of course, the energy and mass conservation equations remain unchanged [205].  

(p65.1) Darcy's law has acceptable results for viscous currents. The relationship between the pressure gradient and average volume velocity can be obtained using Forchheimer's modification of Darcy's model. This relation can add the term of nonlinear drag to Darcy's law [218].
## (s67) Eulerian-Eulerian Approach
(p67.0) Different phases are considered as continuous ones in the Eulerian-Eulerian method. The concept of phase volume fraction is presented duo to the fact that phases were not mixed. Concentration is considered as a continuous function, spatially and temporally, and sum of them is equal to unity. Each phase has its conservation equation and obtained separately that have the same structure for all phases [232].

(p67.1) Different phases are considered as continuous ones in the Eulerian-Eulerian method. The concept of phase volume fraction is presented duo to the fact that phases were not mixed. Concentration is considered as a continuous function, spatially and temporally, and sum of them is equal to unity. Each phase has its conservation equation and obtained separately that have the same structure for all phases [232].
## (s68) Volume of Fluid Model
(p68.0) The volume of fluid model is a model used to immiscible suspensions simulation when the interfaces among phases are important. In this model, momentum equations are assumed to the fluid and a volume fraction is solved in computational cells to every volume fraction. This approach is used to model the stratified flow, free-surface flow, filling of a reservoir, movement of the liquid surface due to the turbulence, movement of bubbles and transient or steady tracking of the gas-liquid interface. The method is less commonly used for nanofluids within enclosures. It seems that this model alone is not capable to simulate the two-phase of nanofluids [233].

(p68.1) The volume of fluid model is a model used to immiscible suspensions simulation when the interfaces among phases are important. In this model, momentum equations are assumed to the fluid and a volume fraction is solved in computational cells to every volume fraction. This approach is used to model the stratified flow, free-surface flow, filling of a reservoir, movement of the liquid surface due to the turbulence, movement of bubbles and transient or steady tracking of the gas-liquid interface. The method is less commonly used for nanofluids within enclosures. It seems that this model alone is not capable to simulate the two-phase of nanofluids [233].
## (s69) Mixing Model
(p69.0) This model is used for multi-phase fluids. The mixing model uses a hybrid momentum equation so that the mean properties of the different phases are considered in the equation. For dispersed phases, this model uses relative velocity. Of course, if the model does not consider the movement of the dispersed phase, it models the multi-phase flow as a homogeneous medium. Applications of this model are particle-laden and bubbly flows, as well as cyclonic separators. Many researchers used this method to simulate two-phase nanofluid flows in enclosures [234][235][236][237][238][239][240][241][242].

(p69.1) This model is used for multi-phase fluids. The mixing model uses a hybrid momentum equation so that the mean properties of the different phases are considered in the equation. For dispersed phases, this model uses relative velocity. Of course, if the model does not consider the movement of the dispersed phase, it models the multi-phase flow as a homogeneous medium. Applications of this model are particle-laden and bubbly flows, as well as cyclonic separators. Many researchers used this method to simulate two-phase nanofluid flows in enclosures [234][235][236][237][238][239][240][241][242].
## (s70) Eulerian Model
(p70.0) This model is the most complex multi-phase model in terms of the number of equations and relationships. This model solves the continuity and momentum equations phase by phase, separately. The coupling of these equations is done by the pressure and inter-phase exchange coefficients. The coupling is based on the type of phases so that it is different for fluid-solid flows from fluid-fluid ones. Although this model has the potential of simulating multiphase nanofluid flows, and even predicts nanoparticle deposition, it has received less attention due to the complexity and high number of equations [243][244][245][246][247].

(p70.1) This model is the most complex multi-phase model in terms of the number of equations and relationships. This model solves the continuity and momentum equations phase by phase, separately. The coupling of these equations is done by the pressure and inter-phase exchange coefficients. The coupling is based on the type of phases so that it is different for fluid-solid flows from fluid-fluid ones. Although this model has the potential of simulating multiphase nanofluid flows, and even predicts nanoparticle deposition, it has received less attention due to the complexity and high number of equations [243][244][245][246][247].
## (s71) Eulerian-Lagrangian Approach
(p71.0) In this model, the fluid phase is considered continuously by solving the time-averaged Navier-Stokes equations. However, the discrete phase is solved by tracking the motion of particles, bubbles, or droplets within the fluid. Energy is exchanged between phases. In fact, the trajectory of each particle is determined in this method. Since the particle trajectory is known, this model is suitable for modeling spray dryers, fuel combustion, and flows containing particles, However, it is not suitable for modeling liquid-liquid mixtures, fluidized bed substrates or any other applications where the secondary phase volume fraction cannot be neglected. Due to its many equations and difficulties, this method has been used less frequently in enclosures and is more applicable for combustion or phase conversion problems [248].

(p71.1) Danjie et al. [249] investigated the heat transfer of copper/water nanofluid using the Lattice-Boltzmann method in a square cavity. By considering the Ra ranging between 10 3 and 10 6 and range of the nanoparticles volume fraction between 1% and 5%, they realized that the two-phase model should be used instead of single-phase homogeneous one due to the creation of slip in the nanofluid when Ra or nanofluid concentration are relatively high. Goodarzi et al. [237] examined a shallow rectangular enclosure filled with CuO using a mixture two-phase method. They carried out their study in the range of Grashof number of 10 5 to 10 10 . They considered the effect of the Brownian motion. A summary of some articles presented in the field of two-phase nanofluids indicated in Table  12. 

(p71.2) In this model, the fluid phase is considered continuously by solving the time-averaged Navier-Stokes equations. However, the discrete phase is solved by tracking the motion of particles, bubbles, or droplets within the fluid. Energy is exchanged between phases. In fact, the trajectory of each particle is determined in this method. Since the particle trajectory is known, this model is suitable for modeling spray dryers, fuel combustion, and flows containing particles, However, it is not suitable for modeling liquid-liquid mixtures, fluidized bed substrates or any other applications where the secondary phase volume fraction cannot be neglected. Due to its many equations and difficulties, this method has been used less frequently in enclosures and is more applicable for combustion or phase conversion problems [248].

(p71.3) Danjie et al. [249] investigated the heat transfer of copper/water nanofluid using the Lattice-Boltzmann method in a square cavity. By considering the Ra ranging between 10 3 and 10 6 and range of the nanoparticles volume fraction between 1% and 5%, they realized that the two-phase model should be used instead of single-phase homogeneous one due to the creation of slip in the nanofluid when Ra or nanofluid concentration are relatively high. Goodarzi et al. [237] examined a shallow rectangular enclosure filled with CuO using a mixture two-phase method. They carried out their study in the range of Grashof number of 10 5 to 10 10 . They considered the effect of the Brownian motion. A summary of some articles presented in the field of two-phase nanofluids indicated in Table  12. 
## (s72) Non-Rectangular Cavities
(p72.0) Most scholars have studied rectangular cavities, but in recent years, some researchers have also looked at non-rectangular cavities such as triangular, circular. Rahimi et al. [250] examined SiO2-TiO2/W-EG hybrid nanofluid in an H-shaped enclosure using LBM. Bondereva et al. [251] did similar work on a trapezoidal open enclosure by means of the FDM. Bhowmick et al. [252] studied the transient convection with using the FVM in a triangle cavity. Das et al. [253] examined convection in cavities with different geometries such as triangles and square Dogonchi et al. [186] examined the natural convection copper nanofluids under magnetic field in a triangular cavity. There is a semicircular niche in the lower part. They reported that by growing Ra and decreasing Ha, the thermal characteristics are enhanced. Rashad et al. [212] examined natural convection of the alumina/copper hybrid nanofluid in water using the FDM. The cavity is triangular under the magnetic field. There was a constant thermal flux on the floor of the cavity. They found that the rate of heat transfer raises with increasing the Ra and the part where flux enters the cavity. Aghakhani et al. [132] examined the free convection in power-law model with using a non-Newtonian fluid exposed to a magnetic field in a C-shaped enclosure by means of LBM. They realized that reduction in Nu due to raising the power-law index. Using FVM, Esfe et al. [254] investigated free convection of CNT/water-EG nanofluids in trapezoidal configuration. Esfe et al. [255] studied the T-shaped cavity. There is also Table 13, summarizing of studies along with non-rectangular cavities. Table 14 summarizes some of the other works on free convection in enclosures by some researchers. 

(p72.1) Most scholars have studied rectangular cavities, but in recent years, some researchers have also looked at non-rectangular cavities such as triangular, circular. Rahimi et al. [250] examined SiO2-TiO2/W-EG hybrid nanofluid in an H-shaped enclosure using LBM. Bondereva et al. [251] did similar work on a trapezoidal open enclosure by means of the FDM. Bhowmick et al. [252] studied the transient convection with using the FVM in a triangle cavity. Das et al. [253] examined convection in cavities with different geometries such as triangles and square Dogonchi et al. [186] examined the natural convection copper nanofluids under magnetic field in a triangular cavity. There is a semicircular niche in the lower part. They reported that by growing Ra and decreasing Ha, the thermal characteristics are enhanced. Rashad et al. [212] examined natural convection of the alumina/copper hybrid nanofluid in water using the FDM. The cavity is triangular under the magnetic field. There was a constant thermal flux on the floor of the cavity. They found that the rate of heat transfer raises with increasing the Ra and the part where flux enters the cavity. Aghakhani et al. [132] examined the free convection in power-law model with using a non-Newtonian fluid exposed to a magnetic field in a C-shaped enclosure by means of LBM. They realized that reduction in Nu due to raising the power-law index. Using FVM, Esfe et al. [254] investigated free convection of CNT/water-EG nanofluids in trapezoidal configuration. Esfe et al. [255] studied the T-shaped cavity. There is also Table 13, summarizing of studies along with non-rectangular cavities. Table 14 summarizes some of the other works on free convection in enclosures by some researchers. 
