# Evaluation of Wearable Sensor Devices in Parkinson's Disease: A Review of Current Status and Future Prospects

CorpusID: 222142059 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5efc5194e0dc120735a7e1af2c84c9056c5a5c5b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5efc5194e0dc120735a7e1af2c84c9056c5a5c5b)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s1) Wearable Sensors
(p1.0) Wearable sensors are portable and movable accessories that can be worn on the body or embedded in clothes. ese devices include smart glasses, smart watches, smart clothes, or pressure shoes, among others. ey contain both special hardware and software technology, with unique functions of collecting spatiotemporal kinematic parameters, data processing, storage, and transmission. With the rapid development of the Internet technology and the advent of machine learning, wearable technology has been widely used in various fields. Currently, most of the wearable devices used in the field of PD are gyroscopes, accelerometers, or magnetometers [22,35,[43][44][45][46][47].
## (s2) Current Status of Wearable Sensors in the Evaluation of Movement Symptoms in PD
(p2.0) Research has proved that wearable devices are as effective as the standard scale scores in evaluating PD symptoms [25]. ese devices overcome the limitations associated with clinical evaluation scales in terms of objectivity, accuracy, and sensitivity. Notably, the accuracy of assessment scales is limited by the subjectivity and professional knowledge of the assessing physician and the emotion, compliance, and recall bias of patients [48]. e wearable technology improves the accuracy of evaluation by objectively quantifying sports symptoms. Besides, the wearable devices are highly sensitive, thus being able to detect subtle motor abnormalities [22], enabling early [49] or differential [50] diagnosis, and monitoring changes of motion state [51], and long-term and long-distance monitoring of motion [19]. Clinically, rapid and instantaneous assessment may not reveal the true severity of symptoms or fully reflect the state of patients in daily life. us, wearable devices provide clinicians with a comprehensive report of the status of patients in a single assessment, thus optimizing treatment plans. In addition, the use of wearable devices is not limited by time or place. ese devices are therefore ideal for telemedicine, conforming to the future needs of the medical industry. Application of these devices transforms the medical care from being centralized clinical care to individualized diagnosis and treatment.
## (s4) 2
(p4.0) Parkinson's Disease Contrary to previous research conducted in laboratory conditions, a study by Synnott et al. [61] showed that the application of Nintendo Wii Remote enhanced objective 15day assessment of the severity of movement symptoms of PD patients at home. Elsewhere, Memedi et al. [36] reported that a touchscreen telemetry device was able to quantify motor symptoms during episodes and peak dose dyskinesia of advanced PD patients.

(p4.1) is study demonstrated that the device could objectively quantify PD-specific and treatmentinduced motor complications. With the continuous development of science and technology, highly sensitive wearable devices will be developed to promote PD research. Previously, Ferraris et al. [62] used an optical RGB-Depth to perform automated assessment of posture and motor tasks using a self-managed and home-based approach. ey revealed that the wearable devices could efficiently perform automated assessment of PD patients at home. ese findings are fundamental to the design of a telemedicine framework encompassing teleneuromonitoring and neurorehabilitation. However, the patient selection process was not random in this study; thus, bias cannot be ruled out. Hence, more studies are required to improve the application of wearable devices in the future.
## (s5) Tremor
(p5.0) Tremor is often the earliest occurrence of Parkinson's disease. It usually begins from one side of the upper limb, into the ipsilateral lower limb, and then spreads to the contralateral upper and lower limbs. It happens during rest, relaxes during voluntary movement, intensifies during nervous excitement, and disappears during sleeping. A rub-pill like involuntary movement, with a frequency of 4-6 Hz, typically characterizes the tremor [16]. Whereas tremor is not life threatening, it can affect the patient's ability to live comfortable life by compromising various aspects such as dieting, writing, dressing, and self-care. Clinically, tremors are classified as resting tremors, postural tremors, or action tremors [15,17]. e type of treatment depends on the cause of the tremor; thus, accurate diagnosis of the tremor is paramount. Several parameters such as the amplitude of tremor, subtle changes, efficacy, or fluctuations of tremor cannot be effectively assessed by current clinical evaluation scales [15]. Recent studies show that the misdiagnosis rate of tremor dominant PD or essential tremor is nearly 20-30% [63,64]. Assessment of tremors is dependent on emotions during the day; thus, short-term regular outpatient followups do not fully reflect the intensity of the tremor [15,65].
## (s6) Gait
(p6.0) Gait disorder is the main form of postural balance impairment. Often, at the early stages of PD, the swing of upper limbs on the affected side decreases and the lower limbs drags. As PD progresses, freezing of gait (FOG), forward thrust gait, and panic gait develop, all of which make gait disorder the most disabling motor symptom [22,23]. Impaired dopaminergic signaling increases the risk of gait. erefore, gait disorder is an emerging surrogate marker of PD progression [26].
## (s7) Myotonia
(p7.0) Myotonia is an impairment of muscle relaxation, similar to bending soft lead tube, so called "lead tube" rigidity. Myotonia often presents gear-like rigidity that affects many joints of the body and presents special buckling posture. At the clinical level, the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) is often used to evaluate the neck, wrist, elbow, knee, ankle, or other joints of patients [10]. To date, research has focused on quantification of muscle strength through biomechanics. Other methods have also been developed to quantitatively assess myotonia based on the parameters extracted from the passive motion of the joints [81].

(p7.1) Since muscular rigidity is hard to quantify using the current methods, studies have proposed that wearable devices may be effective in quantifying myotonia. For instance, electronic devices, not wearable, have been used to quantify myotonia as a means of revealing neural mechanisms [40]. Another study used a portable transducer to objectively quantify muscle rigidity, and the results were highly consistent with the results of Parkinsonian rigidity clinical score. e specificity and sensitivity of the portable transducer were 89% and 82%, respectively, but only the wrist was quantified [82]. Recently, di Biase and colleagues [83] developed a magnetoinertial motion tracking system to describe the rigidity of joint movement. ey placed the sensors on the most affected parts such as the arm, wrist, palm, thumb, or index finger and extracted the total power and smoothness index as parameters that describe the rigidity. ey used the tasks of UPDRS III to discriminate off/ on motor status as well as PD patients from healthy subjects. Another study quantified axial rigidity through some routine household activities. Phan et al. [68] used BioKin ™ consisting of four sensors placed symmetrically on the back of the trunk to record angular velocity signals as well as capture information about instability and stiffness during activities in natural settings. eir study demonstrated that a small number of sensors could monitor variations in rigidity in PD subjects during routine activities. e studies reviewed above indicate that wearable devices are more reliable and feasible in monitoring instability and myotonia in more natural environment.
## (s8) Nonmotor Symptoms
(p8.0) With increasing awareness of the presence of nonmotor symptoms in PD, it has been realized that these nonmotor symptoms play an extremely important and sometimes leading role in the treatment and even diagnosis of the disease. Nonmotor symptoms of PD include rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behaviour disorder (RBD), hyposmia, depression, and constipation [84]. Nonmotor symptoms may appear years before those associated with dopamine deficiency or, with other nonmotor symptoms, in the progression of the disease. e neuroanatomical and neuropharmacological basis for nonmotor abnormalities in Parkinson's disease remains largely unknown. More and more attention has been paid to the nonmotor aspects of Parkinson's disease, providing valuable insights into the diversity of the clinical, pathological, and neurochemical characteristics of Parkinson's disease. e nonmotor symptoms and signs of Parkinson's disease are now the subject of effective clinical assessments that can detect their presence and track their progress over time. Wearable devices can monitor nonmotor symptoms of Parkinson's disease, such as RBD, which opens up the prospect of exploring the pathological mechanism of nonmotor symptoms.

(p8.1) Kotschet and colleagues [85] described an algorithmic system of accelerometers placed on the wrist that measures daytime sleepiness. ey enrolled 68 PD patients and 30 healthy controls for 10 consecutive days, and somnolence was observed after levodopa administration. e conclusion showed that, compared with the control group, proportion of time immobile (PTI) of PD patients increased 30-60 minutes after taking Levodopa, which confirmed that Levodopa would increase somnolence; PTI can be used as a surrogate measure of daytime sleep in PD patients.
## (s9) Prospect
(p9.0) With the development of science and technology, highly sensitive wearable devices have been developed to promote PD research. is has enabled early or differential diagnosis of PD, monitoring of motion state, prevention or reduction of off-stage status, and assessing of movement complications. However, further in-depth research should be carried out on PD because most of the current research has focused on patients with primary PD, typical Parkinson's syndrome, and the main motor symptoms of PD. is will identify more accurate markers of PD progression, nonmotor symptoms of PD, and other types of atypical Parkinson's syndrome [28,69]. Notably, wearable devices may not be appropriate in cases such as severe motor impairment, off-stage state, cognitive impairment, and for elderly patients [35]. Lastly, it should be noted that wearable devices require unlimited Bluetooth connection for data transmission, and any instability of its connection may lead to data loss [70].
