# Galectins for Diagnosis and Prognostic Assessment of Human Diseases: An Overview of Meta-Analyses e923901-1

CorpusID: 220944385 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/113619d10986b835367e60131d7852907804ebbf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/113619d10986b835367e60131d7852907804ebbf)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Various cancers
(p3.0) Two different study groups conducted similar meta-analyses to explore the relationship between galectin-1 expression and   [13]. These findings should be cautiously interpreted, because they were produced for unclassified cancer, but not specific to a particular type of cancer.
## (s4) Solid tumors
(p4.0) Two different study groups conducted similar meta-analyses in 2018 to explore the association of galectin-9 expression with prognosis in patients with solid tumors [14,15]. However, their   Zhou X et al. also reported a significant association of high galectin-9 expression with better clinicopathological characteristics of solid tumors, including less invasion and absence of lymph node or distal tumor metastasis [15].

(p4.1) Wang Y et al. also evaluated the association of galectin-3 with outcomes of solid tumors, and found a statistically significant association of high galectin-3 expression with poorer OS (HR=1.79) and DFS/PFS/RFS (HR=1.57) [16].
## (s5) Thyroid cancer
(p5.0) Four different study groups performed similar meta-analyses to evaluate the role of galectin-3 in diagnosis of thyroid cancer [17][18][19][20]. According to the effect sizes, meta-analyses by de Matos L et al. [17], Xin Y et al. [18], and Trimboli P et al. [19] calculated the sensitivity and specificity to evaluate the diagnostic performance of galectin-3, but the meta-analysis by Tang W et al. calculated the OR to compare the difference in positive galectin-3 expression rate between patients with and without thyroid cancer [20]. Regardless, all of them supported the diagnostic value of galectin-3. Notably, Xin Y et al. also explored the role of Hector Battifora mesothelial antigen-1 in the diagnosis of thyroid cancer and suggested that the AUC of Hector Battifora mesothelial antigen-1 should be larger than that of galectin-3.
## (s6) Pancreatic cancer
(p6.0) A meta-analysis by Sun Q et al. included 11 studies to explore the role of galectins in diagnosis and prognostic assessment of pancreatic cancer [21]. They found that galectin-3 had diagnostic value for pancreatic cancer. In addition, high galectin-1 expression and low galectin-4 and galectin-9 expression were significantly associated with poorer OS in pancreatic cancer, but galectin-3 expression was not significantly associated with OS or clinicopathological characteristics. The meta-analysis also found a significant correlation of high galectin-1 expression with worse clinicopathological characteristics, including larger tumor size, higher TNM stage, presence of lymphatic vessel invasion, and poorer tumor differentiation. 
## (s10) Heart failure
(p10.0) In terms of diagnosis, Huang Z et al. identified eight studies and conducted a meta-analysis on diagnostic value of galectin-3 for heart failure [24]. The pooled AUC, DOR, sensitivity, and specificity of galectin-3 for diagnosis of heart failure were 0.89, 18.29, 81%, and 63%, respectively.
## (s16) e923901-6
(p16.0) In terms of prognostic assessment, three different study groups performed similar meta-analyses to evaluate the role of galectin-3 for assessing outcomes of heart failure [25][26][27]. But they employed different statistical methods and calculated different effect sizes. In 2015, Chen A et al. included 11 studies and found a positive association of galectin-3 with all-cause mortality by using combining categorical (HR=1.30) and continuous (HR=1.28) data [25]. They also found a statistically significant association of galectin-3 with cardiovascular mortality (HR=1.59). In 2016, Chen Y et al. conducted meta-analyses in chronic heart failure (9 studies) and acute heart failure (4 studies) [26]. The pooled AUC, DOR, sensitivity, and specificity of galectin-3 for predicting all-cause death were 0.64, 2.36, 60%, and 61% in chronic heart failure and 0.64, 2.30, 64%, and 57% in acute heart failure, respectively. In 2017, Imran T et al. found a statistically significant association of elevated plasma galectin-3 level with higher risk of all-cause death (HR=1.09) in nine studies and CVD (HR=1.44) in five studies [27]. Taken together, all three meta-analyses indicated that galectin-3 negatively influenced outcomes of heart failure, but its ability might be relatively weak.
## (s17) Atrial fibrillation
(p17.0) A meta-analysis by Gong M et al. explored the relationship of galectin-3 with risk of atrial fibrillation [28]. They found a significantly higher galectin-3 concentration in patients with atrial fibrillation than those without (MD=-0.268ng/mL) and a significantly higher galectin-3 concentration in patients with persistent atrial fibrillation than those with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (MD=-0.94ng/mL).

(p17.1) Three different study groups performed similar meta-analyses to evaluate the relationship of galectin-3 with recurrence of atrial fibrillation [28][29][30]. Two of them found that patients with recurrence of atrial fibrillation had a significantly higher galectin-3 concentration than those without [28,29], but another did not find such a statistically significant difference in galectin-3 concentration between patients with and without recurrence of atrial fibrillation [30]. By comparison, all of them showed that a higher galectin-3 concentration was significantly related to recurrence of atrial fibrillation.
## (s18) Coronary artery disease
(p18.0) A meta-analysis by Li W et al. identified seven studies involving 10 552 cases and 10 545 controls to evaluate the association of galectin-2-encoding gene (LGALS2) with risk of coronary artery disease [31]. But there was no significant association between them.
## (s20) Chronic Kidney Disease
(p20.0) A meta-analysis by Zhang T et al. included five studies with 5 226 patients and evaluated the association of galectin-3 with outcomes of chronic kidney diseases (CKD) [33]. They found that galectin-3 level positively influenced risks of allcause death (HR=1.379) and cardiovascular events (HR=1.054).
