# R E V I E W Antioxidant, Anti-Inflammatory and Anti-Apoptotic Activities of Nesfatin-1: A Review

CorpusID: 222343792 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/df0580b17ad4c3341a23cb6362fe51aded85dca6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/df0580b17ad4c3341a23cb6362fe51aded85dca6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Nesfatin-1 was first discovered in the hypothalamic nuclei and was initially reported to reduce food intake. 1 Studies have shown that nesfatin-1 is widely expressed in central and peripheral tissues and has pleiotropic effects. 2 More recent evidence indicates that nesfatin-1 exerts antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antiapoptotic effects in different inflammation-related diseases. 3,4 In this review, we provide a brief account of the structure, localization, and functions of nesfatin-1, and mainly focus on the experimental evidence for the antioxidant, antiinflammatory, and anti-apoptotic effects of nesfatin-1 and its possible mechanism.
## (s1) Structure and Localization of Nesfatin-1
(p1.0) Nesfatin-1, an 82-amino acid peptide discovered by Oh-I in 2006, is derived from the precursor protein nucleobindin-2 (NUCB2). 5 The product of the NUCB2 gene is a peptide with 420 amino acid (AA), which is composed of a 396 AA long precursor peptide and a 24 AA long signal peptide (SP). The precursor peptide is cleaved into three different parts by prohormone/proprotein convertase (PC) 1/3 and PC 2: nesfatin-1 (AA 1-82), nesfatin-2 (AA 85-163), and nesfatin-3 (AA 166-396). 5 The structure of nesfatin-1 can also be divided into three segments, namely N23, M30, and C29, 6 among which M30 is critical for its anorexigenic action. 7,8 However, no obvious biological activity has been detected for nesfatin-2 or nesfatin-3. 9 Figure 1 shows a schematic representation of nesfatin-1 processing from its precursor, NUCB2.

(p1.1) Initially, the paraventricular nucleus (PVN), arcuate nucleus (ARC), supraoptic nucleus (SON), and lateral hypothalamic area (LHA) in the hypothalamus were thought to be the main sites of nesfatin-1 expression. 5 Subsequent studies have shown that nesfatin-1 is widely expressed in other regions of the brain also, like
## (s2) Functions of Nesfatin-1
(p2.0) As an energy-regulating peptide, nesfatin-1 is widely expressed in both central and peripheral tissues. 20 This, along with the fact that nesfatin-1 can cross the blood-brain barrier, 21,22 suggests that nesfatin-1 may have pleiotropic effects. In addition to maintaining the feeding balance, this peptide plays an important role in glucose homeostasis, 23 lipid metabolism, 24 modulation of gastrointestinal functions, 25 cardiovascular, 9 and reproductive functions. 26 It may also be involved in epilepsy, 27 psychological disorders, including stress, 28 sleep disorders, 29 anxiety, 30 and depression. 30
## (s5) Gastric Diseases
(p5.0) Expression of nesfatin-1 in the stomach is reported to be 20 times higher than that in the brain tissues in rats. 52 Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) administration is known to increase the production and release of gastric NUCB2/ nesfatin-1. 53 Due to its anti-inflammatory properties, nesfatin-1 may have a protective effect against gastric injury.

(p5.1) Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are commonly used to treat various ailments. However, serious side effects of these drugs, such as bleeding, acute injury, and gastric ulcers, have been widely reported. 54 Recently, potential anti-ulcer and anti-inflammatory effects of nesfatin-1 in a model of gastric ulcer induced by indomethacin, an NSAID with analgesic, antipyretic, and antiinflammatory effects, were studied. 55 The results showed thatnesfatin-1 alleviated the indomethacin-induced gastric injury, by supporting the balance of oxidant and antioxidant systems and inhibiting the production of proinflammatory mediators. 55 Gastro-protective effect of nesfatin-1was confirmed using acetic acid-induced gastric ulcer model. Nesfatin-1 promoted the healing of chronic gastric ulcers induced by acetic acid by accelerating the gastric blood flow and mucosal repair, and partially reversing the downregulation of superoxide dismutase (SOD) mRNA. 56 Moreover, nesfatin-1 treatment healed the acetic acidinduced gastric injury by inhibiting neutrophil infiltration and proinflammatory cytokine release, and promoting the antioxidant activity. 57 Intraperitoneal injection of nesfatin-1 is shown to decrease the gastric lesions induced by water immersion and restraint stress (WRS), probably byinhibitingthe secretion of gastric acid and attenuation of the expression and release of proinflammatory cytokines, including interleukin-1β (IL-1β), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). 58 
## (s6) Cardiac Diseases
(p6.0) Detection of nesfatin-1 protein and mRNA in rat cardiac extracts by Western blotting and qRT-PCR 59 suggests a physiological role for nesfatin-1 in cardiac myocytes. Myocardial I/R injury often causes oxidative stress and inflammation, which in turn, leads to apoptosis and necrosis of cardiomyocytes. 60,61 Nesfatin-1 can prevent this injury by reducing the infarct size and post-ischemic contracture, and by inhibiting the release of lactate dehydrogenase 59 through its antioxidant properties. Myocardial infarction (MI) is one of the most common life-threatening diseases, which may lead to other diseases through oxidative stress and inflammation. 62 Previous studies have suggested that the plasma level of nesfatin-1 in patients of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) was significantly lower than that in healthy controls. 63 Moreover, a negative correlation was reported between the levels of plasma nesfatin-1, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and neutrophils in AMI patients, 63 indicating that reduced nesfatin-1 levels may abet the pathogenesis of AMI through inflammatory mechanisms. In vivostudiesalso confirmed the cardioprotective effect of nesfatin-1. Isoproterenol (ISO)-induced MI in rats is a commonly used experimental model to evaluate the protective effect of various cardioprotective agents against human MI. 64,65 Intraperitoneal administration of nesfatin-1 (10 μg/kg/day) conferred significant cardioprotection against the induced MI in this model by lowering the levels of proinflammatory cytokines and reducing the number of apoptotic and necrotic cells in the myocardium. 3 
