# INNOVATIONS in pharmacy Dosage Adjustment of Irinotecan in Patients with UGT1A1 Polymorphisms: A Review of Current Literature

CorpusID: 225505712 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/958702b869c67e4d1fd21709fff4cee536ab2bdf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/958702b869c67e4d1fd21709fff4cee536ab2bdf)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Results
(p4.0) Eight studies in total were included for analysis. [8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15] All were phase I prospective dose finding studies except for Lu et al14 which was a retrospective chart review. Most of the studies included investigated patients with metastatic colorectal cancer, however two studies included patients with other types of malignancies. 11, 13 Goetz et al11 included patients with metastatic or locally advanced cancers with a variety of different tumor types such as breast, stomach and bladder. Innocenti et al 13 studied patients with solid tumors or lymphomas refractory to standard therapy and tumor types were classified as gastrointestinal, lung or other. The sample size ranged from 48 to 107 participants. 6 out of 8 studies investigated the *1 and *28 alleles only. 8,9,11,[13][14][15] All included patients with *1/1, *1/*28 and *28/*28 genotypes except the two studies by Toffoli et al 8,15 who excluded *28/*28 patients, due to low sample sizes. Satoh et al10 and Kim et al 12 also included the *6 variant allele, which is more prevalent in Asian countries. In Kim's study, there were two patients that displayed the *6/*28 genotype, which they concluded would be functionally similar to a homozygous*28/*28 genotype.

(p4.1) Inclusion criteria in all studies included parameters indicating adequate renal and hepatic function, such as serum creatinine less than 1.5 mg/dL and liver enzymes that were within normal limits. Some studies required patients to have an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of greater than 1,500-2,000 to rule out pre-existing neutropenia. 8,9,11,12,13,15 Other studies had additional criteria such as a wash-out period from prior chemotherapy or radiation that ranged from 3 weeks to 6 months to the time of study initiation. [10][11][12] Finding the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and dose limiting toxicities (DLT) was the primary endpoint in all studies. A 3+3 design ( Figure III) 
