# remote sensing Status of Phenological Research Using Sentinel-2 Data: A Review

CorpusID: 221980595 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8cc6246873cbbb73734ba6c342779b220054af55](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8cc6246873cbbb73734ba6c342779b220054af55)

Fields: Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s4) Phenology of Croplands
(p4.0) Analysis of cropland phenology is different from that of forests in several ways. Although for both it is important to differentiate background signals (e.g., from bare soil) from vegetation, analysis of time series curves for croplands can be particularly challenging due to multi-cropping, management practices, and standing water for rice crops. Additionally, the multi-modal vegetation index time series curves observed in areas with high cropping intensity, or more than one cropping season annually, are in sharp contrast to the unimodal time series curves of forests. Therefore, processing of time series data must be tuned accordingly and allow for decreases in vegetation index values indicating events such as harvest or slurry spreading [31]. While these issues present a challenge for any remotely sensed approach to crop phenology, the higher spatial, temporal and spectral resolutions of Sentinel-2 offer potential improvements.
## (s8) Monitoring Seasonal Change in Grassland to Determine Management Practices, Invasion and Biomass Production
(p8.0) Grasslands provide valuable ecosystem services, and account for more than a third of all agricultural land on earth [55,109]. Characterising phenology of grasslands is particularly challenging since they are sensitive to both management practices (i.e., frequent grazing and cutting events) and weather [110]. Hill (2013) [55] noted that frequent observations are needed to capture changes Remote Sens. 2020, 12, 2760 9 of 24 associated with management practices in grasslands, such as grazing and mowing. In his study, undertaken before Sentinel-2 was launched, Hyperion data were used to simulate observations from Sentinel-2, MODIS and VIIRS. Various vegetation indices and bands were used to study pigments (NDVI, carotenoid reflectance index (CRI), anthocyanin reflectance index (ARI), red-green ratio (RGR)), water content (normalised difference infra-red index (NDII)), soil and senescence (SWIR, PSRI) and biomass (soil adjusted total vegetation index (SATVI)). This study revealed that most of the simulated Sentinel-2 indices except ARI were highly correlated to MODIS and VIIRS with strong linear relationships. VIIRS and MODIS both lack a band at 700 nm that is critical for calculating ARI, and hence this had to be substituted with the closest available band, which might explain its poor correlation with Sentinel-2-based ARI data. The vegetation indices were used to predict grassland cover and nominal vegetation status (with respect to disturbances, i.e., degraded or pristine grasslands).
## (s17) Further Prospects
(p17.0) The current HLS dataset covers the period starting from 2013 for L30 and 2015 for S30 products, as it includes only Landsat-8 and Sentinel-2 data. To date, little work has been reported on inclusion of Landsat-5 and 7 to further extend the historic time series back in time (though data from Sentinel-2 would be lacking for the period before 2015), which could provide more than 30 years of data starting from the 1980s. A study by Roy et al. (2016) [159] provides valuable insights into statistical techniques for normalising data from Landsat-5 and 7, which have different sensor characteristics. Such procedures in combination with data from high temporal frequency data from geostationary satellites (as discussed in Section 6.3) could further improve the modelling of land surface phenology.

(p17.1) With the Sentinel 2-C and 2-D sensors expected to be launched in 2021, to provide continuity of the mission, data from these new satellites, combined with the existing Sentinel-2 data (A and B, provided they are still in operation) could further help resolve issues associated with cloud cover. The Sentinel-2 suite of sensors is thus expected to provide up to 15 years of freely available time series data, which will facilitate more comprehensive studies of vegetation phenology and their climatic drivers. Similarly, with Landsat 9 (that has a similar design to Landsat-8) scheduled to be launched in 2021, the success of the HLS dataset could be further extended and improved. All of these data sets are expected to improve phenological studies by overcoming existing limitations.

(p17.2) In spite of the additional red-edge and SWIR bands available on the Sentinel-2 multispectral instruments with their improved vegetation species detection capabilities, there has been very little research on their efficacy to track vegetation cover and its phenology. For example, out of approximately every four papers that analyse NDVI or EVI derived from Sentinel-2 imagery, only one mentions either SWIR or the red-edge bands. However, there is a growing body of evidence that suggests that the information contained within the red-edge bands is critical for discriminating not only species but also their growth stages and health status. This review also brought to light that most Sentinel-2-based studies are concentrated on mapping crops and their seasonality. Although Sentinel 2 possesses capabilities to monitor phenological and other events across a range of different ecosystems as mentioned in this review, more attention is still needed to show enough confidence in the improved potential of Sentinel-2 in LSP studies.

(p17.3) The literature analysis in this review paper found Sentinel-2-based phenology research to be mainly skewed towards croplands, with other land covers lacking similar attention amongst peer-reviewed papers. Even within the croplands, the phenological metrics, such as the SOS, POS, and EOS, are not always calculated, and the studies mostly concentrate on mapping of crop types and discriminating croplands from other land uses and land covers. Along with other information on crops, such as cropping intensity, location, health, water use and productivity, crop phenological estimates are equally critical for ensuring world food security [160]. Additionally, information on crop phenology (i.e., the cropping calendar and the dates of key growth stages) are important in the agronomic management of crops [161]. Hence, more efforts are required for testing the efficiency of Sentinel-2 data in estimating phenophases of crops.
