# A Review of Technical Standards for Smart Cities

CorpusID: 225363973 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18365e8c77e615ca96cf939aecebf3fdc2cc7e83](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18365e8c77e615ca96cf939aecebf3fdc2cc7e83)

Fields: Engineering, Business, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s7) 1.
(p7.0) Energy and environment: Sustainable growth is created by technology and cities make better use of resources from electronic sensors that monitor leakages, as well as gamification and behavioral economics to support citizens to conduct considerate decisions on resource utilization [29]. Renewable energy including solar and wind will be important sources of energy generation [30][31][32]. Data analytics will be used to enhance energy and power system operation [33]; 2.
## (s46) Country Description Barcelona
(p46.0) Bakici et al. [94] examined the city of Barcelona and analyzed its Smart City initiative, including its urban policy implications. This article analyzes Barcelona's transformation in the areas of Smart City management, drivers, bottlenecks, conditions, and assets. The authors described the Barcelona Smart City model and examined the key factors of the Smart City strategy while considering living labs, Open Data, e-Services, smart districts, initiatives, and infrastructures. The Barcelona Smart City model consists of four domains including smart governance, smart economy, smart living, and smart people. The 22@ Barcelona region is a central point for innovation and economic development, as small-medium enterprises use the region as a test-bed to trial novel technologies. There is no information regarding the standards adopted in the 22@ Barcelona region.
## (s50) Country Description Brazil
(p50.0) Macke et al. [104] described that the city of Curitiba, Southern Brazil to be a green, inclusive and livable city. It is the top ten smartest cities globally speaking. Curitiba has several well-known sustainability programs. Effective leadership and devotion to intelligent transportation planning aided Curitiba to turn into a sustainable city and a standard for effective urban planning. The city's achievements are considered in six factors namely integrated urban planning, pedestrian priority zones, environmental awareness, waste management system, effective public transport system, and social justice. Smart living can be attained by delivering the four factors namely, community integration socio-structural relations, material well-being, and environmental well-being. International standards are not discussed in the work. Afonso et al. [105] studied Brazilian capital indicators and developed a maturity model called Brazilian Smart City Maturity Model to allow transform public databases into useful indicators to assist city managers in planning. The authors mentioned that the ISO 37120 standard provides 100 different performance indicators for cities. The standard consists of 17 themes, 46 core indicators, and 54 indicators that can help define public policies based on different domains. The model is an ongoing work.
