# materials Doping Effect on Cu 2 Se Thermoelectric Performance: A Review

CorpusID: 229302558 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d518923100fdbd94d08bae6807dc1f09bba2ea74](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d518923100fdbd94d08bae6807dc1f09bba2ea74)

Fields: Physics, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s2) Doping by Group IIIA Elements
(p2.0) In 2014, a high ZT value of 2.62 at 1029 K Cu 2 Se bulk material with Al dopants was synthesized by Bin Zhong's group [40]. The semiconductor crystal they acquired, as shown in the XRD pattern in Figure 4a, is made up of α-Cu 2 Se and Cu 3 Se 2 composite at low temperature range and β-Cu 2 Se single phase at high temperature range. From Figure 4b the SEM combined with Figure 4c the EDS analysis, we can grab the information that this bulk material has the nature of highly aligned lamellae with the size of 3-4 µm, and all compositional elements has a homogeneous distribution along the lamellae and heterogeneous distribution across the lamellae. These peculiar microstructures lead to anisotropic TE properties of the samples. As is shown in Figure 4d, at the orientation across the lamellae, namely the direction normal to the aligned grain planes, the samples will always have a higher electrical conductivity and a lower thermal conductivity, both lead to a higher ZT value. The mechanism is not investigated or presented by Bin Zhong et al., but they stated that it stems from the highly aligned Cu + ion layers in the aligned lamellae, which lower the lattice thermal conductivity. Similar results are found in Ting Zhang's work [49]. They obtained the same microstructure of highly aligned Cu 2 Se material, but without any dopants. They proposed that it's the aligned lamellae structure provide the Cu + ions with more passageways for movements, making them capable of scattering more phonons and carriers. In this way, the lattice thermal conductivity and electrical conductivity will be decreased, compared to lamellae-structure-free samples. Also a Pb doped Cu 2 Se material synthesized by Zheng Zhu et al., has the same layered structure [50]. In their experiments, they find that the lower the width of the lamellae, the lower the thermal conductivity. Thus, they deduce that it's the large amount of grain boundaries across the lamellae contribute to the remarkable decrease of the thermal conductivity. The phonons and carriers are efficiently scattered by grain boundaries, the thinner the lamellae, the denser the grain boundary, the lower the thermal conductivity. Both Ting's and Zheng's work explained, to some extent, the origin of the high ZT value. But no anisotropy is found in either of their works, which is boiled down to the randomly oriented grains, i.e., the lamellae in Ting's or Zheng's work are only locally aligned. However, it's noteworthy that the large amount of grain boundaries across the lamellae should have strong scattering for both phonons and carriers, which will definitely lead to the decrease of both thermal and electrical conductivity. This is supported by result of Ting's and Zheng's work. However, in Bin Zhong's work, an interesting anomaly is found that the electrical conductivity is higher on the direction perpendicular to the lamellae than along the lamellae, even with grain boundaries of high density. Another dopant in group IIIA which have an extraordinary effect in enhancing the TE performance of Cu 2 Se materials is Indium. The Cu 2 Se/CuInSe 2 (CS/CIS) nanocomposites, synthesized by A. A. Olvera et al., through ball milling and uniaxial hot-pressing, obtained the ZT value of 2.6 at 850 K for the sample Cu 2 Se doped with 1 mol% In, which is displayed in Figure 5i [51]. Different from other dopants, this time, the introduction of indium induces a formation of second phase in the Cu 2 Se matrix. As is shown in Figure 5a, the backscattered electron image of the sample with content of half CS and half CIS, a mechanical mixture is formed on a microscale. Areas with higher contrast, marked in blue, is CIS phase, and CS for lower contrast. Zooming in at CS areas, shown in Figure 5b,c, we can still find that the lower contrast region, which is used to be thought of CS region in Figure 5a, is still a mixture of CS and CIS on nanoscale. Moreover, interfaces of coherency are also found in the STEM image (Figure 5d), and illustrated in the schematics shown in Figure 5e. As for the TE properties, as is shown in Figure 5f,g, the introduction of the second phase CIS, plays an important role in enhancing the electrical conductivity and reducing the thermal conductivity. For the increase in the electrical conductivity, from the schematics in Figure 5e, the In 3+ ions occupy the Cu + ion sites, forming a hybrid "Cu 2 Se-like" substructure, play a part in confining the diffusion of Cu + ions, give rise to an undercut in the scattering of carriers, which means a higher carrier mobility, also means a higher electrical conductivity. As for the reduction of thermal conductivity, the huge reduction, is a comprehensive outcome of the CIS nano-inclusions and coherent interfaces. Seen in Figure 5a,b, two phases of CIS and CS interweave from nanoscale to microscale, plenty of CIS nano-inclusions are formed in CS grains, becoming a perfect center of phonon scattering. At the same time, coherent interfaces formed between the nano-inclusions and CS matrix play an important part in prohibiting phonon transport on account of the different lattice vibration and the Cu + disorder level between CS and CIS, but have a good performance in transferring carriers between those two phases. In this case, the TE properties is, almost idealized, improved by increasing the electrical conductivity and decreasing the thermal conductivity simultaneously. Other elements in group IIIA are also used as dopants in Cu 2 Se, though with inferior ZT value to ones discussed above, interesting mechanisms that enhance the TE properties are quite worthy of mentioning. Cu 2 Se with nano-boron incorporated is carried out by Sheik Md. Kazi Nazrul Islam et al. [52], through ball-milling and SPS. Nano-boron particles are precipitated at the grain boundaries, as is shown in schematics, HAADF STEM image and EDS map in Figure 6a-e. Those insolating precipitants works as perfect phonon scattering centers, as a result, the thermal conductivity of the Cu 2 Se is significantly decreased, shown in Figure 6f. Even though the final highest ZT value of this sample only reached 1.6 at 852 K, much lower in comparison to Al and In doping, the ZT enhancement ratio is relatively high which is by a factor of 1.6 to 2.6 compared to the undoped sample. Thus, B is still a promising dopant for ZT enhancement of Cu 2 Se, if other synthesizing methods like hydrothermal methods and hot pressing are exploited to increase the ZT value of the original undoped sample, it is likely that the B doped samples can achieve better results. Ga doping is also investigated by F.S Liu et al., through ball milling and SPS [53]. A second phase CuGaSe 2 is formed in the matrix, but Liu found this second phase have an opposite effect which is increasing the thermal conductivity while decreasing the electronic conductivity, and the increment of ZT value of their samples is not distinct, even it is decreased at some certain content. 
## (s3) Doping by Group IVA Elements
(p3.0) Comprehensive investigations on Cu 2 Se have been conducted by Lanlin Zhao et al. doped by a variety of carbon resources, including graphite (G), carbon nanotubes (CNT), super P (SP) and hard carbon (H) [54]. Among these, 0.3 wt% carbon fiber doped Cu 2 Se achieved the highest ZT value of 2.4 at 850 K. The composites are synthesized through solid state reaction and melt quenching. It is interesting to note that, from Figure 7a, the final composite synthesized by melt quenching, shows no dependence on the initial carbon sources, i.e., no matter what kind of carbon source is chosen, the eventual samples are composed of hexagonal carbon and monoclinic Cu 2 Se at room temperature. As is shown in Figure 7b,c, where the Cu 2 Se matrix are composed of small grains with sizes from 30-60 nm, and the carbon nanoparticles are gathered in grain boundaries. During the melt-quenching process, carbon precipitates played an important role in preventing grain ripening. As displayed in Figure 7d, Cu 2 Se with various carbon dopants shows an overall increase in the electrical conductivity and decrease in the thermal conductivity, leading to enhanced ZT values. The electrical conductivity increment can be apparently attributed to the high electrical conductivity nature of carbon. As for the thermal conductivity, which is dominant in enhancing the ZT values, is due to the huge amount of grain boundaries with carbon decorates. Those carbon nanoparticles, as indicated in the schematics in Figure 7e, can scatter phonons, resulting in a significant increase in the thermal boundary resistance, namely decrease in thermal conductivity. This mechanism is quite similar to boron-doped samples discussed in the section above. Other experiments on C doping are conducted as well. Raghavendra Nunna et al. [55] synthesized a CNTs-Cu 2 Se composites through ball-milling and SPS. In their experiments, CNTs works similarly as the nucleation center, depressing the ripening of Cu 2 Se grains. However, different from the result in Zhao's work, CNTs in Nunna's experiments, maintained the original multiwalled-nanotube structure as presented in Figure 8a-e, even so, the mechanism in decreasing the thermal conductivity is identical by strong phonon scattering at CNTs enriched grain boundaries, which is displayed in Figure 8c. Finally, a high ZT value of 2.4 at 1000 K is obtained. The same mechanism is also supported by the work of Meng Li et al. by dispersing graphene nanoplates (GNPs) into the Cu 2 Se matrix through ball-milling and SPS [56]. Increased electrical conductivity and decreased thermal conductivity are brought about by the high density of grain boundaries with enriched GNPs. A high ZT value of 1.7 at 873 K is obtained. Meng Li et al. also investigated on the carbon nanodots (CDs) incorporated Cu 2 Se [57]. This might be due to the different synthesis methods which are hydrothermal synthesis and hot-pressing, the samples show a characteristic of layered structure. Apart from the phonon scattering at the interfaces between the CDs and Cu 2 Se matrix, those interfaces between the layers also play a part in reducing the thermal conductivity. Eventually a high ZT value of 1.98 at 973 K is achieved. Apart from using expensive ingredients like carbon-nanotubes or graphene, novel approaches using grape juice as carbon resources are proposed by Sheik Md Kazi Nazrul Islam et al. [58], and an extraordinarily high ZT value of 2.5 at 984 K is obtained. In their synthesis process, Cu 2 Se powders are mixed with grape juice and dried up on a hot plate. Then the samples are calcined into bulks and heated up to 1200 • C. Finally, a polycrystalline Cu 2 Se structure, with C and Cu2O enriched boundaries is obtained, which is displayed in the STEM image in Figure 9a-d. Moreover, zooming in at the region of grain boundaries, Cu 2 O can be found at the interface between C and Cu 2 Se. Those Cu 2 O inclusions and carbon particles, together formed a carbonaceous material at grain boundaries, as illustrated in the schematics in Figure 9e. The TE performance of the samples are displayed in Figure 10. The existence of C and Cu 2 O, can increase the hole concentration and enhance electrical conductivity (seen in Figure 10a,b). In addition, the carbonaceous material can decrease the thermal conductivity by strengthen the phonon scattering at grain boundaries, which is illustrated in Figure 10d, the thermal conductivity measurement is displayed in Figure 10c. Thus, from Figure 10e, an overall enhancement of ZT value can be observed in all grape juice 'doped' samples, and a good thermal stability can be observed in Figure 10f.  Si is also used as dopants in adjusting the TE performance of Cu 2 Se. Jingdan Lei et al. introduced SiC nanoparticles into Cu 2 Se matrix, obtaining a remarkable ZT value of 2.0 at 875 K [59]. Their samples are synthesized through mechanical alloying and SPS. The final pellets, as presented in Figure 11a-c-the FESEM and BSE images of the sample, are comprised of nanograins of sizes from tens to hundreds of nanometers, and the ball shaped SiC nanoparticles are invisible in this image, as a result of the low mass of SiC compared to the Cu 2 Se matrix, but a ball-shape can be seen in the region marked by yellow circles, indicating the existence of SiC nanoparticles, which is also supported by the ball shaped Si in the EDS images, shown in Figure 11f. The TE properties are displayed in Figure 12a-d, the enhancement in the TE properties is attributed to mainly two aspects: the decrease in the thermal conductivities and the increase in the electrical conductivities, and these two aspects both benefit from the introduction of nano-SiC particles. These nano-particles brings about the production of more defects like nanotwins, facilitating the liquid behavior of Cu + ions, i.e., those Cu + ions-the ion carrier-are more prone to move out of the lattice thus increasing the electrical conductivity, as can be observed in Figure 12c. At the same time, the enhanced liquid behavior will contribute to a stronger phonon scattering. Plus, the dense grains and SiC nanoparticles are also perfect scattering centers for phonons of medium wavelength. Finally, the Cu 2 Se mixed with 0.05 wt% SiC nanoparticles achieves the highest ZT value of 2.0 at 875 K.  Dashed lines are results of previous work on pure Cu2Se, which is not included in this review [59].

(p3.1) A Sn doped Cu 2 Se is synthesized through melting, annealing and SPS by Trevor P. Bailey et al., and an enhanced ZT value of 1 is observed in sample Cu 2(1−x) Sn x Se at 823 K [60]. Sn 2− point defect and SnSe second phase both contribute to reducing thermal conductivity through strengthening phonon scattering. Though the TE performance of Sn doping is not as significant as C doping, Sn is one of the few elements discussed in this article that has a peculiar effect in chemically stabilizing the Cu 2 Se matrix at high temperatures and under a current by preventing Cu precipitation. The mechanism is: First, point defects formed by Sn atoms, which has a larger size than Cu atoms, play as physical and electrical barriers in hampering the migration of Cu atoms. Those point defects can cause distortion in the lattice blocking the pathway for Cu electromigration. Second, the SnSe second phase can also play a role in hindering Cu-ion transport. Chemical stability is one of the biggest barriers hindering Cu 2 Se from application, which will be talked about in the Analysis section. Similar study is also presented by F.S. Liu et al. [61]. In their study, through introducing SnSe into the Cu 2 Se matrix through vacuum melting and SPS, an enhanced ZT value of 1.41 at 823 K is obtained in (Cu 2 Se) 0.97 (SnSe) 0.03 sample.

(p3.2) Pb is also used in doping of Cu 2 Se to enhance the TE property. Zheng Zhu et al. synthesized Pb-doped Cu 1.98−x Pb x/2 Se by hydrothermal synthesis and hot-pressing, obtaining a ZT value of 1.52 at 973 K [50]. The microstructures show a highly aligned layered structure similar to Al doped Cu 2 Se samples. They draw the conclusion that, by Pb doping, the carrier concentration is decreased, and more point defects and interfaces are introduced into the matrix.
## (s4) Doping by VA Elements
(p4.0) Investigations on using VA elements as dopants are so few that the Bi is the only one we find. The Bi-doped α-Cu 2 Se (Cu 2-3x Bi x Se) synthesized through hydrothermal method and SPS by Wangwei Liao et al., shows a ZT value of 0.43 at 373 K [62]. Bi as an electron donor, can reduce the carrier concentration of Cu 2 Se from 4.1 × 10 20 to 2.0 × 10 20 cm −1 at a doping level of x = 0.006, but will increases the carrier concentration significantly if the Bi concentration is continually increased. This can be explained by the fact that at low Bi concentration, the incorporation of trivalent Bi 3+ ions can compensate for the Cu deficiency, then decrease the carrier concentration, but at high Bi doping levels, the low solubility of Bi in the Cu 2 Se matrix can regenerate Cu deficiencies thus the carrier concentration is increased. Hence, due to the reduced carrier concentration, the carrier thermal conductivity is reduced significantly and finally resulted in an enhanced figure of merit ZT value of 0.43 at 373 K.
## (s6) Doping by VIIA Group Elements
(p6.0) Doping by halogen elements seems to be less promising, as halogen ions usually possess an electrovalence of −1, which means a Cu + vacancy should be formed when one halogen atom is doped into the lattice replacing the site of a Se 2− ion. While the deficiency of Cu + has a significant reverse effect on the TE performance of Cu 2 Se [72,73] by increasing the thermal conductivity and reducing the Seebeck coefficient. Nevertheless, some achievements are still made in halogen doped samples, and some conflicts are quite interesting to be noted. Jingyi Wang et al. synthesized a series of Cu 2 Se 1−x I x through hydrothermal method and hot-pressing, obtaining a ZT value of 1.1 at 773 K, as shown in Figure 18d [74]. I − ions and Cu + vacancies introduced plenty of point defects into the lattice, resulting in an overall result of reduced thermal conductivity and enhanced electrical conductivity, as displayed in Figure 18a-c. While the case is different in Br and Cl doped samples. Though Cu deficiency can attribute to the increase of hole concentration [73], a significant decrease of hole concentration is observed in work of Tristan W. Day's group on Br-doped Cu 2 Se due to the donor nature of halogen elements, resulting in a decrease of electrical conductivity [75]. The same decrease of electrical conductivity is also observed in work of Minji Kim et al. on Cl-doping [76]. Moreover, a second phase of CuCl is observed in Cl doped samples, which played a significant role in reducing thermal conductivity by strengthening phonon scattering. With the existence of the second phase, a high ZT value of 0.6 is achieved at 620 K, twice of the undoped sample. However, no second phase is observed in Br or I doped samples. The second phase finding in Cl doped sample can be a promising approach to compensate for the negative effects brought by the unavoidable Cu deficiency. Nevertheless, an unexpected thermal instability is found at temperatures higher than 620 K, due to the low melting point of CuCl [76]. Even so, another discovery made by Huilin Liu et al. might be a way out [77]. In their study, Cu 2 Se was synthesized through SPS. A high ZT value of 2.3 is achieved at 400 K (shown in Figure 19) due to the phonon critical scattering during phase transition of materials possessing the nature of second-order phase transition. In a study of Br doped Cu 2 Se, Tristan W. Day et al. put forward that if the hole concentration in Cu 2 Se can be decreased to an appropriate concentration, the ZT value of Cu 2 Se can be increased to as high as 1.16 at 305 K theoretically [75]. Thus, halogen doped samples can still possible be made in near-room-temperature TE materials. 
