# Exploring the effectiveness of technology-based learning on the educational outcomes of undergraduate healthcare students: an overview of systematic reviews protocol

CorpusID: 227167990 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e9ed3aafc3a1a8f63049cea37d0a563323ebaae6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e9ed3aafc3a1a8f63049cea37d0a563323ebaae6)

Fields: Education, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) METHODS AND ANALYSIS
(p1.0) The OoSR is also known as an umbrella review or a systematic review of systematic reviews. It is a methodology that can be used to assist readers to work through the outcomes of related systematic reviews by collecting, disseminating, synthesising and harmonising its conclusions to guide practice. 44 One of the purpose of OoSR is to catalogue available research syntheses pertaining to the topic of technology-based education in healthcare and harmonising the evidence outcome for recommendation of practice and future research. Therefore, an OoSR protocol is required to cater to upcoming reports.
## (s5) Open access
(p5.0) (3) data collection and study appraisal, and (4) synthesis and finding. ROBIS is rated based on the judgement of the assessor either as low, high or unclear on each domain based on the signalling questions provided. The final judgement on the overall level of risk of bias will be made considering the results of the four domains. ROBIS has an acceptable level of validity and reliability. 83 Prior to the AMSTAR and ROBIS assessment, a pretest study will be carried out to evaluate the validity and reliability of the assessment tools. An inter-rater reliability is planned; where one researcher with experience in publishing overview, experience in using AMSTAR and experience providing training in conducting an overview study is considered as a gold-rater, while at least two inexperienced researchers in overview study will be recruited as comparison-raters. Articles that are accepted during the screening process will be sampled and randomly selected using a computer-generated application (https://www. randomizer. org/). At least 10% of the total included articles or 10 articles, whichever higher, will be selected for inter-rater reliability testing. The sample articles will be independently rated on AMSTAR by the gold-rater and the comparison-raters. The rating will then be compared and calculated for agreement in the percentage format and based on Cohen's kappa analysis. It is hypothesised that the rating should achieve an overall average of 80%. If the cut-off value is achieved, then, the rating of the remaining articles can be done independently by one rater. If not achieved, then, a discussion will be held between the raters to resolve any confusion and to reach a consensus, and additional training would also be provided. At that juncture, the remaining articles will be rated independently by one rater and verified thereafter. A concurrent validity will be conducted between these two tools (ie, AMSTAR and ROBIS) as none of the research team members are experienced in using ROBIS. All included articles will be selected to be tested for the concurrent validity. These two tools were previously used in unison and compared for reliability and construct validity. 83 
## (s7) DISCUSSION
(p7.0) An inestimable number of systematic reviews are available; over 40 000 systematic reviews are registered in the PROSPERO alone since its inception and more than a dozen systematic reviews are published daily. [90][91][92] This situation results in overwhelming numbers of available systematic reviews. Hence, OoSR can collect and synthesise the evidence as a whole to create concrete findings. 91 93 A similar situation is also observed with TBL. The rapid development of technology has contributed towards abundant technology development for education purposes and in turn has resulted in many systematic reviews produced pertaining to this topic. However, systematic reviews have limitations where some studies are too homogeneous or focused on a single aspect of either one type of population or a specific technology or outcome. Another drawback is that a certain level of skill is required to retrieve suitable and appropriate articles. Therefore, OoSR could facilitate educators to be quickly informed and to become on par with the current available evidences on a particular topic.
