# Relevance of the study of metabolic profiles in sheep and goat flock. Present and future: A review

CorpusID: 228844957 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a0e87d6af3b2b3fcfe1e0b9eb7decc9e55999dc9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a0e87d6af3b2b3fcfe1e0b9eb7decc9e55999dc9)

Fields: Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s2) Selecting the proper parameters for different profiles
(p2.0) When the clinical pathology is used contemporarily to the anamnesis, the physical examination and even other laboratory tests, (e.g. urine tests) it could be useful in establishing the initial reference range for a patient. In addition, it would help to formulate a list of problems, to rule out or confirm a diagnosis, to determine the prognosis, to plan treatment options and to monitor the response to treatment.

(p2.1) Usually, a ruminant chemistry panel includes, among others, several analytes and enzymes (Russell & Roussel, 2007): glucose, lactate, serum urea nitrogen (SUN), creatinine, electrolytes (sodium, chloride, and potassium), total carbon dioxide (TCO 2 ), hepatic enzymes (ALPalanine aminotransferase-and GGT -gamma-glutamyl transferase-), bilirubin, minerals (calcium, phosphorous, and magnesium), serum proteins (total protein and albumin), and muscle enzymes (CK -creatin kinase-and AST -aspartate aminotransferase-). In addition, AG (anion gap) and globulin concentration, can be determined, if not provided, by the calculation AG = (Na + + K + ) -(Cl -+ HCO 3 -) and the differences between total protein and albumin, respectively.
## (s8) Reference intervals in sheeps and goats
(p8.0) The concept of reference interval represents the normal values that should be found from a healthy animal (reference population) and is needed to interpret patients' results (Friedrichs et al., 2012).

(p8.1) It has been reported that reference intervals should be evaluated every 3-5 years (Ceriotti et al, 2009). In addition, evaluation is recommended when excessive false-positive and false-negative results are noted by clinicians and whenever there are significant changes in animal patient populations, preanalytical techniques, or analytical quality.
## (s10) Sampling theory
(p10.0) The interpretation of flock-based tests is different from interpreting laboratory tests for metabolites from individual animals (Oetzel, 2003). A review describes different theories (. establishment of cut-off values) and methodologies (i.e. sample size needed) to detect a specific disease . In general terms, most of the suggestions are made for bovine, thus the number of samplings significantly varies in comparison with ovine and caprine flocks, with a greater population. Nevertheless, there are some questions that, independently of the species, should be taken into account if we want to obtain reliable and reproducible data (Elbers et al., 1995):
