# Frequency-Hopping MIMO Radar-Based Communications: An Overview

CorpusID: 224705448 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44b5c0b05fad0ef04335af860582e2c1a2713528](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44b5c0b05fad0ef04335af860582e2c1a2713528)

Fields: Engineering, Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s1) B. Signal Model
(p1.0) The FH-MIMO radar is based on fast frequency hopping. Namely, each pulse is divided into H sub-pulses, also referred to as hops [14]. The centroid frequency of the transmitted signal changes randomly across hops and antennas, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Denote the radar bandwidth as B. By dividing the frequency band evenly into K sub-bands, each sub-band has the bandwidth of B/K. Out of the K centroid frequencies, M (< K) frequencies are selected to be the hopping frequencies per hop, one for each antenna. Let k hm denote the index of the sub-band selected by antenna m at hop h. To ensure the waveform orthogonality of FH-MIMO radar, the following constraints are imposed for the radar [23],
## (s2) III. OVERVIEW OF EXISTING SIGNALING STRATEGIES FOR FH-MIMO DFRC
(p2.0) Several signaling strategies have been specifically designed for FH-MIMO DFRC. Overall, the existing strategies can be categorized into two groups, one based on conventional phase modulations [10]- [13] and the other exploiting the diversity in frequency hopping [14]. In this section, the existing signaling strategies are first reviewed with their modulation and demodulation processing illustrated. Then the strategies are compared from various aspects.

(p2.1) A. Information Modulation 1) Phase Modulations: In [10], [11], phase shift keying (PSK) is introduced to FH-MIMO DFRC by embedding PSK phases into radar signals. More specifically, a constant phase

(p2.2) is the J-bit PSK constellation. In [12], the differential PSK (DPSK) is proposed to replace PSK, so as to reduce range sidelobes and out-ofband transmission. To further improve the spectral shape of the modulated radar signal, the continuous phase modulation (CPM) is introduced in FH-MIMO DFRC [13]. The underlying principle is that signals with smoother modulating phase correspond to lower out-of-band transmission.

(p2.3) 2) Hopping Frequency-based Modulation: In [14], the combinations of hopping frequencies are used to convey information bits, referred to as frequency hopping code selection (FHCS). As illustrated earlier, only M out of K sub-bands are selected each hop as hopping frequencies. Thus, there are C M K combinations of hopping frequencies, and the combinations can be employed to convey up to ⌊log 2 C M K ⌋ number of information bits per radar hop, where ⌊·⌋ rounds towards the negative infinity.

(p2.4) 3) Comparing Two Modulation Methods and Discussions: Both modulation methods will lead to changes to the original FH-MIMO radar system, but in a different manner. The phase modulations change the phases of radar signals, and the phases can severely vary over antennas and hops, depending on the information bits to be sent. In contrast, FHCS leaves the phases unaltered but changes the hopping frequencies over hops. A windfall of the phase modulations is that the periodic spikes in the sidelobe regions of the range ambiguity function are suppressed, which will be explained shortly. This beneficial feature is not shared by FHCS-modulated waveform which has similar range ambiguity function to the original radar waveform, since both waveforms are essentially based on randomly selected hopping frequencies. Nevertheless, a prominent advantage of FHCS over phase modulations is the reduced complexity in information demodulation and the improved robustness against channel estimation errors, as will be illustrated in Section III-B. Fig. 3 compares the range ambiguity functions of an FH-MIMO radar under different modulations. We see the aforementioned spikes in both the original radar waveform and the FHCS-modulated one. These spikes are attributed to the reuse of sub-bands as hopping frequencies over hops; refer to [10] for an in-depth analysis. We also see from Fig. 3 that  the sidelobe spikes are suppressed by the BPSK modulation. This is because BPSK scrambles the phases of the original radar waveform over hops and antennas, hence preventing the coherent accumulation in the sidelobe regions of the range ambiguity function.
## (s3) B. Information Demodulation
(p3.0) We proceed to describe the methods that demodulate the information embedded in radar signals. As seen from (4), the signals transmitted by different antennas of the radar transmitter are superimposed in the time domain. Nevertheless, based on the waveform orthogonality as depicted in (2), the signals can be separated in the frequency domain. The L-

(p3.1) where P = 1 is taken as in prior works [10]- [16] and δ(l) is the Dirac delta function. The noise term is dropped for illustration convenience. 1) FHCS Demodulation: Based on Y h (l), an FHCS symbol can be readily demodulated by identifying the peaks in the magnitude of Y h (l). The indexes of the peaks result in the estimated set of {l * hm ∀m}. Based on the relation between l * hm and k hm given in (5), we can obtain the combination of hopping frequencies used in the radar hop. The estimated combination is then used to demodulate the FHCS symbol.

(p3.2) 2) PSK Demodulation: Given the simple signal model, PSK is used to illustrate the demodulation of the phase modulation-based signaling schemes; while DPSK and CPM can be demodulated similarly. Provided k hm is known by the UE, l * hm is then obtained based on (5). Extract the value of

(p3.3) Provided that channel parameters are known, we can suppress β 0 e −jmu0 and demodulate the PSK symbol ̟ hm . Note that (I1) is applied to obtain (5) from (4) so that inter-hop and inter-antenna interferences are avoided. To this end, both FHCS and PSK demodulations implicitly apply (I1), since the demodulations are performed based on (5). As for (I2) and (I3), they are not required for FHCS demodulation and are explicitly used in the PSK demodulation.

(p3.4) Note that none of the information (I1)-(I3) is easy to acquire in practice. For the first two information (I1) and (I2), a specific synchronization link may be required to establish between the radar and UE. Such a link can make the radar require extra resources, e.g., hardware and frequency etc. More specifically, an extra antenna and correspondingly RF chain can be required for synchronization, since the existing antennas of the radar transmitter are fully occupied for radar detection. Besides, a different frequency band (from the original radar operating frequency) can be required to establish the synchronization link so as to reduce the mutual interference between radar and communications. The acquisition of the third information (I3) is subject to that of the first two, since inter-antenna and inter-hop interference will be incurred without an accurate timing. 
## (s4) C. Comparing Signaling Schemes for FH-MIMO DFRC
(p4.0) The aforementioned signaling schemes are compared in terms of their impact on radar performance, their communication performance and the necessary information for demodulation. The comparison is summarized in Table I. Note that the radar ambiguity functions and spectral containment of the signaling schemes have been comprehensively compared in [15]. The data rates of different schemes are provided in the works [10]- [14]. Yet, the necessary information is overlooked in most of the existing works which consider ideally known (I1)-(I3).

(p4.1) We notice that DPSK demodulation does not require (I2) in quasi-static channels, since the channel response is suppressed in the differential processing [12]. In contrast to phase modulation-based schemes, FHCS does not require (I2) or (I3), since it pursues to estimate (I2) from the magnitude of the frequency-domain signal, as illustrated in Section III-B1. Strictly speaking, FHCS can be demodulated without requiring (I1), provided that the timing offset is small. However, interhop and inter-antenna interferences are introduced given a nonzero timing offset, which consequently degrades the demodulation performance of FHCS. As will be shown in Section IV-C, the demodulation performance of FHCS has a significant impact on that of PSK. To this end, accurate timing is still desired for FHCS to attain a high communication performance of FH-MIMO DFRC.
## (s8) C. Performance Illustration
(p8.0) Numerical results are provided here to demonstrate the high estimation performance of the method elaborated on above. Fig. 5 plots the mean squared error (MSE) of the estimated channel parameters against the SNR, as measured based on (4) and denoted by γ 0 below. To evaluate the MSE ofû 0 , N = 2 × 10 4 independent trials are performed, and the MSE is calculated by N −1 n=0 (û 0 (n) − u 0 ) 2 /N , whereû 0 (n) is an estimate of u 0 and is obtained in the n-th independent trial. The MSE ofβ 0 is calculated similarly. Based on [27], the Cramér-Rao lower bound (CRLB) of u 0 estimation is given by 3/(π 2 M Lγ 0 ).

(p8.1) We see from Fig. 5 that the MSEs of bothû 0 andβ 0 monotonically increase with the SNR. In particular, the MSE ofû 0 approaches the CRLB when the SNR exceeds 6 dB, which validates the high accuracy of the estimation method provided in Section IV-B2. A noticeable gap exists between the MSE ofû 0 and the CRLB. This is caused by the threshold effect when detecting the DFT peak for a coarse u 0 estimate. Please refer to [27] for more details on this effect.  We see from Fig. 6 that, with either the estimated k hm or its true value, the SER performance of BPSK achieved based on the estimated channel parameters approaches the performance under the ideally known channels. This again validates the high accuracy of the channel estimation method. We also see from the figure that, employing the estimated channel parameters, FHCS outperforms BPSK w.r.t the SER against E b /N 0 , which owes to the improved data rate of FHCS over BPSK. Since the combination of FHCS and BPSK further improves the data rate, the SER performance of the combination is improved over those of the individual modulations.

(p8.2) We further see from Fig. 6 that the k hm has a much stronger impact on the SER of BPSK compared with the channel parameters β 0 and u 0 . To achieve the SER of 10 −4 , using the true value of k hm can reduce the required E b /N 0 by 5 dB, compared with using the estimated k hm . On one hand, this observation indicates that the final SER performance of FH-MIMO DFRC should be carefully analyzed after taking the detection performance of k hm into account, as discussed in Section III-C. On the other hand, this observation strongly suggests that new methods should be developed to improve the estimation performance of k hm .
## (s12) C. Multi-Path Channel
(p12.0) Thus far, only the LoS-dominated AWGN channel is considered for FH-MIMO DFRC. As discussed in Section II-A, it can be practical to consider the LoS channel for some scenarios, such as the G2A communications between a ground-based radar and an HAP; see Fig. 1. However, as also illustrated in the figure, multi-path fading can happen in FH-MIMO DFRC, when the airborne UE, e.g., UAV, flies at a low altitude. Under the multi-path fading, the signal transmitted by some antennas of the radar transmitter can be severely attenuated. Fig. 8 illustrates the signal attenuation caused by multipath fading by plotting |Y h (l)|, namely, the magnitude of the DFT of the UE-received signal within a radar hop, where Y h (l) is given in (5) and an accurate timing is assumed here. Based on the waveform design illustrated in Section IV-B1, the m-th DFT peak corresponds to the signal from antenna m (m = 0, 1, · · · , M − 1). We see from the figure that a severe attenuation of the signal transmitted by antenna three is observed on the first UE antenna. Performing the method elaborated in Section IV-B1 to detect the hopping frequency, we see from the left subfigure in Fig. 8 that the hopping frequency of the third antenna is incorrectly detected. This incorrect detection will lead to incorrect demodulation of not only hopping frequency-based modulations, e.g., FHCS, but also phase-based modulations, e.g., PSK. For the later modulation, the signal used for demodulation is extracted based on the identified indexes of the DFT peaks.

(p12.1) A viable solution to combating the multi-path fading in FH-MIMO DFRC is equipping the UE with multiple antennas and hence exploit the antenna diversity. This is demonstrated in Fig. 8. The left subfigure also plots the magnitude of the DFT of the signal received by another UE antenna. Clearly, the multi-fading attenuation of the signal transmitted by the third antenna is greatly relieved. By combining the signals of the two antennas incoherently, the sum signal can be used to detect the hopping frequency more reliably; see the right subfigure in Fig. 8. It is worth mentioning that improving the detecting performance of the hopping frequencies also substantially benefits to the SER performance of demodulating phase-based modulations, as demonstrated in Fig. 6. With the benefits of using multi-antenna receivers at the UE recognized, we should also bear in mind that effective signal reception also relies on the accurate estimation of timing offset and channel parameters. These practical issues have not been properly addressed for a single-antenna receiver yet, not to mention multi-antenna configurations.
