# MOOCs Acceptance and Use in Higher Education Institutions through UTAUT2: An Overview

CorpusID: 229541102 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/443e4b25e4fda2cb232e86f43554cdbba53f935f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/443e4b25e4fda2cb232e86f43554cdbba53f935f)

Fields: Education, Political Science, Computer Science

## (s3) Model of Acceptance and Use
(p3.0) UTAUT's theory has high reliability and validity because of the combination of eight models describing behavioural use in information systems and assessed from employee perceptions (Im et al. 2011). Meanwhile, UTAUT2 theory possess a high level of reliability when assessed from user context (Venkatesh et al. 2012). The finding of an empirical study on the acceptance and use of MOOC using the UTAUT2 model shows intention to join in MOOCs intercedes the relationship among Habit and MOOC Actual Usage (Limayem et al. 2007). This study uses a structural equation model approach (SEM) to test UTAUT2 models and hypothesis relationships between UTAUT2 ideas. The implication of this study shows that MOOC designers need to be more sensitive and ready to design interesting and easy-to-use learning applications. The most important learning environment should be in line with the advancement of Web 2.0 technology (Limayem et al. 2007).
## (s4) UTAUT2 Model
(p4.0) Unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) developed by Venkatesh et al. (2003) explained factors affecting acceptance and use of technology. According to Venkatesh et al. (2003), UTAUT developed as combination of eight models that are predominantly utilized in earlier examinations for clarifying acceptance and use of new technology. These eight models and theories include Theory of Reasoned Action ( (Venkatesh et al. 2003). Figure 2 shows the extended theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT2) proposed by Venkatesh et al. (2012) 
## (s5) Performance Expectancy
(p5.0) Performance expectancy can be defined as the degree to which an individual believes that using the system will help him or her to attain gains in job performance (Venkatesh et al. 2003). Online learning like MOOC allows students to access learning materials from courses that they are participating and delivering completed tasks online. Performance expectancy expected to be one of the most important factors that directly influence the acceptance intention (Decman, 2015).
## (s7) Social Influence
(p7.0) Social influence is the degree to which an individual perceives that important people believe they should use the new system (Sumak et al. 2010). Social influence is a direct determinant of behavioural intention (Venkatesh et al. 2003). In this context, social influence defined as a stage of a student who believes that the individual who is important for the student should use the MOOC.
## (s8) Facilitating Conditions
(p8.0) Facilitating conditions can be defined as the degree to which an individual believes that an organizational and technical infrastructure exists to support the use of the system (Venkatesh et al. 2003). Facilitating conditions is an environmental factor for an action to be easy (Mazman & Usluel, 2010). A user who has access to a favourable set of facilitating conditions, such as online courses as MOOC will have a greater intention to use.
## (s9) Hedonic Motivation
(p9.0) Hedonic Motivation can be defined as the fun or pleasure derived from using a technology (Vander-Heijden 2004). Hedonic motivation plays an important role in determining the acceptance and use of a technology (Venkatesh et al. 2012). In this study, hedonic motivation refers to students who use the MOOC in learning and find it enjoying, fun and entertaining. Therefore, students become motivated to learn the topics through MOOC and these students tend to continue to use the MOOC.
## (s10) Price Value
(p10.0) Price value is the consumers' cognitive trade-off between the perceived benefits of using mobile banking services and the monetary cost of using it (Venkatesh et al. 2012). It includes factors such as data service carriers cost, device cost, service cost, and transaction fee, where appropriate. The price value is positive when the benefits of using the technology perceived to be greater than the associated monetary cost.
## (s11) Habit
(p11.0) Habit can be defined as the extent to which individuals tend to behave automatically because of the learning gained from experience using certain technologies (Venkatesh et al. 2012). According to (Davis and Venkatesh 2004), habit known as the determinants of behavioural intentions. Research in the Information System (ICT) indicates that habit has a significant impact on the behavioural intention of using a technology (Lee at al. 2014). Habit affects the intention of behaviour towards the acceptance and use of user technologies, such as MOOC. Habit can be measured through the extent in which individual beliefs in behaviour and actions change into a habit (Limayem et al. 2007).
