# Low-cost Technological Strategies for Smallholders Sustainability: A Review

CorpusID: 225868419 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d5688185aba8531225b0b11fba535cc651798a43](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d5688185aba8531225b0b11fba535cc651798a43)

Fields: Computer Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Engineering, Business, Environmental Science

## (s3) Technological strategies of natural resource management
(p3.0) Understanding dynamic interaction between agricultural ecosystems, use of resources and climate allows to define technological strategies for natural resource management (water, soil and biodiversity) to obtain a balance between productivity and sustainability.

(p3.1) Digital technologies allow automatic data collection of the environment, soil, fertilization, irrigation, and crop development (Balafoutis et al., 2017). With data, it is possible to use the natural resources of the agroecosystem intelligently, improve the adaptation to the variability of climatic conditions and increase the agricultural potential. Remote monitoring technologies support the adaptation of agricultural practices (i.e. fertilization, irrigation, fumigation) in order to optimize the production costs and improve the quality of products (Dorigo et al., 2007;Jin et al., 2018).
## (s5) Technological strategies for sustainable growth
(p5.0) Technological strategies focused on promoting sustainable growth in rural areas promote the strengthening of the skills, human and social capital of farmers to expand sustainability and boost agricultural economies. Agricultural software ecosystems uses technological tools in the massive generation of a variety of data that are collected and analyzed to be used in the planning and analysis of the strategic decisions (Kruize et al., 2016). In (Musat et al., 2018) the authors stated that software tools support the operation of collaborative systems permitting to the smallholders producers to efficiently manage their crops, and they also facilitate the interaction with other agricultural agents and actors in the sector. The software platforms carry out the data collection and given the opportunity to send notifications to other producers in case of generalized problems, or if they are issues of common interest for the agricultural community.

(p5.1) A particular case is (Jiménez-Brenes et al., 2017) where the application of UAV was described to evaluate the pruning techniques in olive trees and analyze their impact on harvest, nutrition, pest control, and diseases. These strategies allow the strengthening knowledge of the producers and reinforce the sustainability of the crops through evaluation and validation of the field practices.

(p5.2) Technological strategies for sustainable growth look to boost agricultural economies through the exchange of data and knowledge between different actors in the sector, the strengthening of rural communities and the evaluation of field practices. In this sense, the technologies should provide innovative solutions with high social and economically viable impact.

(p5.3) Technological strategies for sustainable growth look to boost agricultural economies through the exchange of data and knowledge between different actors in the sector, the strengthening of rural communities and the evaluation of field practices. In this sense, the technologies should provide innovative solutions with high social and economically viable impact.
