# Viburnum opulus L.-A Review of Phytochemistry and Biological Effects

CorpusID: 226296054 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/425290343d3455a3a6bd5df5804553306fafeed3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/425290343d3455a3a6bd5df5804553306fafeed3)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Botanical Characteristics
(p1.0) VO is the most popular variety in Europe, with the exception of the northern ends of the Scandinavian Peninsula and the southern ends of the Iberian, Apennine, and Balkan Peninsulas [9,17]. In addition, two others varieties such as V. opulus var. americanum Aiton growing in North America and V. opulus var. sargentii (Koehne) Takeda native to Korea, Northern China, and Japan have been recognized as the same species [33].

(p1.1) VO is a fast-growing, up to 4-5 m height, deciduous shrub. Its leaves are opposite, three-lobed, with a rounded base and coarsely serrated margins ( Figure 1A). On the top, they are naked and dark green, while underneath they are lighter, slightly hairy with star-shaped hairs. The leaves develop together with the flowers and then turn discolored into scarlet-purple.  The white flowers are produced in corymbs 4-11 cm in diameter at the top of the stems. Each bloom is composed of an outer ring of large sterile flowers (1.5-2.5 cm in diameter) and an inner ring of tiny fertile ones (4-5 mm) ( Figure 1B). The flowers bloom in late spring, and are pollinated by insects [17]. The decorative cultivar "Roseum" (synonym "Sterile", "Snowball") has only sterile type of flowers that give the appearance of snowballs ( Figure 1C).
## (s3) Antioxidative Components
(p3.0) Plants are known as a natural source of different compounds with antioxidant properties such as ascorbic acid (vitamin C), α-tocopherol (vitamin E), carotenoids, chlorophylls, and phenolic compounds [57]. Antioxidants may protect human cells from reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) generation of which is exacerbated under pathological conditions in different ways. Antioxidants can convert free radicals into non-radical compounds, break the chain reaction of lipid oxidation, inhibit pro-oxidative enzymes and chelate metal ions, among others. So, antioxidants present in the diet may have a significant effect on the prophylaxis and progression of various diseases associated with oxidative stress.
## (s5) Antioxidative Effect
(p5.0) Reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced intracellularly act as subcellular messengers in signal transduction pathways or as a part of the cell defense mechanism [68]. However, their excessive production can result in damage of many molecules, including protein and lipid peroxidation, DNA strand breaks, and RNA modifications, which further generate intracellular oxidative stress. The alteration of intracellular homeostasis manifests with cell dysfunction, metabolic failure, and finally, cellular death induction. The intake of exogenous antioxidants, such as vitamins C and E, phenolic compounds, and natural plant pigments, may support the antioxidative defense [69].
## (s7) Effect on Carbohydrates Metabolism
(p7.0) Chronic elevation of postprandial hyperglycemia manifests the irregularity in glucose metabolism related to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Because increased blood glucose concentration leads to oxidative stress generation, insulin resistance induction, and tissue damage, therefore there is a need for finding phytocompounds with hypoglycemic activity. Inhibition of carbohydrateor oligosaccharide-hydrolyzing enzymes can be beneficial in lowering the postprandial glucose concentration. Among the digestive enzymes, the hydrolysis of internal 1,4-glycosidic linkages of starch to maltose, maltotriose, or dextrins is performed by α-amylase, whereas α-glucosidase catalyzes glucose release from disaccharides and oligosaccharides. A screening study with cell-free assay identified VO fruits acetone extract as able to inhibit pancreas α-amylase with IC 50 between 0.97 and 2.19 mg/mL, depending on the type of assay performed [20]. Simultaneously, IC 50 for the inhibition of α -glucosidase was equal to 4.05 mg/mL.

(p7.1) On the other hand, the blood glucose level is strongly influenced by glucose transport and absorption in the small intestine by membrane-integrated transporters. An in vitro study demonstrated that phenolic-rich fraction obtained from VO fresh fruit juice at 50 µg/mL dose decreased the uptake of fluorescent glucose analogue 2-(N-(7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazol-4-yl)amino)-2-deoxyglucose (2-NBDG) by human adenocarcinoma Caco-2 cells by almost 20% [21]. Methanol-acetone extract from VO fruit pomace had lower efficacy and decreased 2-NBDG uptake by circa 10%. Glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2) is the main protein involved in intestinal bi-directional glucose transport across the enterocyte membrane. However, the further study demonstrated no influence of VO extract on GLUT2 mRNA level [21]. That observation allowed authors to suppose that phenolic constituents might act as an inhibitor of GLUT2 protein rather, which in turn will decrease the absorption of glucose released from the meal.

(p7.2) In the regulation of blood glucose level in the human body insulin is involved, which is secreted by pancreatic cells after the elevation of glucose concentration. The effect of VO fruit juice on pancreatic β-cells activity was also evaluated [22]. Cell-based studies demonstrated that VO fresh juice and juice enriched with phenolics at 75 and 50 µg/mL dose, respectively, decreased glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) in mouse MIN-6 cells by 20-35% ( Figure 2). Moreover, both preparations increased insulin secretion (by 10-15%) at low glucose concentration. These results suggested that VO could be involved in insulin resistance development, it may deepen insulin insufficiency, decrease glucose uptake by peripheral tissues, and elevate hyperglycemia. Authors proposed that observed in vitro GSIS inhibition resulted from the direct influence of extract constituents on cellular membranes-they observed the decrease of MIN-6 membrane fluidity and its hyperpolarization, which in turn inhibited insulin release. On the other hand, the corresponding dose of VO samples elevated secretion of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) by enterocytic GLUTag cells in the presence of 20 mM glucose. That protein is an incretin hormone, which after binding to its receptor (GLP1R) stimulates insulin secretion from β-cells. Results demonstrated that VO samples increased the life time of GLP-1 peptide by direct inhibition of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP4) enzyme, which is responsible for the fast degradation of GLP-1 activity. In the presence of VO, the activity of DPP4 was decreased by 40%. Therefore, despite the potential side effect of VO on the GSIS process, the other extract properties could be helpful to obtain normalized glucose concentration. Still, it needs to be emphasized that VO samples intensified free fatty acids uptake and lipids accumulation in MIN-6 cells cultured in the presence of an elevated concentration of palmitic acid. These observations may contribute to the potentially lipotoxic effects of VO leading to β-cells dysfunction and death. Another enzyme-protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP-1B)-is also involved in glucose cellular uptake regulation. This protein dephosphorylates insulin receptor (IR) and insulin receptor substrate IRS-1 disrupting the insulin signaling pathway. Thus, PTP-1B inhibitors are thought to increase the insulin sensitivity. A chemical-based study revealed that VO fruit acetone extract was a strong inhibitor of PTP-1B with IC50 equal to 0.15 mg/mL [20].
## (s8) Effect on Lipid Metabolism
(p8.0) Disturbance of homeostasis of lipid metabolism and lack of physical activity often leads to overweight, obesity, and type 2 diabetes. To approach the decrease of fatty acids absorption, inhibition of enzymes involved in fat digestion could be used. Pancreatic lipase splits triglycerides into absorbable monoacylglycerols and fatty acids in the intestinal lumen. It was demonstrated that acetone extract from dried VO fruits and isolated phenolic compounds inhibited the pancreatic lipase activity with IC50 equal to 11.5 and 3.3 mg/mL, respectively [23]. Moreover, isolated phenolics demonstrated synergistic action with orlistat, the known clinically approved lipase inhibitor. On the other hand, the juice obtained from fresh fruits was able to inhibit lipase activity by 50% at 262 mg/mL concentration, whereas IC50 for its isolated phenolics was equal to 55 mg/mL [24]. It can be concluded that extract obtained from dried plant material, which was more active against lipase, contained other bioactive compounds produced during the drying process of fruits.

(p8.1) So far, there is no study demonstrating direct VO influence on weight gaining during in vivo studies, therefore the presented review focuses mainly on cell-based studies. It is known that dietary fatty acids are mainly absorbed and transported to the circulation from intestine using protein Another enzyme-protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP-1B)-is also involved in glucose cellular uptake regulation. This protein dephosphorylates insulin receptor (IR) and insulin receptor substrate IRS-1 disrupting the insulin signaling pathway. Thus, PTP-1B inhibitors are thought to increase the insulin sensitivity. A chemical-based study revealed that VO fruit acetone extract was a strong inhibitor of PTP-1B with IC 50 equal to 0.15 mg/mL [20].
## (s9) Effect on Lipid Metabolism
(p9.0) Disturbance of homeostasis of lipid metabolism and lack of physical activity often leads to overweight, obesity, and type 2 diabetes. To approach the decrease of fatty acids absorption, inhibition of enzymes involved in fat digestion could be used. Pancreatic lipase splits triglycerides into absorbable monoacylglycerols and fatty acids in the intestinal lumen. It was demonstrated that acetone extract from dried VO fruits and isolated phenolic compounds inhibited the pancreatic lipase activity with IC 50 equal to 11.5 and 3.3 mg/mL, respectively [23]. Moreover, isolated phenolics demonstrated synergistic action with orlistat, the known clinically approved lipase inhibitor. On the other hand, the juice obtained from fresh fruits was able to inhibit lipase activity by 50% at 262 mg/mL concentration, whereas IC 50 for its isolated phenolics was equal to 55 mg/mL [24]. It can be concluded that extract obtained from dried plant material, which was more active against lipase, contained other bioactive compounds produced during the drying process of fruits.

(p9.1) So far, there is no study demonstrating direct VO influence on weight gaining during in vivo studies, therefore the presented review focuses mainly on cell-based studies. It is known that dietary fatty acids are mainly absorbed and transported to the circulation from intestine using protein transporters, mainly protein known as cluster of differentiation 36/fatty acid translocase (CD36/FAT). VO fruit phenolics (50 µg/mL) decreased CD36/FAT mRNA expression level in Caco-2 cells treated with elevated concentration of palmitic acid [21]. Additionally, the uptake of free fatty acid fluorescent analogue TF2-C12 by enterocytes, as well as the accumulation and size of lipid droplets, was downregulated in cells by at least 10%.

(p9.2) Obesity is characterized by the accumulation of excess fat in adipose tissue and results from enhanced development of preadipocytes into adipocytes, known as adipogenesis. Under in vitro conditions it manifests by the increased ability of adipocytes to accumulate triacylglycerol in cytosolic lipid droplets. The phenolic extract obtained from VO-dried fruits at 75 µg/mL reduced lipid content in differentiated mice 3T3-L1 adipocytes by 22% [23]. Research also revealed no influence of VO phenolics on adiponectin, the key regulator of insulin sensitivity. However, the downregulation of leptin, concentration of which is increased in obesity, was observed. Fresh juice and juice purified by solid-phase extraction enriched with phenolics also inhibited adipogenesis at doses equal to 100 and 25 µg/mL, respectively [24]. In this case, samples also decreased the uptake of free fatty acids (by circa 10%) and activated the lipolysis process (by 20%) leading to the breakdown of accumulated triacylglycerol to fatty acids and glycerol. Purified by the SPE method VO juice increased the expression of adiponectin mRNA and secreted protein (25%), and at the same time decreased leptin secretion by 20%. In both of the presented studies, the importance of phenolic compounds as inhibitors of adipogenesis is postulated.

(p9.3) The study of Zakłos-Szyda et al. revealed the molecular mechanism involved in adipogenesis inhibition induced in cells incubated with VO [24]. It is known that the major adipogenesis regulator is peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ), which belongs to the nuclear receptors family. After ligand binding to the PPAR-γ domain, the conformational change and switching of nuclear receptor corepressors to coactivators occur. After agonists binding, the PPAR-γ receptor connects with retinoid X receptor, and as a heterodimer translocates to peroxisome proliferator responsive element (PPRE) within the promoter of target genes responsible for adipogenesis and activates their transcription. Other important proteins cooperating with PPAR-γ receptor are sterol regulatory element binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c) and (C/EBP). VO samples impaired the differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells via downregulation of the key adipocyte differentiation regulatory genes mRNA and protein levels by at least 30% ( Figure 3). Furthermore, the mRNA level of fatty acid synthase (FAS) involved in the synthesis of long-chain fatty acids, CD36/FAT transporter, and acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) catalyzing the synthesis of the malonyl-CoA, was downregulated by 55.6 and 25%, respectively.
## (s11) Osteogenic Activity
(p11.0) One of the unwanted symptoms related to obesity is chronic inflammation, which in turn induces the osteoclastogenesis process leading to bone tissue demineralization and osteoporosis [98]. It was reported that VO juice and isolated phenolics increased the mineralization of the extracellular matrix of human osteogenic Saos-2 cells (Figure 4) [25]. Stronger osteogenesis potential revealed purified phenolic extract, which at 25 µg/mL dose increased alkaline phosphatase activity by 35%. This enzyme is involved in matrix calcification and mineralized nodules formation. After cell treatment, the increase of mRNA level of the Runt-related transcription factor (RUNX2) was observed. RUNX2 is the major osteogenesis regulator, which binds to osteoblast specific cis-acting element (OSE) in the promoter region of the major osteoblast bone matrix protein genes and controls their expression [103]. As was shown osteogenic differentiation markers related to matrix mineralization, such as collagen type 1 and osteonectin, were elevated at the transcription level in cells treated with phenolics isolated from VO. Purified phenolic extract also decreased the receptor activator of nuclear factor-kB ligand (RANKL) mRNA level, therefore preventing its binding with the receptor present in osteoclast, and osteoclastogenesis.
## (s12) Influence on Blood Vessels Activity
(p12.0) In the inflammation state and blood pressure regulation, angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE I) is also involved. This protein converts the angiotensin I into the potent vasoconstricting angiotensin II and degrades bradykinin, a potent vasodilator inhibitor [104]. Therefore inhibitors of ACE I play an important role in the regulation of blood pressure and fluid and electrolyte balance. Performed cell-free screening identified ethanolic extract of VO fruits as a weak inhibitor of ACE I, where dose 0.1 mg/mL decreased the enzyme activity by 5.1%. For comparison, ethanol extract from bark had no effect on ACE I activity.

(p12.1) Bujor et al. reported that VO fruit extract showed vasorelaxant activity in phenylephrine precontracted rat aortic rings with concentration giving half-maximal relaxation equal to 6.31 µg/mL [32]. Moreover, VO at 71.02 µg/mL inhibited the activity of arginase enzyme by 50%. This hydrolyzes L-arginine to L-ornithine and urea and is implicated in the regulation of nitric oxide (NO) synthesis by limiting the availability of intracellular L-arginine for nitric oxide synthase (NOS), and attenuates smooth muscle relaxation. The authors proposed VO fruit extract usage as a remedy in diseases associated with endothelial dysfunction and impaired vasodilation.

(p12.2) Studies performed on human umbilical endothelial cells (HUVECs) demonstrated a lack of the toxic effect of VO fruit juice or purified fruit juice rich in phenolic compounds (100 and 25 µg/mL, respectively) on the metabolic activity of cells [25]. Samples had no effect on the secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which is involved in angiogenesis and may promote the healing of injured tissue.
## (s13) Effect on Urinary System and the Endometriosis
(p13.0) So far, the VO effect on urinary system is the most efficiently investigated. Nephrolithiasis, known also as urolithiasis, is a kidney stone disease that develops in the urinary tract. A study performed on the Wistar rats with sodium oxalate-induced urolithiasis demonstrated that lyophilized ethanol extract obtained from VO fruits and juice, administrated orally in dose 100 mg/mL, induced a diuretic effect and reduced the level of oxalate, the main constituent of the stones [30]. This was followed by elevation of kidney glutathione and total thiols parameters, as well as the reduction of lipid peroxidation and thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS). Similar studies were conducted with other ethanol-acetic, methanol, and n-hexane extracts obtained from VO fruits. They showed less potent anti-urolithiatic properties than ethanolic extract. Moreover, a histopathological study identified the most irregularly shaped calculus fragments in kidney tissue after the animals were treated with ethanol-acetic preparation. Erdem and co-workers evaluated the effects of VO fruit ethanol extract on nephrolithiasis in the Spraque-Dawley rats model [31]. The authors showed that oral administration of both 0.5 and 1 mL of the extract at a concentration of 10 mg/mL to rats for five days a week during a one-month period had a beneficial effect on the urinary system. VO fruit extract increased the urine volume and urine citrate levels, decreased urine cystine and oxalate levels, and lowered the crystal deposits in kidney tissue, and also prevented oxidant damage and crystal formation in kidney tissue. Other studies also demonstrated VO as useful in the treatment of mild to moderate level hypocitraturic stone disease [105]. Juice obtained from fruit kept in brine water for a month was used as a source of bioactive components, which has a comparable level of citrate to lemon juice. Authors suggested VO juice usage as an alternative pharmaceutical treatment method in this disease, however, there were no details presented about the used treatment.

(p13.1) Recent retrospective research performed on human subjects presented a positive effect of VO on patients with distal ureteral stones with a diameter of <10 mm [106]. It was evaluated that after treatment with diclofenac and 1000 mg of VO extract (peroral 3 x 2 on-demand) the elapsed time to stone expulsion was significantly shorter than in the group treated with diclofenac only. Additionally, in VO group the rate of stone expulsion was significantly higher and the need for additional treatment (ureteroscopy or extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy) and the analgesic requirement was lower. Despite these positive results, it needs to be mentioned that among 53 patients involved in the trial and assigned to VO treatment, five patients developed dyspeptic complaints with upper abdominal pain. There was also evidence about the induction of severe abdominal pain and acute pancreatitis in a 38-years old male patient with urolithiasis, who drank 2 glasses of VO extract water daily for 4 days [107].

(p13.2) In addition to the above mentioned VO therapeutic potential against urolithiasis, the inhibition of chemical painful stimuli and antinociceptive potential was also demonstrated [6]. Water extract obtained from VO air-dried and powdered leaves at 100 and 200 mg/mL doses inhibited the acetic acid-inducted abdominal stretching response in the Swiss albino mice by 57% and 63%, respectively. The Tail-flick test with radiant heat as stimuli exhibited an antinociceptive effect similar to that of the morphine group at the 90th min, whereas the maximal effect in pain reduction (62%) was obtained for 200 mg/kg dose after 150th min.

(p13.3) Because of the uterine relaxant and antispasmodic properties, VO bark is used as a traditional medicine in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome to reduce menstrual fluid volume and decrease the pain associated with uterine contractions [55,108]. Yet, there are no trials evaluating its efficacy in this regard. Nonetheless, a recent study demonstrated VO fruit potential in the treatment of endometriosis manifesting by the presence of endometrial tissue outside the uterine cavity with commonly occurring pelvic pain [109]. In vivo studies performed on the Sprague Dawley rats with induced endometriosis by uterine tissue auto-transplantation were treated with extracts obtained from air-dried fruits at dose 100 mg/kg for 28 days. Among the studied samples the ethyl acetate and methanol extracts decreased the sizes of endometric implants and their adhesion the most effectively. The decrease of inflammation was also observed-after VO treatment the TNF-α, VEGF, and IL-6 levels were reduced. Since both extracts were rich with chlorogenic acid (its concentration in methanol extract was three-folds higher than after extraction with ethyl acetate), authors attributed the observed activity to chlorogenic acid.
## (s14) Anti-Cancer Activity
(p14.0) Because of the lower adverse side effects in the prevention and therapy of cancer the phytochemicals are gaining more attention. So far there are only a few studies proving the anticancer properties of VO with animal subjects. A study performed by Ulger et al. demonstrated the protective effect of VO juice against 1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH)-induced colon cancer in the Balb-c mice [110]. Juice administration after tumor induction (for 18 weeks) and simultaneously with the chemical inducer (for 30 weeks) reduced tumor lesion and sufficiently downregulated the progress of established tumors in both cases. However, treatment with juice was not able to prevent the induction of colon cancer. In another study, juice of VO fresh fruits (1, 2, and 4 mg/kg) displayed antitumor activity in the Balb/c mice with intraperitoneal inoculation of Ehrlich ascites carcinoma (EAC) cells [111]. The Ehrlich tumor belongs to a rapidly growing and aggressive carcinoma. Histopathological findings demonstrated that in animals treated with the highest dose of juice the liver, colon, small bowel, and kidney had no pathological changes, therefore the metastasis was not observed. Because VO treatment elevated SOD and CAT activities authors associated the observed effect with the antioxidant potential of juice constituents and cytotoxic activity against EAC cells, which was proved in in vitro study.
## (s15) Cytoprotective Properties
(p15.0) Cytoprotection is a process by which chemical compounds provide protection to cells against harmful agents. To understand the cytoprotective potential of phytocompounds there can be used cell-based assays or animal models. Because of the high content of phenolic compounds, as well as other components with antioxidative potential, VO revealed properties to neutralize or scavenge free radicals via chemical interaction with active molecules.

(p15.1) VO fruit juice, as well as isolated phenolic compounds (50-75 µg/mL), showed protective activity against oxidative stress generated by t-BOOH in human hepatoma HepG2, insulin secreting β-TC3 and MIN-6 cells, as well as partially restored their metabolic activity [20,22]. Other study identified neuroprotective activity of VO leaf methanol extract as inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase (AChE), which via degradation of acetylcholine is responsible for the development of Alzheimer's disease [75]. As it was demonstrated with cell-free assay, the 100 µg/mL dose inhibited AChE by almost 88%.

(p15.2) So far, there are some in vivo studies about antioxidant enzymes regulation by VO components. Zayachkivska et al. investigated the influence of proanthocyanidins isolated from air-dried VO fruits on gastrointestinal mucosal damage induced by water immersion and resistant stress in the Wistar albino rats [83]. The results showed that proanthocyanidins doses 25-75 mg/kg applied orally increased the activity of SOD, CAT, and GPx in gastric mucosa, as well as reduced the damage of the tissue in stressed animals, therefore can be used as gastroduodeno protective agents. In another study, the effect of VO-dried fruit components against ischemia-reperfusion induced oxidative stress during the lung transplantation in the Wistar rats was investigated [84]. In that study methanol extract obtained from air-dried and powdered fruits was administered intra peritoneally in a dose of 200 mg/kg to recipient and donor. In group with induced oxidative stress the SOD, CAT, GPx activities and total glutathione level were markedly lower, whereas VO treatment compensated this effect. Malondialdehyde level in the lung tissue, which corresponds to lipid peroxidation of cellular membranes, as well as level of plasma protein carbonyl, were reduced in rats treated with VO fruit extract. These findings indicated that VO can be used as therapeutic against oxidative stress during lung transplantation.

(p15.3) Sarıözkan et al. suggested that simultaneous consumption of VO-dried fruit water extract (100 mg/mL weekly) prevented and reduced the structural and functional damages in reproductive organs, tissues, and cells in the Wistar albino rats caused by taxane class chemotherapeutics, such as docetaxel and paclitaxel [113]. Mechanistic studies showed that elevation of SOD, CAT, and GPx activity occurred in testis and epididymis of group co-treated with VO, as well as the decrease of lipid peroxidation. VO was shown as an agent downregulating increments in germ cell apoptosis and testicular histo-and cytopathological damages in animals treated with paclitaxel.
