# Technologies Trend towards 5G Network for Smart Health-Care Using IoT: A Review

CorpusID: 220836721 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88c0b6e4569ba02a7a296825024a90608bc0b283](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88c0b6e4569ba02a7a296825024a90608bc0b283)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) Our Contributions
(p1.0) There have been many studies on smart health-care that explored the topic with various aspects [29][30][31][32][33]. Table 1 shows the review of different researchers related to smart health-care. Our contribution is to deliver a review of 5G smart health-care with a different perspective that includes:
## (s5) Contributions of Authors
(p5.0) Ahad et al. [29] In this review, the author presented architecture and taxonomy of smart health-care network based on 5G covering the communication technologies, objectives, performance measures, and requirements. Secondly, the author presented a detailed overview of different approaches, such as scheduling and routing, to achieve different objectives and requirements of smart health-care. Finally, the author presented open issues and challenges related to smart health-care.

(p5.1) Mahmoud et al. [30] In this review, the author presented a review on Cloud of Things (CoT) and how to improved smart health-care applications with the help of CoT. Secondly, the author gave a detailed review of different issues, such as energy efficiency with CoT for smart health-care applications. 
## (s7) Contributions of Authors
(p7.0) Qi et al. [31] In this review, the author examines different applications of IoT with respect to smart health-care with various aspects (i.e., heartbeat monitoring, oxygen, blood pressure monitoring, oxygen saturation monitoring, etc.). Secondly, the author discussed in detail about existing enable IoT technologies for smart health-care applications with different aspects, such as networking, data processing, and sensing technologies.

(p7.1) Dhanvijay et al. [32] In this review, the author delivered a detailed review of different IoT smart health-care systems for WBAN, which enables data transmission and data reception. Secondly, the author provided a detailed analysis of security and privacy, power management, resource management, and energy management related to IoT smart health-care.

(p7.2) Baker et al. [33] In this review, the author proposed a smart health-care model for health monitoring, which can be used for global tracking and special condition monitoring of human being. Secondly, the author delivered a review on the state-of-the-art with respect to different components of the proposed model (i.e., sensors monitoring for blood pressure, wearables that can be monitoring the different condition of the body and vital signs). Thirdly, the author presented a review of different communication standards for smart health-care.

(p7.3) To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to present a review of all the above mentioned concisely and comprehensively on the 5G network for smart-health care using IoT.
## (s10) Communication Technologies
(p10.0) Various smart health-care services are highly dependent on the communication range (i.e., short and long-range) between devices and servers. Bluetooth, ZigBee, and Wi-Fi are the most noticeable short-range wireless technologies for smart health-care, such as Body Area Network (BAN). LTE and WiMAX are evident long-range technologies used to transfer data between local server to BS in the smart health-care system. Furthermore, LTE-M is considered to be an enhancement to assist IoT. However, 3GPP needs to further provide improvements to address coverage, battery life-time, and device complexity [34]. Besides protocols currently in use, LoRa standardises the LoRa-WAN protocol for smart health-care use to ensure interoperability among several service providers. Moreover, SIGFOX offers an exceedingly adaptable worldwide network by considering smart health-care applications having low power utilisation. A comparison of notable communication technologies is presented in Table 2. 
## (s12) IoT Health-Care Services
(p12.0) IoT is anticipated to empower a variety of health-care assistance services where every service delivers a combination of health-care solutions. However, health-care and IoT health-care service have no standard definitions. In a few situations, a service cannot be equitably isolated from a specific solution or application. This paper proposes some of the weakness and potential of a service to be a build an application or set of solutions.

(p12.1) Ambient Assisted Living (AAL): AAL are services, concepts, and products that enable technologies and the social environment to enhance the quality of life. The inspiration of AAL is to provide the freedom to elderly people in their place of living in a helpful and safe way. Services that AAL administrations provide self-governance and at the time of any problem providing them remote assistance [35].

(p12.2) Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR): ADR is the reaction happening due to the use of medicine that is prescribed by the doctor. Normally, ADR is the result of using an unusual amount of medicine or perhaps the effect of mixing two or more prescriptions. Although the ADR is inherently generic, which is not particular to the medicine for a specific infection, it is recommended to take few typical specialised problems and their solutions (called ADR administrations). An ADR that is based on IoT is proposed in [36]. In this, the medication is distinguished on the patient's side through techniques for barcode/NFC-authorized gadgets. With the help of a framework (intelligent in the context of pharmaceutical data), the data are processed out for the detection of medicine to be appropriate with the allergy profile and electronic history of patient's health.

(p12.3) Community health-care (CH): community health-care services (CHs) are based on the idea of making a local network. This might be a system dependent on IoT throughout the metropolitan health-care centres, rural area, or a residential area. The connection of a few networks like this might be acknowledged as helpful network scenarios. For these scenarios, a specific service, called community health-care (CH), which is unavoidable for meeting aggregate specialised necessities as a suite. A helpful proposal exploiting IoT in rural health-care checking is presented in [37] and observed to be competent in energy consumption. The authorisation and distinct authentication mechanism should be combined because of the cooperative network. In [38], a network for community medication is suggested. This network incorporates numerous Wireless BANs (WBANs) for making CH. The architecture of the network for community medication is just like 'Virtual Medical-Health-care Centre'.
## (s13) Health-Care Applications
(p13.0) Smart health-care services result in the creation of applications, so that clients and patients can correctly use the applications [46]. Table 3 presents different Internet of Things (IoT) based health-care applications.

(p13.1) Sensing of Glucose: diabetes is the gathering of metabolic infections that contain high glucose blood (sugar). The monitoring of blood glucose detect the change in glucose level and help for arranging of diet, physical activities, and time of medication. An m-IoT design method for average glucose instantaneous detection is presented by [47]. The technique that is discussed in this paper is the connection of sensors (associated with patients) by the IPv6 network to the foremost health-care suppliers.

(p13.2) Electrocardiogram (ECG) Supervision: ECG is the inspection of electrical activity record related to human heart, integrates the approximation of the straight-forward pulse and the declaration of vital rhythm along-with the determination of complex arrhythmias, delayed QT intervals, and myocardial ischemia [48].
## (s15) Characteristics of Smart Health-Care
(p15.0) The critical requirements for successful deployment of the smart health-care system are presented in Figure 4. Those major requirements are classified as Things-oriented, App-oriented, and Semantics-oriented. The establishment of a personalised network in the sensors and the user's computing device, and information security are the sole responsibilities of App-oriented architectures in order to guarantee the authenticity of data transmissions among applications in smart-phones and sensors. The duties of architectures that are things-oriented are immediate supervision, flexible application, responsiveness at the higher level, consumption of low power, higher efficiency, and switching on the intelligent procedure. Systems that are Semantic-oriented should be capable of handling natural language execution methods for improving user experience, growing detectable specimens that are based on the earlier obtained information, and having exceptional computing abilities [59,60]. 
## (s21) Low-Latency and High-Reliability Communications
(p21.0) The scenario is linked to ultra-reliable communication and Tactile Internet applications, such as remote surgery and vehicle to vehicle (i.e., Ambulances) communications for driverless cars. The main requirement for this scenario is high reliability and low latency. For example, in [63,64], the outage probability that is required is approximately equal to 10 −7 and end-to-end delay is 1ms.
## (s24) Massive MIMO (Multiple-Input Multiple-Output) and 3D MIMO
(p24.0) According to Shannon's theorem for the capacity of a network, the upper limit to the capacity of a communication link in bps is fixed, and this rule might be used for investigation on achieving superior data rates [65].
## (s25) Millimetre-Wave Communications
(p25.0) From Equation (1), it is clear that the channel with high bandwidth results in an enhanced data rate. However, for increasing the bandwidth of the channel, the higher operating frequency is required. It will solve the second trend for the next generation network (i.e., 5G) by using higher frequencies in the millimetre wave band. However, there are many disadvantages of millimetre wave communications. Firstly, having free-space propagation in the millimetre wave leads to higher signal attenuation [69]. Secondly, rain, atmospheric gases, and buildings are reasonable observers of this band [70]. For the problem, as mentioned above, different solutions are possible: using tiny cells will lead to minimising the attenuations; for higher attenuations, the directive antennas to be used or indoor base stations to avoid the building absorption issue.
## (s27) Device-To-Device (D2D) Communications
(p27.0) D2D communication is another trend for the next-generation network that is 5G [73]. The said technique is usable in two different methods. The first way is where one terminal collaborates with others in a manner that enhances the communication features between the base station and terminals. The second method is where one terminal communicates with another terminal directly without including the base station. Device-to-device communication can improve channel reliability, system throughput, operation cost reduction, and energy efficiency. Figure 8 shows both of the approaches. Direct communication in D2D allows for numerous D2D links concurrently to share the same bandwidth, which leads to increasing the cell traffic capacity. Furthermore, the SNR can be improved with direct communication approach (as compared to the communication through the base station), due to which transmission power is minimised to save energy or maximise the link capacity. At last, the radio link latency is reduced by D2D direct communication [74]. 
## (s35) Achieving Interoperability
(p35.0) Interoperability is a capability to interconnect two or more than two different devices and networks for data exchange. The smart health-care network consists of various IoT devices with different domains (i.e., remote health monitoring, remote surgery, and ECG). Interoperability performs a significant role by providing a platform of connectivity to various devices with different communication technologies. However, due to a lack of universal standards communications technologies, the interoperability between multiple domains is a significant hurdle for IoT success [79]. Therefore, a critical intelligent approach is required to check interoperability at different levels and allow for millions of devices in the network to communicate with each other. Different organisations, like oneM2M and FIWARE, are working in collaboration with various standardisations, like ETSI, OMA, and 3GPP, to sort out the interoperability issue.
## (s36) Analysis of Big Data
(p36.0) In a smart health-care network, big data analysis is a dominant research direction. The future smart health-care network will consist of millions of devices that will generate an enormous volume of information and data for analysis [80]. These data contain private user information (i.e., Data of Patient) and surrounding environment information of the patient (i.e., Heartbeat rate, ECG, etc.). Therefore, intelligent algorithms and approaches are needed for data analysis. For instance, the information that is generated by local devices in the network must be efficiently analysed with the help of machine learning algorithms. The main concerns that must be addressed are:
## (s40) Performing IoT Connectivity
(p40.0) The smart health-care network can consist of millions of devices in future. The concept of this network can only succeed if the connectivity is provided to every single device [27]. These devices have the ability to provide information after sensing. In this network, any existing communication technology can be used by IoT devices, such as a cellular network (i.e., 5G and LTE), Bluetooth and Wi-Fi. However, there are many challenges to guaranteeing connectivity to each device in the smart health-care network, such as:
## (s42) Achieving Security, Trust and Privacy
(p42.0) In a smart health-care network, security is an important challenge, due to the connectivity of different IoT devices. It is challenging to implement complex security algorithms and protocols due to limited battery life and processing power on IoT devices [81]. In the future, most of the IoT device will be at risk of attacks. This can lead to different types of threats and attacks in terms of privacy and security. The following issues must be taken into account to design a successful 5G based smart health-care network.
