# Multipath Routing in Wireless Sensor Networks: Survey and Research Challenges

CorpusID: 2295142 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12e57d23f9ce3fa04f5287e61280c4c6e1184acb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12e57d23f9ce3fa04f5287e61280c4c6e1184acb)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Recent advances in wireless communication technologies and the manufacture of inexpensive wireless devices have led to the introduction of low-power wireless sensor networks. Due to their ease of deployment and the multi-functionality of the sensor nodes, wireless sensor networks have been utilized for a variety of applications such as healthcare, target tracking, and environment monitoring [1]. The main responsibility of the sensor nodes in each application is to sense the target area and transmit their collected information to the sink node for further operations. Resource limitations of the sensor nodes and unreliability of low-power wireless links [2], in combination with various performance demands of different applications impose many challenges in designing efficient communication protocols for wireless sensor networks [3]. Meanwhile, designing suitable routing protocols to fulfill different performance demands of various applications is considered as an important issue in wireless sensor networking. In this context, researchers have proposed numerous routing protocols to improve performance demands of different applications through the network layer of wireless sensor networks protocol stack [4,5]. Most of the existing routing protocols in wireless sensor networks are designed based on the single-path routing strategy without considering the effects of various traffic load intensities. In this approach, each source node selects a single path which can satisfy performance requirements of the intended application for transmitting its traffic towards the sink node. Although route discovery through single-path routing approach can be performed with minimum computational complexity and resource utilization, the limited capacity of a single path highly reduces the achievable network throughput [6,7]. Furthermore, the low flexibility of this approach against node or link failures may significantly reduce the network performance in critical situations. For instance, whenever the active path fails to transmit data packets (as a result of limited power supply of the sensor nodes, high dynamics of wireless links and physical damages), finding an alternative path to continue data transmission process may cause extra overhead and delay in data delivery. Therefore, due to the resource constraints of sensor nodes and the unreliability of wireless links, single-path routing approaches cannot be considered effective techniques to meet the performance demands of various applications. In order to cope with the limitations of single-path routing techniques, another type of routing strategy, which is called the multipath routing approach has become as a promising technique in wireless sensor and ad hoc networks. Dense deployment of the sensor nodes enables a multipath routing approach to construct several paths from individual sensor nodes towards the destination [8]. Discovered paths can be utilized concurrently to provide adequate network resources in intensive traffic conditions. Alternatively, each source node can use only one path for data transmission and switch to another path upon node or link failures. The latter one is mainly used for fault-tolerance purposes, and this is known as alternative path routing.

(p0.1) In the past decade, multipath routing approach has been widely utilized for different network management purposes such as improving data transmission reliability, providing fault-tolerant routing, congestion control and Quality of Service (QoS) support in traditional wired and wireless networks. However, the unique features of wireless sensor networks (e.g., constrained power supply, limited computational capability, and low-memory capacity) and the characteristics of short-range radio communications (e.g., fading and interference [9,10]) introduce new challenges that should be addressed in the design of multipath routing protocols. Accordingly, existing multipath routing protocols proposed for traditional wireless networks (such as ad hoc networks) cannot be used directly in low-power sensor networks. During the past years, this issue has motivated the research community of wireless sensor networks to develop multipath routing protocols which are suitable for sensor networks.

(p0.2) There are several papers surveying proposed routing protocols for wireless sensor networks. These surveys describe and analyze the general routing strategies proposed for sensor networks [4,5]. However, none of these literatures has provided a comprehensive taxonomy on the existing multipath routing protocols for wireless sensor networks. Al-Karaki et al. [4] presented routing challenges and design issues in wireless sensor networks. They classified all the existing routing strategies based on the network structure and protocol operation. Alwan et al. [11] provided a brief overview on the existing fault-tolerant routing protocols in wireless sensor networks and categorized these protocols into retransmission-based and replication-based protocols. Tarique et al. [12] and Mueller et al. [13] classified the existing multipath routing protocols in ad hoc networks based on the primary criterion used in their design. Accordingly, the principal motivation of conducting this research was lack of a comprehensive survey on the proposed multipath routing protocols for wireless sensor networks. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first effort to classify and investigate the operation as well as benefits and drawbacks of the existing multipath routing protocols in sensor networks.

(p0.3) The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview on the main challenges in designing routing protocols for wireless sensor networks and presents a brief classification on the existing protocols in these networks. Primary motivations behind using multipath routing approach in wireless sensor networks and key issues in designing multipath routing protocols are discussed in Section 3. Section 4 introduces a comprehensive taxonomy of the existing multipath routing protocols in wireless sensor networks. This classification provides a deep analysis on the most recently proposed multipath routing protocols, highlighting their advantages and disadvantages. Section 5 examines the main features of different classes of multipath routing protocols and their suitability for various applications. Finally, Section 6 concludes and identifies some of the future directions for further research in this area.
## (s2) Multipath Routing in Wireless Sensor Networks
(p2.0) Due to the limited capacity of a multi-hop path [6] and the high dynamics of wireless links [2,9], single-path routing approach is unable to provide efficient high data rate transmission in wireless sensor networks. Nowadays, the multipath routing approach is broadly utilized as one of the possible solutions to cope with this limitation. This section presents the primary motivations behind using multipath routing approach in wireless sensor networks. We also discuss the main design issues in the development of the existing multipath routing protocols.
## (s3) Motivations for Using Multipath Routing Approach in Wireless Sensor Networks
(p3.0) As stated before, multipath routing technique has demonstrated its efficiency to improve wireless sensor and ad hoc networks' performance. In the following, we review the performance gains that can be achieved through using multipath routing approaches.

(p3.1) Reliability and Fault-Tolerance: Due to the time-varying characteristics of low-power wireless links, dynamic network topology, and wireless interference, reliable data transmission in wireless networks is a challenging task [34,35]. The original idea behind using multipath routing approach in wireless sensor networks was to provide path resilience (against node or link failures) and reliable data transmission. In the fault tolerance domain, whenever a sensor node cannot forward its data packets towards the sink, it can benefit from the availability of alternative paths to salvage its data packets from node or link failures. Through this mechanism, as long as an alternative path is available from a target area towards the sink node, data forwarding can be continued without any interruption even in the case of path failure.

(p3.2) Multiple paths also can be used simultaneously to elevate data transmission reliability. There are two different approaches to provide reliable data transmission through concurrent multipath routing. The first approach is based on transmitting multiple copies of an original data packet over different paths to ensure packet recovery from several path failures. Through this technique, data transmission reliability can be guaranteed, if data forwarding over at last one path is done successfully. Erasure coding is another technique used by some of the existing protocols to provide desired reliability demand of different applications. Based on the utilized coding technique, each source node adds some additional information to the original data packets and then distributes the generated data packets over different paths. To reconstruct original packets, at last a certain number of transmitted data packets from each source node should be received by the sink node. Accordingly, if a few numbers of paths failed to deliver some data packets to the sink node, still the reliability of data transmission can be guaranteed through reconstructing data packets from successfully received data packets by the sink node.
## (s4) Basic Principals in Designing Multipath Routing Protocols
(p4.0) Although the multipath routing approach has been employed for different purposes, the achieved performance gain is highly affected by the ability of the proposed protocol to construct an adequate number of high-quality paths. Each multipath routing protocol includes several components to construct multiple paths and distribute network traffic over the discovered paths. In the following, we describe these components in detail.

(p4.1) Path Discovery: Since data transmission in wireless sensor networks is commonly performed through multi-hop data forwarding techniques, the main task of the route discovery process is to determine a set of intermediate nodes that should be selected to construct several paths from the source nodes towards the sink node. Different parameters are used in the existing multipath routing protocols to make routing decisions. Among these parameters, the amount of path disjointedness is the main criterion which is utilized by all the existing multipath routing protocols to discover several paths from each sensor node towards the sink node [8,12]. As depicted in Figure 1, discovered paths can be generally categorized as node-disjoint, link-disjoint, or partially disjoint paths. For node-disjoint paths, there is no common node or link among the discovered paths. Therefore, any node or link failure in a set of node-disjoint paths only affects the path, which contains the failed node or link. Since this kind of path disjointedness provides higher aggregated network resources, node-disjoint paths are preferred over link-disjoint and partially disjoint paths. Still due to the random deployment of the sensor nodes, it is difficult to discover a large set of node-disjoint paths between sensor nodes and sink node. In contrast, link-disjoint paths may contain several common nodes while there is no shared link between the paths. Accordingly, any node failure in a set of link-disjoint paths may deactivate several paths that share the failed node. Finally, partially disjoint paths can include multiple paths, which may share several links or nodes between different paths. In comparison with the aforementioned types of path disjointedness, any link or node failure in a set of partially disjoint paths may affect several paths. However, constructing multiple partially disjoint paths can be easily performed. Regarding to the advantages and disadvantages of different types of path disjointedness, network density and performance requirements of underlying application play an important role to make the best decision between using node-disjoint, link-disjoint or partially disjoint paths. The amount of path disjointedness is the basic criteria that should be considered for discovering a set of paths, but due to the time-varying properties of radio communications and resource limitations of the sensor nodes, only considering this criterion may not result in the construction of high-capacity paths [2,53,54]. In some situations, merely assuming the amount of path-disjointedness for route discovery may lead to the construction of several low-quality paths. To address this problem, in addition to the amount of path disjointedness, different routing algorithms utilize various routing cost functions to make the best routing decision based on the application related performance demands. The main purpose of a routing cost function is to capture various properties of wireless links and sensor nodes to calculate cost of data transmission over different paths. To this aim, the employed routing cost functions in the existing multipath routing protocols are composed from several components to measure the capability of different nodes or links to provide performance demands of various applications (e.g., maximizing path throughput, minimizing end-to-end delay, improving network lifetime, and even traffic distribution). Path length, packet loss rate, delay and residual battery level of the sensor nodes are among the basic components of the routing cost functions utilized by the existing multipath routing protocols.

(p4.2) Path Selection and Traffic Distribution: After construction of multiple paths, another important issue that should be addressed is the selection of an adequate number of paths for data transmission purposes. According to the main intention of designing each multipath routing protocol, a certain number of paths should be selected to meet the performance demands of the intended application. Therefore, proposing a perfect path selection mechanism to choose a sufficient number of paths is the most important part of designing a high-performance multipath routing protocol. One protocol may decide to use only the best path for data transmission and keep additional paths as the backup paths for fault-tolerance purposes [12,32,55]. In contrast, another multipath routing protocol may utilize several G paths concurrently to provide reliable data transmission or even traffic distribution [56][57][58][59][60]. Still, the number of selected paths plays an important role to improve different performance parameters. In fact, due to the wireless interference between nearby nodes, using all the constructed paths in single-channel wireless networks does not necessarily provide higher data transmission capacity. Nevertheless, data transmission through a few numbers of paths may not efficiently utilize the underlying resources of dense wireless sensor networks. Once a set of paths are selected among the discovered paths, the multipath routing protocol should determine how to distribute network traffic over the selected paths. Based on the primary motivation behind the design of different multipath routing protocols they may utilize various traffic allocation mechanisms. For instance, transmission reliability can be guaranteed by introducing a certain degree of data redundancy in the data delivery process based on the reliability requirement of the underlying application. After that, the source node will utilize several paths to forward generated network traffic towards the sink node [57]. If the key idea is to improve performance demands such as throughput, data delivery ratio, delay, and lifetime, an efficient load distribution mechanism can be employed to distribute the overall network traffic over the constructed paths [41,45]. Furthermore, to improve resource utilization over individual paths, the injected traffic rate over each path should be calculated according to the path capacity.

(p4.3) Path Maintenance: Due to the resource constrains of sensor nodes and high dynamics of low-power wireless links, paths are highly error prone. Therefore, path reconstruction should be provided to reduce performance degradation. This is the main task of the path maintenance phase in multipath routing protocols. Path rediscovery process can be initiated in three different situations: (1) when an active path has failed, (2) when all the active paths have failed or, (3) when a certain number of active paths has failed. Since, the frequency of initiating route rediscovery process in the first approach is higher than for the two other approaches, using this strategy imposes a high overhead. Nevertheless, performing a route rediscovery process after the failure of all the active paths may significantly reduce network performance. Therefore, it seems that the third approach may represent a trade-off between the advantages and disadvantages of the first two approaches.
## (s6) Alternative Path Routing
(p6.0) Most of the existing multipath routing protocols in this class were mainly developed to provide fault tolerance at the network layer of protocol stack. Since providing fault tolerance was the primary motivation of utilizing multipath routing approaches for reliable data transmission over unreliable links, most of the early works on multipath routing technique fall in this category. As link and node failures are the main causes of path failures, the primary objective of these protocols is to guarantee certain performance parameters through preserving multiple alternative paths as the backup routes. This section introduces the ongoing research on the fault-tolerant routing using multipath routing approach. Table 1 summarizes few of the protocols from this category.

(p6.1) Directed Diffusion [14] is a query-based routing protocol that uses the concept of multipath routing to provide path failure protection. Figure 4 shows the main operations of this protocol. According to Figure 4(a), routing operation is initialized by the sink node through flooding interest messages throughout the network. These interest messages contain some information regarding to the task that should be performed by the sensor nodes. During this stage, all the intermediate nodes cache the interest messages received from their neighbors for later use. Moreover, upon reception of an interest message, the receiver node creates a gradient towards the node from which this message has been received. As it can be seen from Figure 4(b), in this stage several paths can be discovered between each pair of source-sink nodes. After that, whenever a source node detects an event matched with the existing information in its interest table, it forwards its data packets towards the sink node through all the constructed gradients. The sink node receives its requested data through several paths with a low-data rate. Based on the packet reception performance over each path, the sink node can select the best path, i.e., the path with minimum latency, for data transmission. For this, the sink node reinforces the selected path by sending low-rate reinforcement messages towards the source node. Then, the source node merely transmits its data towards the sink node through the selected path. This process is demonstrated in Figure 4(c). Furthermore, sink node continues to send low-rate interest messages over the remaining paths. This is to preserve the freshness of the established interest tables at the intermediate nodes, while it also maintains the discovered paths. When the active path fails to forward data packets, another available path can be used to provide fault-tolerant routing. Accordingly, whenever the data reception rate from the active path is reduced, the sink node reinforces the second available best path.  Simulation results [14] show that Directed Diffusion can preserve event delivery ratio in the case of any node or link failure along the active path. Moreover, this protocol reduces data transmission delays caused by path failure by decreasing the frequency of route rediscovery. As Directed Diffusion depends on low-rate flooding for route discovery and path maintenance, this protocol does not provide an efficient route discovery mechanism. Furthermore, according to the main operation of this protocol, it can only be used in query-driven applications.

(p6.2) Braided Multipath Routing Protocol [32] is a seminal multipath routing protocol proposed to provide fault-tolerant routing in wireless sensor networks. This protocol uses a similar approach as Directed Diffusion to construct several partially disjoint paths. A general form of the established paths is presented in Figure 5. This protocol utilizes two types of path reinforcement messages to construct partially disjoint paths. Path construction is initiated through the sending of a primary path reinforcement message by the sink node to its best neighboring node towards the source node. For example, in Figure 5, the sink node sends the primary path reinforcement message to node D. When an intermediate node receives a primary path reinforcement message, it forwards this message to its best next-hop neighboring node towards the source node. This process is repeated until the primary path reinforcement message reaches the source node. In addition to the primary path construction process, source node and all the intermediate nodes along the primary path construct an alternative path around their next-hop neighboring nodes. This alternative path passes through the neighboring node, which is not included in the primary path. To this aim, whenever the sink and intermediate nodes send out the primary path reinforcement message, they also generate an alternative path reinforcement message and send this message to their next preferred neighboring node towards the source node. For instance, in Figure 5, the sink node sends an alternative path reinforcement message to node G in order to establish a backup path around node D. During this process, whenever an intermediate node, which is not a member of the primary path, receives an alternative path reinforcement message, it should forward this message to its best next-hop neighboring node. This process terminates upon reception of this message by one of the nodes along the primary path. As a result, each intermediate node along the primary path constructs a backup path around its next-hop neighboring node on the primary path via transmitting an alternative path reinforcement message. Through establishing a set of partially disjoint paths between the source and sink nodes, whenever the primary path fails to forward data packets towards the sink node, one of the constructed alternative paths can be utilized to avoid data transmission failure.

(p6.3) Simulation results [32] show the lower overhead of braided multipath routing approach compared to the idealized node-disjoint multipath protocol. Furthermore, through performance evaluation of the proposed protocol under a wide range of failure probabilities, it is demonstrated that the proposed approach provides about 50% higher resilience against path failures, compared to the idealized nodedisjoint multipath protocol. However, since this protocol utilizes only one path for data transmission, the end-to-end throughput is limited to the capacity of a single path. Besides, since this approach is designed based on the principles of Directed Diffusion, the drawbacks of Directed Diffusion can be also applied to this protocol.

(p6.4) Reliable and Energy-Aware Multipath Routing [55] is designed to mitigate the energy efficiency requirement of wireless sensor networks, while provides reliable data transmission through maintaining a backup path from each source node towards the sink node. Similar to the above presented protocols, the routing operation in this protocol is also initialized by the sink node. In this way, whenever the sink node receives an interest message from a source node and there is no active path towards the source node, it initiates a service-path discovery process through flooding a service-path request message. Upon reception of the service-path request message at the corresponding source node, the receiver node transmits a service-path reservation message towards the sink node (through the reverse path) to confirm the discovered path. While the service-path reservation message moves from the source node towards the sink node, whenever a node along the reverse path receives this message, it reserves a part of its residual battery level for data transmission over this path. The service-path construction process finishes by receiving the service-path reservation message at the sink node. Afterwards, the source node can transmit its data packets towards the sink node through the constructed path. After constructing the service-path, sink node initiates another path discovery process to establish a backup path towards the same source node by flooding a backup path discovery message. During this process, the intermediate nodes, which are not a member of the discovered service-path, broadcast the received backup path discovery message to their neighbors. Therefore, a node-disjoint path is created to provide fault tolerance in the case of service-path failure.

(p6.5) Although this protocol provides energy-efficient and reliable data transmission, however it suffers from the main disadvantage of the alternative path routing strategy: the end-to-end capacity is limited to the capacity of a single path. More importantly, this protocol neglects the effects of wireless interference and link unreliability on the required energy for successful data transmission.
## (s8) Multipath Routing Protocols for Reliable Data Transmission
(p8.0) As it was pointed out in Section 3.1, in addition to the alternative routing techniques, concurrent multipath routing can be used to support reliable communication over unreliable low-power wireless links through introducing data redundancy during the data transmission process. According to the operation of the protocols presented in the previous section, those protocols are designed to reduce the frequency of path rediscovery while they provide high path resilience against route failure. However, introduced protocols in this section utilize the packet replication technique or erasure coding in conjunction with the concurrent multipath routing technique to satisfy the reliability requirements of various applications. The rest of this section provides an in-detail explanation of the employed route discovery mechanisms in a few of the existing reliable-based multipath routing protocols and investigates about their advantages and disadvantages. Table 2 summarizes the main operation of the selected reliable-based multipath routing protocols to provide a fast overview over the main features of these protocols. [57] uses the packet duplication technique to provide desired data transmission reliability for each application. In this approach, whenever a source node wants to forward its traffic towards the sink node, it first determines the required data transmission reliability based on the importance of the collected data. After that, the source node adds some information (e.g., local channel error rate, its hop count towards the sink node, and desired reliability) as Dynamic Packet State (DPS) fields to the data packets and sends multiple copies of the generated data packets over several paths. The source node determines the required number of paths to fulfill the reliability demands of the collected information according to the DPS fields of the data packets. During data transmission, all the intermediate nodes use the provided information by the DPS fields in the received data packets to determine the number of copies that should be transmitted to their next-hop neighboring nodes. This process continues until all the transmitted data packets reach to the sink node.
## (s9) Reliable Information Forwarding (ReInForm) Using Multiple Paths in Sensor Networks
(p9.0) According to the main operation of this protocol, ReInForm tries to improve data transmission reliability through utilizing the packet duplication technique at all the involved sensor nodes in the data transmission process. Accordingly, the elevated reliability of this protocol is achieved at the high cost of energy consumption and bandwidth utilization, which is in contrast with the primary demands of resource-constrained sensor nodes.

(p9.1) N-to-1 Multipath Routing Protocol [33] is proposed according to the convergecast traffic pattern of wireless sensor networks. The main aim is to simultaneously discover multiple node-disjoint paths from all the sensor nodes towards a single sink node. Furthermore, during data transmission phase, all the intermediate nodes utilize a packet salvaging technique at each hop to improve data transmission reliability. The entire routing operation in N-to-1 multipath routing protocol is performed through a simple flooding strategy in two stages. The sink node starts the first stage of the route discovery process through broadcasting a route update message. This stage, which is called branch-aware flooding, utilizes the main benefit of a simple flooding technique to construct a spanning tree and discover several paths from sensor nodes towards a single sink node. During this phase, each sensor node that receives a route update message for the first time, selects the sender of this message as its parent towards the sink node. In addition, if an intermediate node overhears a route update message from another neighboring node that introduces an alternative node-disjoint path through a different branch of the spanning tree, it adds this path to its routing table. This process continues until all the sensor nodes discover their primary path towards the sink node and a spanning tree same as Figure 6(a) is constructed through all the nodes. After that, the second stage of this protocol is initialized in order to discover more paths from each sensor node towards the sink node with the use of multipath extension flooding technique. As it can be seen from Figure 6(b), each link between two individual nodes that belong to different branches of the constructed spanning tree can help to establish an additional path from these nodes towards the sink node. Accordingly, the main purpose of employing multipath extension flooding technique in the second stage is to exchange some information regarding to the discovered node-disjoint paths in the first stage between the nodes belong to different branches of the constructed spanning tree. At the end of this stage, a routing tree similar to the Figure 6(b) is constructed by all the sensor nodes. Finally, source nodes split their traffic into several segments and distribute these data segments over the discovered paths. In fact, this protocol utilizes the single-path forwarding strategy for transmitting each data segment, while all the intermediate nodes use an adaptive per-hop packet salvaging technique to provide fast data recovery from node or link failures along the active paths. N-to-1 multipath routing protocol uses the broadcast nature of radio communications to construct several node-disjoint paths from sensor nodes towards the sink node without using additional control packets. This protocol also profits from the availability of several paths at the intermediate nodes to improve reliability of packet delivery by employing a per-hop packet salvaging strategy. Nevertheless, using such a simple flooding strategy cannot result in constructing high-quality paths with minimum interference. According to the operation of this protocol, all the constructed paths are located in physical proximity of each other and concurrent data transmission over these paths may reduce the network performance.
## (s10) Multipath Multispeed Protocol (MMSPEED)
(p10.0) According to the above descriptions, whenever a source node wants to forward a data packet towards the destination, it determines the speed requirement of the data packet based on its distance to the destination and its specified end-to-end deadline. Then, the classifier of the source node selects the corresponding speed layer that can meet the speed requirements of the data packet. The selected speed layer module performs all the subsequent routing decisions for data packet forwarding during the data transmission process. These routing decisions are made based on the amount of speed progress that can be achieved by each intermediate node. Furthermore, if an intermediate node receives a data packet and it perceives that this packet cannot meet its specified deadline through the selected speed layer, the receiver node can set another speed layer to satisfy the deadline requirement of the packet. From reliability perspective, MMSPEED benefits from path diversity property of multipath routing approach to guarantee reliability requirements of each data packet. This protocol provides reliability differentiation through controlling number of active paths and sending multiple copies of the original data packets over several paths. Accordingly, each intermediate node selects a set of next-hop neighboring nodes towards the destination node based on the estimated packet loss rate over each link and their geographic distance from itself.

(p10.1) As mentioned above, MMSPEED provides a probabilistic QoS guarantee in two different domains through combining geographic forwarding technique with a multipath routing approach. To satisfy different delay requirements, each intermediate node tries to forward its received data packet to the neighboring node, which is closer to the destination node in order to provide a good speed progress. However, according to the experimental results provided in [9], probability of successful data transmission over low-power wireless links highly depends on the sender-receiver distance and interference power of the receiver. Therefore, using geographic routing with greedy forwarding does not necessarily improve network performance metrics. Moreover, since data transmission over long links exacerbate the required energy for data transmission, this protocol cannot support long-life applications. [60] is mainly designed to provide soft-QoS guarantee in terms of reliability and delay. The end-to-end soft-QoS problem is formulated as a probabilistic programming problem and then it is converted into a deterministic linear programming using an approximation technique. Therefore, MCMP is developed according to the linear programming approach which is a deterministic approximate of the defined end-to-end soft-QoS problem. Using Equations (1) and (2), MCMP maps the delay and reliability of the links along different paths towards the sink node to the end-to-end delay and reliability demands of various applications:
## (s11) Multi-Constrained QoS Multipath Routing (MCMP)
(p11.0) (1) (2) where and represent the delay and reliability requirements at node i. D i is the delay experienced by a packet at node i. R i is the fraction of the reliability requirement assigned to the path passing through node i, and h i is the hop count from node i to the sink node.

(p11.1) MCMP utilizes two different strategies to satisfy delay and reliability demands of wireless sensor network applications. During the route discovery process, all the intermediate nodes utilize Equation (1) to choose the neighboring node that fulfills the delay requirement of the intended application. To satisfy reliability, each node selects one or a set of its neighboring nodes, which additively provides the desired reliability towards the sink node. Therefore, at the end of the route discovery process, each source node has discovered a set of partially disjoint paths that can additively satisfy delay and reliability demands of the target application. Figure 8 demonstrates a set of discovered paths using MCMP protocol. According to the structure of the constructed paths, source and intermediate nodes, which have discovered multiple sub-paths towards the sink node, should send several copies of the original data packets to the sink node through different sub-paths to provide reliability. For instance, in Figure 8, node G should forward two copies of its received data packets towards the sink node through node H and node I.

(p11.2) The introduced data redundancy of MCMP is the main disadvantage of this protocol. Furthermore, since partially disjoint paths are usually located nearby, high data rate transmission causes significant interference. This highly affects the maximum achievable data transmission rate using this protocol.  [64] is the extended version of MCMP to provide energy-efficient communication, while it also satisfies the delay and reliability requirements of each application. In the MCMP protocol described earlier, intermediate nodes select the set of their neighboring nodes that satisfies the delay and reliability requirements of the data source, regardless of the energy consumed for data transmission over individual links. In contrast, ECMP introduces an energy optimization problem. This problem is constrained by delay, reliability and geo-spatial energy consumption to provide multi-constrained QoS routing in sensor networks. Accordingly, the main motivation in designing ECMP is to support multi-constrained QoS routing with minimum energy consumption. To demonstrate this issue, consider Figure 9, where node A has two neighboring nodes that can equivalently satisfy the delay and reliability requirements of the intended application. As it can be seen from this figure, the distance between node A and node B is shorter than the distance between node A and node C. Since the required energy for data transmission can be related to the distance between sender and receiver [65], energy consumption for data transmission over link A-B is lower than the energy consumption for data transmission over link A-C. Therefore, selecting node B as the next-hop neighboring node A can result in lower energy consumption. However, in MCMP, nodes randomly select their next-hop neighboring nodes without considering the amount of energy consumption over the chosen link. Therefore, compared to MCMP, ECMP refines the set of next-hop nodes to a smaller set through considering the energy efficiency of the links towards the neighboring nodes. According to the experimental results [64], both MCMP and ECMP provide an equivalent delivery ratio and transmission delay. However, ECMP results in lower energy consumption, compared with MCMP. [56] is the modified version of Directed Diffusion [14] that propounds the idea of using multipath routing approach to support high-quality video streaming in low-power wireless sensor networks. DCHT introduces a novel path reinforcement method and uses a new routing cost function, which considers  [2] and delay metrics to discover high-quality paths with minimum end-to-end latency. Similar to the Directed Diffusion, routing operation in this protocol is initialized by flooding an interest message throughout the network. Moreover, in order to calculate data transmission latency over each path, sink node adds a timestamp (t 0 ) to the interest message. When a source node can provide the data requested by the sink node, it broadcasts explore data packets towards the sink node through the established gradients in the first stage. Upon reception of an explore data packet at an intermediate node, it uses Equations (3) and (4) to calculate the cost of data transmission over the sub-path from which this packet is received:
## (s13) Delay-Constrained High-Throughput Protocol for Multipath Transmission (DCHT)
(p13.0) After that, the receiver node only broadcasts the lowest calculated cost to its next-hop neighboring nodes. In Equation (4), N indicates the number of traversed hops and ETX j identifies the ETX value of jth hop. In order to address the route coupling effect, ETX value of each link is estimated according to the experienced Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) over that link.

(p13.1) When the sink node receives an explore data packet that cannot meet the delay requirement of the intended application, or whenever the path discovery timer expires, the sink node starts to reinforce multiple node-disjoint paths for data transmission. To satisfy the delay constraint of the intended application, the sink node investigates the end-to-end delay of the explore data packets received through different paths and only reinforces the paths with acceptable end-to-end delays. The path reinforcement is performed through sending reinforcement messages over the selected paths towards the source node. Whenever a reinforcement message is received by an intermediate node, it searches its local candidate table and selects one of its best next-hop neighboring nodes that does not belong to any other path between the source and sink node. When the source node receives the transmitted reinforcement messages by the sink node, it divides its traffic to several streams using the Multiple Description Coding (MDC) algorithm. This algorithm tries to improve data transmission reliability through forwarding each generated stream over two different paths.

(p13.2) The utilized path reinforcement strategy and routing metric in this protocol greatly improves the performance of the original Directed Diffusion by constructing multiple high-quality low-delay paths. When the target source node floods an explore data packet to the network, each node estimates the ETX value of its neighboring nodes based on its experienced SNR. Then, in the path reinforcement process, the sink node uses the ETX value of the discovered paths to select minimum interfering paths. However, this technique cannot accurately calculate the exact value of the experienced interference during the data transmission process. The actual interference strength during the data transmission process highly depends on the traffic load of the interfering nodes. If the interfering nodes, which are located near an active path, do not involve in any data forwarding process, these nodes cannot impose any interference on the active path. Furthermore, each generated data stream should be transmitted through two different paths to provide a certain level of data transmission reliability. However, due to the random topology of the wireless sensor networks, constructing a sufficient number of node-disjoint paths to support high-rate multimedia streaming may not be feasible. [66] is one of the recently proposed protocols designed to satisfy the reliability and delay requirements of real-time applications. EQSR improves reliability through using a lightweight XOR-based Forward Error Correction (FEC) mechanism, which introduces data redundancy in the data transmission process. Furthermore, in order to fulfill the delay requirements of various applications, this protocol utilizes a service differentiation technique through employing a queuing model to manage real-time and non-real-time traffic. EQSR initializes through broadcasting a HELLO message by all the sensor nodes. During this phase, sensor nodes collect information regarding to the cost of data transmission though their neighboring nodes. In the second phase of this protocol, the sink node starts the route discovery process by sending a Route-request message to its preferred neighbor selected by Equation (5). Intermediate nodes use Equation (5) to select the most preferred next-hop neighboring node towards the source node from their neighboring set N. This process continues among the intermediate nodes until the source node receives a Route-request message transmitted by the sink node:
## (s15) Multipath Routing Protocols for Efficient Network Resource Utilization
(p15.0) With respect to the limitations of tiny sensor nodes, the key idea behind the development of this protocol category is to balance network traffic and resource utilization throughout the network. This section is dedicated to describe some of the most recently proposed protocols in this group of multipath routing protocols. Table 3 provides an in-depth comparison of the presented routing protocols based on the details of their employed route discovery and traffic distribution algorithms.  [67] exploits the path diversity provided by multipath routing approach to prolong network lifetime by distributing network traffic over multiple node-disjoint paths. When an event occurs in the network, a sensor node in the event area is selected as the source node and initiates the route discovery process. Accordingly, the selected source node transmits multiple Route-request messages to its neighboring nodes. These Route-request messages include different path IDs to construct multiple node-disjoint paths from the selected source node towards the sink node. During the route discovery process, all the intermediate nodes select one of their best next-hop neighboring nodes towards the sink node, which satisfy Equation (6) and it is not included in any other path: 
## (s16) Energy-Efficient Multipath Routing Protocol
(p16.0) where N a represents the neighboring set of node a. d ay is the distance (in hop count) between node a and sink node, d by is the distance (in hop count) between node b and sink node, and ∆d is the difference between d ay and d by . e b,residual and e b,init represent the residual and initial battery level of node b, respectively. Upon reception of the first Route-request message by the sink node, it sets a timer to fulfill the path establishment process in an acceptable period. Therefore, all the paths discovered after the timer timeouts are considered as low-quality paths and the sink node discards the Route-request messages received from these paths. Then, the sink node assigns different data rates to the established paths using Equation (7). Sink node uses the ASSIGN messages to inform the selected source node about the assigned data rate of each path. Source node starts data transmission upon the reception of the ASSIGN messages:

(p16.1) Assuming N paths between a pair of source-sink nodes, r j is the assigned data rate to the jth path, R is the requested data rate (by the application) that should be arrived at the sink node. p i and p j are the costs of ith and jth paths.

(p16.2) The main advantage of this protocol is to prolong network lifetime by distributing network traffic over several paths according to the cost of data transmission over these paths. The residual battery level of the sensor nodes and their distance to the sink node are considered as the main parameters in the route discovery and load distribution algorithms. However, the interference level experienced by the intermediate nodes (along nearby paths) and its effects on the network performance is disregarded. On the other hand, as demonstrated in [59,68], a lower number of interference-minimized paths provides higher performance compared to the situation in which more number of paths is established without considering the effects of interference. Nevertheless, this protocol establishes and utilizes all the discovered node-disjoint paths. [69] is designed based on the multipath version of AODV (i.e., AOMDV [70]) to achieve energy-efficient and low-latency communication in wireless sensor networks through using cross-layer information. Path construction is similar to the mechanism introduced in AOMDV with a few improvements. While AOMDV tries to discover all the possible link-disjoint paths between each pair of source-sink nodes, the AOMDV-Inspired Multipath Routing Protocol uses different routing table management strategy to construct only hop count optimal paths towards the destination node. With this protocol, the sink node confirms an additional path only if its first hop is different from the previously discovered paths and if this path provides the same hop count towards the sink node. Otherwise, if the sink node receives a Route-request message with the lower hop count than the existing routes (established from the same source node), it substitutes all the previously established paths by the newly discovered path. Figure 10 demonstrates the routing tables constructed at the source node by AODV, AOMDV and AOMDV-Inspired Multipath Routing Protocol. AOMDV does not introduce any load distribution mechanism to split network traffic over the established paths. AOMDV-Inspired Multipath Routing Protocol utilizes the information provided by the MAC layer to reduce data transmission latency. To this aim, during data transmission process, each intermediate node searches its routing table and forwards its received data packets to the next-hop neighboring node that wakes up earlier. While this MAC layer technique can reduce the transmission delay and interference, it requires all the sensor nodes to be aware about their neighboring nodes' timing information. Furthermore, similar to the ad hoc-based routing protocols, this protocol should flood the whole path information throughout the network during the route discovery phase. This flooding process imposes significant overhead to the resource-limited sensor nodes.
## (s17) AOMDV-Inspired Multipath Routing Protocol
(p17.0) Interference-Minimized Multipath Routing Protocol (I2MR) [45] aims to support high-rate streaming in low-power wireless sensor networks through considering the recent advances in designing high-bandwidth backbone networks. I2MR tries to construct zone-disjoint paths and distributes network traffic over the discovered paths by assuming a special network structure and the availability of particular hardware components. Figure 11 demonstrates a simple schematic of the network structure assumed in this protocol.

(p17.1) All the deployed gateway nodes are assumed as the final destinations and it is supposed that these nodes are directly connected to the command center using non-interfering and high-capacity links. In I2MR, the source node utilizes two paths for data transmission and keeps only one backup path towards the central command center. The route discovery phase includes three main steps: in the first step, each source node selects one gateway node as its primary gateway node and constructs the shortest possible path towards this gateway node. Then, in the interference-zone marking step, one and two-hop neighboring nodes of all the intermediate nodes along the first path are marked as the interference zone of the primary path. Finally, in the last stage, the primary gateway node determines the preferred quadrants from which the secondary and backup gateway nodes should be selected. As it is shown in Figure 12, these quadrants are determined based on the location of the source node. Furthermore, the preferred gateway nodes should be located beyond the interference rang of the primary gateway node and they should have less distances to the source node than the other candidate gateway nodes. When the secondary and backup gateway nodes are determined, the source node starts to construct the secondary and backup paths through the nodes that are not marked as the interferencezone of the primary path. At the end of the path construction process, source node loads the primary and secondary paths with the highest possible data rate and preserves the third path to achieve prompt packet recovery upon path failure. During the data transmission process, whenever an intermediate node along an active path detects a long-term congestion, it should notify the source node to reduce its injected data rate.  The simulation results indicate the higher performance of I2MR compared to the standard AODV and a simple node-disjoint multipath routing protocol [45]. However, the achieved performance improvement requires a special network structure and particular hardware components, which may not be feasible for many applications. In addition, due to the high complexity of the introduced zone-marking algorithm, this mechanism cannot effectively construct interference-minimized paths. Moreover, source nodes construct the three shortest paths (i.e., with minimum hop count) towards three separate gateway nodes to reduce the effects of wireless interference among the successive nodes along a path. However, due to the time-varying properties of low-power wireless links, data transmission over long hops results in increased packet loss ratio.

(p17.2) Maximally Radio-Disjoint Multipath Routing (MR2) [71] utilizes an adaptive incremental technique to construct minimum-interfering paths, which satisfy the bandwidth requirements of multimedia applications. Additional paths are constructed whenever the active paths cannot provide the bandwidth requirements of the available network traffic. Like the other query-based routing protocols [14,55,56], the sink node initializes the route discovery process by flooding the network with a request message. Upon reception of the request message by the immediate neighboring nodes of the sink node, the receiver node adds its ID to the received request message as the path ID and rebroadcasts this message. Then, whenever a node receives a request message, it first checks the reported path ID and if it has not any path from the introduced source node (i.e., path ID) towards the sink node, it should add the reported path to its routing table. Otherwise, if the included path ID in the received request message already exists in the routing table of the receiver, the introduced path should be replaced with the previous one if it provides a path with lower hop count. If the received request message causes an update operation on the routing table, the receiver node should rebroadcast the request message. This process is continued until the request message is received by a sensor node that can provide sink node with the requested data. At this time, source node starts packet transmission towards the sink node through the shortest discovered path. In order to address the mutual interference problem between adjacent paths, all the intermediate nodes along the active path should notify their neighboring nodes to act as the passive nodes in order to prevent them from participating in any route discovery process. Therefore, during the data transmission process, intermediate nodes that receive a data packet should send a bepassive message to all of their neighboring nodes except their next and previous-hop neighbors along the active path. Using this mechanism, whenever an additional path should be constructed (to provide sufficient bandwidth for data transmission), passive nodes are unable to respond to any request message.

(p17.3) This protocol eliminates the negative effects of wireless interference by putting some nodes in the passive state. Simulation results confirm that MR2 improves the overall data reception rate at the sink node more than 70% and 30% compared to a multipath routing approach without interference-awareness and a single-path routing scheme, respectively. Still, this protocol suffers from two main drawbacks: first, MR2 is only suitable for query-driven applications; second, the utilized flooding strategy for constructing non-interfering paths imposes a high control overhead. [25] is an on-demand multipath routing protocol and uses the location information of all the sensor nodes to establish two collision-free paths between a pair of source-sink nodes. EECA aims to reduce the negative effects of wireless interference through constructing two paths in both sides of the direct line between the source-destination pair. Furthermore, the distance between these two paths is more than the interference range of the sensor nodes. This is demonstrated in Figure 13. In the first stage of the route discovery process, the source node checks its neighboring nodes to find two distinct groups of the nodes on both sides of the direct line between the source-destination pair. Figure 13 represents these two groups with white and gray circles. After finding these neighboring sets, the source node broadcasts a Route-request packet towards these nodes to establish two node-disjoint paths. During the route discovery process, intermediate nodes utilize the same technique (used at the source node) to select their next-hop neighboring nodes and broadcast the received Route-request packet towards the sink node. Upon reception of a Route-request packet by an intermediate node, the receiver node uses a back-off timer to restrict the overhead introduced by the route discovery flooding. Before broadcasting the received Route-request packet by the intermediate nodes, they set a back-off timer according to their distance from the sink node and their residual battery level. Neighboring nodes with higher residual battery and shorter distance to the sink node select shorter back-off timer. Therefore, at each stage of the Route-request flooding only one node wins to broadcast its received Route-request packet towards the sink node. Upon reception of the Route-request packet at the sink node, it sends a Routereply packet in the reverse path towards the source node. When the source node receives a Route-reply packet, it can transmit its traffic through the established path. Although EECA tries to discover the two shortest paths such that their distance from each other is more than interference range of the sensor nodes, it needs the nodes to be GPS-assisted and relies on the information provided by the underlying localization update method. These requirements increase the cost of network deployment and intensify the communication overhead, specifically in large and dense wireless sensor networks. In addition, as low-power wireless links exhibit significant signal variations over time, calculating the interference range of the sensor nodes based on the distance may not result in an accurate interference estimation [72]. Moreover, while transmitting data over minimum-hop paths can theoretically reduce end-to-end delay and resource utilization, however, using such paths in low-power wireless networks increases the probability of packet loss and intensifies the overhead of packet retransmission over each hop. [59,68] improves the performance demands of event-driven sensor networks (e.g., delay, data delivery ratio, throughput, and lifetime) through construction of an adequate number of interference-minimized paths. LIEMRO utilizes an adaptive iterative approach to construct a sufficient number of node-disjoint paths with minimum interference from each event area towards the sink node. Whenever an event occurs in the sensor field and there is no active path for data transmission towards the sink node, the selected source node starts to establish the first path by transmitting a Route-request message towards the sink node. During this stage, source node and all the intermediate nodes select one of their next-hop neighboring nodes using Equations (8) and (9):
