# Clinical effectiveness and cost effectiveness of individual mental health workers colocated within primary care practices: a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 227261137 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ce1b57b37cb395bd2d5c7a7772f089e1d57c287b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ce1b57b37cb395bd2d5c7a7772f089e1d57c287b)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s10) Study selection
(p10.0) Following removal of duplicates, 1863 titles and abstracts were screened to assess their suitability for inclusion within this review. Subsequently, 52 full-text papers were screened, of which 37 were deemed to be irrelevant. Fifteen papers were identified to be included [26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36][37][38][39][40] (figure 1).
## (s19) Implication for practice and policy
(p19.0) The WHO has advocated in recent years that the primary healthcare environment is the optimal environment for the treatment of a plethora of conditions, including mental health disorders. 3 Thus, a multitude of structural interventions and changes have been proposed to fulfil this policy change effectively. One of the changes that has been proposed and that this review has focused on is that of the integration of an onsite MHW within primary care practices. This review has found that the integration of an MHW is correlated in some studies with decreased severity and a reduction of symptoms and therefore leads to better healthcare outcomes for patients with a range of mental health problems. This supports existing evidence that providing mental healthcare within the primary care setting is beneficial and that increasing resource expenditure on MHWs will lead to beneficial impacts to the mental health of the populations exposed to them. However, there is insufficient evidence from this review to suggest that MHWs within primary care practices significantly elevate the quality of mental healthcare, compared with standard GP care. Likewise, there is little evidence to suggest that the intervention is more cost effective, although this may be as a consequence of there being few studies examining this. Larger scale introductions of this intervention, and further RCTs, will enable more substantial and rigorous evaluations of clinical and cost effectiveness. Until then, a degree of caution is needed in investing significant resources to implement this intervention. Furthermore, other possible policy and quality improvement recommendations relating to management of mental health problems should be investigated. For instance, a review has suggested that mental health Open access treatments within secondary care may be more effective than those delivered in primary care, thus providing more resources to this environment may be more beneficial. 52 
