# Paper-Mobile Applications, An Emerging Powerful Tool for Dyslexia Screening and Intervention… Mobile Applications, An Emerging Powerful Tool for Dyslexia Screening and Intervention A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 228879120 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f581de99ba6cb61c2a112fc1a0c17a47bd79190a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f581de99ba6cb61c2a112fc1a0c17a47bd79190a)

Fields: Education, Computer Science

## (s7) What mobile smart applications have been designed for dyslexia screening?
(p7.0) First classification of the literature review was about mobile smart apps for dyslexia detection. Based on the results of the Systematic Literature Review, 12 papers (46,2%) presented studies about mobile smart applications for dyslexia screening. A significant number of them has been developed to facilitate this procedure.

(p7.1) Particularly, in Colombo, Sri Lanka, a new mobile application was produced, called "The CURE", so as to assist people with dyslexia and dysgraphia. A great number of sequential revised steps were followed to define both the requirements and the accuracy of this tool. Approximately 100 patients with dysgraphia and dyslexia, expert health professionals and specialized doctors took part in this study. Results showed that this application met individuals' with dyslexia and dysgraphia needs, related to the progress of their reading and writing skills [13].

(p7.2) In Spain, a magnificent puzzle app was introduced, named "DysPuzzle". The aim was to identify pre-readers with potential dyslexic problems, applying screening criteria, linked to motor skills and characteristics. Thus, in this process a usability test was implemented, inspecting 10 German-speaking children (aged 3-6 years old), accompanied with their 5 parents. Obviously, the majority of kids were amazed and intrigued by this mobile application. They comprehended the navigation and rules of the game easily, since the appropriate guidelines were given. Also, parents interacted with gamepuzzle, understanding the data input. This tool was considered to be a novel mode for detecting dyslexia in kindergarten [14].

(p7.3) Moreover, in Bologna, Italy, an android app with the intention of detecting kids was proposed, enrolled in second class of the elementary school with reading disabilities such as dyslexia. In this experiment, some primary students were tested, playing the application twice under supervision. Then, a questionnaire ("Post Experiment Questionnaire"), related to usability, understanding and difficulty of the environment and views about the app, was filled in by 43 participants. Further preliminary study concerning the validity of this instrument took place, involving 9 children. Researchers came to the optimistic conclusion that the tool could screen students with reading difficulties successfully, being an appealing app [15].

(p7.4) In Sao Paolo, Brazil, a mobile application for dyslexia screening was created. As a further action after detection process, it supported reading skills, related to this disability, as well. In this experimental procedure, a set of tests were conducted. In particular, assertive tests were taken place in 4 dyslexics and non-dyslexics to find possible errors, followed by sound interference tests. These searched for the environment noise concerning the reading procedure in the same manner as above. Tests with dyslexics, compared with non-dyslexics was the next step to prove differences in their results of reading recognition. Also, usability tests were carried out to prove some criteria of the instrument (easiness, reliability etc.). These tests resulted in the approval of this mobile app as far as the identification of dyslexic signs was concerned [16].

(p7.5) In Malaysia, also, a cross-platform screening test was constructed, called "DycScreen", which was available in mobiles, computers and other devices. An instructor, 3 dyslexic and 15 non-dyslexic pupils participated in this study, being asked to answer all questions referred to each section. Even though participants had difficulty in specific evaluations (e.g. cognitive assessments), staying intrigued and willing to take the test through digital devices. In this way, potentially dyslexic children were identified efficiently [17].

(p7.6) In Mexico, a linguistic web-based game was presented, known as "Dytective", which could be played, using several digital devices like a mobile phone. The sample was 243 children and adults (95 participants with dyslexia), who participated in this research, playing all game levels after parental consent. Observations indicated that "Dytective" could be an effective, accurate and easy to access approach of identifying possible signs of dyslexia without special equipment [18].

(p7.7) In Saudi Arabia, a pioneering mobile health framework for any language was presented, aided by auto-grading algorithms to screen possible signs and symptoms of dyslexia. More than 5 dyslexic and 10 non-dyslexic people were asked to take the test for different test modules several periods. The auto-grading was used as a detection approach to categorize dyslexics in a group among the other participants. Significant observations of this process, showed that the form of the features played vital role, since a diverse feature or a detailed and a low-level feature was poor for the identification rate [19].
## (s8) What mobile smart applications have been designed for dyslexia intervention?
(p8.0) Second classification was addressed to mobile smart applications for dyslexia intervention. This category consisted of 14 studies (53,8%). Several mobile smart apps have been constructed, accumulating supplementary or totally different features and forms.

(p8.1) Specifically, in Portugal, a pioneering mobile application was recommended, with the view to enhancing a dyslexic student's re-educating. In this study, dyslexic and nondyslexic groups of 4 students aged 10-12 years old were tested in a game usability and functionality testing. The former had the same or sometimes better performance than the latter, interacting with the interface in an easy way. It was a powerful tool for adaptiveness of students' with dyslexia learning environment, as it provided both these children and their teachers with useful feedback about their progress through optimizing their multisensory perception [11].
