# Scheduling in cloud manufacturing systems: Recent systematic literature review

CorpusID: 228969851 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/452df82a18974297a9595b6c0c6045bdbfe79e54](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/452df82a18974297a9595b6c0c6045bdbfe79e54)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s4) Literature review
(p4.0) As mentioned in Section 2, a systematic literature review was conducted for scheduling problems in CMfg environments. The objective of that review is to analyze the evolution in the study of scheduling problems in CMfg after Liu et al. [11]. To do this, we present below a classification of the works according to the approach and/or resolution method used by the authors to address the problem.
## (s5) Exact approaches
(p5.0) In this first stage of the review, we review all the papers found that make use of exact resolution methods. The first work that we found within this group is Delaram et al. [31]. The authors discuss the analogy between tasks scheduling in cloud computing and cloud manufacturing. A linear mixed-integer programming (MILP) formulation is proposed, with the aim to minimize logistics and production costs. Some illustrative cases are solved using LINGO. Suma and Murugesan [32] also address a problem through a MILP approach, but in this case, in addition to logistics and production costs, both production and transfer times are considered in the objective function. To solve the problem they use a Min-Max approach. In Vahedi et al. [33], a multi-objective problem is addressed using aconstraint method. The particularity of the problem studied is that it allows the rejection or acceptance of jobs by the service suppliers. In addition, the prices and produced quantities are established in order of equalizing the profits along all the producers associated with the CMfg platform.

(p5.1) Zhang et al. [34] suggest a process-by-stages approach for the assignment problem of tasks to producers. In the first stage, the production process is planned, either by a multi-agent system or by simple proximity, and in a second stage, the scheduling is carried out. In this case, the scheduling is done using Constraint Programming as the resolution method. Akbaripour et al. [24] tackle a scheduling problem with time windows for the availability of productive resources. To solve the problem of transportation and production of customer orders, the authors propose a MILP model. The model seeks to minimize production and transportation costs, as well as production and transportation times, while also trying to maximize the quality of service used for production. They solve the problem using CPLEX. Other approach is to consider different levels of decision, in which the decision of one player is linked to the decision of another one. Wang et al. [35] is an example of this approach. In their work, the authors propose a multi-agent structure, where service providers (short-term agents) optimize their performance linked to a hierarchical agent with priority with long-term objectives. However, the hierarchical agent can optimize its performance measure as long as the objective function of the rest of the short-term agents yield within certain limits. Different problems and configurations of the cloud manufacturing problem are analyzed, as well as different objective functions (total completion time and the weighted number of late jobs). In addition, the authors study the complexity of the different problems proposed, and present resolution methods for some of them.
## (s6) Game Theory based approach
(p6.0) A widely used approach for decision-making problems in CMfg is Game Theory. The main advantage of this approach is that it allows the decision-making process to be decentralized so that customers and suppliers of production resources directly coordinate their activity. In Liu et al. [36] the system under study is modeled as a multi-agent system, in which the different agents negotiate and resolve the decision problems involved in CMfg. To do this, first, customer orders must be broken down into subtasks in order to be able to make the corresponding matching between subtasks and productive resources. In Xiao et al. [37], also a decentralized problem is analyzed but considering the customer's perspective. The customer establishes his payments in order to minimize total production times, total production costs, and improving reliability. To find Nash equilibria, a Biogeography-based optimization algorithm is used. Chen et al. [38] suggest a cooperative game approach, in which customers seek to obtain resources to produce their orders. Initially, the allocation of clients to resources is done centrally, and then, in a second stage, collaborative games are proposed with the aim to improve the initial allocation. The authors demonstrate that this problem is NP-hard. Finally, the authors propose dynamic programming algorithms to solve some of the problems proposed.

(p6.1) Another type of problem that can be addressed with game theory is the case of incomplete information, as in Liu et al. [39]. In this work, the authors propose a decision mechanism based on a double auction. These auctions are held between the service applicant (customer) and the service provider (producer). The mechanism ensures that the services finally assigned meet the quality, time, and cost preferences defined by the clients. Another approach to address the problem is to consider a non-cooperative public goods game model as in Bai et al. [40]. This approach allows us to converge towards an optimal schedule more efficiently than other methods, such as Genetic Algorithm (GA). Another strategy is to consider biddings as in Liu et al. [41]. The objective of this work is to maximize the overall benefit of all participants. In the case of decomposing the production tasks into sub-tasks, the bidding method is also applied. The authors' results make it possible to ensure that the proposed approach efficiently solves the problem, as well as to ensure trust and fairness among the participants.
## (s8) Machine learning and Artificial intelligence
(p8.0) This subsection analyzes the articles that have used methods based on Machine Learning or Artificial Intelligence. This subsection clearly shows the speed of growth in the study of scheduling problems in CMfg. Until the review of [11] there are practically no papers based on these approaches, while from that review to the moment, there have been several publications in this field. As the first contribution in this line is Liu et al. [25], where the same authors as in [11], propose an exploratory study on the subject. In [25], a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) based approach is proposed, which combines the benefits of deep learning with reinforcement learning. The work develops a framework where the different scheduling problems in CMfg environments can be solved from DRL. This approach would automatically extract high-level characteristics of tasks and resources, as well as the learning inherent in scheduling patterns, rules, and approaches. In Chen et al. [64], the objective is to minimize the makespan and the total traveled distance. To obtain non-dominated solutions, the authors develop an agent system that makes decisions using the method of Reinforcement Learning based Assigning Policy (RLAP). Under the RLAP approach, tasks are assigned to each agent, which allows to solve problems with dynamic features. Dong et al. [65] suggests a Deep-Q-Network (DQN) method for the task assignment problem, which includes a classification of the tasks and the current status of the process. The proposed method is compared against other classical resolution heuristics proposed to minimize the makespan. The numerical experiments show the benefits of DQN when surpassing the other methods. An application based on Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) can be found in Zhu et al. [27]. A multi-user demand problem and the resource allocation problem are presented as a multi-objective optimization problem. This multi-objective problem seeks to minimize operating time, maximizing the use of resources, and minimizing general expenses. The authors transform the multi-objective problem into a reinforcement learning (RL) problem and solve using ANN. In Morariu et al. [66] , recurrent neural networks (RNN) are applied. In this case, the authors use the RNN to generate a predictor of future scenarios and thus obtain the schedule. To do this, the providers of productive resources provide information in real-time, about the current state of the production process. This information is then filtered and processed by RNN, to estimate the near-future scenario, and this feeds the optimizer that determines the schedule.
## (s9) Heterogeneous approaches
(p9.0) Finally, we present below some works that contribute to scheduling in CMfg, but that due to their specific characteristics do not fall into any of the previous sections (or if they do, it would be in more than one of them). Therefore, these works are analyzed individually in this subsection.

(p9.1) The first work of this group is Zhou et al. [67]. In this work, the authors propose a model based on Discrete Events Simulation (DES). Based on this approach, the authors study the dynamic relationships that occur between the different elements of the CMfg system (providers, customers and owners of the platform). Different numerical experiments are reported, with variations in the values of demand and resources, since the authors claim that this kind of study will be important for future dynamic developments of CMfg.

(p9.2) In line with the previous work, Zhou et al. [68] also propose an analysis of the events present in a CMfg environment. However, in this work, the authors go one step further and develop heuristic methods for sequencing tasks (event-triggered dynamic scheduling). The proposed heuristic is based on determining those events that require or not the activation of a new operation. In this way, the proposed heuristic is able to achieve better results than other existing heuristics.

(p9.3) A highly customized method for scheduling problems in CMfg is proposed by He et al. [69]. The authors consider a problem similar to that of [48] but using a different allocation approach. In this case, the resolution method is based on a heuristic to solve the scheduling by analyzing the job priorities. Jobs with the same priority are managed in such a way that they are all optimized simultaneously.

(p9.4) In Additive Manufacturing environments, the assignment of tasks to the right supplier, is a key element for solving scheduling problems in CMfg. In this sense, Wang et al. [70] propose a special method based on computer vision algorithms. Thus, the form factors and dimensions of the tasks commissioned by clients can be matched with the correct supplier. The planning of the operations is based on the results of the computer vision algorithms.

(p9.5) The last of the miscellaneous works, Zhou et al. [71], especially analyzes the impact of implicit logistics services in a CMfg system. First, a set of pre-selected manufacturing service providers is generated. Thus, tasks can be assigned considering logistics efficiency. To achieve efficiency in the logistics service, a heuristic method is used that is based on the distance between customers and suppliers.
## (s11) Review results discussion
(p11.0) As a first summary of the performed review, Figure 2 is presented. This figure shows the representativeness of each of the methods used to solve Scheduling problems in CMfg in terms of percentages of the total reviewed papers. Exact approaches. These types of approaches represent 13% of the articles reviewed, as can be seen in Figure 2. Within the reviewed papers it is interesting to note that, when studying the problem with exact approaches, the structural analysis of the problem and its behavior take on another depth. In spite of the complexity of the problem, certain methods and strategies are proposed to optimally solve the problem under particular assumptions, [35]. On the other hand, the study of the problem in a exactly manner can provide new insights about how the complexity scales as the problem size increases. We note that in a cloud-based paradigm, the pay-as-you-go criterion can make the system grows considerably in a very short time. This may cause a considerable pressure on the CMfg platform, as it must ensure the quality of service between customers and suppliers.

(p11.1) Game theory approaches. Based on the review of articles related to game theory, the models and results achieved are very interesting and promising. Naturally, game theory allows solving a decision problem in a decentralized and efficient way, in which each player obtains the best possible result for the scenario faced. Although the CMfg scheduling study is very recent, there is clear evidence (13% of the works reviewed use this approach) that it is a more than an adequate approach to address this problem.

(p11.2) Bio-inspired metaheuristics. Metaheuristics based-on procedures have been widely the most suggested method to solve scheduling problems in CMfg, representing more than 50% of the reviewed articles. The main argument for this percentage may be the computational complexity of scheduling problems, where in many cases they are NP-complete [19]. In addition, the problem of matching or assigning each customer's order to each service supplier must be solved [5], which increases the difficulty of resolution. Considering the versatility of bio-inspired metaheuristics to address combinatorial optimization problems, they are an excellent option for the problems considered in this present paper. In this sense, a large number of the reviewed papers about metaheuristics make use of GA to solve the problem. GA can be considered as one of the most general methods of the bio-inspired metaheuristic approach. Thus, it would be concluded that there is still a lot of room for the design of more tailored bio-inspired metaheuristics.

(p11.3) Machine learning and Artificial intelligence. The last group of works presented in this review about scheduling in CMfg, are those based on the approaches of Machine learning and Artificial Intelligence. These resolution methods have exploded in recent years, extending their capabilities and applications to areas that have never been thought of from that perspective [72]. Past CMfg reviews have found no articles about it, as mentioned by [25]. Considering all the groups of the works reviewed, this is the smallest, representing 10% of the total. However, those articles have shown that these approaches can be valuable to address preference-driven allocation problems.
## (s12) Future research lines
(p12.0) Scheduling in Cloud Manufacturing is a topic of growing interest in the scientific community, where notable contributions have been made in modelling and solving related problems. However, we believe that there is still a long way to go to reach the maturity that scheduling has achieved in other fields. With this idea in mind, we provide below certain directions for future research. We note that the proposed lines for future research are based on those works considered for the systematic review presented in Section 3, with special emphasis on the optimization approaches used. For those readers interested in other topics of CMfg such as task decomposition or matching, we direct to [11].
