# A Review of Accelerated Long-Term Forgetting in Epilepsy

CorpusID: 228087886 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73544d8f799626f214f1ab568c74bc783bf77ad9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73544d8f799626f214f1ab568c74bc783bf77ad9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Search Strategy and Results
(p1.0) We searched for articles investigating ALF in epilepsy patients by using a search string "accelerated" AND "forgetting" AND "epilepsy" to retrieve results from PubMed and Web of Science. To our knowledge, Fitzgerald et al. wrote the most recent review article with explicit emphasis on exploring ALF in relation to epilepsy through group studies-it was therefore added as an additional source [13]. The search string has been chosen because of the wide use of the term [10]. The procedure of article selection is presented in Figure 1. The inclusion criteria were (1) a group of patients with epilepsy or seizures tested for ALF through any selected material, (2) the procedure of ALF testing is described, and (3) the data for the selected recall and recognition points is presented and/or discussed. We omitted uncontrolled case reports and case series from the search protocol but included some notable examples in the discussion. For each article, we noted the type of epilepsy or seizures the patients had, whether they experienced seizures or were on antiepileptic medication. We presumed that ALF was present if the study group performed as well as or better than the control group at a short delay (e.g., up to an hour), but presented with a memory impairment at a longer delay. Systematic quality analysis by level of evidence was judged inappropriate. While methodological evaluation of ALF studies before 2014 has been performed based on specific criteria by Elliot et al., potential bias in other studies that are discussed is noted individually throughout this review [10].

(p1.1) Fifty-one article met the inclusion criteria. Sixteen studies explored ALF in patients with TEA and 21 included patients with TLE. Four studies examined patients with generalized epilepsies. Some reports included patient groups with different disorders: TLE and genetic generalized epilepsy (GGE)-3, TLE and extratemporal epilepsy (ETE)-5, various epilepsies-2. Seven studies (14%) did not observe ALF, suggesting the disorder may be frequent, but not ubiquitous among selected epilepsy patients. Methodological tendencies to produce positive results and publication bias should be considered as well. Fifty-one article met the inclusion criteria. Sixteen studies explored ALF in patients with TEA and 21 included patients with TLE. Four studies examined patients with generalized epilepsies. Some reports included patient groups with different disorders: TLE and genetic generalized epilepsy (GGE)-3, TLE and extratemporal epilepsy (ETE)-5, various epilepsies-2. Seven studies (14%) did not observe ALF, suggesting the disorder may be frequent, but not ubiquitous among selected epilepsy patients. Methodological tendencies to produce positive results and publication bias should be considered as well. The studies involving patients with TLE (both alone and including patients with ETE or GGE) are presented in Table 1. Reports exploring ALF in patients with TEA and other focal or generalized epilepsies are outlined in Tables 2 and 3, accordingly. Table 1. Group studies of patients with temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE). Ordered in descending number of TLE patients involved. Information that was lacking or is not applicable is presented as blank cells. AEDs-antiepileptic drugs, CVLT-C-California Verbal Learning Test-Children's Version, DCS-R-Diagnosticum für Cerebralschädigung-Revised, ETE-extratemporal epilepsy, GASE-Global Assessment of the Severity of Epilepsy, GGE-genetic generalized epilepsy, HVLT-R-Hopkins Verbal Learning Test-Revised, IGE-idiopathic generalized epilepsy, L-TLE-left temporal lobe epilepsy, M/F-male/female, RAVLT-Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test, ROCF-Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Table 2. Group studies involving patients with transient epileptic amnesia (TEA). Ordered in descending number of TEA patients involved. Information that was lacking or is not applicable is presented as blank cells. AEDs-antiepileptic drugs, GKMDT-Graham-Kendall Memory for Designs test, M/F-male/female, RAVLT-Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test, ROCF-Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure 
## (s8) Material Specificity in ALF
(p8.0) Knowing that the dominant hemisphere is more associated with language function, an intuitive presumption would be that ALF of word or story material should be more prominent in left TLE and ALF of visuospatial data-in right TLE [69][70][71]. There is some evidence that this classic notion of hemisphere dominance may be adapted to the phenomenon of ALF. For example, left TLE has been found to predominate in several reports of ALF demonstrated by verbal memory testing [36,37].
## (s11) Clinical Characteristics of TEA
(p11.0) TEA may be understood as a TLE subtype comprised of a specific presentation of transient anterograde or retrograde amnesia episodes (mostly shorter than 60 min) with witnessed preservation of cognitive function during the event [4]. TEA patients are older, more often male and experience the attacks from several times a year to several times a day [4,44,46,80,81]. Amnesia on awakening, partial amnesia, topographic, and autobiographic memory impairment are characteristic of TEA [4,81,82].
## (s14) Focal Extratemporal Epilepsy and ALF
(p14.0) Focal extratemporal epilepsy in adults has been revealed to produce ALF in a story recall task after learning-to-criterion and to be present in individual cases while testing for verbal recall [23,31,38]. As mentioned previously, such uncued recall deficits may represent an impairment of information retrieval. This further adds to the idea that ALF is probably caused by problems in temporal and extratemporal neocortical sites and/or their connectivity with the hippocampus. Such localization would produce both the late (systems) consolidation deficits observable in TEA and TLE and the retrieval impairment in ETE.
## (s15) ALF in GGE
(p15.0) In contrast to TLE and TEA, which encompass pathogenetic mechanisms in the memory structures of the temporal lobe, GGE has no such direct association. Nevertheless, both short and long-term memory function can generally be impaired in patients with GGE [85,86]. Further, the phenomenon of ALF has been demonstrated in children with GGE. While Davidson et al. found ALF in children with and without seizures, but associated the finding with poor initial learning, Gascoigne et al. showed that ALF is related to epilepsy severity and is still evident with controlled learning conditions in children who experience seizures [59,60]. In addition, there are indications that early-onset ALF in GGE does not subside over time-even with the reduction of seizures or the severity of epilepsy [7]. In this longitudinal study by Grayson-Collins et al., only recall was affected, thus revealing a potential retrieval deficit in the patients examined. While subclinical generalized discharges have been linked to poor long-term recall and ALF, the latter was absent in studies of adult GGE, including the report by Beilharz et al. [5,6,19,61]. The authors employed both the incomplete and complete learning paradigms, allowing comparison with the pediatric studies. A study by Muhlert et al. (evaluated being the best in terms of methodology by Elliot et al.) of adult patients with GGE did not report ALF either-forgetting of visual and verbal information was comparable to controls [5,10]. Overall, while generalized seizures do not seem to influence adult long-term retention on a level that would precipitate evident ALF, they may more likely impair retrieval in children.
## (s19) Is Seizure Activity or Structural Damage Essential to Cause ALF?
(p19.0) In this review, we considered the clinical, imaging and EEG correlates for ALF in TLE, TEA, ETE, and GGE. Prior to our analysis, Baker and Zeman proposed four possible mechanisms to explain the reasons underlying ALF in epilepsy: clinical or subclinical seizure activity, structural brain pathology, side effects of anti-convulsant drugs, and psychological mechanisms [3]. ALF, however, is not strongly associated with either of these clinical circumstances, except for some evidence linking ALF with subclinical interictal activity. We suggest that as much as the symptoms of long-term forgetting can be evident in the clinical setting, overt seizure activity or gross structural changes might overshadow the delicate pathology of ALF rather than explain it. For instance, it is unclear what part do hippocampal lesions play in the acceleration of forgetting; while the hippocampus probably acts in both synaptic and systems consolidation, its atrophy or injury seems to be more related to immediate anterograde deficits, not long-term forgetting. In fact, our review outlines many occasions where extrahippocampal sites (such as the amygdala, the prefrontal cortex) or connectivity problems are linked to observable ALF. As Helmstaedter et al. put it, "ALF seems to be a non-lateralized fronto-limbic dysfunction rather than a lateralized hippocampal dysfunction" [21]. There is also no solid evidence to consider seizures or subclinical interictal discharges as causing ALF-the underlying neuronal damage or synaptic reorganization, however, might unite the two [101]. This would in theory explain the accounts of ALF in non-epileptic disorders and the association of ALF with seizure severity in children GGE and adult TLE [3,16,60].
## (s21) Detecting ALF in Clinical Practice
(p21.0) The prevalence of ALF is uncertain, but memory complaints in epilepsy are frequent [102]. The benefits of searching for ALF routinely in patients with reported forgetfulness is questionable-it remains unclear, how such a finding would change the patient's care strategy. It could nonetheless be important in substantiating the patient's concerns by providing objective evidence of an existing memory disorder. Such validation of subjective complaints may relieve the patient's distress by reassuring that ALF is not a functional disorder, but likely a consequence of epilepsy. However, ALF detection for both clinical and research purposes is not straightforward. The material employed to expose ALF varies in the type of information tested (verbal, story, picture, visuospatial design, route, real-life events etc.) while the paradigm employed during evaluation (recall, cued recall, and recognition) probably allows detection of distinct memory processes [10]. There are methodological recommendations to prevent bias during ALF testing and improve the patient experience [10,103]. These include testing for both verbal and visuospatial items, evaluating both recall and recognition, avoiding short-term memory influence (by prolonging the first testing interval) and ceiling, floor, and rehearsal effects. Further, new tests of both verbal and visuospatial memory are being explored for their potential use in ALF experiments [103]. Incidental memory tests may also be a practical solution as they would detect ALF for real-life events and be easy to effectuate in the clinical setting [45].
## (s23) Memory Rehabilitation
(p23.0) Alternative tactics to improve everyday information retention have been explored. For instance, the use of rehearsal and repetition, which is discouraged in clinical ALF trials, could benefit patients in means of overall recollection of memories [62,100]. Because recollection depends on initial acquisition, careful learning and/or treatment of attention deficits may simulate the learning-to-criterion paradigm and mitigate the negative effects of incomplete initial learning. Even wakeful resting after having learnt new data has been demonstrated to improve long-term recollection [107,108]. Del Felice et al. reviewed existing memory rehabilitation studies in patients with TLE and proposed that cognitive strategies, external mental aids, computerized training and non-invasive brain stimulation should be further explored to provide behavioral and mental techniques for reducing the burden of forgetfulness [109].
