# Molecular Sciences Pathophysiology of Peripheral Arterial Disease (PAD): A Review on Oxidative Disorders

CorpusID: 220046334 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7fecc86481319eba9f16bb3b114a774df5fa38](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7fecc86481319eba9f16bb3b114a774df5fa38)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s3) Introduction on Topic
(p3.0) Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is one of the clinical types of atherosclerotic diseases. For this reason, particular attention should be given to its frequent diagnosis in elderly individuals, with particular prevalence of PAD-affected patients in socially and economically advanced countries [1,2].
## (s4) Biochemistry of the Physical Exercise: Pro and Anti Oxidative Effects
(p4.0) The close relationship between muscle stress and arterial wall damage and cardiovascular events has been scientifically demonstrated [7]. PE acts on arterial resistance inducing vasodilating effects, modulates the arterial pressure, improves both the insulin resistance and fat metabolism, and acts on the adipose system. PE positively regulates systemic low-grade inflammation, reduces the high circulating levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, counteracts the endothelial dysfunction, reduces platelet adhesion and aggregation, and improves sympatho-vagal balance [8]. PE regulates the arterial pressure, reduces the high plasma level of lipid and lipoproteins, and reduces both overweight and obesity. PE gives its notable positive impact on the so-called risk factors for cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). PE counteracts the physical inactivity that leads to clinical conditions through dysregulation of such molecular ways.
## (s6) Antioxidants, and Heme Oxygenase 1 in Peripheral Artery Disease
(p6.0) PAD patients suffer from modified acetyl-CoA ester accumulation when the concentration of carnitine in muscle cells lowers [62]. In PAD patients there is inadequate ATP generation. Thus, cell respiratory activity worsened. PAD patients show increased levels of esterified derivatives of acyl-CoA, which may be closely related to lowered blood perfusion [63].

(p6.1) This metabolic imbalance occurs when muscle and plasma levels of carnitine are low, as, e.g., in patients suffering from progressed PAD [64]. The results of studies suggest that carnitine stimulates glucose disposal and oxidation, leading to the efficient utilization of glucose under ischemia as occurs in PAD patients. The anti-oxidative drug propionyl L-carnitine was shown to modify OxS in PADs [64][65][66].

(p6.2) It is noteworthy to clarify the role played by biochemical agents in cardiovascular tissue. It has been demonstrated that OxS characterized PAD as the higher levels of the nitric oxide 2 enzyme (NOX2) found in PAD patients compared to normal subjects [67]. In PAD, there is an upregulation of the NO bioavailability, and thus an improvement of the NO synthesis was the target to achieve a treatment of the PAD patients.

(p6.3) Different antioxidant agents and drugs were tested in studies forwarded to evaluate the OxS inhibition. Vitamins C [68][69][70] and E [71,72], glutathione [73,74], natural agents as the polyphenols (epicathechin, catechin) [75,76], and carnitine were tested to counteract the OxS both in clinical trials or in the HUVEC model. Antioxidant agents and drugs showed several anti OxS effects concerning the clinical performances (walking distance, pain free distance) linked to the OxS, on endothelial dysfunction (microculatory perfusion, flow mediated dilatation, arterial response to exercise, platelet dysfunction/aggregation), and on surrogate oxidative biomarkers bloodstream released, i.e., malondhyaldheide, 4-hydroxynonale, and TABRS ( Table 1). The supplementation of anti OxS agents could be evaluated as an additional and helpful option in threating PAD patients. 
## (s9) Discussion
(p9.0) OxS is involved both in triggering and developing the atherosclerosis. Consequently, any agents, drugs and strategies must counteract its deleterious effects on arterial functions. The efficacy of medical strategies in treating PAD is currently debated. The most important objectives of the following long-term outcomes of PAD patients are the reduction in CVD events, and the potency of open peripheral arterial circulation as result of open or interventional procedures. On the other hand, OxS produced by chronic peripheral ischemia induced by haemodynamic imbalance must be fought to restore cell and tissue metabolism. New medical strategies must be directed towards achieving objectives such as improving oxygen tissue extraction and creating angiogenesis or arteriogenesis. In this regard, the regular supervised PE has shown interesting effects in treating PAD patients: it improves physical and muscle performance and acts on cell and tissue metabolisms, such that regulated physical exercise seems to counteract OxS. There is great interest in the vaso-protective effects of HO-1, which is largely attributable to its end products, being a potent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory and also by affecting the proliferation, migration and adhesion of smooth vascular muscle cells, endothelial cells, and leukocytes [94][95][96][97][98]. It is known that the redox capability of HO-1 is regulated by Nrf2 [95]. The protective role of HO-1 in several atherosclerotic diseases was still released; however, a few data were still released concerning HO-1 in PAD. Poor attention to this field could be caused by low prevalence of PAD compared to other atherosclerotic diseases. Consequently, it seems there is less attention paid to PAD in searching and in diagnosing other atherosclerotic diseases (coronary, carotid diseases)

(p9.1) Since pharmacotherapy for PAD patients failed to fully achieve some objectives (walking distance improvement, pain reduction or absence, cardiac or carotid diseases morbidity, PAD's outcome and prognosis, quality of life) there is an interest in new therapeutic options such as targeting the HO-1. In fact, a number of studies have clarified the interesting capability of the 
## (s10) Discussion
(p10.0) OxS is involved both in triggering and developing the atherosclerosis. Consequently, any agents, drugs and strategies must counteract its deleterious effects on arterial functions. The efficacy of medical strategies in treating PAD is currently debated. The most important objectives of the following long-term outcomes of PAD patients are the reduction in CVD events, and the potency of open peripheral arterial circulation as result of open or interventional procedures. On the other hand, OxS produced by chronic peripheral ischemia induced by haemodynamic imbalance must be fought to restore cell and tissue metabolism. New medical strategies must be directed towards achieving objectives such as improving oxygen tissue extraction and creating angiogenesis or arteriogenesis. In this regard, the regular supervised PE has shown interesting effects in treating PAD patients: it improves physical and muscle performance and acts on cell and tissue metabolisms, such that regulated physical exercise seems to counteract OxS. There is great interest in the vaso-protective effects of HO-1, which is largely attributable to its end products, being a potent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory and also by affecting the proliferation, migration and adhesion of smooth vascular muscle cells, endothelial cells, and leukocytes [94][95][96][97][98]. It is known that the redox capability of HO-1 is regulated by Nrf2 [95]. The protective role of HO-1 in several atherosclerotic diseases was still released; however, a few data were still released concerning HO-1 in PAD. Poor attention to this field could be caused by low prevalence of PAD compared to other atherosclerotic diseases. Consequently, it seems there is less attention paid to PAD in searching and in diagnosing other atherosclerotic diseases (coronary, carotid diseases).

(p10.1) Since pharmacotherapy for PAD patients failed to fully achieve some objectives (walking distance improvement, pain reduction or absence, cardiac or carotid diseases morbidity, PAD's outcome and prognosis, quality of life) there is an interest in new therapeutic options such as targeting the HO-1. In fact, a number of studies have clarified the interesting capability of the induced HO-1 through dietary antioxidants (i.e., curcumin, polyphenols, isothyocianates), through PE, and through some available drugs (statins, fibrates) [96][97][98][99][100][101][102][103][104][105]. We are looking for new advanced drugs derived from further study and encourage researches to undertake this work.
