# Blended Learning as Instructional Model in Vocational Education: Literature Review

CorpusID: 228949999 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8720bedda37fd71afac3ab733876963ace5d97be](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8720bedda37fd71afac3ab733876963ace5d97be)

Fields: Education, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The development of digital technology creates one innovation in learning models that can occur both online and offline (known as blended learning). Blended learning is a formal education program through the delivery of content and instruction through digital and online media that control elements of students over time, place, and  [55]. Many universities implement a mixed learning process because it can promote effective learning and successfully integrate online and offline classes for adult students [2]. Teachers who are involved in mixed learning processes in vocational education, tend to adopt different approaches to teaching as well as mixed learning designs [3].

(p0.1) The advantage of blended learning is that students can learn flexibly, freely, and broadly wherever and whenever [4]. Blended models can improve student's performance in vocational education and lead to more effective learning. [5]. Blended learning can reduce the number of class meetings [6]. The blended learning model gives teachers more time in learning activities that involve students in improving their abilities.
## (s2) Results
(p2.0) The articles that have been collected must be examined one by one. In the first stage, it must be ascertained whether all are in accordance with the predetermined selection criteria. If the initial search results are extensive, filtering can be done by assessing the abstract of each article. After making sure that it fits the criteria, each study report is assessed for its quality by the researcher.

(p2.1) The explicit criteria for assessing the quality of research articles included the design, implementation and topic analysis aspects of 45 published articles. The results summary of qualitative studies can be seen in table 1.  Based on table 1 regarding summary of qualitative studies, a meta-analysis has been carried out on the publication, then the Limitations have been seen

(p2.2) The results obtained are considered that Blended learning is an activity that takes place in two different areas, namely in person and online. Locally designed mixed learning should fit the environment for both teachers and students [30].

(p2.3) Thus, combining online and offline learning requires a precise proportion of application. The proportion of learning using information technology can be seen in the classifications in integrated face-to-face learning & online can be see table 2. 
## (s7) Source: [21][22][31]
(p7.0) Based on table 2, it can be seen that the proportion of blended learning is in the range of 30-79%. Regarding the proportion of online activity, it appears that there is a relationship between the proportion of mixed and perceptions that result in Mixed Moderate (36% -40% online) and High (50% online) and High (50% online) tend to have the most positive perceptions of blended learning, compared to Low proportion (27% -30% online) [32]. The result is in line with government policies that allow universities to implement blended learning.

(p7.1) Several universities in Indonesia have implemented blended learning with a range of 50% online and 50% offline. And also 60% enrolled in college offline and the others studied online. These proxies can adapt to individual courses and other considerations. Meanwhile, according to Saeman, theoretical subjects for online proportions are certainly more dominant or whereas practical subjects use offline learning more. The combination of face-to-face and online was done in a complementary manner, while activities and online communication and face-to-face adjustments are needed. In results, teachers must be able to identify the characteristics of the courses applied.
## (s11) c. Vocational Blended Learning Modeling
(p11.0) One of the developments of blended learning in vocational is Vocational Blended Learning (VBL) modeling. The results showed that in order to determine the learning model, it needs to consider the suitability of the educational model, techniques, teaching methods, facilities, and infrastructure. The framework of Vocational can be seen in Figure 4.  [46] A framework of Vocational Blended Learning Modelin, describes three phases starting from plan, analysis, and design or self-evaluation and prototyping as the implementation phase as shown in figure 4. This framework requires 1) Infrastructure (technical) to measure the availability of information system hardware such as computer and server bandwidth. 2) Integration between content and the ICT learning process.

(p11.1) The development of professionalism and the successful application of blended learning depends on the abilities of human resources, lecturers, and students. It is also necessary to design lesson plans according to the needs of the model and select materials that are in accordance with the characteristics of vocational education. In the case of learning media, props are needed that can simulate actual working conditions. Developing pedagogy in the use of information technology is instrumental in increasing teacher capacity. 4) Support (policy and financial), other factors that can support the successful use of blended learning are in the form of institutional policies and financial support.
