# Ultrasonic Guided-Waves Sensors and Integrated Structural Health Monitoring Systems for Impact Detection and Localization: A Review

CorpusID: 233459036 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e4f7aa6d2f5465699f49f89b79fa35f427b980c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e4f7aa6d2f5465699f49f89b79fa35f427b980c)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s3) Ultrasonic Guided Waves Generated by Different Velocity of Impacts on Isotropic Elastic Plates
(p3.0) Impact monitoring systems can be designed for different applications, where impacts with different objects hitting the structure have different energy, mass, and velocity. It is of interest to explain the different effects on UGWs that were generated by impacts at different velocity. There are several categories of impact loading: low velocity (large mass), intermediate velocity, high/ballistic velocity (small mass), and hyper velocity impacts. These categories of impact loading are important because there are remarkable differences in energy transfer between the object and target, energy dissipation, and damage propagation mechanisms as the velocity of the object varies. Low velocity impacts occur typically at a velocity below 10 m/s, intermediate impacts occur between 10 m/s and 50 m/s, high velocity (ballistic) impacts have a range of velocity from 50 m/s to 1000 m/s, and hyper velocity impacts have the range of 2 km/s to 5 km/s, according to the literature [23].
## (s5) •
(p5.0) The frequency content of the ultrasonic signals that are generated by impacts depends on the impact velocity [28,31] and it is not modified during the propagation inside the plate [32].

(p5.1) According to the above assumptions, we can remark that the main feature of the signals generated by impacts is the impact velocity that also determines the amplitude of the Lamb waves. From the physics laws for a falling body from a certain height, the potential energy is converted to kinetic energy; the impact velocity v i can be calculated by knowing the kinetic energy E k and the mass m of the impacting object, as reported in the following formula: The study reported in [28] shows that two fundamental propagation modes can be distinguished in impact phenomena: a slow propagation mode (flexural mode or A 0 mode) and a fast propagation mode (extensional mode or S 0 mode).

(p5.2) The amplitude of the signal in A 0 mode is dominant as compared to the S 0 mode, but the amplitude of the latter is strongly linked to the speed of the impact: the greater the speed of the impact the greater the amplitude of the signal relative to the S 0 mode. The authors in [28] also reported an acquired signal from a high-speed impact (700 m/s), where they demonstrate, when that applying a low-pass filter with (with a cut-off frequency of 800 kHz), it is possible to only extract the two fundamental propagation modes (A 0 and S 0 ) and, in this case, the amplitude of the S 0 mode becomes comparable to that of the A 0 mode. According to the authors experience, we investigated the possibility to also extract the S 0 mode signal in low velocity impacts by applying a low-pass filter in the analogic front-end electronic board with proper cut-off frequency. Figure 3 shows ultrasonic signals that are generated by a low-velocity impact (about 3 m/s) on an aluminum plate with thickness 1.5 mm. 

(p5.3) The study reported in [28] shows that two fundamental propagation modes can be distinguished in impact phenomena: a slow propagation mode (flexural mode or A0 mode) and a fast propagation mode (extensional mode or S0 mode).

(p5.4) The amplitude of the signal in A0 mode is dominant as compared to the S0 mode, but the amplitude of the latter is strongly linked to the speed of the impact: the greater the speed of the impact the greater the amplitude of the signal relative to the S0 mode. The authors in [28] also reported an acquired signal from a high-speed impact (700 m/s), where they demonstrate, when that applying a low-pass filter with (with a cut-off frequency of 800 kHz), it is possible to only extract the two fundamental propagation modes (A0 and S0) and, in this case, the amplitude of the S0 mode becomes comparable to that of the A0 mode. According to the authors experience, we investigated the possibility to also extract the S0 mode signal in low velocity impacts by applying a low-pass filter in the analogic front-end electronic board with proper cut-off frequency. Figure 3 shows ultrasonic signals that are generated by a low-velocity impact (about 3 m/s) on an aluminum plate with thickness 1.5 mm. Ultrasonic signals generated by a low-velocity impact (about 3 m/s) in blue color, and the same signal filtered by an analogic low-pass filter with a cut-off frequency of 400 kHz in red color. The dotted green circle represents the portion of the signal relative to the A0 mode; the dotted yellow circle represents the portion of the signal relative to the S0 mode.

(p5.5) From the analysis of Figure 3, it is apparent that the fast propagation mode S0 becomes comparable in amplitude with the A0 mode only after filtering the ultrasonic propagating signal that is generated by the impact. The possibility of processing the fast S0 mode instead of the slower A0 mode, is often the best signal processing design strategy, because this early arrival time signal is less affected by overlapping of the multiple reflections from the structure edges [33]; moreover, the impact signal detection and positioning is even more complicated in large structures for the higher attenuation and the mode conversions after the propagation on areas with different thicknesses. The topics briefly re- From the analysis of Figure 3, it is apparent that the fast propagation mode S 0 becomes comparable in amplitude with the A 0 mode only after filtering the ultrasonic propagating signal that is generated by the impact. The possibility of processing the fast S 0 mode instead of the slower A 0 mode, is often the best signal processing design strategy, because this early arrival time signal is less affected by overlapping of the multiple reflections from the structure edges [33]; moreover, the impact signal detection and positioning is even more complicated in large structures for the higher attenuation and the mode conversions after the propagation on areas with different thicknesses. The topics briefly reviewed in this section remark the importance of the understanding the physical background for designing sensors and the analog front-end to simplify and make the information extraction from the signal reliable. 
## (s12) Comparison of Piezoelectric PVDF and PZT Sensors Sensitivity for Impact Detection
(p12.0) In the previous section, we reported the design and fabrication of a circular sensor that was integrated in the same IDT device with the aim to capture impact generated Lamb wave signals propagating from any direction with respect to the sensor center. Some companies have specialized in providing patch piezoelectric sensors with characteristics that are suitable for acoustic source localization, and off the shelf devices are available from Acellent and Physik Instrumente. Specifically, in our design, the circular PVDF sensor has a diameter of 6.5 mm, similar to Acellent's SML-SP-1/4-PZT sensor (1/4", or 6.35 mm) (see Figure 4).

(p12.1) The sensitivity of the circular piezoelectric element as a receiver was assessed by comparing it to a PZT device of a similar active area (see Figure 4), the Physik Instrumente P-876.SP1. These two sensors were taped side-by-side to an aluminum plate 1.2 mm thick, with a third transducer used as transmitter and placed at distance of 200 mm from both. A Morlet wavelet centered at 250 kHz was transmitted and received using the same pre-amplifier for both sensors: an instrumentation amplifier (INA) providing a voltage gain of 78 dB at 250 kHz. The excitation wavelet and the acquired traces are plotted in Figure 7a,b, respectively.

(p12.2) The plot shows that, as expected from the piezoelectric properties of the materials, the circular element sensitivity is lower than the PZT device. However, such a wide difference may not be a problem in impact detection applications, where the signals tend to be rather large, as reported in [73], for different impact velocities. In some cases, the large input voltage at the preamplifier input exceeds the rail-to-rail input and saturates the output with a consequent loss of information of the impact event. In conclusion, the different sensitivity of the two piezoelectric materials is not a limiting factor for the choice between the two. There are other differences between that must be considered for the choice of the sensor technology as temperature. In the following section, we analyze the operating temperature range of PVDF piezo films, being limited with respect piezoceramic and piezocomposites (see Table 1). The plot shows that, as expected from the piezoelectric properties of the materials, the circular element sensitivity is lower than the PZT device. However, such a wide difference may not be a problem in impact detection applications, where the signals tend to be rather large, as reported in [73], for different impact velocities. In some cases, the large input voltage at the preamplifier input exceeds the rail-to-rail input and saturates the output with a consequent loss of information of the impact event. In conclusion, the different 
## (s18) Sensors Embedding
(p18.0) Another issue for sensors is the embedding in the structure to ensure durability for service in harsh environmental conditions. Bellan et al. carried out an example of the embedding PVDF IDTs for composite CRFP materials [78], but no easy solution for connections 
## (s19) Sensors Embedding
(p19.0) Another issue for sensors is the embedding in the structure to ensure durability for service in harsh environmental conditions. Bellan et al. carried out an example of the embedding PVDF IDTs for composite CRFP materials [78], but no easy solution for connections and wiring of the piezoelectric film was provided. Following these early works, an innovative approach that was based on bioinspired sensors was proposed by Ghoshal et al. [79] with a ribbon of PZT element array. Recently, the concept of "smartskin" (SS) of bioinspired embedded sensors was developed with several advantages in the installation and the simplified task for signal acquisition and processing [80]. Another interesting approach for "aircraft smart composite skin" (ASCS) was proposed in [81], with the investigation of efficient ways to connect in series and/or parallel a large number of PZT sensors with front end electronics; a signal processing strategy for converting analog information to digital sequences was also a main result towards simplifying the embedded signal processing.
## (s24) Real Time Electronics for Impact Monitoring
(p24.0) In this section, we review the developments on real time electronics for monitoring multiple impacts with multichannel inputs capability, which is a mandatory feature for implementing large sensor network experiments and installation.

(p24.1) From the research point of view is also very important to test the whole SHM with multiple impacts to gather many signals in real time, as shown by Ren et al. [110]. This approach allows, with laboratory experiments, to simulate repetitive impacts at different energy levels and periods to test and optimize the sensor layout and electronic signal conditioning parameters. The multiple impact experiments can be done in the laboratory with programmable mechanical impactors, as reported in [27,50]. This solution is very useful for avoiding time consuming experiments that are based on the pencil-lead break (PLB) tool for the collection of large signal data bases to test advanced algorithms (see Ebrahimkhanlou et al. [105]). Impact detection and positioning is obtained with several sensors (at least three) that were deployed on the structure with a strategy for uniform area coverage and detection sensitivity.
## (s26) Hardware Developments of Wired and Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) for SHM and Validation Tests
(p26.0) From the previous sections, it turns out that, in recent years, the combination of several progresses in sensors and mixed signals low power electronics have introduced a new paradigm for the SHM systems that is the network of sensors nodes, as reported by Farrar et al. [130]. Figure 10 shows a conceptual description of the migration from single distributed sensors on a structure to the sensor network, where, for example, the authors represented a sensor network for monitoring a COPV system. In the same picture are shown the main electronic blocks that are needed to realize a sensor node with active and passive mode operation. The transducer driver (for broadband or narrow band ultrasonic transducers) and the signal conditioning are both controlled by a mixed signal System on Chip (SoC). The connections between nodes and the central unit (see architecture in Figure 10) can be implemented with wired solutions where the power lines for the nodes can sustain a sufficient data rate by using power line communication (PLC) protocols and related chipset. Simplified connection schemes and a low power digital electronic front end has been recently proposed and validated on an aircraft wing by Qiu et al. [81]. The SoC development of a node with passive and active mode operation poses several design issues that are related to the electronic design. The main issues are the power consumption and design of an efficient ultrasonic pulser to gain transduction efficiency in active mode [131]. Local high voltage power amplifiers or pulsers are needed to excite transducers with 10 V to 100 V amplitude excitation signals; the local availability of high voltages is generally obtained with boost DC/DC converters. This type of converter can be realized with SoC solutions, but the integration of passive components (inductors and capacitors) still needs to find a compromise between the size and switching frequency. The dimensions also become critical for the integration into the structure and protection of electronics is needed to guarantee a life-time same as the monitored structure. The cost of wiring is generally high, and the replacement of defective hardware and sensors should be avoided for a time that is comparable to the service life of the facility.

(p26.1) Schubert et al. published one of the first implementation of this paradigm [102] with the Match-X project of the Fraunhofer Institute. The node design and electronic integration with a stack of miniaturized PCBs with embedded PZT transducers that were mounted on a glass-fiber-reinforced-polymer (GFRP) plate is reported. The paper also addressed the requirement of power supply overvoltage protection and detection of failure events that is one important consideration for self-diagnostic of nodes. Lehmann et al. [53] presented, in the same year, the results of validation of the embedded PZT MFC transducers in an aircraft wing. Local processing of the acoustic signatures was demonstrated by the integration of the AFE in the node architecture: the ADC, algorithms for data reduction, and digital communication by a Digital Signal Processor (DSP). Although the adopted solution for data transfer was based on a two wires industrial Controller Area Network (CAN) bus, the authors introduced an expandable feature to open the wireless connection with a Bluetooth module, a key feature for the evolution to a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN). Figure 11 shows the main electronic blocks of a sensor node for a WSN.   Schubert et al. published one of the first implementation of this paradigm [102] with the Match-X project of the Fraunhofer Institute. The node design and electronic integration with a stack of miniaturized PCBs with embedded PZT transducers that were mounted on a glass-fiber-reinforced-polymer (GFRP) plate is reported. The paper also addressed the requirement of power supply overvoltage protection and detection of failure events that is one important consideration for self-diagnostic of nodes. Lehmann et al. [53] presented, in the same year, the results of validation of the embedded PZT MFC transducers in an aircraft wing. Local processing of the acoustic signatures was demonstrated by the integration of the AFE in the node architecture: the ADC, algorithms for data reduction, and digital communication by a Digital Signal Processor (DSP). Although the adopted solution for data transfer was based on a two wires industrial Controller Area Network (CAN) bus, the authors introduced an expandable feature to open the wireless connection with a Bluetooth module, a key feature for the evolution to a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN). Figure 11 shows the main electronic blocks of a sensor node for a WSN.  [102] with the Match-X project of the Fraunhofer Institute. The node design and electronic integration with a stack of miniaturized PCBs with embedded PZT transducers that were mounted on a glass-fiber-reinforced-polymer (GFRP) plate is reported. The paper also addressed the requirement of power supply overvoltage protection and detection of failure events that is one important consideration for self-diagnostic of nodes. Lehmann et al. [53] presented, in the same year, the results of validation of the embedded PZT MFC transducers in an aircraft wing. Local processing of the acoustic signatures was demonstrated by the integration of the AFE in the node architecture: the ADC, algorithms for data reduction, and digital communication by a Digital Signal Processor (DSP). Although the adopted solution for data transfer was based on a two wires industrial Controller Area Network (CAN) bus, the authors introduced an expandable feature to open the wireless connection with a Bluetooth module, a key feature for the evolution to a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN). Figure 11 shows the main electronic blocks of a sensor node for a WSN.   
## (s27) Nodes and Modules with Low Power Electronics Solutions with Energy Harvesting
(p27.0) The main evolution for continuous impacts monitoring is the concept of autonomous nodes. In the case of an SHM system, we can observe that environmental operating conditions, like those described in Figure 1, are represented by different types of energy exchanges with the structure. This interaction from the point of view of the impact event capture is seen as a disturbance or noise, but from the point of view of local energy accumulation, can represent an opportunity.

(p27.1) A preliminary work testifying to this evolution was published by Champaigne et al. [132], describing a wirelessly connected SHM system to interface up to four PZT sensors and an AFE that was capable of matching with the characteristics of different types of sensors.

(p27.2) In that paper, low power electronics that were available at that time were adopted to be compatible with charge capacity of a dual AA-cell battery pack to reach an operational time up to 10 total hours. A consideration must be made about the careful choice done for digital electronics, such as the ADC, FPGA, and digital communication, which are typically power-hungry devices. A recent paper that can solve the power demands for continuous monitoring is proposed by Fu et al. [133], and the solution consists of keeping in a sleep mode a section of the digital electronic processing until a detected event switches on the power supply of the data acquisition and processing blocks; Overly et al. published a similar approach with a compact electronic design for a wireless smart sensor node [134]. The latter work used low power chips and self-diagnostic for the detection of PZT elements debonding from an aircraft wing. Another important design issue that is tackled in the paper is the temporal synchronization of data from an impact event that was detected by the WSN; this topic will be expanded in Section 5.2. The design of a WSN with low power budget obtained by the sleep mode operability is presented by Giannì et al. [135]; in particular, the authors analyze the design issues regarding the AFE + ADC noise characteristics and their influence on the errors achievable for impact positioning with a triangulation method.
## (s29) Toward SHM Sensor Networks with Smart Nodes
(p29.0) From the previous paragraph there is strong interest in moving the SHM system toward sensor networks and, in the following section, we will draw some general comments and challenges for addressing the next steps for new developments. In this section, we discuss the advancements of smart nodes in the perspective of an impact sensing SHM network.

(p29.1) The evaluation of data transfer requirements for a node is one of the topics that is now under development for the research. The reduction of data rate for a "smart-node" requires that some local processing is needed. The data rate reduction is achievable by compressive sensing techniques, as investigated by Mascarenas in [150]. The recent research on this subject also demonstrated the benefits for the autonomous detection and localization of an AE source, as we will explain later in Section 6.

(p29.2) The presence of smart sensor nodes, and a relatively dense interconnection network, can provide some degree of redundancy to the SHM system, where failing sensor nodes will not compromise the operation of the overall system. Of course, the thickening of the interconnection network goes against the minimum-encumbrance policy, which is one of the original goals of the sensor network architecture, but it is a trade-off that should, nonetheless, be considered. From the point of view of harnessing, PLC represents a way to achieve the minimum amount of cabling required to route the sensor network, albeit at the cost of reduced bandwidth. A problem that is deeply ingrained in sensor networks that need to cooperate in the ways described above is how to achieve and maintain inter-node synchronization. Although the topic has not been addressed so far, the problem of synchronization in measurement and control networks is well known and it will be approached starting from the provisions of the Precise Time Protocol (PTP) IEEE 1588 standard that can reach a synchronization accuracy of 0.1 µs wired network connected on ethernet. Such performance is compatible with SHM sensor network design being the UGW signals with the frequency content below 1 MHz and Time of Flight (TOF) in the order of 10 µs-100 µs. This analysis derives from the main requirement that each sensor node needs to be synchronized up to a fraction of the DToA to produce data that are useful for accurate impact positions. The synchronization problem is even more complex for WSNs and the next section will go in some detail of the proposed solutions.
## (s30) WSN and IoT for SHM
(p30.0) In the last few years, the concept of WSN for SHM has moved on to the Internet of Things (IoT) for SHM. The main advantage of introducing the communication of a WSN for SHM over the Internet comes from the possibility to uniquely identify the data packet generated sensor node and the large bandwidth for data transmission; time correlation is achieved thanks to the accurate synchronization of nodes. In addition, the large storage capacity of the cloud allows for further implementing data interpretation using AI and deep learning for Big Data (BD); some examples of the latter novel development will be reported in the next section.

(p30.1) Tokognon et al. [151] have reviewed the challenges for the design SHM using IoT technologies well to achieve intelligent and reliable WSN for monitoring structures. The authors identify three main blocks to be integrated for this aim:
## (s31) •
(p31.0) Sensing and data Acquisition Subsystem. • Data Management Subsystem: preprocessing methods used to organize raw data that were acquired from sensors and remove the noise before processing; novelty detection, classification, and regression approaches. Among them, novelty detection based on artificial neural networks. • Data Access and Retrieval Subsystem.

(p31.1) The requirement of low power communication technology based on the IPv6 assignment of a node is analyzed for battery operated sensors. The work of the ZigBee Alliance has accelerated the expansion of the sensor network and building automation market. From the PHY and MAC layers that are defined in the IEEE 802.15.4 standards, Zigbee considers the networking and services layer, through the full application layer. ZigBee PRO was specifically developed for device-to-device communication in an IoT context.

(p31.2) Unfortunately, WSN based on IEEE 802.15.4/ZigBee do not currently support IP, mainly due to the small length of packets that are used in IEEE 802.15.4. Therefore, most of the solutions proposed consist of using IP proxy or gateways. A network configuration strategy for WSN configuration with sink nodes at the edge of the network, also called border routers, with IP protocol connection over the Internet is presented in the paper by Tokognon et al. [151]. From the sink nodes, data can be transferred with JavaScript object notation (JSON) to a Web server, where a large storage capacity is commonly available.

(p31.3) Moreover, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) defined the 6LoWPAN standard (RFC 4944) to allow the use of IPv6 packets over IEEE802.15.4 networks. The new compressed IP headers resolve the packets size issues and the fragmentation mechanism to transmit IP packets over IEEE802.15.4 networks. IETF also started a working group to evaluate the appropriate routing protocols for low-power (RPL) and lossy networks.

(p31.4) The node synchronization is another challenge for a distributed IoT, as stated in the previous section. Scuro et al. [152] published a paper that was devoted to this problem, and a solution was proposed with each node equipped with a clock; the nodesexchange synchronization messages to evaluate the frequency and the offset of their clock with respect to the one taken as a reference (master) or with respect to its neighbor sensor node. This solution implies an additional overhead, since extra messages and re-synchronization periods are required.

(p31.5) In the same structure, local area networks with routers that give priority to the transmission of the synchronization messages, or that compensate for the transmission delay, can be deployed. In these cases, a synchronization accuracy in the order of microseconds is still achievable. In fact, for the SHM system, the typical accuracy that is needed between the node is in the range [0.6, 9.0] µs. Muttillo et al. [153] presented a solution for structural monitoring with digital accelerometers ADXL355 with high resolution that was connected to hardware for IoT connection. A high synchronization between the sensors was implemented to preserve such performance.
