# ASSESSING OF SOIL EROSION RISK THROUGH GEOINFORMATION SCIENCES AND REMOTE SENSING -A REVIEW

CorpusID: 238924506 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d1f341c8d795c488bc6b12ddcde9ef59f4da11da](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d1f341c8d795c488bc6b12ddcde9ef59f4da11da)

Fields: Geography, Computer Science, Environmental Science, Physics

## (s1) Erosion Model Types and Structures
(p1.0) Models are part of the erosion prediction technology, used in development of soil conservation and environmental degradation planning systems. Erosion is based on defining the relation among controlling factors and soil loss delivery soil loss from one point on the landscape to another within a given set of management conditions.

(p1.1) The types of soil erosion models are summarized in (Wischmeier and Smith, 1978). More recently an overview with a typologization of water erosion models is made by (Karydas et al., 2012). In general, models fall into three main categories, depending on the physical processes simulated, the model algorithms describing these processes, and the data dependency of the model. The category of soil erosion models:
## (s3) Basic Methods, Tools, and Standards for Soil Erosion Risk Assessment
(p3.0) The selection of method of measurement depends on the type of erosion, the purpose, and the target accuracy of the measurement. The techniques for measuring erosion discussed in (Loughran, 1989) are all appropriate and necessary for assessing soil loss.
## (s11) where,
(p11.0) A is computed soil loss, R is the rainfall-runoff erosivity factor, K is a soil erodibility factor, L is the slope length factor, S is the slope steepness factor, C is a cover management factor, P is a supporting practices factor.

(p11.1) In (Devatha et al., 2015) using USLE model and Remote Sensing (RS) and Geographic Information System (GIS) methods are used for estimate the annual soil loss for Kulhan watershed of Shivnath basin, sub-basin of Mahanadi basin, Chhattisgarh. Results shows that the study area has gentle slope so the erosion loss is obtained with low rate and it is within acceptable limit. Soil erosion map is reclassified according to erosion risk where in the study area is within the acceptable limit. Results shows that soil erosion USLE model in combination with GIS is an efficient tool to handle large volume data needed for watershed soil loss studies. When the assessment model region is large and needed consider big year time period USLE method can be time-consuming. A help to reduce the calculation time significantly come by the parallelization implementation of method. Such an implementation in (Wieland et al., 2012) is considered. In (Risse et al., 1993) shows that the USLE method overestimates erosion for low measured erosion and does not underestimate erosion for measured high erosion relative to moderate erosion.
## (s13) CLSE (Chinese Soil Loss Equation)
(p13.0) The CLSE is empirical model was develop in (Liu et al., 2002) of USLE for China as estimating average annual soil loss by water on hillslope for cropland. The model predict interrill erosion from farmland under different soil conservation practices use an empirical multiplicative equation with six factors obtained from experiment stations covering most regions of China and modified to the scale of Chinese unit plot defined:

(p13.1) Chinese soil loss equation is to predict annual average soil loss from slope cropland under different soil conservation practices. In (Liu et al., 2002) the USLE model use 30 year data was adapted in substituting the C and the P factor with three factors considering the biology, engineering and tillage practices
## (s17) Zheng's Model
(p17.0) Zheng's soil erosion model is described in (Zheng et al., 2008). It is empirical model develop a proportional function for event sediment yield prediction through analyzing the field observations at 12 small catchments over the Loess Plateau as well as updated through deriving the regression coefficient from the power function. The model can be effectively used as a management tool the vast majority of the annual sediment yield. In order to predict event sediment yield is proposed a proportional function. The performance of the model is good for high-magnitude events, especially extreme events.
## (s19) G2 Model
(p19.0) G2 is a soil erosion model for developing monthly erosion maps at regional scale was introduced by a team from Aristotle University of Thessaloniki and DG JRC within GEOLAND 2 project is included in JRC (G2, 2020). The G2 model proposes innovative techniques for the estimation of vegetation and protection factors. It is a complete, an empirical model for soil erosion rates and has evolved with time into a quantitative model mapping soil loss and sediment yield on month-time intervals, designed to run in a GIS environment. A detailed description in (Karydas and Panagos, 2018) is presented where the model adopts fundamental equations from RUSLE and the Erosion Potential Method (EPM). It aimed at developing an equation to estimate the water erosion and to put up a service for regional soil erosion monitoring across Europe (Karydas et al. 2012;Panagos et al., 2015). The G2 model clearly shows the critical seasons, hotspots and land uses which are more susceptible to erosion as the model is described by the following formula :
## (s28) QSWAT (Quantum Soil and Water Assessment Tool) Model
(p28.0) The QSWAT is process-based method an implementation of the SWAT in Quantum GIS (QGIS). It is improved version of SWAT model developed in (Dile et al., 2016) as open-source software set up with Python uses various functionalities of QGIS and is installed as its plugin. QGIS is a free and open source desktop GIS application that provides data viewing, editing and analysis capabilities. The model was input with various watershed parameters as spatial variation of topographic features along with weather parameters. QSWAT has the capability to visualize results. It can help visualize static data, and it can animate the results at model simulated time steps. It demonstrates successfully with Gumera watershed located in Lake Tana basin, tropical highland region of Ethiopia. QSWAT model has improved the processing capabilities of the SWAT and lesser processing time on Digital Elevation Models (DEMs), and better statistical and dynamical representation of outputs.
## (s30) EPIC (Erosion Productivity Impact Calculator) Model
(p30.0) The EPIC model (Sharply and Williams, 1990;Williams et al. 1984;Williams, 1990) was originally developed to determine the relationship between soil erosion and soil productivity throughout the U.S. The EPIC is a physically based model which components include weather simulation, hydrology, erosion-sedimentation, nutrient cycling, plant growth, tillage, soil temperature, economics, and plant environment control. The EPIC model is operational and has produced reasonable results under a variety of climatic conditions, soil characteristics, and management practices. It has also demonstrated sensitivity to erosion in terms of reduced crop production. It was used for that purpose as part of the 1985 RCA (1977 Soil and Water Resources Conservation Act of USA) analysis. To simulate rainfall/runoff erosion, EPIC contains six equations -the USLE, the Onstad-Foster modification of the USLE, the MUSLE, two recently developed variations of MUSLE, and a MUSLE structure that accepts input coefficients. The approach in EPIC estimates potential wind erosion for a smooth bare soil by integrating the erosion equation through a day using the wind speed distribution.
## (s32) ANSWERS (Aerial Non-Point Source Watershed Environment Response Simulation)
(p32.0) The ANSWERS model developed in (Beasley et al., 1980) presented one of the first operational, fully spatially distributed, catchment erosion and sediment yield models. It is a physically based model that simulates excess rainfall, the orientation of laminar and rill flow, subsurface drainage, and the removal and transport of sediment at the watershed scale, applicable to basins with an area of up to 100km 2 . The model is limited in the size of watershed it can deal with. The ANSWERS model consists of a water erosion and sediment transport model described in (Beasley et al., 1980) as:
## (s33) • Hydrologic
(p33.0) The elemental size is defined such that the pertinent hydrologic and erosional variables can be assumed to be uniform within the watershed element where conditions may vary greatly from one element to the next. A typical cross-sectional view of a small area or element within a watershed is depicted in Fig.2.   Fig.2 Profile of a watershed element (Beasley et al., 1980) • Erosion Soil detachment, transport, and deposition are closely related to the concurrent hydrologic processes occurring in a watershed. Detachment and transport can be accomplished by either raindrop impact or overland flow. However, the small amount of sediment transported from a field by raindrop impact was neglected. The processes described in the erosion model are shown in Fig. 3. (Beasley et al., 1980) The ANSWERS program is a comprehensive model intended to be used in quantitatively evaluating nonpoint source pollution in an ungaged watershed and in determining the relative effectiveness of alternative corrective plans. The distributed analysis also provides a characterization of the hydrologic response as well as erosion and deposition occurring throughout the watershed during a storm event. The disadvantage of the model is that it requirements for large amount of input data and analyze of results.
## (s35) CREAMS (Chemicals, Runoff and Erosion from Agricultural Management Systems)
(p35.0) CREAMS model in (Knisel, 1985) is a physically based and a field-scale (less than 5 ha in size) model uses various aspects of the USLE equation, that predicts runoff, erosion and chemical transport from agricultural areas operating as well as in single storm events as in a long-term average mode. The model includes four components: hydrology, erosion, plant nutrients, and pesticides. The erosion component of CREAMS simulates detachment of soil particles and subsequent transport of these particles. Hydrologic inputs include rainfall depth, rainfall erosivity, runoff volume, and peak runoff rate. Soil-water content is calculated from a water balance that includes evapotranspiration, percolation, seepage below the root zone, and snowmelt.
## (s38) WEPP (Water Erosion Prediction Project) Model
(p38.0) It is a process-based, spatially-distributed model. Compared with the USLE method (Flanagan et al., 2007) which was used extensively to predict long-term average annual soil loss, it was a mature technology was only applicable to detaching regions of a hillslope, and could not estimate sediment deposition or sediment delivery from fields to off-site channels or streams. Also USLE method no capabilities to estimate runoff, spatial locations of soil loss on a hillslope profile or within a small watershed, channel erosion, effects of impoundments, recurrence probabilities of erosion events, or watershed sediment yield. Developed to address all of these needs leads to the WEPP (Nearing et al., 1989) as serve empirically based erosion prediction technologies like USLE as well as software development including GUI and integration of WEPP with GIS software. It is a physically based model with distributed parameters that can be used in either a single event or continuous time scale and calculates erosion from rills and inter-rills, assuming that detachment and deposition rates in rills are a function of the transport capacity.
## (s43) WSRF (Weighted Subspace Random Forest)
(p43.0) In (Xu et al., 2012) is suggested a new random forest, namely, the WSRF model, which involves weighting the input variables and afterward opting for the variables that ensure each subspace always includes informative attributes. The WSRF model is implemented as multi-thread processes. This algorithm categorizes very high-dimensional data and sparse data with random forests made using small subspaces. A new variable weighting manner is applied for the variable subspace choice rather than the traditional random variable sampling in the random forest model (Zhao et al., 2017). More details of the WSRF model are presented in (Xu et al., 2012;Zhao et al., 2017) 
## (s48) DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
(p48.0) A preview of most uses and useful erosion models were considered. Uses of soil loss models suppose strong attention into reliability, predictive accuracy, and estimates of a model. Additionally, one must be careful considered the accurate of estimations of soil loss in order to implement conservation measures. For example, WEPP, SWAT, MMF, DYRIM, Si′s and Yang's model may be suitable for assessing the impacts of climate change, land-use shifts and land management. Since Si′s model is spatially-lumped, it is not able processing of the spatial pattern of erosional response over a large area. Because SWAT and WEPP take reservoirs into account and Tian's modelthe sediment trapped by check-dams, they are useful for examining the impact of check-dams. Erosion control measures should always be adjusted to local conditions and simulation studies can help to identify the most optimal combination of measures.

(p48.1) One of the major challenges in soil erosion modelling is the mismatch between the small spatial and temporal scales of data collection and model conceptualization, and the large spatial and temporal scales. In erosion models main errors come from incompatibilities between model scales, scale of input parameter data, and the intended scale of the model outputs. It is clear that the variability, nonlinearity and the interacting nature of erosion and deposition processes over various scales significantly influence the mechanics of surface runoff generation and soil erosion.

(p48.2) An important problem is applications of the contemporary erosion models which used input data with resolution 1000m pixels. This difficulty cam be solved as assume data to be homogeneous for significantly larger areas than the 1000m resolution of pixels, such as Soil Mapping Units (SMUs).

(p48.3) The biggest problem with erosion modelling is the difficulty of validating the estimates produced. At the regional and larger scale, virtually no reliable data exist for comparing estimates with actual soil losses.

(p48.4) Controls on surface runoff generation and the resulting soil erosion are instantaneous phenomena and modelling them ideally requires fine time resolution data. There are methods which translating erosion models across spatial scales and diminishing the scaling effects as a great improvement in modelling results. Therefore, a key problem in choosing a model is the time scale at which the erosion processes will be predicted. Fortunately, today there are many and different models about estimate and prediction have its own characteristics and application scopes. Such that as USLE, RUSLE, EPIC, and the Geometric Mean Diameter based (Dg) model (Römkens et al., 1988). These were developed in the United States based on American soil-erosion databases, however, which may render them entirely ineffective for soils at other geographical locations. Others preview models are Water Erosion Prediction Project (WEPP), Soil Erosion Model for Mediterranean Regions (SEMMED), ANSWERS, LISEM, European Soil Erosion Model (EUROSEM), SWAT, Simulator for Water Resources in Rural Basins (SWRRB), Agricultural Non-point Source pollution model (AGNPS), etc. were used in regional scale assessment.
