# Influential Factors and Evaluation Methods of the Performance of Grouted Semi-Flexible Pavement (GSP)-A Review

CorpusID: 237694325 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d9c88be55ea4f54d051d8541a32336922d4dfa0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d9c88be55ea4f54d051d8541a32336922d4dfa0)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s4) Aggregate Gradation
(p4.0) Open-grade aggregate is designed primarily as a skeleton of OAC for GSP. It mainly maintains compressive pressures from traffic loads and forms inter-air voids of OAC. Therefore, a good gradation can not only provide a good compressive strength but also construct an even and interconnective space of void.

(p4.1) An optimal gradation mostly can be realized by two design methods: an experiential method and a volumetric method called the main aggregate filling (MAF) method. The latter assumes coarse aggregate is supporting the main structure of OAC and can achieve the required void volume by filling fine aggregate and binder into the compacted coarse aggregate. Due to back-calculation of the void volume, this method is concise to control the final void rate of OMA [43,44]. However, interconnectivity of void is overlooked in this method, which is another important factor for permeability of OAC equally to void volume [45]. Therefore, factors affecting particle sizes and consecutiveness of aggregate gradation are considered to establish the relationships between the given characters above, illustrated in Figure 2, Tables 2-4.   The main coarse aggregate used in GSP normally falls in a range of 4.75 mm-13.2 mm particle size. Several combinations of different tiers in this range can form OMA with the requested void rate. Under the similar void rate, gradation with a large particle size will benefit the whole structure. Moreover, the water permeability of samples which have a large proportion in larger particles (14~10 mm) is significantly higher than that of average samples ( Table 2) [46]. A lower residual void rate of GSP will be obtained after grouting [50,51]. Overall, a coarser aggregate gradation can be more conducive to forming a larger void space, which has better interconnection, to make the grouted cement mortar more easily able to penetrate the OMA mat [46,52]. Subsequently, flexural tensile strength and compressive strength of the following GSP are also be improved, which are positively linked with low-temperature performance and high-temperature performance, respectively [49]. On the contrary, some other properties may be slightly harmed with the increase of particle size. Cantabro loss rises to a certain value, which indicates that the cohesion between aggregate in GSP is weakened.

(p4.2) From a different perspective, Ding et al. proposed that uniform gradation could conduct smoother void spaces and less stress concentration than continuous gradation. He compared two types of gradations: uniform gradation (one tier: 10~5 mm) and continuous gradation (three tiers: 13~10 mm, 10~5 mm, and 5~3 mm) [53]. It was found that GSP with uniform gradation was superior to that with continuous gradation in the properties of Marshall stability, splitting strength, compressive resilience, and low-temperature bending capacity [53].

(p4.3) Saboo et al. evaluated seven types of gradations using the hierarchical ranking strategy considering parameters as void content, permeability, abrasion resistance, and tensile strength of OAC; BSI-4% and Densiphalt12-4.5% were selected as the optimal gradation which had a main tier of 4.75 mm~12.5 mm [47]. In general, gradation with the main particle sizes in the scope of 4.75 mm~12.5 mm is appropriate to improve the performance of GSP to form a better structure ( Figure 2).

(p4.4) However, a conflict exists in previous hypotheses that mainly concerns coarse particles. For example, a given continuous gradation may also contain larger-tier aggregate. The reason may be that the influence of gravel morphology and fine aggregate is overlooked which needs further research [52]. In our opinion, the two viewpoints are all correct, though only the applying scope of these principles is different. The definitions for describing gradation types are difficult to quantify, due to the existence of few samples with untested properties, such as residual void rate and water permeability. Large particle size and uniform gradation can both contribute to the formation of evener and larger void space.

(p4.5) Open-grade aggregate is designed primarily as a skeleton of OAC for GSP. It mainly maintains compressive pressures from traffic loads and forms inter-air voids of OAC. Therefore, a good gradation can not only provide a good compressive strength but also construct an even and interconnective space of void.

(p4.6) An optimal gradation mostly can be realized by two design methods: an experiential method and a volumetric method called the main aggregate filling (MAF) method. The latter assumes coarse aggregate is supporting the main structure of OAC and can achieve the required void volume by filling fine aggregate and binder into the compacted coarse aggregate. Due to back-calculation of the void volume, this method is concise to control the final void rate of OMA [43,44]. However, interconnectivity of void is overlooked in this method, which is another important factor for permeability of OAC equally to void volume [45]. Therefore, factors affecting particle sizes and consecutiveness of aggregate gradation are considered to establish the relationships between the given characters above, illustrated in Figure 2, Tables 2-4.   The main coarse aggregate used in GSP normally falls in a range of 4.75 mm-13.2 mm particle size. Several combinations of different tiers in this range can form OMA with the requested void rate. Under the similar void rate, gradation with a large particle size will benefit the whole structure. Moreover, the water permeability of samples which have a large proportion in larger particles (14~10 mm) is significantly higher than that of average samples ( Table 2) [46]. A lower residual void rate of GSP will be obtained after grouting [50,51]. Overall, a coarser aggregate gradation can be more conducive to forming a larger void space, which has better interconnection, to make the grouted cement mortar more easily able to penetrate the OMA mat [46,52]. Subsequently, flexural tensile strength and compressive strength of the following GSP are also be improved, which are positively linked with low-temperature performance and high-temperature performance, respectively [49]. On the contrary, some other properties may be slightly harmed with the increase of particle size. Cantabro loss rises to a certain value, which indicates that the cohesion between aggregate in GSP is weakened.

(p4.7) From a different perspective, Ding et al. proposed that uniform gradation could conduct smoother void spaces and less stress concentration than continuous gradation. He compared two types of gradations: uniform gradation (one tier: 10~5 mm) and continuous gradation (three tiers: 13~10 mm, 10~5 mm, and 5~3 mm) [53]. It was found that GSP with uniform gradation was superior to that with continuous gradation in the properties of Marshall stability, splitting strength, compressive resilience, and low-temperature bending capacity [53].

(p4.8) Saboo et al. evaluated seven types of gradations using the hierarchical ranking strategy considering parameters as void content, permeability, abrasion resistance, and tensile strength of OAC; BSI-4% and Densiphalt12-4.5% were selected as the optimal gradation which had a main tier of 4.75 mm~12.5 mm [47]. In general, gradation with the main particle sizes in the scope of 4.75 mm~12.5 mm is appropriate to improve the performance of GSP to form a better structure ( Figure 2).

(p4.9) However, a conflict exists in previous hypotheses that mainly concerns coarse particles. For example, a given continuous gradation may also contain larger-tier aggregate. The reason may be that the influence of gravel morphology and fine aggregate is overlooked which needs further research [52]. In our opinion, the two viewpoints are all correct, though only the applying scope of these principles is different. The definitions for describing gradation types are difficult to quantify, due to the existence of few samples with untested properties, such as residual void rate and water permeability. Large particle size and uniform gradation can both contribute to the formation of evener and larger void space.
## (s11) Complex Admixtures
(p11.0) The purpose of complex admixtures for GSP is to combine advantages of different admixtures. However, some combinations are not always as expected, because of underlying contradictive influences of combined admixtures on GSP. Therefore, in its composition design, more factors and more procedures should be considered in a comprehensive way to achieve desired outcomes, comparing to the individual components [83].

(p11.1) The purpose of complex admixtures for GSP is to combine advantages of different admixtures. However, some combinations are not always as expected, because of underlying contradictive influences of combined admixtures on GSP. Therefore, in its composition design, more factors and more procedures should be considered in a comprehensive way to achieve desired outcomes, comparing to the individual components [83].
## (s19) Anti-Weather-Exposure Ability
(p19.0) Anti-weather-exposure ability of GSP was tested by conserving samples in an exposing environment for 7 days, 90 days, 180 days, and 240 days. Its strength and fatigue life were shown no decline in Marshall stability test and cyclic wheel load test [115].
## (s20) Fatigue Life Performance
(p20.0) The fatigue life of GSP has raised more concern in recent years, because of its different fatigue life behavior from asphalt and concrete [117]. The results of fatigue life of GSP are summarized in characteristics and correction factors, which are attained by the Indirect Tensile Fatigue test (ITFT), Fatigue Bending test, Cyclic Wheel Load test, Proportion-scale Accelerated Road test, and Full-scale Accelerated Road test. Test methods and fatigue equations of these studies are also shown in Table 11. 

(p20.1) The fatigue life of GSP has raised more concern in recent years, because of its different fatigue life behavior from asphalt and concrete [117]. The results of fatigue life of GSP are summarized in characteristics and correction factors, which are attained by the Indirect Tensile Fatigue test (ITFT), Fatigue Bending test, Cyclic Wheel Load test, Proportion-scale Accelerated Road test, and Full-scale Accelerated Road test. Test methods and fatigue equations of these studies are also shown in Table 11. 
## (s25) Compressive Strength Prediction Model
(p25.0) Compressive strength of GSP is assessed by Cube compressive strength test. The values have a linear relationship with that of grouted hydrated cement mortar [137]. The expression is shown as below:
## (s26) 2S2P1D Model
(p26.0) Cai et al. evaluated the viscoelastic behavior of GSP according to the 2S2P1D model (composed of 2 spring units, 2 parabolic units, and 1 clay pot unit). It was found that the 2S2P1D model had a good correlation with the test results. The equation was expressed as follows [140]: * ( ) = + µ( ) ( ) ( ) (6) * ( ) was the complex modulus; was the equilibrium modulus; was the glassy modulus; was the angular frequency; µ was a calibration constant; was the complex number;

(p26.1) was the characteristic relaxation time; k and h were constant values defined as 0 < < ℎ < 1; and was a constant that depended on the viscosity of the dashpot. The reinforcement effect of GSP is positively linked with the OMA void ratio, and the dynamic modulus is associated with the gradation [140]. In other words, cement can play a role to enhance the strength of GSP under high-temperature and low-frequency loads.

(p26.2) Cai et al. evaluated the viscoelastic behavior of GSP according to the 2S2P1D model (composed of 2 spring units, 2 parabolic units, and 1 clay pot unit). It was found that the 2S2P1D model had a good correlation with the test results. The equation was expressed as follows [140]: * ( ) = + µ( ) ( ) ( ) (6) * ( ) was the complex modulus; was the equilibrium modulus; was the glassy modulus; was the angular frequency; µ was a calibration constant; was the complex number;

(p26.3) was the characteristic relaxation time; k and h were constant values defined as 0 < < ℎ < 1; and was a constant that depended on the viscosity of the dashpot. The reinforcement effect of GSP is positively linked with the OMA void ratio, and the dynamic modulus is associated with the gradation [140]. In other words, cement can play a role to enhance the strength of GSP under high-temperature and low-frequency loads.
## (s27) Weak Interlayer Model
(p27.0) A cracking model is specially introduced to calculate cohesion strength of interfaces to determine the position of cracking and explain the internal factors through a full-scale Heavy Vehicle Simulator test [42,141]. Then, the strain energy of distortion (SED) is defined as the response parameter to predict weak interlayers. A high SED value presents a higher vulnerability to to cracking at this position. The equation is illustrated as follows:
## (s53) Aggregate Gradation
(p53.0) Open-grade aggregate is designed primarily as a skeleton of OAC for GSP. It mainly maintains compressive pressures from traffic loads and forms inter-air voids of OAC. Therefore, a good gradation can not only provide a good compressive strength but also construct an even and interconnective space of void.

(p53.1) An optimal gradation mostly can be realized by two design methods: an experiential method and a volumetric method called the main aggregate filling (MAF) method. The latter assumes coarse aggregate is supporting the main structure of OAC and can achieve the required void volume by filling fine aggregate and binder into the compacted coarse aggregate. Due to back-calculation of the void volume, this method is concise to control the final void rate of OMA [43,44]. However, interconnectivity of void is overlooked in this method, which is another important factor for permeability of OAC equally to void volume [45]. Therefore, factors affecting particle sizes and consecutiveness of aggregate gradation are considered to establish the relationships between the given characters above, illustrated in Figure 2, Tables 2-4.   The main coarse aggregate used in GSP normally falls in a range of 4.75 mm-13.2 mm particle size. Several combinations of different tiers in this range can form OMA with the requested void rate. Under the similar void rate, gradation with a large particle size will benefit the whole structure. Moreover, the water permeability of samples which have a large proportion in larger particles (14~10 mm) is significantly higher than that of average samples ( Table 2) [46]. A lower residual void rate of GSP will be obtained after grouting [50,51]. Overall, a coarser aggregate gradation can be more conducive to forming a larger void space, which has better interconnection, to make the grouted cement mortar more easily able to penetrate the OMA mat [46,52]. Subsequently, flexural tensile strength and compressive strength of the following GSP are also be improved, which are positively linked with low-temperature performance and high-temperature performance, respectively [49]. On the contrary, some other properties may be slightly harmed with the increase of particle size. Cantabro loss rises to a certain value, which indicates that the cohesion between aggregate in GSP is weakened.

(p53.2) From a different perspective, Ding et al. proposed that uniform gradation could conduct smoother void spaces and less stress concentration than continuous gradation. He compared two types of gradations: uniform gradation (one tier: 10~5 mm) and continuous gradation (three tiers: 13~10 mm, 10~5 mm, and 5~3 mm) [53]. It was found that GSP with uniform gradation was superior to that with continuous gradation in the properties of Marshall stability, splitting strength, compressive resilience, and low-temperature bending capacity [53].

(p53.3) Saboo et al. evaluated seven types of gradations using the hierarchical ranking strategy considering parameters as void content, permeability, abrasion resistance, and tensile strength of OAC; BSI-4% and Densiphalt12-4.5% were selected as the optimal gradation which had a main tier of 4.75 mm~12.5 mm [47]. In general, gradation with the main particle sizes in the scope of 4.75 mm~12.5 mm is appropriate to improve the performance of GSP to form a better structure ( Figure 2).

(p53.4) However, a conflict exists in previous hypotheses that mainly concerns coarse particles. For example, a given continuous gradation may also contain larger-tier aggregate. The reason may be that the influence of gravel morphology and fine aggregate is overlooked which needs further research [52]. In our opinion, the two viewpoints are all correct, though only the applying scope of these principles is different. The definitions for describing gradation types are difficult to quantify, due to the existence of few samples with untested properties, such as residual void rate and water permeability. Large particle size and uniform gradation can both contribute to the formation of evener and larger void space.

(p53.5) Open-grade aggregate is designed primarily as a skeleton of OAC for GSP. It mainly maintains compressive pressures from traffic loads and forms inter-air voids of OAC. Therefore, a good gradation can not only provide a good compressive strength but also construct an even and interconnective space of void.

(p53.6) An optimal gradation mostly can be realized by two design methods: an experiential method and a volumetric method called the main aggregate filling (MAF) method. The latter assumes coarse aggregate is supporting the main structure of OAC and can achieve the required void volume by filling fine aggregate and binder into the compacted coarse aggregate. Due to back-calculation of the void volume, this method is concise to control the final void rate of OMA [43,44]. However, interconnectivity of void is overlooked in this method, which is another important factor for permeability of OAC equally to void volume [45]. Therefore, factors affecting particle sizes and consecutiveness of aggregate gradation are considered to establish the relationships between the given characters above, illustrated in Figure 2, Tables 2-4.   The main coarse aggregate used in GSP normally falls in a range of 4.75 mm-13.2 mm particle size. Several combinations of different tiers in this range can form OMA with the requested void rate. Under the similar void rate, gradation with a large particle size will benefit the whole structure. Moreover, the water permeability of samples which have a large proportion in larger particles (14~10 mm) is significantly higher than that of average samples ( Table 2) [46]. A lower residual void rate of GSP will be obtained after grouting [50,51]. Overall, a coarser aggregate gradation can be more conducive to forming a larger void space, which has better interconnection, to make the grouted cement mortar more easily able to penetrate the OMA mat [46,52]. Subsequently, flexural tensile strength and compressive strength of the following GSP are also be improved, which are positively linked with low-temperature performance and high-temperature performance, respectively [49]. On the contrary, some other properties may be slightly harmed with the increase of particle size. Cantabro loss rises to a certain value, which indicates that the cohesion between aggregate in GSP is weakened.

(p53.7) From a different perspective, Ding et al. proposed that uniform gradation could conduct smoother void spaces and less stress concentration than continuous gradation. He compared two types of gradations: uniform gradation (one tier: 10~5 mm) and continuous gradation (three tiers: 13~10 mm, 10~5 mm, and 5~3 mm) [53]. It was found that GSP with uniform gradation was superior to that with continuous gradation in the properties of Marshall stability, splitting strength, compressive resilience, and low-temperature bending capacity [53].

(p53.8) Saboo et al. evaluated seven types of gradations using the hierarchical ranking strategy considering parameters as void content, permeability, abrasion resistance, and tensile strength of OAC; BSI-4% and Densiphalt12-4.5% were selected as the optimal gradation which had a main tier of 4.75 mm~12.5 mm [47]. In general, gradation with the main particle sizes in the scope of 4.75 mm~12.5 mm is appropriate to improve the performance of GSP to form a better structure ( Figure 2).

(p53.9) However, a conflict exists in previous hypotheses that mainly concerns coarse particles. For example, a given continuous gradation may also contain larger-tier aggregate. The reason may be that the influence of gravel morphology and fine aggregate is overlooked which needs further research [52]. In our opinion, the two viewpoints are all correct, though only the applying scope of these principles is different. The definitions for describing gradation types are difficult to quantify, due to the existence of few samples with untested properties, such as residual void rate and water permeability. Large particle size and uniform gradation can both contribute to the formation of evener and larger void space.
## (s60) Complex Admixtures
(p60.0) The purpose of complex admixtures for GSP is to combine advantages of different admixtures. However, some combinations are not always as expected, because of underlying contradictive influences of combined admixtures on GSP. Therefore, in its composition design, more factors and more procedures should be considered in a comprehensive way to achieve desired outcomes, comparing to the individual components [83].

(p60.1) The purpose of complex admixtures for GSP is to combine advantages of different admixtures. However, some combinations are not always as expected, because of underlying contradictive influences of combined admixtures on GSP. Therefore, in its composition design, more factors and more procedures should be considered in a comprehensive way to achieve desired outcomes, comparing to the individual components [83].
## (s68) Anti-Weather-Exposure Ability
(p68.0) Anti-weather-exposure ability of GSP was tested by conserving samples in an exposing environment for 7 days, 90 days, 180 days, and 240 days. Its strength and fatigue life were shown no decline in Marshall stability test and cyclic wheel load test [115].
## (s69) Fatigue Life Performance
(p69.0) The fatigue life of GSP has raised more concern in recent years, because of its different fatigue life behavior from asphalt and concrete [117]. The results of fatigue life of GSP are summarized in characteristics and correction factors, which are attained by the Indirect Tensile Fatigue test (ITFT), Fatigue Bending test, Cyclic Wheel Load test, Proportion-scale Accelerated Road test, and Full-scale Accelerated Road test. Test methods and fatigue equations of these studies are also shown in Table 11. 

(p69.1) The fatigue life of GSP has raised more concern in recent years, because of its different fatigue life behavior from asphalt and concrete [117]. The results of fatigue life of GSP are summarized in characteristics and correction factors, which are attained by the Indirect Tensile Fatigue test (ITFT), Fatigue Bending test, Cyclic Wheel Load test, Proportion-scale Accelerated Road test, and Full-scale Accelerated Road test. Test methods and fatigue equations of these studies are also shown in Table 11. 
## (s74) Compressive Strength Prediction Model
(p74.0) Compressive strength of GSP is assessed by Cube compressive strength test. The values have a linear relationship with that of grouted hydrated cement mortar [137]. The expression is shown as below:
## (s75) 2S2P1D Model
(p75.0) Cai et al. evaluated the viscoelastic behavior of GSP according to the 2S2P1D model (composed of 2 spring units, 2 parabolic units, and 1 clay pot unit). It was found that the 2S2P1D model had a good correlation with the test results. The equation was expressed as follows [140]: * ( ) = + µ( ) ( ) ( ) (6) * ( ) was the complex modulus; was the equilibrium modulus; was the glassy modulus; was the angular frequency; µ was a calibration constant; was the complex number;

(p75.1) was the characteristic relaxation time; k and h were constant values defined as 0 < < ℎ < 1; and was a constant that depended on the viscosity of the dashpot. The reinforcement effect of GSP is positively linked with the OMA void ratio, and the dynamic modulus is associated with the gradation [140]. In other words, cement can play a role to enhance the strength of GSP under high-temperature and low-frequency loads.

(p75.2) Cai et al. evaluated the viscoelastic behavior of GSP according to the 2S2P1D model (composed of 2 spring units, 2 parabolic units, and 1 clay pot unit). It was found that the 2S2P1D model had a good correlation with the test results. The equation was expressed as follows [140]: * ( ) = + µ( ) ( ) ( ) (6) * ( ) was the complex modulus; was the equilibrium modulus; was the glassy modulus; was the angular frequency; µ was a calibration constant; was the complex number;

(p75.3) was the characteristic relaxation time; k and h were constant values defined as 0 < < ℎ < 1; and was a constant that depended on the viscosity of the dashpot. The reinforcement effect of GSP is positively linked with the OMA void ratio, and the dynamic modulus is associated with the gradation [140]. In other words, cement can play a role to enhance the strength of GSP under high-temperature and low-frequency loads.
## (s76) Weak Interlayer Model
(p76.0) A cracking model is specially introduced to calculate cohesion strength of interfaces to determine the position of cracking and explain the internal factors through a full-scale Heavy Vehicle Simulator test [42,141]. Then, the strain energy of distortion (SED) is defined as the response parameter to predict weak interlayers. A high SED value presents a higher vulnerability to to cracking at this position. The equation is illustrated as follows:
