# biology A Review on Nanopesticides for Plant Protection Synthesized Using the Supramolecular Chemistry of Layered Hydroxide Hosts A Review on Nanopesticides for Plant Protection Synthesized Using the

CorpusID: 239533708 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/710d6168cf01642c219e5a399e2f8082a0963294](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/710d6168cf01642c219e5a399e2f8082a0963294)

Fields: Chemistry, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s17) Layered Hydroxides
(p17.0) The 2D, inorganic, layered structure is composed of single or double metal ions. The thickness of this inorganic layer is well established to be 4.8 A. The basal spacing of the LDH with nitrate, sulfate, carbonate, chlorine and iodine is around 7-9 A, depending on the counter anion occupied in the interlamellar of the LDH [27]. Upon intercalation of the guest anions such as pesticides, drugs, etc., this basal spacing will be expanded, depending on the size and spatial orientation of the anions in the interlamellar of the LDH [28].

(p17.1) Various active ingredients, anions, organic and inorganic species can be intercalated in the LDH interlamellar as the guests using the supramolecular chemistry approach. As a result, various applications can thus be generated. The nanostructured LDH has been used as the host of the AI, and the resulting complex inherited superior properties of the host; controlled release, being more potent, having higher bioavailability, etc. [9].
## (s19) Application of Layered Hydroxides in Agriculture
(p19.0) Various applications of layered hydroxides in agriculture are summarized in Figure 3; smart fertilizers, nanosensors, pesticides remediations, precision farming, nanopesticides, etc. LHs and LDHs can be used in various agriculture sectors either as their original synthetic compounds or their derivatives; after modification, intercalation, etc., [5,6,8,12,40]. One of the important applications of LHs and LDHs is the formation of a new generation of pesticides. Various types of pesticides; herbicides, insecticides, fungicides, etc., as the AIs can be intercalated into the LHs and LDHs hosts. The number of combinations of host-guest complexes that can be formed via supramolecular chemistry is huge, thus opening up unlimited opportunities to produce and explore this area of research, development and innovation.
## (s21) Method of Synthesis
(p21.0) There are three main methods that can be adopted to synthesize nanopesticides using host-guest supramolecular chemistry, namely direct, indirect and reconstruction or "memory effect". The direct method involves the co-precipitation of the anions and cations in a controlled pH environment. In the indirect method, the counter anion that already exists in the interlayers of the LDH is exchanged with the AI as the guest from the solution. This can be achieved by placing the preprepared LDH into a solution containing the anion of the pesticide AI so that the anion exchange process will take place, resulting in the intercalation of the new guest, which is the AI for the formation of the host-guest nanomaterial [44][45][46][47][48].

(p21.1) The host-guest supramolecular complex can be also synthesized using the regeneration or the "memory effect". For example, LDH was prepared first and then calcined at a certain temperature to produce a mixed oxides phase. Rehydration by contacting the calcined LDH with an aqueous solution containing anions to be intercalated results in the intercalation of the anion into the LDH lamellar, and this process is called "memory effect". Other methods such as sol-gel, solid hammer mill, micelles-assisted, etc., can be also adopted and the details of these processes can be found elsewhere [49].
## (s22) Physicochemical Characterizations
(p22.0) In order to confirm whether the host-guest supramolecular complex was formed after the synthesis of the nanopesticides, various physicochemical analyses have to be performed and are only discussed briefly here. Table 2 summarizes the techniques used and the information that can be gathered from them.

(p22.1) The XRD is an excellent technique to confirm the intercalation episode of the guest (pesticide active agent) into the inorganic host (LHs or LDHs). Of course, other supporting techniques are also important to support it. For example, work on the synthesis of nanofungicide using hexaconazole as the AI into the Zn/Al-LDH interlamellar, resulted in the expansion of the basal spacing from 8.72 to 28.87 Å, due to the size and spatial orientation of the guest, with hexaconazole compared to nitrate species in the LDH. In addition, four harmonic reflections can be also observed. A slow scan revealed that eight harmonics reflections can be resolved, resulting in a better basal spacing of 29.42 Å, an average from the eight harmonics [9].

(p22.2) Using the software, the three-dimensional structure of the guest molecule, hexaconazole, can be obtained. It is known that the Zn/Al-LDH brucite thickness is 4.8 Å, therefore the space available for the spatial orientation of the organic moiety, hexaconazole, is 24.62 Å. Therefore, the plausible spatial orientation, taking into account the co-presence of sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate, is as given in Figure 5 [9]. 
## (s24) Kinetic Release of the Guest from the Nanopesticides
(p24.0) Pesticide release is a process where AI leaves the host and eventually becoming available for the biological action. This study involves AI release rate, dissolution, diffusion, erosion and the study of the factors that affect the release rate. In vitro releases of AI into a solution under a certain condition are usually used to study the release of the AI from the synthesized nanopesticides [50].
## (s26) Zinc Layered Hydroxide
(p26.0) LH has a 2D inorganic layered structure, which is composed of a single metal hydroxide. Zn-LH is the most common one used to host various AI guests for the synthesis of nanopesticides that can be found in the literature, as shown in Table 4. For example, isoprocarb and carbamate were separately intercalated into the Zn-LH for the formation of their nanoinsecticides, resulting in better thermal stability and environmental friendliness of the AI compared with their counterparts [61,62]. Table 4. Nanopesticides synthesized using host-guest supramolecular chemistry using zinc-layered hydroxide as the host and various AIs as the guest for various targets and advantages.
## (s31) Zinc/Aluminum-Layered Double Hydroxide
(p31.0) Zn/Al-LDH is subjected to more intense research compared to other LDHs, regarding its use as the host of various AI pesticides for various nanopesticide applications. This is because it is relatively simple and cheap to prepare, and it is easier to form the 2D, well-ordered, inorganic, layered structure with good crystallinity. Table 5 shows the nanopesticides prepared using host-guest supramolecular chemistry based on Zn/Al-LDH. AIs such as mandelic acid were intercalated into Zn/Al-LDH to be used as slow-release preservatives and for crop protection [70]. Herbicides or defoliants; 2,4-dichlorophenoxy and 4-chlorophenoxy acetate were simultaneously intercalated into the Zn/Al-LDH and were found to be promising candidates which can simultaneously control the release of the two AIs at differently controlled rates [71]. Similarly, 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acids in the presence of glyphosate showed better herbicide properties [72]. Table 5. Nanopesticides prepared using host-guest supramolecular chemistry based on a Zn/Al-LDH host using various guests, AIs, for various targets and advantages.
## (s35) Magnesium/Aluminum-Layered Double Hydroxide
(p35.0) Magnesium/aluminum-layered double hydroxide (Mg/Al-LDH) is in the family of LDHs where the inorganic 2D layered structure is composed of Mg 2+ and Al 3+ cations and this inorganic sheet is positively charged. The counter anions are inserted into the intergallery of the Mg/Al 2D inorganic structure to balance the charge so that the resulting materials are neutrally charged.

(p35.1) Many AIs can be used as the counter anions as shown in Table 6. The choice is very much dependent on the final target use and the different desired advantages of the properties of the nanomaterial, LDH, such as controlled properties, higher thermal stability, etc. Herbicides such as (4-chloro-2-methylphenoxy) acetic acid [93], 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid [94], 2-methyl-4-chlorophenoxyacetic acid [95] and atrazine [96] were used for the intercalation process so that the resulting nanoherbicides formed have slow-release properties, which then reduce the environmental hazards. Other special properties of these nanoherbicides are given in Table 6. Table 6. Nanopesticides prepared using host-guest supramolecular chemistry based on a Mg/Al-LDH host using various guests, AIs, for various targets and advantages.
## (s37) Atrazine
(p37.0) The herbicide would be delivered close to its site of uptake, enhancing efficiency and reducing the required dose [96] 4-Chloro-2-Methylphenoxy Acetic Acid Slow release of the herbicide reduces the hazardous effects that it can pose to the environment. [93] 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic Acid A stronger and irreversible herbicidal effect on the test plants [94] 2-Methyl-4-Chlorophenoxyacetic Acid Higher loading of the AI herbicide and exhibits better adsorption properties [95] Camphorsulfonic Acid and Ciprofloxacin Remarkable improvement in thermal stability [97] Cinnamic Acid A green pesticide/plant growth regulator [98] Hexaconazole and Triadimenol Loading amount of hexaconazole is higher than triadimenol in the LDHs nanohybrids [99] Imazamox Decreasing water-pollution risk, maintaining efficacy with the advantages of soil compatibility.
