# Role of Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma in the Assessment of Blunt Abdominal Trauma -A Review

CorpusID: 234138606 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/14babbfed8d91c86f6bde7c4b88c7613e16cb7e9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/14babbfed8d91c86f6bde7c4b88c7613e16cb7e9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Comparison of Various Studies Regarding Role of FAST in Assessment of Blunt Abdominal Trauma
(p5.0) sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of FAST for IAI of 90.9 %, 83.6 %, and 84.3 %, respectively. Subsequent studies on FAST performed in children varied in findings. Some showed significantly decreased sensitivity 33 % to 55 % but consistently high specificity of 83 % to 95 % of FAST, suggesting FAST was not an effective screening modality. In contrast, others showed much higher sensitivity and specificity suggesting that FAST is an effective screening tool after blunt abdominal trauma. A meta-analysis of 25 articles counting 3,838 paediatric patients appeared pooled test characteristics of the following: affectability, 80 % (95 % CI, 76 -84 %); specificity, 96 % (95 % CI, 95 -97 %); positive probability proportion, 22.9 (95 % CI, 17.2 -30.5); and negative probability proportion, 0.2 (95 % CI, 0.16 -0.25). 14 There was a notable decrease in sensitivity when only levels 1 and 2 evidence were reviewed. One of the limitations of FAST in detecting IAI in children is that at least 37 % of IAI are not associated with free fluid. One of the most important potential benefits of FAST is to rapidly identify patients who present with hypotension secondary to intra-abdominal haemorrhage. In our study, the accuracy of FAST was lower in patients with hypotension (61.5 %) vs. those with normal BP (Blood Pressure) on arrival (73.7 %) although there were very few patients that presented with hypotension for age. Also, we found that FAST was no more accurate in the subset of patients with abnormal abdominal examinations or lower GCS (Glasgow Coma Scale) than those with normal abdominal examinations and higher GCS score. In our study, FAST had improved accuracy in those patients who were less injured (ISS < 16) as compared to those with a higher Injury Severity Score (ISS) (80.6 % vs. 54.6 %). This may be explained by the fact that demonstrative precision is influenced by illness predominance. As infection predominance diminishes, demonstrative exactness increments at the same affectability and specificity possibly clarifying the appearance of expanded precision of FAST in patients with more ISS where IAI is amazingly uncommon.

(p5.1) Hence, after review, we can conclude that the advantages of FAST are as it is portable, non-invasive, accessible, conducted bedside, cost-effective, lack of exposure to radiation, real-time imaging, multiplanar capability, and serial application. The disadvantages of FAST are: it is operator dependant; it depends on patient habitus, is the specific identification of injury may not be possible and has poor penetration through the air. The quality of sonography evaluation isn't a mere devise-based outcome but also a huge technique dependant factor, involving the proficiency of the sonographer too. Repeated exposure of the surgeon to the intrathoracic and intra-abdominal injuries will prove to be provocative not only as a sonographer with learned techniques to conduct the investigation but also as a mode to recognize minimal to minute intra-abdominal pathologies and conditions causing the deterioration of the clinical status of the patient. Though the detection of intra-abdominal and intrathoracic injury is a tedious job and requires quite good experience, quick detection of the free fluid and a quick examination in the emergency room would help in the hastening of the management of the patient. 19 Despite having multiple types of research proving the usage of FAST in the assessment of patients with blunt trauma abdomen not to be reliable enough to decide further decision or even shown to be time consuming in various scenarios such as paediatric blunt abdominal trauma, patients with multiple injuries, penetrating injuries, bowel injuries, pelvic fractures, etc., many surgeons are fearing that the abandonment of routine FAST in cases of blunt abdominal trauma would not be a safe option to maintain a required mode of management and line of treatment.
## (s6) Su m m a r y
(p6.0) Ultrasonographic imaging could be a non-invasive, reasonable, and promptly accessible instrument at the patient's side. Thus, at numerous establishments, it has fundamentally supplanted diagnostic peritoneal lavage for the discovery of intraperitoneal fluid. In cases where there are experienced hands involved, the FAST examination has been appeared to be both delicate and in the location of haemoperitoneum in casualties of blunt abdominal injury. 15 The review of the studies conducted shows that the usage of FAST in blunt abdominal trauma as an emergency modality does help in speeding up the clinical decision making, but, some researches have shown that there are many factors which support the intended opinion that wastage of time in carrying out FAST will not only slow down the required speed of managing the patient but also prove to be additional collateral damage in the wellbeing of the patient.

(p6.1) For a few surgeons, the principal motive of using FAST is to rule out intraperitoneal free fluid, intrathoracic injury and to evaluate the severity of damage caused. Haemodynamically stable patients experiencing blunt trauma to the abdomen are to be assessed at the earliest and their further steps of management are to be determined very fast.
