# Management of Dentigerous Cysts -A Review

CorpusID: 237856056 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a6b9e4858f0095f236887a07f3a52d0979c6916](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a6b9e4858f0095f236887a07f3a52d0979c6916)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) B A C K G R O U N D
(p0.0) The concept of 'liquid tumours' was first put forth by a German surgeon by the name of Scultet in 1671. They were considered even back then to cause pressure within the jawbones that was significant enough to bring about some degree of expansion. "Dentigerous Cysts" (DC) as a term was first put forth in 1853 by James Paget; it was considered a broad term, encompassing all cysts that were thought to have their origin in dental tissue. It was only by 1976, following attempts at classification, that a niche was created for the term, with Shear stating 'follicular' and 'dentigerous' cysts to be one and the same. 2 In 1892, Carl Partsch proposed a 'cystotomy' as a means to halt expansion and address the negative effects of a build-up of pressure, thus giving birth to Marsupialisation. Kurt Thoma later developed this technique into 'Decompression', which -he stated -had the added benefits of allowing for pulp vitality to be maintained, lowering the risk of fracture to the maxilla or mandible, and preservation of important structures such as the maxillary antrum and the inferior alveolar nerve, showing that the risk of recurrence was acceptably low.

(p0.1) DCs have been studied over time in great detail, providing some insight into how they originate, the nature of their biology and the manifestations of the same in a general populace. Being a type of odontogenic cyst, the DC is a localized swelling of cystic nature associated with an impacted tooth commonly occurring in the mandible in association with the lower third molar, followed by the canine, third molar and central incisor of the maxillary region. 3 It accounts for 20 % of all jaw cysts with around 10 % of impacted teeth manifesting this pathology. Usually an accidental finding on routine radiography, most DCs tend to present well into the second or third decades of life without overt prodromal symptoms. It is with the permanent dentition that the developmental DC is commonly associated, even more so with an impacted mandibular third molar.

(p0.2) In patients with DCs who are in the mixed dentition phase, the cause may be attributed to a deciduous tooth that loses vitality. It may cause bacteria or bacterial products to spread beyond the root apex, bringing about inflammation that can affect the follicle of the developing enamel organ. This is what is believed to initiate the build-up of fluid and eventual separation of the reduced enamel epithelium from the coronal portion of the tooth bud. In such patients, an asymptomatic presentation is rare, with the patient complaining of both pain and swelling. Such DCs are thought to be of an inflammatory origin, presenting early, that is within the first two decades of life, and are associated often with the developing lower premolar. This may be -in part -due to close proximity of the primary molar to the follicle of the growing permanent bicuspid.
## (s1) MO D A L I T I E S F O R T H E M A N A GE M E N T O F D E N T I GE R O U S C Y S T S D e n t i g e r o u s C y s t A l so K n o w n a s F o l l i c u l a r C y s t
(p1.0) Classically solitary, it is only in conjunction with syndromes (for eg: Maroteaux -Lamy / cleidocranial dysplasia) that bilateral or multiple cysts are found. DC generally presents between the 2 nd and 3 rd decades of life, showing a male predilection wherein the ratio is 3:2 for male to female patients. Lee et al. in 2019 confirmed using the Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test that cysts were larger amongst the male population by a significant degree. 10 The typical follicular space is 3 -4 mm and when the space is more than 5 mm a dentigerous cyst can be suspected. Transformation of the cyst into ameloblastoma, mucoepidermoid carcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma can also take place.
## (s5) M ar s u p i a l i s a t i o n ( P a r t s ch I T e ch n i q u e )
(p5.0) It is therefore advisable to revert to the original modality of treatment -one that had fallen out of over the past few decades in opposition to the complete enucleation approach, only to rise again as the more preferable form of therapy in specific situations, such as amongst patients in the first or second decades of life-decompression.

(p5.1) The classical treatment modality of marsupialization or decompression are primarily the choice of treatment for inflammatory dentigerous cysts. This is recommended in order to preserve the tooth that is associated with the pathology. This also favours their eruption when it is difficult to reliably predict the tooth eruption.

(p5.2) Sometimes after marsupialization / decompression, eruption of the associated impacted teeth assumes an abnormal position. It is therefore highly advisable to use a multifaceted approach to the management of such patients. The oral pathologist, the oral and maxillofacial surgeon, and the orthodontist have a unique opportunity to coordinate their efforts to bring about a form of therapy that addresses each patient's specific problems. The identification of the anomaly, its precise surgical approach and the subsequent focus on preservation of the patient's dentition offers the opportunity to successfully remove the offending tissue, while helping the patient achieve a normal occlusion by employing traction of the impacted tooth into its final desired place. This is only made possible if adequate space exists, which again lends considerable weight to the argument of including the skills of an experienced orthodontist to aid in the initial planning stage of the treatment and also the final orthodontically activated traction. 17 Marsupialization, also known as Decompression or Partsch I technique, is a surgical technique based on the incomplete removal of the lining of the pathological cavity, while focusing on reducing the effect the cyst has on the adjacent structures. The cyst shrinks gradually to become smaller. This procedure permits a break in the cystic wall and paves a way for the cystic wall to drain the contents of the cyst. The cyst wall is sutured to the oral mucosa. This procedure permits the eruption of the cyst associated tooth, with or without orthodontic traction.

(p5.3) The advantages of marsupialisation are: • Smaller duration of surgical intervention • Minimal trauma to the patient • Adjacent anatomic structures such as the teeth, the floor of the nose, the inferior alveolar nerve and the maxillary sinus are left intact

(p5.4) The drawbacks of marsupialization are: • Longer hospital stay • Greater duration of postoperative care and follow up • Requires a high degree of patient and parental compliance • Subpar bony healing in patients older than 20 years of age • The risk of recurrence is categorically stated to be higher than the Partsch II technique • The lining of the dentigerous cyst if not removed in its entirety, can cause any ameloblastomas or carcinomas that may be developing in other parts of the lining and may be missed due to incomplete histological examination • A secondary procedure may be necessary • Repeated packing of the pathological cavity is required 18
## (s6) D I SC U S SI O N
(p6.0) The treatment for patients with a dentigerous cyst of an inflammatory -type that includes an impacted tooth should no longer be enucleation. Instead, a multi-disciplinary approach employing marsupialization along with orthodontic traction of the associated impacted tooth can be incorporated in the treatment plan. The traction of the impacted tooth performed by the orthodontist who is part of the team should be planned based on the availability of sufficient space for the impacted tooth to be brought into occlusion. Research has been carried out to assess the favourable period of time for planning the traction orthodontically in order to allow the encased tooth to erupt from the cyst.

(p6.1) These researchers concluded that the eruption of the tooth with a dentigerous cyst associated is predictable and may take place three months following marsupialization; in certain cases, a longer duration of traction maybe required. The factors that are in favour for the eruption of a cyst associated with tooth after marsupialization are disputable. Researchers reported that factors that influence eruption of tooth depends on the age, inclination and depth of tooth, formation of root, and availability of space. In contrast, other researchers concluded that the above mentioned factors were not remarkable and need not favour tooth eruption 19 Nyimi et al. has concluded that an initial approach, that is a conservative surgical approach with primary closure of the subsequent defect (less than 4 cm), reduces the morbidity of aggressive surgeries. It obtains the complete bone healing within twenty-four months of the postoperative period. The treatment of large cystic lesions when cases are carefully selected is marsupialization being most common. Evocyst is an attractive new approach for obtaining complete bone defect healing within 3 months. 20 Kimura et al. have developed a normal method for the treatment of odontogenic cysts. They have developed a silicone based tube as a decompression device. 21 Núñez et al. has described an evacuator for odontogenic cysts (Evocyst), which is a closed and active (vacuum like) drain system. This is to promote osteogenesis and also to manage odontogenic cysts by means of active intra-cystic negative pressure. This device reveals a high rate of a new bone formation. Using the new device, a new bone formation takes place within less than three months, compared to conventional decompression that employs passive drains which tend to require up to twelve months to heal. 22 Johnson et al. in 1994 reported the risk that occurs when considerable amounts of odontogenic epithelium remain within the affected bony cavity for a long duration. They suggested that the epithelium that positions around the crown of an impacted tooth may not necessarily undergo an immediate transformation into a dentigerous cyst. They also reported that the average age of occurrence of squamous carcinoma arising in a dentigerous cyst is 60.8 years. The pluripotent nature of the odontogenic epithelium around the crown of tooth determines its increased chance to become cystic or malignant in the future. 23 Literature reports of a patient who at 16 months of age is the youngest patient ever reported with a carcinoma arising in a dentigerous cyst. This case satisfies all the existing criteria for this rare lesion. It projects that it is distinct on the basis of age of onset and the absence of a chronic lymphocytic infiltrate. The advanced age of previously reported cases of squamous cell carcinoma arising in a dentigerous cyst and the associated chronic inflammatory changes seen histologically have favoured a speculation that these carcinomas occur after a slow malignant change of the odontogenic epithelium. 4,24,25 
