# Biogeographic Overview of Ulmaceae: Diversity, Distribution, Ecological Preferences, and Conservation Status

CorpusID: 235298690 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e9f65eaddaffd28cf40b27851e2ae7d645ee492f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e9f65eaddaffd28cf40b27851e2ae7d645ee492f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s16) Species Macroclimatic Niche
(p16.0) The distribution of each species was used to assess the realized climatic niche of natural populations. Global data of 19 bioclimatic variables (e.g., mean annual temperature and precipitation, seasonality; the full list of variables is shown in Supplementary file S3) were downloaded from WorldClim at a high resolution (30 arc-seconds) for the 1970-2000 period [91]. For each species, we generated 1000 random points in the area of its distribution, where climatic data were extracted. For each variable, we only kept data between the 5th and 95th percentiles to perform the analyses to remove unwanted outliers due to imprecision in species distributions and for more caution in the evaluation of species climatic preferences. The resolution of the climatic data (30 arc-seconds,~1 km) does not capture microclimates (e.g., in ravines and slopes), which have been found to be important for some species (e.g., Zelkova abelicea, [92]). We therefore must consider that our analyses represent macroclimatic preferences.

(p16.1) The different Köppen-Geiger climates were also recorded for each species, according to its distribution. The Köppen-Geiger climate classification system uses a 2-or 3-letter abbreviation to designate each climate type [87,88]. The first letter indicates the main climate: A-tropical, B-arid, C-temperate, D-cold, and E-polar. The second letter indicates the seasonal precipitation type: m-monsoon, w-savannah, W-desert, Ssteppe, s-dry summer, w-dry winter, and f-no dry season. The third letter gives precision regarding the temperature (h-hot, k-cold, a-hot summer, b-warm summer, c-cold summer, and d-very cold winter).
