# Innovative Coatings of Metallic Alloys Used as Bioactive Surfaces in Implantology: A Review

CorpusID: 236417044 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/305ad65c7f7b495ce7ed3604c7d418117b5edde9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/305ad65c7f7b495ce7ed3604c7d418117b5edde9)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Inserting implants into living organisms must be carried out in accordance with the natural conditions of living systems; considering that the functionality of the human body is achieved through the normal activity of each physiological system, any organ dysfunction thus is transmitted to the whole living system [1]. Implants can partially or totally replace a damaged element of the body under the conditions of their acceptance by the host environment [2,3]. Among the metallic materials approved for use in medical practice (orthopedics and dentistry), the most frequently used are: stainless steels with small amounts of carbon (316L), Co-Cr alloys, such as Co-Cr-Ni-Mo, precious metal alloys, Ti and its alloys (TiAlV, TiAlVMoFe, and TiAlZr), and biodegradable alloys [4]. Improvement in the long-term utilization of implantable materials is achieved by modifying its surface exposed to physiological and biological environments [5]. In numerous studies, it has been observed that metallic biomaterials undergo a series of corrosion reactions in human body fluids. These reactions result in release of metallic ions, which are toxic at high concentrations. Metal implants have different compositions and various structures than human bone, thus, the healing process takes longer as the bone/implant interface forms more slowly [6]. Along with heat treatments, laser treatments are also employed for covering the surfaces of metal implants with thin layers; these are sometimes structured at micro-and nanolevel obtained by more sophisticated or simpler chemical and electrochemical techniques that are overall more efficient than the bare metal surface. The criteria for the inclusion of biocompatible materials in international standards for the selection of implantable materials for prostheses are based on their biocompatibility [7] and are as follows:

(p0.1) • Chemical and electrochemical criteria: the implant material in human tissue must be inert and must not suffer corrosion (local or general) in relation to mechanical, chemical, and bacteriological stresses.
## (s3) Coatings with Hydroxyapatite and Calcium Phosphate
(p3.0) Osteointegration represents a continuous, structural, functional, and coexistent symbiotic relationship between differential and appropriately remodeled biological tissues and components obtained synthetically from materials (implants) with specific clinical functions accepted by the body without initiating any rejection mechanism. In practice, osseointegration represents the process or mechanism of anchoring a non-vital component (implant) in a bone from a living organism that remains for a long time unchanged even under mechanical stress. An implant is considered osseointegrated when there is no relative progressive displacement between the implant and the bone with which is in direct contact.

(p3.1) Bioactivity is the characteristic of a biomaterial (used in making an implant) to form a connection with living adjacent tissues [25]. A layer of bioactive material must meet two conditions: to develop a positive biological interaction and induce the growth of bone tissue in the periphery, in order to achieve a bone-implant connection. The biological activity of the bioactive material [26] should be moderate, since too rapid growth of bone tissue causes a chaotic development of bone components, with the formation of cavities and structures that are not properly interconnected. In the long run, appearance of infection and resistance to the development of bone in some areas is possible.
## (s4) Coatings with TiO2
(p4.0) Ti oxides are used to promote osteointegration [56] and are classified into rutile, anatase, and brookite if their crystalline structure is considered. At low temperatures, the brookite turns into rutile. For this reason, only anatase and rutile are of interest. Ti and its alloys oxidize easily in air and form a layer of TiO2 on the surface of the metal. This layer is called native, has thicknesses between 3 and 7 nm, and contains the amorphous phase. Native oxide provides very good chemical stability manifested by increased corrosion resistance [57]. The concentration ratio between Ti and O gradually varies from 1 to 2 [58]. Ti and its alloys are stable and resistant to corrosion; however, the literature has considered the amount of Ti ions that can be released in the tissues adjacent to the metal implant used [59]. The release of Ti ions into tissues indicates that its corrosion has occurred in vivo. Native TiO2 is bioinert and cannot promote a direct link with living bone, which implies that TiO2 does not show osteoconductivity and osseointegration. To increase biocompatibility, the TiO2 layer needs to be thick and dense.

(p4.1) TiO2 has a molecule composed of a positive Ti + ion and two O 2-negative ions. When Ti is in contact with electrolyte solutions (body fluids, saliva, and plasma), OHcan easily bind to the Ti cation in the TiO2 and Ti-OH groups. Acidic or basic Ti-OH groups can form on the surface of Ti [60]. 

(p4.2) The pH of the electrolyte influences the charge on the Ti surface. When the pH is less than 4, the Ti-OH groups will become [Ti-OH2] + and will determine the positive charge of the surface.

(p4.3) For pH values above 9, Ti-OH yields a proton and forms the [Ti-OH] -anion, and thus, the Ti surface is negatively charged. When the pH is between 4 and 9, Ti-OH is observed simultaneously in oxide, acid hydroxides, as well as basic hydroxides forms.

(p4.4) The isoelectric point (IEP) of TiO2 is in the narrow range of pH 5-6. It indicates the pH value of a solution where the net charge on the surface of Ti is zero.

(p4.5) Negatively charged surfaces can attract cations such as Ca 2+ , Na + , and Mg 2+ , whereas H2PO4 -or HPO4 2-anions are attracted to the positively charged surface.
## (s8) Polymeric Coatings
(p8.0) The polymer-based coatings are biocompatible and facilitate the biological fixation of the implant in the human body. With the help of these polymer-based coatings, the osseointegration process is facilitated, the possible infections related to the fixation of the metal implant being minimized. Using polymers, the interaction with the cellular material increases, forming a structural support for the formation of new tissue. Using polymeric materials, an increase in the corrosion resistance of biodegradable implants (such as Mg and its alloys) is also obtained [121].
## (s18) Introduction
(p18.0) Inserting implants into living organisms must be carried out in accordance with the natural conditions of living systems; considering that the functionality of the human body is achieved through the normal activity of each physiological system, any organ dysfunction thus is transmitted to the whole living system [1]. Implants can partially or totally replace a damaged element of the body under the conditions of their acceptance by the host environment [2,3]. Among the metallic materials approved for use in medical practice (orthopedics and dentistry), the most frequently used are: stainless steels with small amounts of carbon (316L), Co-Cr alloys, such as Co-Cr-Ni-Mo, precious metal alloys, Ti and its alloys (TiAlV, TiAlVMoFe, and TiAlZr), and biodegradable alloys [4]. Improvement in the long-term utilization of implantable materials is achieved by modifying its surface exposed to physiological and biological environments [5]. In numerous studies, it has been observed that metallic biomaterials undergo a series of corrosion reactions in human body fluids. These reactions result in release of metallic ions, which are toxic at high concentrations. Metal implants have different compositions and various structures than human bone, thus, the healing process takes longer as the bone/implant interface forms more slowly [6]. Along with heat treatments, laser treatments are also employed for covering the surfaces of metal implants with thin layers; these are sometimes structured at micro-and nanolevel obtained by more sophisticated or simpler chemical and electrochemical techniques that are overall more efficient than the bare metal surface. The criteria for the inclusion of biocompatible materials in international standards for the selection of implantable materials for prostheses are based on their biocompatibility [7] and are as follows:

(p18.1) • Chemical and electrochemical criteria: the implant material in human tissue must be inert and must not suffer corrosion (local or general) in relation to mechanical, chemical, and bacteriological stresses.
## (s21) Coatings with Hydroxyapatite and Calcium Phosphate
(p21.0) Osteointegration represents a continuous, structural, functional, and coexistent symbiotic relationship between differential and appropriately remodeled biological tissues and components obtained synthetically from materials (implants) with specific clinical functions accepted by the body without initiating any rejection mechanism. In practice, osseointegration represents the process or mechanism of anchoring a non-vital component (implant) in a bone from a living organism that remains for a long time unchanged even under mechanical stress. An implant is considered osseointegrated when there is no relative progressive displacement between the implant and the bone with which is in direct contact.

(p21.1) Bioactivity is the characteristic of a biomaterial (used in making an implant) to form a connection with living adjacent tissues [25]. A layer of bioactive material must meet two conditions: to develop a positive biological interaction and induce the growth of bone tissue in the periphery, in order to achieve a bone-implant connection. The biological activity of the bioactive material [26] should be moderate, since too rapid growth of bone tissue causes a chaotic development of bone components, with the formation of cavities and structures that are not properly interconnected. In the long run, appearance of infection and resistance to the development of bone in some areas is possible.
## (s22) Coatings with TiO2
(p22.0) Ti oxides are used to promote osteointegration [56] and are classified into rutile, anatase, and brookite if their crystalline structure is considered. At low temperatures, the brookite turns into rutile. For this reason, only anatase and rutile are of interest. Ti and its alloys oxidize easily in air and form a layer of TiO2 on the surface of the metal. This layer is called native, has thicknesses between 3 and 7 nm, and contains the amorphous phase. Native oxide provides very good chemical stability manifested by increased corrosion resistance [57]. The concentration ratio between Ti and O gradually varies from 1 to 2 [58]. Ti and its alloys are stable and resistant to corrosion; however, the literature has considered the amount of Ti ions that can be released in the tissues adjacent to the metal implant used [59]. The release of Ti ions into tissues indicates that its corrosion has occurred in vivo. Native TiO2 is bioinert and cannot promote a direct link with living bone, which implies that TiO2 does not show osteoconductivity and osseointegration. To increase biocompatibility, the TiO2 layer needs to be thick and dense.

(p22.1) TiO2 has a molecule composed of a positive Ti + ion and two O 2-negative ions. When Ti is in contact with electrolyte solutions (body fluids, saliva, and plasma), OHcan easily bind to the Ti cation in the TiO2 and Ti-OH groups. Acidic or basic Ti-OH groups can form on the surface of Ti [60]. 

(p22.2) The pH of the electrolyte influences the charge on the Ti surface. When the pH is less than 4, the Ti-OH groups will become [Ti-OH2] + and will determine the positive charge of the surface.

(p22.3) For pH values above 9, Ti-OH yields a proton and forms the [Ti-OH] -anion, and thus, the Ti surface is negatively charged. When the pH is between 4 and 9, Ti-OH is observed simultaneously in oxide, acid hydroxides, as well as basic hydroxides forms.

(p22.4) The isoelectric point (IEP) of TiO2 is in the narrow range of pH 5-6. It indicates the pH value of a solution where the net charge on the surface of Ti is zero.

(p22.5) Negatively charged surfaces can attract cations such as Ca 2+ , Na + , and Mg 2+ , whereas H2PO4 -or HPO4 2-anions are attracted to the positively charged surface.
## (s26) Polymeric Coatings
(p26.0) The polymer-based coatings are biocompatible and facilitate the biological fixation of the implant in the human body. With the help of these polymer-based coatings, the osseointegration process is facilitated, the possible infections related to the fixation of the metal implant being minimized. Using polymers, the interaction with the cellular material increases, forming a structural support for the formation of new tissue. Using polymeric materials, an increase in the corrosion resistance of biodegradable implants (such as Mg and its alloys) is also obtained [121].
