# Operating Performance of External Non-Involute Spur and Helical Gears: A Review

CorpusID: 236377887 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dcdcf52be6d5b6f5f4d972bed543f858f4f83404](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dcdcf52be6d5b6f5f4d972bed543f858f4f83404)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Materials Science

## (s6) Vibration and Noise of Gears
(p6.0) The main geometric parameter that affects gear noise is the contact ratio. Mesh stiffness depends on the contact ratio, and it has a decisive influence on vibration and noise level [28]. The gearing is more silent and quieter if the contact ratio is higher. For helical gears, the total contact ratio is the sum of the transverse contact ratio and the face contact ratio.
## (s11) Operating Performance of External Non-Involute Spur and Helical Gears: A Review
(p11.0) The generated tooth flank has a singular point due to the sharp transition between the radii. To eliminate it, Yang [61] proposed a rack cutter with three circular arcs, shown in Fig. 8b. He named it a stepped triple circular-arc gearing. He developed a mathematical model of the gearing and performed a stress analysis using FEM.

(p11.1) Ariga and Nagata [62] also suggested an improvement of Wildhaber-Novikov gearing. The top of the new tooth profile has the shape of a circular arc, and the dedendum consists of two involutes. Tests have shown that these gears are less sensitive to centre-distance errors than conventional W-N gears.
## (s12) Pure Rolling Helical Gears
(p12.0) Chen et al. [65] developed novel circular arc helical gears (CAHGM) with pure rolling. Based on the meshing principle of space curve meshing, the parameter equations of the concave-convex circular arc profiles were established. A pair of CAHGM was manufactured via rapid prototyping technology. The contact ratio equation and the theoretical kinematic performance were validated. The gears have a large backlash which is harmful to the forward and reverse drives. Chen et al. [66] and [67] also developed pure rolling helical gears with convex-to-convex meshing type and pure rolling rack and pinion mechanism. Geometric design, meshing performance, and mechanical behaviour were presented. Parametric equations for contact curves and for the tooth surfaces were derived. A numerical comparison of contact stresses and bending stresses between the modified involute gearing and the new gearing was made.

(p12.1) With new gearing, the maximum bending stresses are significantly lower, and the contact stresses are 1.5 to 2 times higher. The maximum contact stress can be decreased by increasing the tooth number and face width and decreasing the helix angle. Properties of pure rolling gearing have not yet been experimentally researched.
## (s20) Gearing with a Parabolic Path of Contact
(p20.0) Wang et al. [6] worked on gears with a parabolic path of contact. A mathematical model of the gearing was derived on the basis of a known path of contact. The influence of the parabola parameters on the shape of teeth of the pinion and the gear was analysed. The number of teeth in which dedendum undercut occurs is significantly smaller than in the case of involute gearing. A numerical comparison of contact stresses and bending stresses between the involute gearing and the new gearing was made; both are lower in the new gearing. This general statement is valid for any form of a parabola, while the quantitative values depend on the parabola parameters that can be optimized. Properties of a gearing with a parabolic path of contact have not yet been experimentally researched.
