# Western pond turtles in the Mojave Desert? A review of their past, present, and possible future Citation

CorpusID: 236390930 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a9116cf65c4b14703e0518021e61daabeb9077ab](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a9116cf65c4b14703e0518021e61daabeb9077ab)

Fields: Geography, Environmental Science, Biology

## (s12) Piute Ponds records
(p12.0) WPTs were only recently documented in the Piute Ponds at Edwards Air Force Base . In 2019 and 2020, 12 WPTs were captured at Piute Ponds (Fig. 1G), including three juveniles suggesting that the population is reproducing. The genetic relationships of this population to others in southern CA are not yet known. Our preliminary hypothesis is that the population is native and derived from the source population that resides farther up Amargosa Creek. It is interesting to note that Piute Ponds WPTs appear to have conspicuous inguinal scutes typical of A. marmorata. Spinks et al. (2014) 
## (s16) Western pond turtle genetics
(p16.0) Based on analysis of mitochondrial DNA only, all new Mojave River samples of A. pallida we collected were found to be identical to the previously sequenced Camp Cady Mojave River samples and one of the three haplotypes found within San Mateo Creek (Fig. 3) in San Diego County, CA (Spinks and Shaffer 2005;Spinks et al. 2014). This haplotype is two mutations away from the most abundant ND4 haplotype that occurs in both San Mateo Creek and the rest of San Diego County (see Supple mentary File 1: Table S1). Two much more extensive genetic analyses using RADseq and whole genome resequencing data are in progress.
## (s17) Modern observations and ecological research
(p17.0) The California Natural Diversity Database (https://wildlife.ca.gov/Data/CNDDB) contains a short list of recent (since 1989) observations of WPTs in the Victorville area including near the regional water treatment plant. Despite interest in recording observations of WPTs in the Mojave River, only a single study has been published on their ecology. Lovich and Meyer (2002) conducted a mark-recapture study at Camp Cady and Afton Canyon 23 km downstream. At Camp Cady, 21 individual turtles were marked, while at Afton Canyon only 14 turtles were marked despite significant trapping efforts, a reflection of the tenuous survival status of those populations  Table 2. The approximate boundary of the Mojave Desert is outlined with gray dashed lines. Not all fossil records are shown (e.g., Anza Borrego Desert State Park, California and Golden Shores, Arizona). Modern records include early historical accounts discussed in the text as well as more recent records. Not all recent records or trapping locations are shown to protect sensitive populations of Actinemys. Some locations are approximations based on lack of information available. The captive population at the California Desert Discovery Center in Barstow, California is not labeled. at the time. Reproductive females at both sites combined ranged in straight-line carapace length from 13.3-16.0 cm. Clutch size determined by X-radiography ranged from 3-6 eggs (x ̅ = 4.46 eggs). Females nested from 6 June-8 July, and most migrated away from artificially maintained ponds at Camp Cady to nest in the sand of the adjacent dry riverbed. No live juveniles were observed at either site during that research although ants apparently killed one hatchling at Camp Cady.
