# A survey of various intelligent home applications using IoT and intelligent controllers

CorpusID: 237761764 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fc4e3cd886a21ecf1eed0d0cf6b83ae6876594f8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fc4e3cd886a21ecf1eed0d0cf6b83ae6876594f8)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s3) Intelligent home description
(p3.0) The idea of intelligent homes first emerged as a wonderful home efficiency vision of the "homes of tomorrow" in the 1930s [37]. Many promises of 'unprecedented comfort, Relief and complacency and advantages of modern household life have only been accomplished in the last few decades of the last century. At the same time, the focus on domestic efficiency has increased to energy efficiency. Darby [19] describes two key concepts for smart homes: home and user-focused, which defines intelligent houses as very automatic housing of integrated devices, with the emphasis on modern techniques, comfort and (domestic) quality.

(p3.1) Building and system centred in building energy efficiency, auxiliary services and generation of distributed electricity, and how information and communication technology can be used to address them. The author notes that both terms share the significance of communication. for the connection of devices and remote access/control and the provision of services [19]. Figure 1 is an example to illustrate the intelligent home concept. 

(p3.2) The idea of intelligent homes first emerged as a wonderful home efficiency vision of the "homes of tomorrow" in the 1930s [37]. Many promises of 'unprecedented comfort, Relief and complacency and advantages of modern household life have only been accomplished in the last few decades of the last century. At the same time, the focus on domestic efficiency has increased to energy efficiency. Darby [19] describes two key concepts for smart homes: home and user-focused, which defines intelligent houses as very automatic housing of integrated devices, with the emphasis on modern techniques, comfort and (domestic) quality.

(p3.3) Building and system centred in building energy efficiency, auxiliary services and generation of distributed electricity, and how information and communication technology can be used to address them. The author notes that both terms share the significance of communication. for the connection of devices and remote access/control and the provision of services [19]. Figure 1 is an example to illustrate the intelligent home concept. 
## (s4) What does the intelligence meam?
(p4.0) When speaking of intelligent houses, one should too think of how to describe "intelligent" or "smart". What distinguishes an intelligent home from a traditional home in which most of us live? Based on Edwards and Grinter [38], smart environments and omnipresent computing intelligence have four features: a) The environment uses sensor information to assess the current situation (For eg, if you have triggered a motion sensor detector, it means somebody has to get near). b) The thing can presume state while taking into account a variety of factors at once (e.g. the machine can determine that it is time for dinner if the table includes several persons). c) By evaluating the situation, the environment will forecast a user's intentions (e.g. if motion detectors are installed in the future, it means that the consumer goes through the corridor and the user will want his or her path illuminated). d) The environment can behave preventively on the basis of purpose (e.g. the device can opt to switch the lights in advance so that the user may walk easily).

(p4.1) When speaking of intelligent houses, one should too think of how to describe "intelligent" or "smart". What distinguishes an intelligent home from a traditional home in which most of us live? Based on Edwards and Grinter [38], smart environments and omnipresent computing intelligence have four features: a) The environment uses sensor information to assess the current situation (For eg, if you have triggered a motion sensor detector, it means somebody has to get near). b) The thing can presume state while taking into account a variety of factors at once (e.g. the machine can determine that it is time for dinner if the table includes several persons). c) By evaluating the situation, the environment will forecast a user's intentions (e.g. if motion detectors are installed in the future, it means that the consumer goes through the corridor and the user will want his or her path illuminated). d) The environment can behave preventively on the basis of purpose (e.g. the device can opt to switch the lights in advance so that the user may walk easily).
## (s6) Intelligent home design
(p6.0) At least a few things, including sensors, equipment or actuators, are in an intelligent home that is not inherently intelligent on its own. A sensor generates data but does not contribute to the value of the home environment on its own. For instance, if the homeowner is needed to change the temperature to external temperature, moisture and other variables, a thermostat is not deemed clever. It can hold the temperature constant, but automation is not "intelligence." Only by collectively storing and analyzing all data on the environment, extracting trends and decisions taken without user interference can an environment be considered intelligent. The design of a smart home is based on how devices communicate, how and where the data from sensors and use patterns are stored, how Knowledge and patterns are interpreted and collected and how the user communicates with the devices and how the devices communicate with the user.

(p6.1) Soliman et al. [39] developed an intelligent home device architecture, actuators and sensors are attached to a microcontroller and are used to gather environmental data and carry out some acts. The data is transmitted from the microcontroller allowed by the ZigBee technology to the central server. The server then uploads the data through an application-programming-interface (API) to the cloud storage. A backend server, Storage and app in the front end are included in the cloud solution. The data is back-end processed and analyzed (Google App Engine). The user is able to view and manage the environment with a web application. The architecture proposed by Cook et al. [40] was made up of controllers (servers for computers), sensors (door/temperature/motion/light sensors), and relays (actuators). The communications layer is Wireless technology-based including ZigBee wireless network. A publish/subscribe pattern is the basis for the middleware layer. Jie et al. [41] suggested an architectural model addressing the scalability problem. The proposed model with a standardized interface allows devices to be connected to or removed with little effort from the intelligent home infrastructure. In [42] Hosek et al. define the Technology and hardware specifications of an intelligent Gateway to Home. Guoqiang et al. [43] suggest an intelligent house portal architecture that can be configured for approved communication protocols and convert Heterogeneous sensor information in a consistent format. Figure 2 shows the general intelligent home architecture. 

(p6.2) At least a few things, including sensors, equipment or actuators, are in an intelligent home that is not inherently intelligent on its own. A sensor generates data but does not contribute to the value of the home environment on its own. For instance, if the homeowner is needed to change the temperature to external temperature, moisture and other variables, a thermostat is not deemed clever. It can hold the temperature constant, but automation is not "intelligence." Only by collectively storing and analyzing all data on the environment, extracting trends and decisions taken without user interference can an environment be considered intelligent. The design of a smart home is based on how devices communicate, how and where the data from sensors and use patterns are stored, how Knowledge and patterns are interpreted and collected and how the user communicates with the devices and how the devices communicate with the user.

(p6.3) Soliman et al. [39] developed an intelligent home device architecture, actuators and sensors are attached to a microcontroller and are used to gather environmental data and carry out some acts. The data is transmitted from the microcontroller allowed by the ZigBee technology to the central server. The server then uploads the data through an application-programming-interface (API) to the cloud storage. A backend server, Storage and app in the front end are included in the cloud solution. The data is back-end processed and analyzed (Google App Engine). The user is able to view and manage the environment with a web application. The architecture proposed by Cook et al. [40] was made up of controllers (servers for computers), sensors (door/temperature/motion/light sensors), and relays (actuators). The communications layer is Wireless technology-based including ZigBee wireless network. A publish/subscribe pattern is the basis for the middleware layer. Jie et al. [41] suggested an architectural model addressing the scalability problem. The proposed model with a standardized interface allows devices to be connected to or removed with little effort from the intelligent home infrastructure. In [42] Hosek et al. define the Technology and hardware specifications of an intelligent Gateway to Home. Guoqiang et al. [43] suggest an intelligent house portal architecture that can be configured for approved communication protocols and convert Heterogeneous sensor information in a consistent format. Figure 2 shows the general intelligent home architecture. 
## (s7) PROTOCOLS OF CONNECTIVITY AND COMMUNICATION
(p7.0) Devices must be linked to share information in an intelligent home environment. Intelligence (as previously stated) occurs when the environment is aware of the system's current state. To accomplish this, a single sensor is insufficient to collect useful data; therefore, multiple sensors are needed to communicate and increase the usefulness of the data gathered. The communication protocols are used to decide how these devices and sensors can interact. These protocols determine how companies and collaborators exchange information with requirements, hardware and licensing protocols. Communication protocols are typically classified into three main media groups: 1) hybrid, 2) wired, and 3) wireless.

(p7.1) Some protocols provide longer distances, while others provide stronger protections, while others reduce energy consumption. The choice is often dependent on the size of the network. Personal area networks (PAN) and local area networks (LAN) are widely used within a smart home body area network (BAN). A comprehensive comparison of multiple home area network (HAN) communication technologies is given in [44]. The remainder of this section offers a summary and recommendations for selecting the most popular and evolving communication technologies (wired and wireless).

(p7.2) Devices must be linked to share information in an intelligent home environment. Intelligence (as previously stated) occurs when the environment is aware of the system's current state. To accomplish this, a single sensor is insufficient to collect useful data; therefore, multiple sensors are needed to communicate and increase the usefulness of the data gathered. The communication protocols are used to decide how these devices and sensors can interact. These protocols determine how companies and collaborators exchange information with requirements, hardware and licensing protocols. Communication protocols are typically classified into three main media groups: 1) hybrid, 2) wired, and 3) wireless.

(p7.3) Some protocols provide longer distances, while others provide stronger protections, while others reduce energy consumption. The choice is often dependent on the size of the network. Personal area networks (PAN) and local area networks (LAN) are widely used within a smart home body area network (BAN). A comprehensive comparison of multiple home area network (HAN) communication technologies is given in [44]. The remainder of this section offers a summary and recommendations for selecting the most popular and evolving communication technologies (wired and wireless).
## (s10) MOTIVATIONS
(p10.0) The advantages that use intelligent home apps based on clear because energy conservation is critical for both the home and health care, in particular the elderly, and the cost of basic home needs, entertainment and comfort is reduced. The benefits are listed in four categories [45]- [48] in Figure 3 summarizes the most important incentives for studying the smart home. 

(p10.1) The advantages that use intelligent home apps based on clear because energy conservation is critical for both the home and health care, in particular the elderly, and the cost of basic home needs, entertainment and comfort is reduced. The benefits are listed in four categories [45]- [48] in Figure 3 summarizes the most important incentives for studying the smart home. 
## (s11) CHALLENGES
(p11.0) There are various advantages of the smart way of smart home applications oriented to the Internet of things, however, these systems are not suitable solutions for connecting telecommunication networks. The survey showed that researchers are concerned about the nuances of smart operation in IoT-based SH applications and their use. Users face obstacles to the high cost of smart systems and the difficulty in maintaining them, unfriendly user interfaces, and most users do not take into account safety and security, restrictions on wired and wireless technologies, In addition to the challenges of energy management, data transfer, and healthcare. Figure 4 Summarizes the main obstacles that users face based on the smart home application method [45]. 

(p11.1) There are various advantages of the smart way of smart home applications oriented to the Internet of things, however, these systems are not suitable solutions for connecting telecommunication networks. The survey showed that researchers are concerned about the nuances of smart operation in IoT-based SH applications and their use. Users face obstacles to the high cost of smart systems and the difficulty in maintaining them, unfriendly user interfaces, and most users do not take into account safety and security, restrictions on wired and wireless technologies, In addition to the challenges of energy management, data transfer, and healthcare. Figure 4 Summarizes the main obstacles that users face based on the smart home application method [45]. 
## (s12) RECOMMENDATIONS
(p12.0) This section summarizes the literature recommendations most relevant to mitigating challenges and promoting the safe and successful use of smart home technologies such as IoT-based devices and sensors. There are recommendations for the user in terms of behaviour, energy consumption and device breakdowns, and safety and security recommendations to protect against external attacks and the entry of hackers [49]- [51] in Figure 5 explains the recommendations that the user should observe in SH systems. 

(p12.1) This section summarizes the literature recommendations most relevant to mitigating challenges and promoting the safe and successful use of smart home technologies such as IoT-based devices and sensors. There are recommendations for the user in terms of behaviour, energy consumption and device breakdowns, and safety and security recommendations to protect against external attacks and the entry of hackers [49]- [51] in Figure 5 explains the recommendations that the user should observe in SH systems. 
## (s23) Intelligent home description
(p23.0) The idea of intelligent homes first emerged as a wonderful home efficiency vision of the "homes of tomorrow" in the 1930s [37]. Many promises of 'unprecedented comfort, Relief and complacency and advantages of modern household life have only been accomplished in the last few decades of the last century. At the same time, the focus on domestic efficiency has increased to energy efficiency. Darby [19] describes two key concepts for smart homes: home and user-focused, which defines intelligent houses as very automatic housing of integrated devices, with the emphasis on modern techniques, comfort and (domestic) quality.

(p23.1) Building and system centred in building energy efficiency, auxiliary services and generation of distributed electricity, and how information and communication technology can be used to address them. The author notes that both terms share the significance of communication. for the connection of devices and remote access/control and the provision of services [19]. Figure 1 is an example to illustrate the intelligent home concept. 

(p23.2) The idea of intelligent homes first emerged as a wonderful home efficiency vision of the "homes of tomorrow" in the 1930s [37]. Many promises of 'unprecedented comfort, Relief and complacency and advantages of modern household life have only been accomplished in the last few decades of the last century. At the same time, the focus on domestic efficiency has increased to energy efficiency. Darby [19] describes two key concepts for smart homes: home and user-focused, which defines intelligent houses as very automatic housing of integrated devices, with the emphasis on modern techniques, comfort and (domestic) quality.

(p23.3) Building and system centred in building energy efficiency, auxiliary services and generation of distributed electricity, and how information and communication technology can be used to address them. The author notes that both terms share the significance of communication. for the connection of devices and remote access/control and the provision of services [19]. Figure 1 is an example to illustrate the intelligent home concept. 
## (s24) What does the intelligence meam?
(p24.0) When speaking of intelligent houses, one should too think of how to describe "intelligent" or "smart". What distinguishes an intelligent home from a traditional home in which most of us live? Based on Edwards and Grinter [38], smart environments and omnipresent computing intelligence have four features: a) The environment uses sensor information to assess the current situation (For eg, if you have triggered a motion sensor detector, it means somebody has to get near). b) The thing can presume state while taking into account a variety of factors at once (e.g. the machine can determine that it is time for dinner if the table includes several persons). c) By evaluating the situation, the environment will forecast a user's intentions (e.g. if motion detectors are installed in the future, it means that the consumer goes through the corridor and the user will want his or her path illuminated). d) The environment can behave preventively on the basis of purpose (e.g. the device can opt to switch the lights in advance so that the user may walk easily).

(p24.1) When speaking of intelligent houses, one should too think of how to describe "intelligent" or "smart". What distinguishes an intelligent home from a traditional home in which most of us live? Based on Edwards and Grinter [38], smart environments and omnipresent computing intelligence have four features: a) The environment uses sensor information to assess the current situation (For eg, if you have triggered a motion sensor detector, it means somebody has to get near). b) The thing can presume state while taking into account a variety of factors at once (e.g. the machine can determine that it is time for dinner if the table includes several persons). c) By evaluating the situation, the environment will forecast a user's intentions (e.g. if motion detectors are installed in the future, it means that the consumer goes through the corridor and the user will want his or her path illuminated). d) The environment can behave preventively on the basis of purpose (e.g. the device can opt to switch the lights in advance so that the user may walk easily).
## (s26) Intelligent home design
(p26.0) At least a few things, including sensors, equipment or actuators, are in an intelligent home that is not inherently intelligent on its own. A sensor generates data but does not contribute to the value of the home environment on its own. For instance, if the homeowner is needed to change the temperature to external temperature, moisture and other variables, a thermostat is not deemed clever. It can hold the temperature constant, but automation is not "intelligence." Only by collectively storing and analyzing all data on the environment, extracting trends and decisions taken without user interference can an environment be considered intelligent. The design of a smart home is based on how devices communicate, how and where the data from sensors and use patterns are stored, how Knowledge and patterns are interpreted and collected and how the user communicates with the devices and how the devices communicate with the user.

(p26.1) Soliman et al. [39] developed an intelligent home device architecture, actuators and sensors are attached to a microcontroller and are used to gather environmental data and carry out some acts. The data is transmitted from the microcontroller allowed by the ZigBee technology to the central server. The server then uploads the data through an application-programming-interface (API) to the cloud storage. A backend server, Storage and app in the front end are included in the cloud solution. The data is back-end processed and analyzed (Google App Engine). The user is able to view and manage the environment with a web application. The architecture proposed by Cook et al. [40] was made up of controllers (servers for computers), sensors (door/temperature/motion/light sensors), and relays (actuators). The communications layer is Wireless technology-based including ZigBee wireless network. A publish/subscribe pattern is the basis for the middleware layer. Jie et al. [41] suggested an architectural model addressing the scalability problem. The proposed model with a standardized interface allows devices to be connected to or removed with little effort from the intelligent home infrastructure. In [42] Hosek et al. define the Technology and hardware specifications of an intelligent Gateway to Home. Guoqiang et al. [43] suggest an intelligent house portal architecture that can be configured for approved communication protocols and convert Heterogeneous sensor information in a consistent format. Figure 2 shows the general intelligent home architecture. 

(p26.2) At least a few things, including sensors, equipment or actuators, are in an intelligent home that is not inherently intelligent on its own. A sensor generates data but does not contribute to the value of the home environment on its own. For instance, if the homeowner is needed to change the temperature to external temperature, moisture and other variables, a thermostat is not deemed clever. It can hold the temperature constant, but automation is not "intelligence." Only by collectively storing and analyzing all data on the environment, extracting trends and decisions taken without user interference can an environment be considered intelligent. The design of a smart home is based on how devices communicate, how and where the data from sensors and use patterns are stored, how Knowledge and patterns are interpreted and collected and how the user communicates with the devices and how the devices communicate with the user.

(p26.3) Soliman et al. [39] developed an intelligent home device architecture, actuators and sensors are attached to a microcontroller and are used to gather environmental data and carry out some acts. The data is transmitted from the microcontroller allowed by the ZigBee technology to the central server. The server then uploads the data through an application-programming-interface (API) to the cloud storage. A backend server, Storage and app in the front end are included in the cloud solution. The data is back-end processed and analyzed (Google App Engine). The user is able to view and manage the environment with a web application. The architecture proposed by Cook et al. [40] was made up of controllers (servers for computers), sensors (door/temperature/motion/light sensors), and relays (actuators). The communications layer is Wireless technology-based including ZigBee wireless network. A publish/subscribe pattern is the basis for the middleware layer. Jie et al. [41] suggested an architectural model addressing the scalability problem. The proposed model with a standardized interface allows devices to be connected to or removed with little effort from the intelligent home infrastructure. In [42] Hosek et al. define the Technology and hardware specifications of an intelligent Gateway to Home. Guoqiang et al. [43] suggest an intelligent house portal architecture that can be configured for approved communication protocols and convert Heterogeneous sensor information in a consistent format. Figure 2 shows the general intelligent home architecture. 
## (s27) PROTOCOLS OF CONNECTIVITY AND COMMUNICATION
(p27.0) Devices must be linked to share information in an intelligent home environment. Intelligence (as previously stated) occurs when the environment is aware of the system's current state. To accomplish this, a single sensor is insufficient to collect useful data; therefore, multiple sensors are needed to communicate and increase the usefulness of the data gathered. The communication protocols are used to decide how these devices and sensors can interact. These protocols determine how companies and collaborators exchange information with requirements, hardware and licensing protocols. Communication protocols are typically classified into three main media groups: 1) hybrid, 2) wired, and 3) wireless.

(p27.1) Some protocols provide longer distances, while others provide stronger protections, while others reduce energy consumption. The choice is often dependent on the size of the network. Personal area networks (PAN) and local area networks (LAN) are widely used within a smart home body area network (BAN). A comprehensive comparison of multiple home area network (HAN) communication technologies is given in [44]. The remainder of this section offers a summary and recommendations for selecting the most popular and evolving communication technologies (wired and wireless).

(p27.2) Devices must be linked to share information in an intelligent home environment. Intelligence (as previously stated) occurs when the environment is aware of the system's current state. To accomplish this, a single sensor is insufficient to collect useful data; therefore, multiple sensors are needed to communicate and increase the usefulness of the data gathered. The communication protocols are used to decide how these devices and sensors can interact. These protocols determine how companies and collaborators exchange information with requirements, hardware and licensing protocols. Communication protocols are typically classified into three main media groups: 1) hybrid, 2) wired, and 3) wireless.

(p27.3) Some protocols provide longer distances, while others provide stronger protections, while others reduce energy consumption. The choice is often dependent on the size of the network. Personal area networks (PAN) and local area networks (LAN) are widely used within a smart home body area network (BAN). A comprehensive comparison of multiple home area network (HAN) communication technologies is given in [44]. The remainder of this section offers a summary and recommendations for selecting the most popular and evolving communication technologies (wired and wireless).
## (s30) MOTIVATIONS
(p30.0) The advantages that use intelligent home apps based on clear because energy conservation is critical for both the home and health care, in particular the elderly, and the cost of basic home needs, entertainment and comfort is reduced. The benefits are listed in four categories [45]- [48] in Figure 3 summarizes the most important incentives for studying the smart home. 

(p30.1) The advantages that use intelligent home apps based on clear because energy conservation is critical for both the home and health care, in particular the elderly, and the cost of basic home needs, entertainment and comfort is reduced. The benefits are listed in four categories [45]- [48] in Figure 3 summarizes the most important incentives for studying the smart home. 
## (s31) CHALLENGES
(p31.0) There are various advantages of the smart way of smart home applications oriented to the Internet of things, however, these systems are not suitable solutions for connecting telecommunication networks. The survey showed that researchers are concerned about the nuances of smart operation in IoT-based SH applications and their use. Users face obstacles to the high cost of smart systems and the difficulty in maintaining them, unfriendly user interfaces, and most users do not take into account safety and security, restrictions on wired and wireless technologies, In addition to the challenges of energy management, data transfer, and healthcare. Figure 4 Summarizes the main obstacles that users face based on the smart home application method [45]. 

(p31.1) There are various advantages of the smart way of smart home applications oriented to the Internet of things, however, these systems are not suitable solutions for connecting telecommunication networks. The survey showed that researchers are concerned about the nuances of smart operation in IoT-based SH applications and their use. Users face obstacles to the high cost of smart systems and the difficulty in maintaining them, unfriendly user interfaces, and most users do not take into account safety and security, restrictions on wired and wireless technologies, In addition to the challenges of energy management, data transfer, and healthcare. Figure 4 Summarizes the main obstacles that users face based on the smart home application method [45]. 
## (s32) RECOMMENDATIONS
(p32.0) This section summarizes the literature recommendations most relevant to mitigating challenges and promoting the safe and successful use of smart home technologies such as IoT-based devices and sensors. There are recommendations for the user in terms of behaviour, energy consumption and device breakdowns, and safety and security recommendations to protect against external attacks and the entry of hackers [49]- [51] in Figure 5 explains the recommendations that the user should observe in SH systems. 

(p32.1) This section summarizes the literature recommendations most relevant to mitigating challenges and promoting the safe and successful use of smart home technologies such as IoT-based devices and sensors. There are recommendations for the user in terms of behaviour, energy consumption and device breakdowns, and safety and security recommendations to protect against external attacks and the entry of hackers [49]- [51] in Figure 5 explains the recommendations that the user should observe in SH systems. 
