# Complex Systems, Emergence, and Multiscale Analysis: A Tutorial and Brief Survey

CorpusID: 237818779 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4042157062331449b86e426785b14f911e6874a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4042157062331449b86e426785b14f911e6874a)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science, Physics

## (s3) Power Law and Heavy-Tailed Distributions
(p3.0) In contrast to Gaussian, exponential, and other thin-tailed distributions that have a well-defined scale, a power law distribution does not have a scale. It has been observed in various kinds of physical, biological, technological, and and social systems. Well-known examples include the distribution of word frequency, web hits, citations of scientific papers, telephone calls, copies of books sold, diameter of moon craters, intensity of solar flares, intensity of wars, magnitude of earthquakes, wealth of the richest people, and population of cities [37].
## (s5) Reasons Why the Power Law Is Favored in Modeling
(p5.0) Two reasons make the power law extremely important in complexity science. One reason is that it embodies the notion of self-similarity, and thus is the natural mathematical tool for describing fractal phenomena. The other reason is that it often signifies great risk, due to infinite variance or even mean. To understand the first reason, imagine a large room with a lot of balls flying around. See Figure 2. Assume the size of the balls follows a power law distribution,

(p5.1) When we observe the balls with our naked eyes, we normally will only pay more attention to the balls of certain size ranges-large balls will block our vision, and very small balls cannot be seen. Now assume that our eyes are comfortable with the scales r 0 , 2r 0 , r 0 /2, etc. Our perception is determined by the relevant abundance or the ratio of the balls of sizes 2r 0 , r 0 , and r 0 /2:

(p5.2) It is independent of r 0 . Now suppose we view the balls through a microscope with a magnifying power of 100, so now our eyes will be focusing on the balls with scales 2r 0 /100, r 0 /100, r 0 /200, etc. The ratio of the balls on those scales will again be independent of the scale r 0 /100. A perception independent of the scale is the essence of self-similarity.

(p5.3) The second reason that the power law is associated with higher risks is easier to understand, since a power law distribution has infinite variance when 0 < α < 2 and even infinite mean when 0 < α ≤ 1. Here, on one hand, one has to have some awe with the power law, as otherwise the cost could be tremendous. For example, during financial crises or economic downturns, the loss of the listed companies follows a power law distribution that is even heavier than the distribution of the gains of all profitable companies [51,52].

(p5.4) As further examples, the size of forest fires and volcanic eruptions also follow power law distributions (see Figures 3 and 4), which has obvious implications for fire fighting or observation of volcanoes-going too close to the sites could easily lead to casualties. However, on the other hand, one also has to be mindful that having infinite variance or mean is not always associated with the severity of natural disasters. An important counterexample is flooding, as it has been found that stream flow of rivers in dry seasons (especially in desert areas) is better described by power law distributions, while that in wet seasons is better described by log-normal distributions [53]. In deserts, surely flooding does not constitute a major risk.   
## (s8) Phase Space and Transformation
(p8.0) Phase space is the arena for the evolution of a dynamical system to unfold. It is spanned by all the variables needed to fully characterize the evolution of the system. To help one to better understand the idea, let us start from a system characterized by only two state variables, X 1 and X 2 . Monitoring the system often amounts to examining the waveforms of X 1 (t) and X 2 (t). One may instead try to examine the trajectory defined by (X 1 (t), X 2 (t)), where t now is treated as an implicit parameter. The space spanned by X 1 and X 2 is the phase space (or state space) we are discussing. They could be position and velocity, for example. Employing phase space facilitates one to study the dynamics of a complicated system with a geometrical viewpoint. For some dynamical systems, irrespective of initial conditions, the trajectory eventually approaches a single point; this is called a globally stable fixed point solution. Of course, the situation could be more complicated. For example, the trajectory may converge to a closed loop, again irrespective of where the trajectory starts. This is called a globally stable limit cycle. The discrete counter part of a limit cycle is a periodic motion with certain period (say N): the corresponding attractor consists of N points, and the trajectory amounts to hopping among the N points with a definite order.

(p8.1) To be more familiar with the concept of phase space, it is useful to examine certain experience in daily life. To illustrate the idea, suppose we were going to a meeting by a taxi. On our way, there was a traffic jam, and the taxi got stuck. Afraid of being late, we decided to call the organizer. How would we describe our situation? Usually, we would tell the organizer where we got stuck and how quickly or slowly the taxi was moving. In other words, we actually have been using the concept of phase space as part of our daily language.

(p8.2) Although the concept of phase space is among the most basic in dynamical systems theory, its usefulness in geographical science has yet to be seriously explored [60]. To accelerate the coming of a time that phase space becomes as basic in geographical science as in complexity science, it is helpful to discuss two potential applications of phase space in geographical science. One application is top-down, that is, to systematically think about how many independent variables are needed to fully characterize an interesting and important problem in geographical science, and how each variable can be measured. The other application is bottom-up. It is easiest to illustrate the idea by using some variables in the World Value Survey (WVS, accessed on 17 April 2021, http://www.worldvaluessurvey. org/wvs.jsp) as an example. WVS is an interesting project that explores values and beliefs of people around the globe, how the values and beliefs evolve with time, and what social and political implications they may have. Since 1981, researchers have conducted representative national surveys in almost 100 countries. During the survey, a lot of variables have been deduced. We show here that phase space offers a convenient geometrical way to visualize the data and identify co-variations of the variables. For this purpose, we choose a variable that gives three levels of religious participation for people in the nations surveyed. The other variable we choose is happiness, which is given in four levels. How are the two variables related? How different are people in different countries in terms of these two variables? To gain insights into these interesting questions, we can form a phase space spanned by these two variables. The format of the survey data determines that people surveyed in a nation will belong to one of the 12 different categories. To fully utilize the notion of space, we can associate each category with a box. Instead of putting every person belonging to that category at one single point (e.g., the center of the box), we can generate two uniformly distributed random variables as the coordinate of the person in the corresponding box. Please see Figure 6. With such a visualization, one can immediately see the abundance of each category. When WVS data of different waves (times) are used, one can then examine variation of the percentage of people in each category over time for a nation, compare among different nations, deduce functional relationships between these two variables, and classify nations in the world into different clusters. Note Figure 6 may be called phase space ensemble based visualization, where an ensemble amounts to a participant in the survey. Next, let us consider transformations in phase space. A good way to grasp the idea is to imagine the following situation: on a very weedy day, a little boy went outside with a sheet of paper in his hand. He grabbed a handful of sand and put it on the paper. Then he released the paper in the air. How would the sand be swept across the sky? One could even think that originally the boy had arranged the sand to resemble the face of a person. How would the face be twisted by the wind? To make this discussion more concrete, we can consider how a unit circle is transformed by the Henon map [61]:

(p8.3) where a = 1.4, b = 0.3. Figure 7 shows the successive (from left to right and top to bottom) images of the unit circle after n = 1, · · · , 5 iterations. Note that the fifth image is basically the Henon attractor one can find in textbooks, journal papers, or certain web sites. It is usually obtained by choosing an arbitrary initial condition and iterate the Henon map long enough. If the trajectory does not diverge, then after removing the transient points (which are the first few points here), the remaining trajectory (not connected by lines) will be very similar to the fifth image shown here. In our ensemble scenario, we observe that just after one iteration, the unit circle is already changed to a very different shape, and by the fourth iteration, the shape of the image is already very similar to the Henon attractor. By now, one could easily understand that the Henon attractor can either be readily obtained from an arbitrarily shaped phase space region (discarding initial conditions which lead to the divergence of the iterations) or by iterating a single arbitrary initial condition many times. The equivalence of the two approaches, one based on the evolution of ensembles in the phase space, the other based on long-time iterations, is a clear manifestation of the ergodic property of the Henon map (and more generally, chaotic systems). To enhance our understanding of the materials discussed so far, let us visually observe how chaos manifests itself in the chaotic Lorenz system:
## (s22) Structure Function Based Multifractal Analysis
(p22.0) Since the Hurst parameter H is the defining parameter of random fractals, it is certainly of critical importance to estimate H. To facilitate estimation of H, it is most convenient to use the random walk process y, defined by Equation (76), and consider the following multifractal formulation:
## (s28) Adaptive Fractal Analysis (AFA)
(p28.0) In the past three decades, many efforts have been made to estimate H, the most important parameter for random fractals. As a result, many excellent methods for estimating H have been proposed. Among them is the celebrated detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) [151,152]. It works as follows: To analyze a time series, x 1 , x 2 , x 3 , · · · , one first determines its mean x, then constructs a random walk process using Equation (76). By doing so, one has assumed that the data are like a noise process. One then partitions the random walk into non-overlapping segments of length l (therefore, the number of distinct segments is not larger than N/l, where N is the length of the time series). One furthers determines the local trend in each segment by using the best linear or polynomial fitting. This procedure is schematically shown in Figure 27, where a short EEG signal is used as an example. Finally, one obtains the difference between the original "walk" and the local trend. Denote it by u(n). H is then estimated by
