# Survey Summary on Salts Hydrates and Composites Used in Thermochemical Sorption Heat Storage: A Review

CorpusID: 236359453 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/53de4c76dd6bede749fb9ed6e5ea0f23c971e984](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/53de4c76dd6bede749fb9ed6e5ea0f23c971e984)

Fields: Engineering, Chemistry, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s2) Philosophies and Concept of Sorption Heat Storage
(p2.0) The term "thermochemical" storage, which often replaces heat storage by sorption, designates the process during which the molecules (adsorbate) of a fluid (generally a gas) are fixed on a solid or a liquid (adsorbent/absorbent) [30][31][32].
## (s3) •
(p3.0) The chemical adsorption or chemisorption: the process is the result of a chemical reaction with the formation of chemical bonds between the adsorbate and adsorbent surface. The binding energy (1-10 eV) is much stronger than that of physical adsorption and the process may be irreversible.

(p3.1) Due to its high energy density and low heat loss, the sorption-based heat storage TCES system has gained substantial consideration [33]. This reversible energy storage mechanism is commonly referred to as the process of charging for energy storage and discharging for the use of the stored energy. For different applications, the concept of sorption-based TCES can be practical: short/long-term energy storage, cooling systems, domestic supply of hot water, industrial heat/cooling, and space heating.
## (s20) Recent Research of Salt Hydrate Material in TCES Applications
(p20.0) In order to build systems such as reactors, heat exchangers, and solar collectors, thermochemical material properties are a prerequisite. The energy storage capability, operating conditions, and costs of TCES systems are determined by these properties.

(p20.1) New materials matching the criteria need to be developed (i.e., high energy density, thermal conductivity, specific heat capacity, and desorption rate) [18,[79][80][81] to enhance the TES proficiency of the system.
## (s21) Composites Based Salt Hydrates
(p21.0) As previously reported, chemical heat storage materials, particularly hydrates, are promising materials. The well-known studied salts are mainly sulfates (e.g., MgSO 4 [73,88,[95][96][97] and Al 2 (SO 4 ) 3 [73,88]), chlorides (e.g., CaCl 2 [98][99][100], MgCl 2 [59,86,89,101], and LiCl [102]), and bromides (e.g., LiBr [49] and SrBr 2 [49]).
## (s29) Composites Based Binary Salts
(p29.0) Any material has its advantages and drawbacks. The combination of two suitable materials to form a binary salt can therefore enhance the efficiency and stability of the TCES material. In order to achieve favorable performance, for instance, a hydrothermal stable salt with a high deliquescence relative humidity (DRH) and a small amount of deliquescence salt were combined. Mixing sulfate and chloride was the most remarkable example of this. Chloride has a high hygroscopicity and is easy to overhydrate to form a solution in the hydration reaction; this drastically decreases the hydration reaction stability. In comparison, sulfate, due to weak reaction kinetics and insufficient transfer water vapor, experiences an incomplete reaction [57]. By combining these two salts (sulfate and chloride), the dehydrated sulfate was partly dissolved in a solution of chloride hydrated salt to form a higher hydrate state. This prevents the instability of excessive chloride hydration and increases the hydration kinetics of the sulfate salt. To avoid the reactor corrosion by chlorides, a mixture with a high sulfate ratio and low desorption temperature need to be combined [57]. In order to prepare various binary salts, Rammelberg et al. [192] mixed MgCl 2 , MgSO 4 , MgBr 2 , FeSO 4 , and CaCl 2 , examined the properties and circulation stability of each binary salt via a continuous process of hydration/dehydration. Surprisingly, the mixture of calcium chloride and magnesium chloride showed good cycle stability without reaction control to prevent overhydration and showed superior kinetic properties. Similarly, Rammelberg et al. [193] mixed MgSO 4 , MgCl 2 , and CaCl 2 salt hydrates in pairs in order to obtain three binary salt hydrates. At a constant vapor pressure of 21 mbar, the results of the hydration and dehydration reactions showed that the cycling capability of all three mixed materials was enhanced. The mixture of CaCl 2 and MgCl 2 showed an optimal cycling stability and, after 55 cycles, showed almost no diminution. Ejeian et al. [194] prepared MgSO 4 -based composites on activated carbon fiber ((ACF)-LiCl-MgSO 4 ). MgSO 4 was selected as salt in order to avoid solution leakage due to the excessive hydration and increase the composites' mass transfer capability and density of adsorption.

(p29.1) Gordeeva et al. [117] stated that embedding two salts that affect each other into a porous material provides another "way" to control the sorption properties of composites. The formation of LiCl and LiBr solid solutions within the silica gel pores results in the shifting the equilibrium temperature (or pressure) of the salt solvation. The solvation temperature change did not exceed 5-15 • C due to the low mutual solubility of the lithium halides, thus limiting the probability of varying the composite sorption equilibrium.

(p29.2) Posern and Kaps [101] used attapulgite as the host material for adding MgCl 2 to MgSO 4 to produce binary salt for use in TCES systems. The sorption heat was measured at different conditions obtained by adjusting the mixing ratio and the temperature of adsorption/desorption. For composite adsorbents with a salt content of 32.8 wt.% (80/20 wt.% salt solutions of MgSO 4 and MgCl 2 , respectively), an energy density of 1590 J/g was reached under 30 • C (hydration temperature) and 36 mbar (water vapor pressure). A higher content of MgCl 2 in the composite adsorbent corresponded to a higher water uptake and, consequently, to the increase in heat produced. In these conditions, the risk of salt solution leakage was present. The sorption heat could be boosted by 50% compared to pure MgSO 4 salt when the concentration of MgCl 2 in the mixture was 10%. The recyclability of composite adsorbents has not been studied yet.
