# A systematic literature review of machine learning methods in predicting court decisions

CorpusID: 239014377 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73be598e29a37827fbdac08a1d2d45aaca734883](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73be598e29a37827fbdac08a1d2d45aaca734883)

Fields: Computer Science, Law

## (s1) METHOD 2.1. The review protocol-ROSES
(p1.0) The ROSES review protocol lead the current research. The ROSES protocol is developed for systematic review and environment management field maps [34]- [45]. Additionally, the ROSES protocol also encourages researchers to guarantee that they offer the correct information with explicit details. The researchers began the SLR by formulating research questions according to the review's protocol [46]- [48]. Subsequently, the researchers were required to describe the systematic searching strategy that consists of three processes, such as identification, screening and eligibility. the researchers were also required to perform a quality appraisal of the selected articles. Lastly, the authors elaborated on the outcomes generated from the chosen principal articles.
## (s3) Systematic searching strategies
(p3.0) The searching process in SLR comprises three main steps: i) identification, ii) screening, and iii) eligibility [7]. The whole process was summarised in the flow diagram depicted in Figure 1, and explained in the below sections.
## (s5) Screening
(p5.0) The screening process was undertaken for all the selected articles in the identification process. The purpose of the screening purpose is to include and exclude articles based on the criteria determined. the initial screening process restricts the timeline to be in a specific interval recommended by Okoli [49]. The searching process was limited to articles published from the year 2000 to 2021 only. Nevertheless, the searching process was started in March 2021, and the year has not come to an end. Thus, the findings were limited to March 2021. the second inclusion criterion was the language used in the published articles or journals. All non-English language articles were excluded due to possible translation difficulties. The inclusion and exclusion criteria are enlisted in Table 2. TITLE-ABS-KEY(("predict*" OR "prediction*" OR "predicting*" OR "forecast*") AND ("court decision*" OR "legal decision*" OR "law decision*" OR "judicial case*") AND ("machine learning*" OR "artificial intelligence*" OR "AI*" OR "supervise* machine learning*")) Web of Science (TS = (("prediction*" OR "predict*" OR "predicting") AND ("court decision*" OR "judicial decision*" OR "legal decision*") AND ("machine learning" OR "AI"))) 
## (s12) Types of judicial decision
(p12.0) The research questions are discussed in this section. The first research question that was addressed: (RQ1) What types of judicial decisions have been predicted using the machine learning method? In the world of the legal system, judgement consists of various subtasks that have to be considered. The legal system is difficult to be understood by the civilians as the legal processes include interacting with a lawyer, hiring the lawyer, proceeding decisions and the legal decisions' consequences and the implications of words in the case files [53]. This study investigated how machine learning can be used in court proceedings to predict judicial decisions. the prediction can be of various types, such as predicting the legal judgement's outcome or the charges that require multilabel text classification. Multiple subtasks in legal judgement typically comprise comprehensive and complex sub-clauses, such as charges, penalty terms, and fines [52]. Nevertheless, most research experimented with a binary task that classifies only two possible outcomes. Besides predicting the outcome of judicial decision, several countries that utilise the civil law system, such as Germany, France and China, deemed that the prediction of relevant articles is a fundamental subtask that guides and supports the prediction [52].

(p12.1) In this SLR, seven research papers were found to have discussed envisaging construction litigation's outcome. Arditi and Phulket [54] mentioned that construction litigation is ordinary in numerous construction projects, explicitly involving large contracts. Miscommunication, insufficient specifications and plans, rigid contracts, changes in site conditions, non-payment, catch up profits, limited workforce, insufficient tools and equipment, ineffective supervision, notice requirements, constructive changes not acknowledged by owner, delays, and acceleration measures provoking claims and causing disputes. Therefore, Arditi and Phulket [54] proposed a tool to predict the outcome of litigation to minimise construction disputes caused by disagreements that are complicated to be settled without engaging in legal actions [54], [55].
## (s13) Methods of machine learning
(p13.0) In this section, the following research question is discussed: (RQ2) What are the machine learning methods used to predict judicial decisions? Legal professionals are currently focused on artificial intelligence [66]. Envisaging judicial decisions based on historical datasets in the legal domain is not new and widely used in the legal system globally. Machine learning is an emerging scientific study of algorithms and statistical models that are part of artificial intelligence, enabling the system to learn automatically and improve the experience from test data. The core research aspects in applying machine learning in jurisprudence are the extraction of information and analysis on existing legal documents. in previous practices, lawyers and judges have to do all the works manually. However, machine learning has taken the stream of society to become more intelligent by interpreting the text documents and extracting the documents' content [53].
