# IMPACT OF FLUID COMPARTMENTS ON FUNCTIONAL OUTCOMES FOR PATIENTS WITH NEOVASCULAR AGE-RELATED MACULAR DEGENERATION A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 237094610 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc26367c9a7a8cb4e9fe69d3972a539eb2cb522c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc26367c9a7a8cb4e9fe69d3972a539eb2cb522c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Functional Outcomes at Year 1
(p3.0) Randomized studies. In a post hoc analysis of the EXCITE trial, baseline SRF was identified as a key predictor of favorable best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) gains at 1 year (P = 0.05). 6 Best-corrected visual acuity and central retinal thickness only correlated strongly at baseline.

(p3.1) In the CATT trial, in patients with nAMD treated with ranibizumab or bevacizumab, baseline IRF, SRF, and sub-RPE fluid were significantly associated with 1-year visual acuity outcomes in univariate analysis, but not in multivariate analysis after adjustment for baseline variables. 16 In a post hoc analysis of the CATT trial, 13 IRF negatively affected vision at all evaluated time points within the first year of treatment, particularly when there was foveal involvement. visual acuity in eyes with foveal IRF was two lines lower than in those without fluid and one line lower than in eyes with         extrafoveal IRF at all evaluated time points (P , 0.0001). Conversely, foveal involvement of SRF or sub-RPE fluid at 1 year did not significantly affect visual acuity (P = 0.051 and P = 0.40, respectively).

(p3.2) Intraretinal fluid had a greater negative effect on visual acuity than did SRF or sub-RPE fluid at all time points and was independently associated with worse visual acuity over the course of treatment.

(p3.3) In a post hoc analysis of the VIEW (VEGF Trap-Eye: Investigation of Efficacy and Safety in Wet AMD) trials, 12 multivariate modeling indicated that IRF at baseline was associated with a smaller improvement in BCVA at Week 52 (22.77 letters; P , 0.001 vs. no IRF), as was baseline pigment epithelial detachment (PED; 21.88 letters, P = 0.012 vs. no PED). SRF at baseline was associated with a larger BCVA change at Week 52 (+2.11 letters; P = 0.018 vs. no SRF).

(p3.4) In a retrospective exploratory analysis of the HARBOR trial, 17 SRF at baseline was associated with a 2-fold greater likelihood of achieving a Snellen equivalent of 20/40 or better at 1 year than if SRF was absent (multivariate analysis, odds ratio: 2.0; 95% confidence interval 1.2-3.3). Patients with SRF and small lesions (#4.51 disk area of total choroidal neovascularization leakage) were more likely to gain $15 letters than those with SRF and large lesions (odds ratio: 2.5; 95% confidence interval 1.5-4.3). In a post hoc analysis, 8 baseline horizontal IRF extension in the fovea, and IRF volume, had the highest predictive power for concomitant BCVA. Baseline SRF and PED parameters did not contribute to baseline BCVA, regardless of macular location.
## (s4) Functional Outcomes at Other Time Points
(p4.0) Randomized studies: Year 2. Post hoc analyses of the CATT trial 14 found that, at Week 104, eyes with foveal SRF had better visual acuity than those without SRF (P = 0.0005) and eyes with foveal IRF had worse visual acuity than those without IRF (P , 0.0001).

(p4.1) The negative effect of IRF on visual acuity was evident at all time points and worsened over time. Furthermore, eyes with sustained visual acuity loss at 2 years were more likely to have IRF (P , 0.001) and thinner SRF (P = 0.04), but less likely to have SRF (P = 0.006). 9 visual acuity was better in eyes with foveal sub-RPE fluid at Week 104 than eyes with extrafoveal or no sub-RPE fluid (P = 0.048). 14 Sub-RPE fluid at
## (s5) Real-World Studies
(p5.0) The association between fluid and visual acuity outcomes has also been assessed in observational studies. Of the 16 real-world studies identified in this systematic review (details in Table 2), statistical data comparing visual outcomes between patients without fluid to those with SRF and/or IRF were available for 11 studies. Owing to variability in study methodology, patient populations, and data analyses, any conclusions should be interpreted with caution.

(p5.1) Only two observational studies were prospective. 22,23 In one study 22 of patients treated with ranibizumab treat-and-extend, baseline BCVA was significantly worse in eyes with IRF than eyes with SRF alone (P = 0.006). After three injections, eyes that were dry (no IRF/SRF) had better BCVA at Year 1 compared with residual IRF (P = 0.05), whereas eyes with SRF alone had similar BCVA compared with those that were dry. Furthermore, eyes with residual IRF had a greater chance of BCVA loss at Year 1 compared with eyes that were dry (P = 0.01). In a retrospective analysis of another prospective study of patients treated with ranibizumab treat-and-extend, 23 eyes with IRF had significantly lower BCVA at any time point than eyes that were dry or those with SRF (P , 0.001).

(p5.2) Five retrospective, observational studies found that eyes with baseline IRF had worse vision at Month 4, 24 Year 1, [25][26][27] or Year 2 28 than eyes without as determined by multivariate analysis. In addition, eyes with $2 clinic visits without IRF had significantly greater gains in visual acuity compared with eyes with fewer IRF-free visits. 29 Three retrospective, observational studies found that eyes with baseline SRF had better vision at Year 1 30,31 or Year 2 28 than eyes without. In one study, baseline foveal SRF was a significant predictor of positive change in BCVA at Year 1 (+10.6 letters greater than eyes without SRF; P = 0.001). 30 However, four studies found that baseline SRF did not significantly affect visual acuity at Months 4 and 6, 24 or Year 1. [25][26][27] Another study found that visual acuity in eyes with $2 clinic visits without SRF was not significantly different from those with fewer SRF-free visits. 29 In addition, in eyes with SRF and PED, BCVA was not significantly different between patients with persistent SRF and those without SRF or IRF at any visit. 32
## (s6) Number of Injections
(p6.0) Association between fluid compartments and anti-VEGF injection frequency was assessed as a marker for treatment burden. Of the studies identified (Table  3), only the FLUID study found significant associations between fluid presence/absence and number of injections. 11 The mean number of injections was lower in the relaxed (tolerating #200 mm of SRF) group than that in the intensive (not tolerating SRF) group at Year 1 (8.9 ± 2.3 vs. 9.5 ± 2.6; P = 0.001) and Year 2 (15.8 ± 5.9 vs. 17.0 ± 6.5; P = 0.001).
