# Systematic literature review of trials assessing recommended systemic treatments in hepatocellular carcinoma

CorpusID: 239649246 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d2ecb3eaa6eebce6e789592b50edc2d4bf13ef63](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d2ecb3eaa6eebce6e789592b50edc2d4bf13ef63)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Patient & disease characteristics
(p3.0) Minimum and maximum values for each trial arm are used to describe the demographic and disease characteristics shown in Figure 1. Patient age and sex were fairly consistent between studies, with single-arm trials and RCTs in 1L and 2L settings enrolling patients aged 59-68 years (mean) or 51-73 years (median); 71-93% of patients were male. The proportion of patients from the Asia-Pacific region varied widely. Trials included a wide range of patients with vascular invasion (0-88%) and extrahepatic spread (21-86%).

(p3.1) There appeared to be a relationship between the proportion of patients enrolled from Asia-Pacific versus the prevalence of hepatitis B, but not the prevalence of hepatitis C (Supplementary Figure 2), which was expected given the regional epidemiology of hepatitis B [95].
## (s4) Performance status & disease stage
(p4.0) The ECOG performance status, BCLC stage, and Child-Pugh class of patients from each trial arm were also examined for similarity. The ranges of enrolled patients who were ECOG 0 (i.e., fully active), ECOG 1 (i.e., able to perform light/sedentary activity) and ECOG 2 (i.e., unable to perform work activities but capable of self-care) were 25-100%, 17-75% and 0-8%, respectively, in the 1L setting ( Figure 2). Notably, two of the early RCTs assessing sorafenib [37,38] enrolled a much lower proportion of patients who were ECOG 0 compared with other 1L single arm trials and RCTs; these two trials also enrolled patients who were ECOG 2. Aside from these two trials [37,38], the ECOG performance status of patients in 1L trials was largely similar. In the 2L setting, the ranges of enrolled patients who were ECOG 0 and 1 were 52-91% and 9-48%, respectively, and appeared broadly similar.

(p4.1) Seventeen of the 24 trials in the similarity assessment reported patients' BCLC stage at baseline. Patients staged BCLC C (i.e., advanced disease) ranged 43-96% in the 1L setting (Supplementary Figure 4). Two trials in the 1L single-arm setting had a lower proportion of BCLC C patients than most other 1L trials, while the Sorafenib AP trial enrolled BCLC C patients almost exclusively [33,35,37]. Aside from these three trials, the BCLC staging appeared broadly similar in the 1L setting. In the 2L setting, BCLC C patients composed 76%-94% of patients; in this regard, 2L trials appeared broadly similar. Patients with a Child-Pugh score of 5-6 (i.e., Child-Pugh A, considered well-compensated) varied throughout the trial arms, ranging 43-100% in the 1L setting (Supplementary Figure 5)  enrolled >20% Child-Pugh B patients [30][31][32]35]. One 1L RCT [38] enrolled only Child-Pugh B or C patients; other 1L RCTs enrolled <10% Child-Pugh B patients and were therefore considered similar in Child-Pugh class. In the 2L setting, one trial enrolled 55% Child-Pugh B patients [71]; all other 2L trials enrolled >90% Child-Pugh A patients and were considered similar.

(p4.2) In summary, some trials in the 1L setting included patients who had more advanced disease based on ECOG performance status [30,37,38], BCLC stage [37], and Child-Pugh class [30][31][32]35,38]. All these trials assessed sorafenib as single arm or placebo-controlled RCTs. Patients in 2L trials were more similar in terms of these characteristics, aside from one single-arm trial for lenvatinib [71].
## (s5) Efficacy results Survival
(p5.0) The median overall survival (mOS) ranged from 3.5 to 19.2 months in the 1L setting and 7.3 to 22.2 months in the 2L setting. In 1L RCTs, the median (range) of mOS values was 13.4 (4.0-19.2) months in active treatment arms and 4.2 (3.5-7.9) months in placebo/BSC arms ( Figure 3); in 2L RCTs, the median (range) of mOS values was 10.2 (8.5-13.9) months in active treatment arms and 7.8 (7.3-10.6) months in placebo arms (Supplementary Figure 6).

(p5.1) The median progression-free survival (mPFS) ranged 1.9-7.3 months in the 1L setting and 1.5-6.8 months in the 2L setting. In 1L RCTs, the median (range) of mPFS values was 3.8 (2.2-7.3) months in active treatment arms and 1.9 months in BSC ( Figure 3); in 2L RCTs, the median (range) of mPFS values was 3.3 (2.8-6.8) months in active treatment arms and 1.9 (1.5-2.8) months in placebo arms (Supplementary Figure 6).

(p5.2) The association between disease advancement and survival in the 1L setting was explored by plotting the proportion of ECOG 0 patients, BCLC B patients and Child-Pugh A patients versus the mOS for the trials reporting both these outcomes (Supplementary Figure 9). Based on qualitative review, the differences in mOS observed in 1L trials may be partially correlated with the underlying ECOG performance status of patients enrolled.

(p5.3) The 1L and 2L RCTs also reported the hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) of survival based on the Kaplan-Meier curves of PFS and OS. In the 1L setting, all trials assessing sorafenib versus placebo/BSC found a significant improvement in both PFS and OS in favor of sorafenib [36][37][38]. Similarly, the combination of atezolizumab + bevacizumab was associated with an improvement in PFS and OS versus sorafenib [42,43]. The trial assessing lenvatinib and sorafenib demonstrated lenvatinib's non-inferiority [39], while the comparison of nivolumab versus sorafenib did not show a significant improvement in either outcome [40]. Last, the comparison of atezolizumab + bevacizumab versus atezolizumab alone found an improvement in PFS, but OS was not reported  ( Figure 4) [44]. In the 2L setting, cabozantinib and regorafenib were associated with significant improvements in PFS and OS over placebo [77,79]; results for ramucirumab were mixed [78,80], and pembrolizumab did not significantly lower PFS and OS per the trial's specified criteria [81,82] (Supplementary Figure 7). Other time-to-event outcomes, such as the median duration of therapy (mDOT), median duration of response (mDOR) and median time to progression (mTTP) were less frequently reported than mOS and mPFS (Supplementary Table 13).
## (s8) Tumor response
(p8.0) Tumor response for each arm was assessed using Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) or RECIST 1.1 criteria for all but four trials [30,33,73,79]. Less than half the trials also assessed tumor response using modified RECIST (mRECIST) or immune-related RECIST (irRECIST); therefore RECIST results are shown. In the 1L RCT setting, the objective response rate (ORR; i.e., complete response + partial response) median value was 12% (range: 1-26%) among active treatments and 1% (range: 0-1%) among placebo/BSC, while the disease control rate (DCR; i.e., complete response + partial response + stable disease) median value was 53% (range: 35-73%) among active treatment arms and 29% (range: 16-32%) among placebo/BSC arms (Supplementary Figure 9). In the 2L RCT setting, the ORR median value (range) was 7% (range: 4-18%) among active treatment    [44]   arms and 1% (range: 0-4%) among placebo arms, and the DCR median value was 64% (range: 56-83%) among active treatment arms and 39% (range: 33-53%) among placebo arms (Supplementary Figure 10).
## (s10) NMA feasibility
(p10.0) In addition to similar patient characteristics, the feasibility of performing an NMA relies on a network of treatments connected by common comparators assessed in RCTs and common outcomes reported within each network [16]. We examined the outcomes that could be indirectly compared through an NMA for all the treatments recommended by the NCCN Guidelines, based on the available RCT data and network structure (Supplementary Figure 12). Notably, FOLFOX could not be compared with other 1L treatments in an NMA because the in-trial comparator was doxorubicin [61]; since no other recommended treatments have been compared with doxorubicin in a trial setting, FOLFOX could not integrate into the treatment network. Similarly, nivolumab ± ipilimumab could not be compared with other 2L treatments in an NMA because its existing trials were single-arm studies. Based on the currently available RCT data, key efficacy outcomes (i.e., OS, PFS, ORR and DCR) could be indirectly compared via NMA for the majority of recommended treatments in both 1L and 2L RCT settings. Less commonly reported efficacy outcomes such as TTP and DOT could also be indirectly compared via NMA for most treatments. DOR could be indirectly compared in 2L RCTs only. Serious and discontinuation-related TEAEs could be indirectly compared via NMA in both 1L and 2L settings, but grade ≥3 TEAEs could be indirectly compared in the 1L setting only.
## (s11) Discussion
(p11.0) The objective of this study was to determine the similarity of trials assessing recommended systemic treatments for advanced HCC. In general, we found that trials were largely similar based on design and inclusion criteria within respective 1L and 2L categories, aside from some older single-arm trials and placebo-controlled RCTs assessing sorafenib [30][31][32]35,37,38]. The design and patients' disease stage in 2L RCTs were also considered broadly similar and suitable for quantitative comparison.

(p11.1) Trials differed in some key patient characteristics. While age, sex, and prevalence of vascular invasion and extrahepatic spread were relatively similar across trials, the proportion of patients infected with hepatitis B and levels of AFP varied widely. Hepatitis B infection and AFP level may represent treatment effect modifiers and should be evaluated closely in any potential meta-analyses. For example, a review of over 11,000 patients with HCC in USA found that hepatitis B-related cases were associated with a significantly lower risk of mortality compared with cases related to alcohol, metabolic disorder and multiple etiologies [96]. Similarly, AFP is a biomarker often elevated in patients with HCC who are more likely to have viral etiology, cirrhosis, larger or multiple tumors and vascular invasion [97]. Ultimately, the best approach may be to perform quantitative studies using analyses of patient subgroups with underlying disease characteristics or comorbidities as reported by individual study authors to control for specific patient characteristics [13]. This method enables more nuanced information for healthcare decision makers to make targeted recommendations for patients based on the presence or absence of specific disease characteristics, such as bleeding risk, hepatitis B infection or AFP levels.

(p11.2) We also found generally robust reporting of key clinical efficacy outcomes, including mPFS, mOS and tumor response. There is broad consensus that mOS is the primary efficacy outcome of interest in determining a preferred treatment. Other efficacy outcomes, such as mPFS, mTTP and ORR, could be analyzed using NMA with relatively robust networks. However, there is some disagreement within the field on the usefulness of surrogate end points such as mTTP, mPFS and ORR [98][99][100][101], particularly for IO agents, which demonstrate different relationships between tumor response and disease progression than TKI and VEGFRI drugs [102,103]. In other words, although analyses of several efficacy outcomes may be possible in an NMA, the interpretation of analyses on surrogate end points must be performed with a deep understanding of the treatments involved and clinical implications of the findings. Indirect comparisons of serious TEAEs or TEAEs leading to discontinuation are also possible via NMA; however, we did not assess the practicality of indirectly comparing individual adverse events, and these analyses are typically less reliable due to heterogenous reporting and relative rarity.
## (s12) Limitations
(p12.0) The purpose of this study was to qualitatively review the literature; therefore, no quantitative comparisons can be drawn from this study. We noted the limited information or absence of reporting by trial authors on patient characteristics and outcomes of interest, particularly when the primary study involved a clinical trial registry entry or conference abstract with minimal information. For example, mRECIST criteria are considered to be more sensitive than RECIST criteria in assessing tumor response and predicting survival [104]; however, as noted in the Results, mRECIST criteria were used less frequently than RECIST and would therefore be more difficult to assess for similarity in a quantitative analysis. Similarly, the reporting of TEAEs and TRAEs differed for specific safety events. We also did not assess the comparability of patient-reported outcomes, such as quality of life. However, we found that very few trials reported quality of life; therefore a robust assessment of similarity would not be possible.

(p12.1) There are several treatments being assessed as monotherapies or in novel combinations in patients with HCC [105,106]. This review is inherently limited by the rapidly evolving trial landscape in this field. However, our review demonstrates the need for treatments with improved efficacy and safety profiles, as we found that the typical overall survival for patients using recommended treatments in the RCT settings was approximately 12 months, and approximately one in seven patients discontinued trial participation (based on mOS median values of 13.4 months and 10.2 months in 1L and 2L settings, respectively, and median discontinuation due to TEAEs of 13%).
