# treatment of gummy smile using botulinum toxin: a review

CorpusID: 237932459 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a781e6a7f09453a0c84e80be181c29b16772b764](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a781e6a7f09453a0c84e80be181c29b16772b764)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Results
(p2.0) Seventy-six papers were acquired as a result of online literature search via Pubmed, Scopus, and Web of science. Sixty-seven papers among them were excluded as it fell under the exclusion criteria. Fourtythree papers were either described other treatment methods (surgery or laser or filler), not a clinical study, BoNT injection were performed as an adjunct to other treatment method. Twenty-four papers were either no description on BoNT injection and its ef-fect, and short follow-up period. Therefore, 9 papers were used for this review.

(p2.1) Number of subjects who received BoNT injection treatment in 9 papers was 234 in total. When disregarding the 3 papers which do not present either sex or age of the treatment subject, most of treatment subjects was female with a wide range of age distribution from 15 -70. Eight papers have described the treatment subject selection criteria for BoNT injection and 5 papers considered pure HUL patients as the subject excluding patients with VME and delayed passive eruption of teeth (Table 1).

(p2.2) In regards to the measurement parts for quantity of gummy smile, it was mostly measured at the central incisor. It sometimes was measured at the canine teeth or the first premolar. As a method to measure the quantity of gummy smile, 7 literatures conducted indirect measurement with the use of photograph or video equipment and 1 literature conducted repetitive measurement by putting a ruler directly to the face. Also, in order to acquire maximal smile during the process of measuring the quantity of gummy smile, 3 papers described that funny joke or video clip was used (Table 1). Method to measure the degree of gingival exposure is as important an item as maximal smiling induction. Eight among 9 papers described about methods to measure the degree of gingival exposure. Seven papers measured the degree of gingival exposure through photography, Polo 12 used photography and video together and Cengiz et al. 17 and Hexsel et al. 18 used photography and standardized measuring tape. Suber et al. 15 conducted 4 repeated measurements with the use of standardized measuring tape without taking a photo and it was because the moment of maximal smile emergence cannot accurately be taken with a photo. As it was mentioned by Suber et al., 15 it is difficult to capture maximal smiles from a single moment of time. Therefore, the maximal smile screenshots acquired from video can be used as more objective data compared to photography. Also, the studies by Mazzuco and Hexsel 7 and Polo 6 and Cengiz et al. 17 and Hexsel et al., 18 the effort was made to narrow down the error between before and after treatment using a computer program or reference point to compensate the error that generates from photography at the same environment. It would also be an item to be considered when conducting studies in the future.

(p2.3) Seven studies used onabotulinumtoxinA (Botox, Allergan, Irvine, California) with concentration raging from 2 U/0.1 mL to 5 U/0.1 mL. Two studies used abobotolinumtoxinA (Dysport, Ipsen Biopharm Limited, Wrexham, United Kingdom) with a concentration of 25 U/0.1 mL. The total dose of BoNT injected per side ranged from 1.95 to 6.25 U and from 2.5 to 7.5 U for onabotulinumtoxinA and abobotulinumtoxinA, respectively ( Table 2).

(p2.4) The number of injection points varies from 1 to 3 per side. Target muscle was distinguished as containing levator labii superioris alaque nasi (LLSAN) and not. In the 7 literature, it was injected only into LL-SAN or accompanied by another muscle, and in the 2 literature, it was injected into zygomaticus major (ZM) and zygomaticus minor (Zmi) or orbicularis oris (OO). The other muscles that were injected with LLSAN were ZM, Zmi, levator labii superioris (LLS), depressor setpi nasi (DSN).

(p2.5) In order to determine the location of injection, 2 papers used electromyography, 6 used the distance from particular landmark, and 1 pinpointed the location by touching the contracted muscle during smile to ensure precise muscle location before injection ( Table 2).
## (s3) Discussion
(p3.0) It is said that aesthetic appearance of a smile is created by harmony between teeth, lip framework, and gingival scaffold. 3 The lip framework is determined by the activity of various facial muscles, such as LLS, LLSAN, ZM/Zmi. Such muscle plays a role of lifting the upper lip and pulling it toward side when smiling and it creates a smile through interaction with depressor septi nasi muscle, risorius, and orbicularis oris muscle (Fig. 2). Although beautiful smile can be created when there is adequate interaction between muscles, excessive gingival display occurs when excessive muscle capacity is applied to lift upper lip.
