# A systematic literature review of prognostic factors in patients with HR+/HER2− advanced breast cancer in Japan

CorpusID: 237254844 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/584400b31442eb954bc76681c093b227641f341d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/584400b31442eb954bc76681c093b227641f341d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Patients and methods
(p1.0) This systematic literature review (SLR) was conducted based on the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses guidelines (3) and the AMSTAR quality criteria for methodologically assessing the quality of systematic reviews (4).
## (s10) Factors with consistent OS association in both UV and MV analyses.
(p10.0) The HR reported from each study for the factors below are summarized in Fig Disease-free interval DFI was assessed in nine studies, eight of which obtained a significant association between shorter DFI and worse OS in either UV or MV analyses. All of the six studies with UV analysis (9,10,14,16,17,24)  These results show that a shorter DFI is independently associated with worse OS, and its effect size was considered to be moderate as the majority (4 out of 5) of the HR reported from MV analysis were within the range of 1.3 and 2.8.
## (s15) PgR status Five studies assessed PgR status. Two studies used
(p15.0) 1% as a cut-off for PgR positivity (9,18). One study used 20% (23), whereas two studies did not report the cut-off (14,27). Three studies (9,18,27)  Tumour grade Six studies assessed the tumour grade.

(p15.1) Four (10,14,23,27)  ALDH1 expression Two studies evaluated the ALDH1 expression. In one study (23), the authors found an association between the expression of ALDH1 and worse survival, but only in UV analysis (UV: HR 1.552, 95% CI 1.057-2.218, P = 0.025; MV: 1.451, 95% CI 0.985-2.085, P = 0.059). The other study (28) failed to obtain significant results between the ALDH1 expression and survival, leading to an inconclusive association.

(p15.2) Visceral metastases Three studies (16,21,24) evaluated the presence of visceral metastases. No association between the presence of visceral metastases and OS was found in UV analysis. One of these studies (21) found a weak association in MV analysis, HR 0.20 (95% CI 0.04-0.82, P = 0.025). However, this study had a high RoB and a low sample size (n = 32).
## (s17) Lymphovascular invasion
(p17.0) Two studies evaluated the lymphovascular invasion. One study (12) found that lymphovascular invasion was associated with poorer survival, HR 4.03 (95% CI 1.83-8.88, P = 0.001) in UV analysis, although this was not an independent prognostic factor for OS in MV analysis. The other study (9) did not find an association.

(p17.1) Bone metastases Two studies (18,24) evaluated bone metastases in UV analysis and failed to find an association, whereas another study (25) reported that presence of bone metastases was associated with poorer OS in MV analysis; HR 1.57 (95% CI 1.02-2.40, P = NR).
## (s18) Type of A/MBC Two studies evaluated the type of A/MBC
(p18.0) (de novo vs recurrent). One study (24) found that patients with the novo A/MBC had better OS than patients with recurrent A/MBC in UV analysis; HR 0.63 (95% CI 0.40-0.99, P = 0.047), although failed to find this association in MV analysis. The other study (13) did not detect an association.

(p18.1) Progression pattern Two studies evaluated the progression pattern. One study (13) found that patients with progression due to new metastases had better OS than those with progression due to pre-existing lesions in UV analysis; HR NR (P = 0.017), whereas the other study (21) failed to find an association.

(p18.2) ER status Four studies evaluated the ER status. Only one study (9) obtained an association between ER+ and improved survival in UV analysis; HR 0.54 (95% CI 0.34-0.85, P = 0.008), but not in MV analysis. However, one study (21) with non-significant results in UV analysis did report a significant association in MV analysis; HR 0.13 (95% CI 0.03-0.53, P = 0.004).

(p18.3) Tumour size Three studies evaluated the tumour size. One study (12) found an association between a T3 tumour size and worse OS in both UV and MV analysis (UV: HR 7.16, 95% CI 3.33-15.4, P < 0.001; MV: HR 3.05, 95% CI 1.21-7.69, P = 0.02), whereas the other two studies (9,23) did not find associations.
