# The Adsorption Mechanism of Activated Carbon and Its Application -A Review

CorpusID: 234231642 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e348bf9308433171731eec2cbca4068f2486ead9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e348bf9308433171731eec2cbca4068f2486ead9)

Fields: Chemistry, Materials Science

## (s2) Microspore structure
(p2.0) Microspore formation in AC formed during the burning process of AC. According to [5], Activated carbons (ACs) are well-known conventional adsorbents with many applications due to their hydrophobicity, surface functionality, pore structure, and high surface area. The raw materials that undergoes burning process will be converted to charcoal. In this process the particle structure of the raw material will be restructure. Activated carbon (AC)was prepared from date palm leaflets using KOH activation followed by nitric acid oxidation to produce oxidized activated carbon (OAC) which possesses acidic and increase in pore number [6]. The bond between each particle will be break and change into new bond which will create the porous of the material. However, the present spore does not effective as the activated carbon since the number of microspores is less. [7] highlighted from study which mentioned that the sorbent is mainly microporous (with a micropore volume equal to 0.31 cm3 g-1) Hence in order to increase the effectiveness the charcoal must be further process which was the activation process. Throughout activation process more and more of the microspore will be formed alternatively increase the surface area of AC. Microspore were very small and only be seen under SEM. Relatively the microspore act similar to sponge. Sponge which has numerus hole in it can traps dust and other substance. The function of microspore in AC can be related to sponge as its allowed substance to be traps inside it in much smaller size.
