# Designing Pedagogically Effective Haptic Systems for Learning: A Review

CorpusID: 237830216 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2553ba49f1840362ada02ffb41a12b0e2793fb83](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2553ba49f1840362ada02ffb41a12b0e2793fb83)

Fields: Education, Computer Science

## (s3) STEM
(p3.0) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and vis izing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, req conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically sec ary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of ha can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel wa learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary te through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], improving learning outcomes.

(p3.1) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and vis izing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, req conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically sec ary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of ha can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel wa learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary te through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], improving learning outcomes.
## (s6) STEM
(p6.0) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and visualizing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, require conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be seen with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically secondary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of haptics can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a real and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel way for learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary terms through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], thus improving learning outcomes.

(p6.1) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and visualizing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, require conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be seen with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically secondary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of haptics can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a real and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel way for learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary terms through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], thus improving learning outcomes.
## (s8) Biology
(p8.0) Frequently, learning biology requires understanding concepts that are invisible to the naked eye and impossible to experience via touch. Attempting to learn about "invisible" concepts can initially be abstract and hard to visualize for some learners. By capitalizing on the principles of Embodied Cognition, haptic technology provides a tangible solution to this problem by enabling the user to physically interact with micro-scale learning material and create a perceptually rich mental model. A study conducted by Jones et al. investigated the ability of haptic augmentation to influence learning outcomes in students being taught microbiology [19]. Three types of haptic and non-haptic interface devices were compared in their teaching ability as opposed to traditional instruction: the PHANToM haptic joystick (a sophisticated haptic desktop device), Microsoft's Sidewinder (a haptic gaming joystick), and a classic computer mouse (no haptic feedback). In [19], the PHANToM haptic joystick provided the user with the most immersive haptic experience due to the higher degree of sensitivity. The other haptic device that was compared in the study was the Microsoft's Sidewinder, a less-expensive joystick initially developed for use in commercial gaming. The PHANToM device provided a robust 6-degrees-of-freedom movement while the less expensive Sidewinder provided 2-degrees-of-freedom. A computer mouse was used as the nonhaptic interface. Cognitive and affective measures were used to determine student learning differences; upon completion of the three different instructional models, tests measuring students' knowledge of content and attitude toward the learning modules were employed.

(p8.1) Students who had experienced haptic feedback stated that they had "participated more fully in the investigations than those students who had only visual feedback" [19]. It was shown that students who had received haptic feedback used more analogies to describe the learning content during following discussions compared to the students who only received visual feedback. Furthermore, the students receiving haptic feedback also included more tactile-related terminology in post-experiment discussions. This finding suggests that the students who received haptic feedback may have had more embodied experiences with the learning material [19]. Interestingly, an increase in the sensitivity of the haptic tool positively correlated with the number of tactile terms students used when describing a virus. This data suggests that the sensitivity of a haptic tool may directly affect the level of embodiment experienced by the user, potentially leading better learning outcomes [11]. The researchers attribute the students' descriptive differences to "the more perceptually immersive environment", speculating that the "perceptually immersive environment not only makes the material especially interesting and engaging but also improves the students' ability to personally connect with material and construct mental models of the abstract concepts based on actual concrete experiences" [19]. Another study completed by Jones et al. [20] explored how the use of a haptic controllable atomic force microscope, called the Nano Manipulator, influenced high school students' understanding of viruses. The nanomanipulator provided the students with tactile feedback from the properties of the microscopic object being studied and allowed the students to investigate and manipulate objects that are nanometer-size. Adding haptic feedback to traditional microscopy allotted the user with an ability to interact with nanoscale objects in a physical, hands-on way. Results concluded that through the haptic microscope experience, students' conceptions of the microscale adenovirus shifted from 2-D representations to resemble more 3-D-like representations, suggesting a better understanding of adenovirus morphology [20]. These results demonstrate the power of haptic technology for teaching microscopic and nanoscale morphology; with previously abstract concepts becoming tangible to the user. The two studies conducted by Jones further seem to corroborate the ability of haptic augmentation to provide a biologically primary method of interacting with the initially abstract biologically secondary learning material, and that embodied interaction can lead to improved learning outcomes for the users.

(p8.2) Aside from providing users with an embodied avenue for interaction with subject material, it is thought that haptic technology can also reduce cognitive load associated with certain tasks. For example, Schonborn et al. explored the relationship between students' modality of interaction and learning biomolecular specific-binding concepts. Specific binding is a foundational, yet often times complex, concept in biology. In this study, Schonborn et al. assigned twenty students to either a haptic or non-haptic condition where they were asked to complete a docking task that resulted in the best ligand-protein binding conformation [21]. It was found that the group of students receiving haptic feedback produced a tighter constellation of the ligand-protein molecule pair, performed half as many interactive behaviors, and had a 15% learning gain, on average, between the pre-and posttest item that measured conceptual understanding (compared to an average learning gain of 3.5% for the non-haptic group). Schonborn et al. suggested that by being able to fully "feel" the biomolecular docking, cognitive load was redistributed from the visual working memory to the haptic working memory, which may have accounted for the faster docking times, lower number of interactive behaviors, and higher learning gain for the haptic group. However, an interesting result to note is that there was no statistical difference in final docking accuracy between the haptic and non-haptic group. Schonborn et al. attribute these positive learning results to reduced strain on visual working memory (reduced cognitive load via visuo-haptic coordination) and inferences gained through embodied cognition. Schonborn et al.'s theoretical approach is in line with the assertion of Cognitive Load Theory that states "Biologically primary processes can help facilitate the acquisition of biologically secondary knowledge" [11]. In the investigation by Schonborn et al., the haptic interaction can be thought to serve as the biologically primary method of interaction, while the biomolecular docking task and related concepts can be considered the biologically secondary knowledge the users hoped to learn. The resulting learning gain of 15% between the haptic and non-haptic group may corroborate this theoretical cognitive mechanism.

(p8.3) Haptic technology can provide a novel and engaging way for students to interact with their learning material. A pilot study was conducted by Hightower et al. [6] regarding an application called Haptic Explorers. A haptic mobile device's usability was tested by children attending an ecology summer camp. Each child received their own haptic mobile device that worked as a haptic augmented notebook. The children were led on nature walks and divided into two groups with different learning objectives. Throughout the nature lesson, the children were instructed to take notes on relevant material. Half of the students had devices that included haptic augmentation. It was found that the group with haptic augmentation participated in more "science talk" and exhibited more "on task" behavior than the control group, indicating that haptic incorporation can increase learner engagement with material and help keep learners on task [6].

(p8.4) Frequently, learning biology requires understanding concepts that are invisible to the naked eye and impossible to experience via touch. Attempting to learn about "invisible" concepts can initially be abstract and hard to visualize for some learners. By capitalizing on the principles of Embodied Cognition, haptic technology provides a tangible solution to this problem by enabling the user to physically interact with micro-scale learning material and create a perceptually rich mental model. A study conducted by Jones et al. investigated the ability of haptic augmentation to influence learning outcomes in students being taught microbiology [19]. Three types of haptic and non-haptic interface devices were compared in their teaching ability as opposed to traditional instruction: the PHANToM haptic joystick (a sophisticated haptic desktop device), Microsoft's Sidewinder (a haptic gaming joystick), and a classic computer mouse (no haptic feedback). In [19], the PHANToM haptic joystick provided the user with the most immersive haptic experience due to the higher degree of sensitivity. The other haptic device that was compared in the study was the Microsoft's Sidewinder, a less-expensive joystick initially developed for use in commercial gaming. The PHANToM device provided a robust 6-degrees-of-freedom movement while the less expensive Sidewinder provided 2-degrees-of-freedom. A computer mouse was used as the nonhaptic interface. Cognitive and affective measures were used to determine student learning differences; upon completion of the three different instructional models, tests measuring students' knowledge of content and attitude toward the learning modules were employed.

(p8.5) Students who had experienced haptic feedback stated that they had "participated more fully in the investigations than those students who had only visual feedback" [19]. It was shown that students who had received haptic feedback used more analogies to describe the learning content during following discussions compared to the students who only received visual feedback. Furthermore, the students receiving haptic feedback also included more tactile-related terminology in post-experiment discussions. This finding suggests that the students who received haptic feedback may have had more embodied experiences with the learning material [19]. Interestingly, an increase in the sensitivity of the haptic tool positively correlated with the number of tactile terms students used when describing a virus. This data suggests that the sensitivity of a haptic tool may directly affect the level of embodiment experienced by the user, potentially leading better learning outcomes [11]. The researchers attribute the students' descriptive differences to "the more perceptually immersive environment", speculating that the "perceptually immersive environment not only makes the material especially interesting and engaging but also improves the students' ability to personally connect with material and construct mental models of the abstract concepts based on actual concrete experiences" [19]. Another study completed by Jones et al. [20] explored how the use of a haptic controllable atomic force microscope, called the Nano Manipulator, influenced high school students' understanding of viruses. The nanomanipulator provided the students with tactile feedback from the properties of the microscopic object being studied and allowed the students to investigate and manipulate objects that are nanometer-size. Adding haptic feedback to traditional microscopy allotted the user with an ability to interact with nanoscale objects in a physical, hands-on way. Results concluded that through the haptic microscope experience, students' conceptions of the microscale adenovirus shifted from 2-D representations to resemble more 3-D-like representations, suggesting a better understanding of adenovirus morphology [20]. These results demonstrate the power of haptic technology for teaching microscopic and nanoscale morphology; with previously abstract concepts becoming tangible to the user. The two studies conducted by Jones further seem to corroborate the ability of haptic augmentation to provide a biologically primary method of interacting with the initially abstract biologically secondary learning material, and that embodied interaction can lead to improved learning outcomes for the users.

(p8.6) Aside from providing users with an embodied avenue for interaction with subject material, it is thought that haptic technology can also reduce cognitive load associated with certain tasks. For example, Schonborn et al. explored the relationship between students' modality of interaction and learning biomolecular specific-binding concepts. Specific binding is a foundational, yet often times complex, concept in biology. In this study, Schonborn et al. assigned twenty students to either a haptic or non-haptic condition where they were asked to complete a docking task that resulted in the best ligand-protein binding conformation [21]. It was found that the group of students receiving haptic feedback produced a tighter constellation of the ligand-protein molecule pair, performed half as many interactive behaviors, and had a 15% learning gain, on average, between the pre-and posttest item that measured conceptual understanding (compared to an average learning gain of 3.5% for the non-haptic group). Schonborn et al. suggested that by being able to fully "feel" the biomolecular docking, cognitive load was redistributed from the visual working memory to the haptic working memory, which may have accounted for the faster docking times, lower number of interactive behaviors, and higher learning gain for the haptic group. However, an interesting result to note is that there was no statistical difference in final docking accuracy between the haptic and non-haptic group. Schonborn et al. attribute these positive learning results to reduced strain on visual working memory (reduced cognitive load via visuo-haptic coordination) and inferences gained through embodied cognition. Schonborn et al.'s theoretical approach is in line with the assertion of Cognitive Load Theory that states "Biologically primary processes can help facilitate the acquisition of biologically secondary knowledge" [11]. In the investigation by Schonborn et al., the haptic interaction can be thought to serve as the biologically primary method of interaction, while the biomolecular docking task and related concepts can be considered the biologically secondary knowledge the users hoped to learn. The resulting learning gain of 15% between the haptic and non-haptic group may corroborate this theoretical cognitive mechanism.

(p8.7) Haptic technology can provide a novel and engaging way for students to interact with their learning material. A pilot study was conducted by Hightower et al. [6] regarding an application called Haptic Explorers. A haptic mobile device's usability was tested by children attending an ecology summer camp. Each child received their own haptic mobile device that worked as a haptic augmented notebook. The children were led on nature walks and divided into two groups with different learning objectives. Throughout the nature lesson, the children were instructed to take notes on relevant material. Half of the students had devices that included haptic augmentation. It was found that the group with haptic augmentation participated in more "science talk" and exhibited more "on task" behavior than the control group, indicating that haptic incorporation can increase learner engagement with material and help keep learners on task [6].
## (s9) Mathematics
(p9.0) A close relative of the theory of Embodied Cognition, Nathan and Walkington [22] propose a theory of Grounded and Embodied Mathematical Cognition (GEMC). GEMC asserts that a person's actions serve as inputs capable of altering cognitive states and views mathematical communication as a "multi-modal discourse practice, rather than a formal, written, propositional form" [22]. Studies supporting their theory have found that gesture and directed action can significantly improve learning outcomes. They define directed actions as: "physical movements that learners are instructed to formulate by some kind of pedagogical agent" and define gestures as: "spontaneously generated movements, often of the hand, that accompany speech and thought". According to Moyer-Packenham et al. [23], a network of conceptual metaphors is the basis of mathematical knowledge. Moyer-Packenham et al. define conceptual metaphors as: "Cognitive mechanisms [that are] used automatically and unconsciously, having abstracted patterns of inferences from physical experiences". On the premises of Embodied Cognition and Cognitive Load Theory, it is thought that mathematical connections are made when a physical action is connected to an abstract mathematical concept and that physical actions can facilitate the learning of biologically secondary information (mathematics).
## (s10) Medicine
(p10.0) "Medicine, from its inception, has been about connecting clinicians with patients through the sense of touch" [1]. Haptic technology has broad applicability within the medical field, and is continuing to expand. It can offer a cost effective and reusable alterna-tive to current methods of pre-clinical preparation, such as cadavers, live human subjects, animals, or other physical methods of simulation [26]. It can provide a valuable tool for training, evaluating clinical skills, and performing interventional procedures [1,27,28]. The embodied experience haptics offers provides a realistic environment for trainees to develop the motor skills involved with medical procedures and also provides an embodied route for the user to off-loading cognition during training [27]. When learning motor-skills, vision can only partially provide the learner with information. Learning motor tasks, such as medical procedures, proceeds at least in part through haptic exploration and trial and error [29], thus making haptic technology a viable educational solution.

(p10.1) "Medicine, from its inception, has been about connecting clinicians with patients through the sense of touch" [1]. Haptic technology has broad applicability within the medical field, and is continuing to expand. It can offer a cost effective and reusable alterna-tive to current methods of pre-clinical preparation, such as cadavers, live human subjects, animals, or other physical methods of simulation [26]. It can provide a valuable tool for training, evaluating clinical skills, and performing interventional procedures [1,27,28]. The embodied experience haptics offers provides a realistic environment for trainees to develop the motor skills involved with medical procedures and also provides an embodied route for the user to off-loading cognition during training [27]. When learning motor-skills, vision can only partially provide the learner with information. Learning motor tasks, such as medical procedures, proceeds at least in part through haptic exploration and trial and error [29], thus making haptic technology a viable educational solution.
## (s13) Veterinary Medicine
(p13.0) To keep up with modern concerns and requirements, canonical methods of teaching anatomy to veterinary students must adapt [38]. Ethical, resource, and time constraints are a few problems with traditional dissection and anatomy classes, which typically use live animals or cadavers [38]. Haptic technology allows for realistic training with a virtual model, thus providing a reusable method of instruction while reducing ethical and welfare concerns [39]. A study conducted by Kinnison et al. [38]., investigated the practicality and usefulness of a haptic simulator for teaching basic bovine abdominal anatomy. A total of 184 students provided feedback about their experience by answering a questionnaire. The questionnaire results were markedly positive; the students felt that the simulator was "useful", "helped with their understanding of bovine abdominal anatomy", and was "enjoyable" [38]. The hardware used in the study was the PHANToM Premium (3D Systems, Inc., Rock Hill, SC, USA), which had a thimble attachment at the end of the mechanical arm for the student to place their middle finger in to experience the force feedback with. While the majority of the subjective feedback received from the students was positive, some students expressed the desire for the ability to use the whole hand to experience the haptic simulation as to experience a more immersive haptic simulation. Palpation is a widely used technique in veterinary medicine, especially in relatively smaller animals such as cats or dogs; in small animals, abdominal contents can be assessed directly by palpation [39]. Plenty of hands-on experience is necessary for developing palpation skills, however certain small animals, such as cats, exhibit a low tolerance for such examinations. This can make it difficult for novices to gain necessary skill [39]. To address this problem, seven veterinarians consulted on the design of this mixed-reality simulator which was comprised of a stuffed cat modified with PHANToM premium haptic devices. The consulting veterinarians were confident in the ability of the mixed-reality simulator to teach feline abdominal palpation and specified it could have an effective role in instruction. The feedback was majorly positive and hopeful that the simulator could address training issues, such as insufficient opportunities for hands-on training [39].

(p13.1) To keep up with modern concerns and requirements, canonical methods of teaching anatomy to veterinary students must adapt [38]. Ethical, resource, and time constraints are a few problems with traditional dissection and anatomy classes, which typically use live animals or cadavers [38]. Haptic technology allows for realistic training with a virtual model, thus providing a reusable method of instruction while reducing ethical and welfare concerns [39]. A study conducted by Kinnison et al. [38]., investigated the practicality and usefulness of a haptic simulator for teaching basic bovine abdominal anatomy. A total of 184 students provided feedback about their experience by answering a questionnaire. The questionnaire results were markedly positive; the students felt that the simulator was "useful", "helped with their understanding of bovine abdominal anatomy", and was "enjoyable" [38]. The hardware used in the study was the PHANToM Premium (3D Systems, Inc., Rock Hill, SC, USA), which had a thimble attachment at the end of the mechanical arm for the student to place their middle finger in to experience the force feedback with. While the majority of the subjective feedback received from the students was positive, some students expressed the desire for the ability to use the whole hand to experience the haptic simulation as to experience a more immersive haptic simulation. Palpation is a widely used technique in veterinary medicine, especially in relatively smaller animals such as cats or dogs; in small animals, abdominal contents can be assessed directly by palpation [39]. Plenty of hands-on experience is necessary for developing palpation skills, however certain small animals, such as cats, exhibit a low tolerance for such examinations. This can make it difficult for novices to gain necessary skill [39]. To address this problem, seven veterinarians consulted on the design of this mixed-reality simulator which was comprised of a stuffed cat modified with PHANToM premium haptic devices. The consulting veterinarians were confident in the ability of the mixed-reality simulator to teach feline abdominal palpation and specified it could have an effective role in instruction. The feedback was majorly positive and hopeful that the simulator could address training issues, such as insufficient opportunities for hands-on training [39].
## (s14) Venipuncture
(p14.0) Intravenous (IV) catheter insertion is one of the most commonly performed medical procedures [26]. While it is one of the most common, it is also deemed one of the most complex procedures learned by nurses [26]. Serious complications in patients such as infiltration, phlebitis, or pain can be avoided when the IV is inserted with proficiency [26]. Traditional methods of teaching IV insertion include didactic instruction followed by hands-on practice on either a real or simulated arm. These educational methods can be time consuming, cost ineffective, limited in variability, faculty intensive, and may be painful for the training procedure recipient. A literature review conducted by McWilliams and Malecha [26] compared traditional IV insertion instructional methods with haptic IV simulators in terms of their outcomes. he authors found that haptic IV simulators were at least equally as effective as traditional methods of teaching IV insertion and provide a cost-effective alternative to previous instructional methods [26].

(p14.1) Intravenous (IV) catheter insertion is one of the most commonly performed medical procedures [26]. While it is one of the most common, it is also deemed one of the most complex procedures learned by nurses [26]. Serious complications in patients such as infiltration, phlebitis, or pain can be avoided when the IV is inserted with proficiency [26]. Traditional methods of teaching IV insertion include didactic instruction followed by hands-on practice on either a real or simulated arm. These educational methods can be time consuming, cost ineffective, limited in variability, faculty intensive, and may be painful for the training procedure recipient. A literature review conducted by McWilliams and Malecha [26] compared traditional IV insertion instructional methods with haptic IV simulators in terms of their outcomes. he authors found that haptic IV simulators were at least equally as effective as traditional methods of teaching IV insertion and provide a cost-effective alternative to previous instructional methods [26].
## (s35) STEM
(p35.0) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and vis izing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, req conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically sec ary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of ha can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel wa learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary te through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], improving learning outcomes.

(p35.1) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and vis izing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, req conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically sec ary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of ha can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel wa learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary te through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], improving learning outcomes.
## (s38) STEM
(p38.0) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and visualizing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, require conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be seen with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically secondary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of haptics can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a real and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel way for learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary terms through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], thus improving learning outcomes.

(p38.1) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and visualizing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, require conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be seen with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically secondary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of haptics can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a real and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel way for learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary terms through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], thus improving learning outcomes.
## (s40) Biology
(p40.0) Frequently, learning biology requires understanding concepts that are invisible to the naked eye and impossible to experience via touch. Attempting to learn about "invisible" concepts can initially be abstract and hard to visualize for some learners. By capitalizing on the principles of Embodied Cognition, haptic technology provides a tangible solution to this problem by enabling the user to physically interact with micro-scale learning material and create a perceptually rich mental model. A study conducted by Jones et al. investigated the ability of haptic augmentation to influence learning outcomes in students being taught microbiology [19]. Three types of haptic and non-haptic interface devices were compared in their teaching ability as opposed to traditional instruction: the PHANToM haptic joystick (a sophisticated haptic desktop device), Microsoft's Sidewinder (a haptic gaming joystick), and a classic computer mouse (no haptic feedback). In [19], the PHANToM haptic joystick provided the user with the most immersive haptic experience due to the higher degree of sensitivity. The other haptic device that was compared in the study was the Microsoft's Sidewinder, a less-expensive joystick initially developed for use in commercial gaming. The PHANToM device provided a robust 6-degrees-of-freedom movement while the less expensive Sidewinder provided 2-degrees-of-freedom. A computer mouse was used as the nonhaptic interface. Cognitive and affective measures were used to determine student learning differences; upon completion of the three different instructional models, tests measuring students' knowledge of content and attitude toward the learning modules were employed.

(p40.1) Students who had experienced haptic feedback stated that they had "participated more fully in the investigations than those students who had only visual feedback" [19]. It was shown that students who had received haptic feedback used more analogies to describe the learning content during following discussions compared to the students who only received visual feedback. Furthermore, the students receiving haptic feedback also included more tactile-related terminology in post-experiment discussions. This finding suggests that the students who received haptic feedback may have had more embodied experiences with the learning material [19]. Interestingly, an increase in the sensitivity of the haptic tool positively correlated with the number of tactile terms students used when describing a virus. This data suggests that the sensitivity of a haptic tool may directly affect the level of embodiment experienced by the user, potentially leading better learning outcomes [11]. The researchers attribute the students' descriptive differences to "the more perceptually immersive environment", speculating that the "perceptually immersive environment not only makes the material especially interesting and engaging but also improves the students' ability to personally connect with material and construct mental models of the abstract concepts based on actual concrete experiences" [19]. Another study completed by Jones et al. [20] explored how the use of a haptic controllable atomic force microscope, called the Nano Manipulator, influenced high school students' understanding of viruses. The nanomanipulator provided the students with tactile feedback from the properties of the microscopic object being studied and allowed the students to investigate and manipulate objects that are nanometer-size. Adding haptic feedback to traditional microscopy allotted the user with an ability to interact with nanoscale objects in a physical, hands-on way. Results concluded that through the haptic microscope experience, students' conceptions of the microscale adenovirus shifted from 2-D representations to resemble more 3-D-like representations, suggesting a better understanding of adenovirus morphology [20]. These results demonstrate the power of haptic technology for teaching microscopic and nanoscale morphology; with previously abstract concepts becoming tangible to the user. The two studies conducted by Jones further seem to corroborate the ability of haptic augmentation to provide a biologically primary method of interacting with the initially abstract biologically secondary learning material, and that embodied interaction can lead to improved learning outcomes for the users.

(p40.2) Aside from providing users with an embodied avenue for interaction with subject material, it is thought that haptic technology can also reduce cognitive load associated with certain tasks. For example, Schonborn et al. explored the relationship between students' modality of interaction and learning biomolecular specific-binding concepts. Specific binding is a foundational, yet often times complex, concept in biology. In this study, Schonborn et al. assigned twenty students to either a haptic or non-haptic condition where they were asked to complete a docking task that resulted in the best ligand-protein binding conformation [21]. It was found that the group of students receiving haptic feedback produced a tighter constellation of the ligand-protein molecule pair, performed half as many interactive behaviors, and had a 15% learning gain, on average, between the pre-and posttest item that measured conceptual understanding (compared to an average learning gain of 3.5% for the non-haptic group). Schonborn et al. suggested that by being able to fully "feel" the biomolecular docking, cognitive load was redistributed from the visual working memory to the haptic working memory, which may have accounted for the faster docking times, lower number of interactive behaviors, and higher learning gain for the haptic group. However, an interesting result to note is that there was no statistical difference in final docking accuracy between the haptic and non-haptic group. Schonborn et al. attribute these positive learning results to reduced strain on visual working memory (reduced cognitive load via visuo-haptic coordination) and inferences gained through embodied cognition. Schonborn et al.'s theoretical approach is in line with the assertion of Cognitive Load Theory that states "Biologically primary processes can help facilitate the acquisition of biologically secondary knowledge" [11]. In the investigation by Schonborn et al., the haptic interaction can be thought to serve as the biologically primary method of interaction, while the biomolecular docking task and related concepts can be considered the biologically secondary knowledge the users hoped to learn. The resulting learning gain of 15% between the haptic and non-haptic group may corroborate this theoretical cognitive mechanism.

(p40.3) Haptic technology can provide a novel and engaging way for students to interact with their learning material. A pilot study was conducted by Hightower et al. [6] regarding an application called Haptic Explorers. A haptic mobile device's usability was tested by children attending an ecology summer camp. Each child received their own haptic mobile device that worked as a haptic augmented notebook. The children were led on nature walks and divided into two groups with different learning objectives. Throughout the nature lesson, the children were instructed to take notes on relevant material. Half of the students had devices that included haptic augmentation. It was found that the group with haptic augmentation participated in more "science talk" and exhibited more "on task" behavior than the control group, indicating that haptic incorporation can increase learner engagement with material and help keep learners on task [6].

(p40.4) Frequently, learning biology requires understanding concepts that are invisible to the naked eye and impossible to experience via touch. Attempting to learn about "invisible" concepts can initially be abstract and hard to visualize for some learners. By capitalizing on the principles of Embodied Cognition, haptic technology provides a tangible solution to this problem by enabling the user to physically interact with micro-scale learning material and create a perceptually rich mental model. A study conducted by Jones et al. investigated the ability of haptic augmentation to influence learning outcomes in students being taught microbiology [19]. Three types of haptic and non-haptic interface devices were compared in their teaching ability as opposed to traditional instruction: the PHANToM haptic joystick (a sophisticated haptic desktop device), Microsoft's Sidewinder (a haptic gaming joystick), and a classic computer mouse (no haptic feedback). In [19], the PHANToM haptic joystick provided the user with the most immersive haptic experience due to the higher degree of sensitivity. The other haptic device that was compared in the study was the Microsoft's Sidewinder, a less-expensive joystick initially developed for use in commercial gaming. The PHANToM device provided a robust 6-degrees-of-freedom movement while the less expensive Sidewinder provided 2-degrees-of-freedom. A computer mouse was used as the nonhaptic interface. Cognitive and affective measures were used to determine student learning differences; upon completion of the three different instructional models, tests measuring students' knowledge of content and attitude toward the learning modules were employed.

(p40.5) Students who had experienced haptic feedback stated that they had "participated more fully in the investigations than those students who had only visual feedback" [19]. It was shown that students who had received haptic feedback used more analogies to describe the learning content during following discussions compared to the students who only received visual feedback. Furthermore, the students receiving haptic feedback also included more tactile-related terminology in post-experiment discussions. This finding suggests that the students who received haptic feedback may have had more embodied experiences with the learning material [19]. Interestingly, an increase in the sensitivity of the haptic tool positively correlated with the number of tactile terms students used when describing a virus. This data suggests that the sensitivity of a haptic tool may directly affect the level of embodiment experienced by the user, potentially leading better learning outcomes [11]. The researchers attribute the students' descriptive differences to "the more perceptually immersive environment", speculating that the "perceptually immersive environment not only makes the material especially interesting and engaging but also improves the students' ability to personally connect with material and construct mental models of the abstract concepts based on actual concrete experiences" [19]. Another study completed by Jones et al. [20] explored how the use of a haptic controllable atomic force microscope, called the Nano Manipulator, influenced high school students' understanding of viruses. The nanomanipulator provided the students with tactile feedback from the properties of the microscopic object being studied and allowed the students to investigate and manipulate objects that are nanometer-size. Adding haptic feedback to traditional microscopy allotted the user with an ability to interact with nanoscale objects in a physical, hands-on way. Results concluded that through the haptic microscope experience, students' conceptions of the microscale adenovirus shifted from 2-D representations to resemble more 3-D-like representations, suggesting a better understanding of adenovirus morphology [20]. These results demonstrate the power of haptic technology for teaching microscopic and nanoscale morphology; with previously abstract concepts becoming tangible to the user. The two studies conducted by Jones further seem to corroborate the ability of haptic augmentation to provide a biologically primary method of interacting with the initially abstract biologically secondary learning material, and that embodied interaction can lead to improved learning outcomes for the users.

(p40.6) Aside from providing users with an embodied avenue for interaction with subject material, it is thought that haptic technology can also reduce cognitive load associated with certain tasks. For example, Schonborn et al. explored the relationship between students' modality of interaction and learning biomolecular specific-binding concepts. Specific binding is a foundational, yet often times complex, concept in biology. In this study, Schonborn et al. assigned twenty students to either a haptic or non-haptic condition where they were asked to complete a docking task that resulted in the best ligand-protein binding conformation [21]. It was found that the group of students receiving haptic feedback produced a tighter constellation of the ligand-protein molecule pair, performed half as many interactive behaviors, and had a 15% learning gain, on average, between the pre-and posttest item that measured conceptual understanding (compared to an average learning gain of 3.5% for the non-haptic group). Schonborn et al. suggested that by being able to fully "feel" the biomolecular docking, cognitive load was redistributed from the visual working memory to the haptic working memory, which may have accounted for the faster docking times, lower number of interactive behaviors, and higher learning gain for the haptic group. However, an interesting result to note is that there was no statistical difference in final docking accuracy between the haptic and non-haptic group. Schonborn et al. attribute these positive learning results to reduced strain on visual working memory (reduced cognitive load via visuo-haptic coordination) and inferences gained through embodied cognition. Schonborn et al.'s theoretical approach is in line with the assertion of Cognitive Load Theory that states "Biologically primary processes can help facilitate the acquisition of biologically secondary knowledge" [11]. In the investigation by Schonborn et al., the haptic interaction can be thought to serve as the biologically primary method of interaction, while the biomolecular docking task and related concepts can be considered the biologically secondary knowledge the users hoped to learn. The resulting learning gain of 15% between the haptic and non-haptic group may corroborate this theoretical cognitive mechanism.

(p40.7) Haptic technology can provide a novel and engaging way for students to interact with their learning material. A pilot study was conducted by Hightower et al. [6] regarding an application called Haptic Explorers. A haptic mobile device's usability was tested by children attending an ecology summer camp. Each child received their own haptic mobile device that worked as a haptic augmented notebook. The children were led on nature walks and divided into two groups with different learning objectives. Throughout the nature lesson, the children were instructed to take notes on relevant material. Half of the students had devices that included haptic augmentation. It was found that the group with haptic augmentation participated in more "science talk" and exhibited more "on task" behavior than the control group, indicating that haptic incorporation can increase learner engagement with material and help keep learners on task [6].
## (s41) Mathematics
(p41.0) A close relative of the theory of Embodied Cognition, Nathan and Walkington [22] propose a theory of Grounded and Embodied Mathematical Cognition (GEMC). GEMC asserts that a person's actions serve as inputs capable of altering cognitive states and views mathematical communication as a "multi-modal discourse practice, rather than a formal, written, propositional form" [22]. Studies supporting their theory have found that gesture and directed action can significantly improve learning outcomes. They define directed actions as: "physical movements that learners are instructed to formulate by some kind of pedagogical agent" and define gestures as: "spontaneously generated movements, often of the hand, that accompany speech and thought". According to Moyer-Packenham et al. [23], a network of conceptual metaphors is the basis of mathematical knowledge. Moyer-Packenham et al. define conceptual metaphors as: "Cognitive mechanisms [that are] used automatically and unconsciously, having abstracted patterns of inferences from physical experiences". On the premises of Embodied Cognition and Cognitive Load Theory, it is thought that mathematical connections are made when a physical action is connected to an abstract mathematical concept and that physical actions can facilitate the learning of biologically secondary information (mathematics).
## (s42) Medicine
(p42.0) "Medicine, from its inception, has been about connecting clinicians with patients through the sense of touch" [1]. Haptic technology has broad applicability within the medical field, and is continuing to expand. It can offer a cost effective and reusable alterna-tive to current methods of pre-clinical preparation, such as cadavers, live human subjects, animals, or other physical methods of simulation [26]. It can provide a valuable tool for training, evaluating clinical skills, and performing interventional procedures [1,27,28]. The embodied experience haptics offers provides a realistic environment for trainees to develop the motor skills involved with medical procedures and also provides an embodied route for the user to off-loading cognition during training [27]. When learning motor-skills, vision can only partially provide the learner with information. Learning motor tasks, such as medical procedures, proceeds at least in part through haptic exploration and trial and error [29], thus making haptic technology a viable educational solution.

(p42.1) "Medicine, from its inception, has been about connecting clinicians with patients through the sense of touch" [1]. Haptic technology has broad applicability within the medical field, and is continuing to expand. It can offer a cost effective and reusable alterna-tive to current methods of pre-clinical preparation, such as cadavers, live human subjects, animals, or other physical methods of simulation [26]. It can provide a valuable tool for training, evaluating clinical skills, and performing interventional procedures [1,27,28]. The embodied experience haptics offers provides a realistic environment for trainees to develop the motor skills involved with medical procedures and also provides an embodied route for the user to off-loading cognition during training [27]. When learning motor-skills, vision can only partially provide the learner with information. Learning motor tasks, such as medical procedures, proceeds at least in part through haptic exploration and trial and error [29], thus making haptic technology a viable educational solution.
## (s45) Veterinary Medicine
(p45.0) To keep up with modern concerns and requirements, canonical methods of teaching anatomy to veterinary students must adapt [38]. Ethical, resource, and time constraints are a few problems with traditional dissection and anatomy classes, which typically use live animals or cadavers [38]. Haptic technology allows for realistic training with a virtual model, thus providing a reusable method of instruction while reducing ethical and welfare concerns [39]. A study conducted by Kinnison et al. [38]., investigated the practicality and usefulness of a haptic simulator for teaching basic bovine abdominal anatomy. A total of 184 students provided feedback about their experience by answering a questionnaire. The questionnaire results were markedly positive; the students felt that the simulator was "useful", "helped with their understanding of bovine abdominal anatomy", and was "enjoyable" [38]. The hardware used in the study was the PHANToM Premium (3D Systems, Inc., Rock Hill, SC, USA), which had a thimble attachment at the end of the mechanical arm for the student to place their middle finger in to experience the force feedback with. While the majority of the subjective feedback received from the students was positive, some students expressed the desire for the ability to use the whole hand to experience the haptic simulation as to experience a more immersive haptic simulation. Palpation is a widely used technique in veterinary medicine, especially in relatively smaller animals such as cats or dogs; in small animals, abdominal contents can be assessed directly by palpation [39]. Plenty of hands-on experience is necessary for developing palpation skills, however certain small animals, such as cats, exhibit a low tolerance for such examinations. This can make it difficult for novices to gain necessary skill [39]. To address this problem, seven veterinarians consulted on the design of this mixed-reality simulator which was comprised of a stuffed cat modified with PHANToM premium haptic devices. The consulting veterinarians were confident in the ability of the mixed-reality simulator to teach feline abdominal palpation and specified it could have an effective role in instruction. The feedback was majorly positive and hopeful that the simulator could address training issues, such as insufficient opportunities for hands-on training [39].

(p45.1) To keep up with modern concerns and requirements, canonical methods of teaching anatomy to veterinary students must adapt [38]. Ethical, resource, and time constraints are a few problems with traditional dissection and anatomy classes, which typically use live animals or cadavers [38]. Haptic technology allows for realistic training with a virtual model, thus providing a reusable method of instruction while reducing ethical and welfare concerns [39]. A study conducted by Kinnison et al. [38]., investigated the practicality and usefulness of a haptic simulator for teaching basic bovine abdominal anatomy. A total of 184 students provided feedback about their experience by answering a questionnaire. The questionnaire results were markedly positive; the students felt that the simulator was "useful", "helped with their understanding of bovine abdominal anatomy", and was "enjoyable" [38]. The hardware used in the study was the PHANToM Premium (3D Systems, Inc., Rock Hill, SC, USA), which had a thimble attachment at the end of the mechanical arm for the student to place their middle finger in to experience the force feedback with. While the majority of the subjective feedback received from the students was positive, some students expressed the desire for the ability to use the whole hand to experience the haptic simulation as to experience a more immersive haptic simulation. Palpation is a widely used technique in veterinary medicine, especially in relatively smaller animals such as cats or dogs; in small animals, abdominal contents can be assessed directly by palpation [39]. Plenty of hands-on experience is necessary for developing palpation skills, however certain small animals, such as cats, exhibit a low tolerance for such examinations. This can make it difficult for novices to gain necessary skill [39]. To address this problem, seven veterinarians consulted on the design of this mixed-reality simulator which was comprised of a stuffed cat modified with PHANToM premium haptic devices. The consulting veterinarians were confident in the ability of the mixed-reality simulator to teach feline abdominal palpation and specified it could have an effective role in instruction. The feedback was majorly positive and hopeful that the simulator could address training issues, such as insufficient opportunities for hands-on training [39].
## (s46) Venipuncture
(p46.0) Intravenous (IV) catheter insertion is one of the most commonly performed medical procedures [26]. While it is one of the most common, it is also deemed one of the most complex procedures learned by nurses [26]. Serious complications in patients such as infiltration, phlebitis, or pain can be avoided when the IV is inserted with proficiency [26]. Traditional methods of teaching IV insertion include didactic instruction followed by hands-on practice on either a real or simulated arm. These educational methods can be time consuming, cost ineffective, limited in variability, faculty intensive, and may be painful for the training procedure recipient. A literature review conducted by McWilliams and Malecha [26] compared traditional IV insertion instructional methods with haptic IV simulators in terms of their outcomes. he authors found that haptic IV simulators were at least equally as effective as traditional methods of teaching IV insertion and provide a cost-effective alternative to previous instructional methods [26].

(p46.1) Intravenous (IV) catheter insertion is one of the most commonly performed medical procedures [26]. While it is one of the most common, it is also deemed one of the most complex procedures learned by nurses [26]. Serious complications in patients such as infiltration, phlebitis, or pain can be avoided when the IV is inserted with proficiency [26]. Traditional methods of teaching IV insertion include didactic instruction followed by hands-on practice on either a real or simulated arm. These educational methods can be time consuming, cost ineffective, limited in variability, faculty intensive, and may be painful for the training procedure recipient. A literature review conducted by McWilliams and Malecha [26] compared traditional IV insertion instructional methods with haptic IV simulators in terms of their outcomes. he authors found that haptic IV simulators were at least equally as effective as traditional methods of teaching IV insertion and provide a cost-effective alternative to previous instructional methods [26].
