# sustainability Biofloc Systems for Sustainable Production of Economically Important Aquatic Species: A Review

CorpusID: 237817554 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4613a11a635638c926649d9ffb4e043d7f4bad45](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4613a11a635638c926649d9ffb4e043d7f4bad45)

Fields: Business, Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Biofloc Technology
(p1.0) According to the National Agricultural Library Glossary (United States Department of Agriculture, North Bend, WA, USA), BFT is defined as 'the use of aggregates of bacteria, algae or protozoa, held together in a matrix along with particulate organic matter to improve water quality, waste treatment and disease prevention in intensive aquaculture systems' [2]. In other words, BFT relies on the principle of nitrogenous waste recycling by several microbial species (bioflocs) in the system while improving water quality and the growth performance of the reared aquatic species. Heterotrophic bacteria within the system take up ammonium as a nitrogen (N) source for their biomass, thus resulting in a decrease in ammonium/ammonia in the water to non-toxic levels. This process is, however, faster than the nitrification process carried out by autotrophic nitrifying bacteria due to the faster growth rate of heterotrophic bacteria. Figure 1 shows a general overview of the BFT system. Certain factors that affect floc formation (mixture of microorganisms) and water quality in BFT systems are discussed below. In the aquatic environment, the carbon-nitrogen ratio (C/N) plays a vital role in the immobilization of toxic inorganic N compounds into useful microbial biomass that might act as a direct source of food for the reared aquatic species. Immobilization of inorganic N 
## (s3) Source of Organic Carbon
(p3.0) Different carbon sources, such as molasses, glucose, cassava starch, cornmeal, wheat flour, sorghum meal, sugar bagasse, sugar, rice bran, ground bread crumb, glycerol, and anhydrous glucose, are used to enhance nutrient dynamics through an altered C/N ratio as well as improving the production of crustaceans and certain finfish species [20,[23][24][25][26][27][28][29]. The efficient establishment of flocs by different carbon sources mainly depends on their carbon content and speed of degradation, hence indicating that certain carbon sources are more efficient in promoting floc formation than others. Generally, simple sugars such as molasses are degraded faster than complex sugars such as cassava starch, leading to improved water quality, as indicated by lower concentrations of ammonia and a higher growth rate of beneficial microbial biomass [2]. Molasses are the most widely used carbon sources in BFT systems during larval, nursery, and grow-out phases due to their efficiency in improving water quality for the sustainable production of aquatic species [2,30].

(p3.1) One of the most elegant flexibilities of BFT systems is the capability of reusing watercontaining flocs for the production of certain detritivorous species under intensive cultivation. This practice aims to prevent the discharge of nutrient-rich wastewater into the environment, which might result in pollution. Liu et al. [31] conducted a 56-day experiment to elucidate the effect of no carbohydrate addition applied to control water quality in water-reusing BFT systems for tilapia (GIFT Oreochromis niloticus, 99.62 ± 7.34 g). Results indicated no significant difference in growth performance between fish culture in tanks with or without carbohydrate (glucose) addition, hence indicating the feasibility of no carbohydrate addition in water-reusing BFT systems for tilapia. Similar results have been obtained in L. vannamei juveniles (3.5 g) reared in a BFT system for 30 days [32].
## (s5) Dietary Protein Reduction
(p5.0) Dietary protein (DP) is the most expensive ingredient in aquaculture feeds. It is used for tissue and body maintenance as well as sustaining the growth of aquatic organisms. Using high-protein diets above the recommended range not only pollutes the aquatic ecosystem via nitrogenous waste excretion but also increases the costs of production [60]. For example, in Clarias sp. production, farmers in the hatchery generally feed the fry on high-protein diets in the range of 38-40% to reach the maximum output. This is costly to the farmer and does not match the low selling prices of the fish fry [8]. Since bioflocs can serve as alternative nutritive sources for the reared aquatic species, Tacon et al. [61] suggested that bioflocs might also permit the use of lower feed rations and a reduction in the use of costly feed ingredients. Moreover, several studies have indicated that the protein content of bioflocs ranges between 12% and 50% and this depends on the type of organic carbon source used [39,[62][63][64][65].

(p5.1) Braga et al. [66] evaluated the effect of feeds with different protein levels (BFT + FF: 68.48% dietary protein; BFT + BF: 52.51%; BFT + JF: 39.91%) on the spermatophore and sperm quality of Litopenaeus vannamei males (36.40 ± 3.13 g) cultured for 30 days under the BFT system during the pre-maturation period. Compared to shrimp cultured under a clear water system and fed on a mixture of fresh food, higher sperm quality (survival %, spermatophore weight, sperm count %, normal sperm rate %, and dead sperm rate %) was recorded in shrimp fed on BFT + JF compared to other protein levels and a mixture of fresh food. Generally, better sperm and spermatophore quality of shrimp cultured in BFT system were noted compared to those reared under a clear water system, hence indicating the superiority of a BFT-dominated zero exchange system in maintaining better reproductive performance. Xia et al. [60] investigated the influence of different DP levels (31%, 35%, 39%, 43%, and 47%) on the growth, digestibility, digestive enzyme activity, and stress tolerance of Litopenaeus vannamei (Boone, 1931) (6.2 ± 0.2 g) reared under a BFT system for 60 days. The authors observed increasing weight gain with increasing DP levels up to 43% DP, whereas the lowest feed conversion ratio and protein digestibility were recorded at 43% DP. Moreover, higher digestive enzyme activity and tolerance in a sudden decline in salinity were noted at 43% DP. Using spoilage date extract (SDE) as a carbon source for the BFT system, Abbaszadeh et al. [67] found that feeding Litopenaeus vannamei (5.4 ± 0.3 g) on diets containing different protein levels (P15 and P25%) for 35 days led to improved growth performance (protein efficiency ratio and protein productive value). Moreover, lower total ammonia nitrogen (TAN) was observed in the SDE BFT system, indicating better water quality. Under a super-intensive biofloc-dominated system for the culture of Litopenaeus vannamei, Prangnell et al. [65] have recently shown that feeding shrimp (4.70 ± 0.66 g) on commercial feeds of different protein content (35% and 40% DP) for 77 days enhanced the final weight and water quality parameters (35% DP), hence indicating that lower DP levels can support shrimp growth performance and maintain good water properties under intensive cultivation. Similar results have previously been reported by Xu et al. [68], Pinho et al. [69], Kumar et al. [70], and Brito et al. [71]. Xu and Pan [62] reported that manipulating C/N ratios in the zero exchange culture of Litopenaeus vannamei (6.95 ± 0.22 g) fed on different DP levels (P25 and P35) influences the growth performance and water quality of shrimp. The authors found no significant difference in the growth performance of shrimp fed on P25 and P35, except for the FCR, where shrimp fed on P35 had a lower FCR. This could be attributed to the low protein content of the bioflocs and difficulty in ingesting bioflocs under experimental conditions. C/N ratios or their interaction with DP levels did not affect the growth performance of animals.

(p5.2) In Nile tilapia (O. niloticus), several studies have indicated the maintenance of good water properties and growth performance of fish cultured in BFT systems and fed on lower levels of crude protein in the range of 20-31% [33,[72][73][74][75][76].

(p5.3) In Juvenile common carp (Cyprinus carpio), Aalimahmoudi et al. [77] found that rearing fish in a BFT system for 8 weeks with a C/N ratio of 15% and 25% DP level improved growth and feeding parameters, body composition, blood biochemical parameters, and water quality suitable for common carp. Zhao et al. [78] also found that a 20% decrease in DP did not negatively affect the growth performance of mirror cap (Cyprinus carpio specularis) reared in a BFT polyculture system.

(p5.4) Khasanah et al. [8] demonstrated that 34% DP (C/N ratio 15) can replace 38% DP in catfish (Clarias sp. 4-5 cm) fry reared in a BFT system for 35 days. Sawant et al. [79] evaluated the effect of different DP levels (15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 35%, and 40%) on the growth and survival of Labeo rohita (Hamilton, 1822) reared in a BFT system for 80 days and found 25% DP (C/N ratio 19:1) to be superior in terms of the improvement in growth performance (average weight, weight gain, length gain, specific growth rate, and survival) compared to other DP levels. Yu et al. [80] also found that decreasing the DP levels of Rhynchocypris lagowski cultured in the BFT system (8 weeks) from 37% to 29% slightly decreased the growth performance, digestive enzyme activity, and immune response in fish, but no noticeable difference was noted with those fed on a control diet (clear water condition, 37% DP).
## (s6) Compensatory Growth and Productivity
(p6.0) Throughout their life cycle, aquatic organisms experience a period of fasting, probably due to certain factors such as a periodically inadequate food supply, poor water quality, and the presence of pathogens in their environment, which causes stress. In aquaculture, food restriction is considered stressful but this technique has been used to reduce operational costs as well as the concentration of organic matter, nitrogenous, and phosphorus wastes in effluent water [81,82]. Furthermore, when food is restored after a period of starvation, aquatic organisms exhibit a phase of accelerated growth, also known as compensatory growth, which is usually associated with increased weight gain [82]. It is worth noting that animals use tissue energy reserves such as lipids for the induction of compensatory growth and this depends on several factors such as the type of species, development stage, body size, food quality, and the duration of starvation [82,83]. Hence, compensatory growth is a form of an internal adjustment mechanism that assists animals in adjusting to environmental stress [82,84,85]. Studies on feed restriction in BFT systems and its effect on the growth performance and productivity of crustaceans and fish have been conducted, and, below, we present research findings obtained from some of these studies.
## (s10) Drawbacks, Limitations, and Management Aspects of BFT Systems
(p10.0) Despite their use in commercial applications since the mid-1990s, BFT systems are still facing serious drawbacks and operational difficulties. For example, the dependency of outdoor systems on prevailing weather conditions often results in fluctuations in water quality due to changes in microalgae bloom. Therefore, for sustainable aquaculture production, certain factors such as site location, light intensity, and season of the year should be taken into consideration when setting up outdoor BFT systems. Furthermore, the concentration of total suspended solids (TSS) should be carefully monitored. The desirable concentration of TSS for aquaculture ranges from 500 to 1000 mg L −1 , above which turbidity, visibility, and FCR are increased, thus leading to poor growth performance and poor productivity [98].
## (s11) •
(p11.0) Floc volume (FV) should be in the range of 5 to 50 mL L −1 and this can be monitored using Imhoff cones. When FV concentrations are above 50 mL L −1 , sludge should be removed, and if below 5 mL L −1 , carbohydrates should be added.

(p11.1) The slow establishment of nitrifying bacteria within the BFT system is also one of the drawbacks of this technology. It takes more than one month for the initial bioflocs to develop, which might affect aquatic life at sensitive stages of their life cycle. Luo et al. [102] have recently shown that a strategy of a one-time carbohydrate addition at a C/N ratio maintained at 20:1 has a good nitrification performance. However, the authors did not show how fast the nitrifying bacteria were established; thus, more research is needed. De Morais et al. [103] have also shown that increasing the aeration at a rate of 33.75 L/min in Litopenaeus vannamei (Boone, 1931) biofloc culture speeded up the establishment of nitrifying bacteria, whereas a low aeration rate slowed down the process. Jiménez-Ordaz et al. [104] have recently demonstrated that the addition of Schizochytrium sp., L. fermentum (TD19), and two diatoms (Grammatophora sp. and Navicula sp.) can induce the formation of bioflocs in a hyper-intensive culture of P. vannamei reared in a BFT system. Therefore, more research is needed to optimize the conditions necessary for the fast establishment of slow-growing nitrifying bacteria in BFT systems.

(p11.2) Another serious limitation of BFT is high energy costs. Aerators and pumps require energy for their normal operation and any incident of power failure can cause huge economic losses. Likewise, high energy costs (hydroelectricity) make BFT systems less feasible to small-scale farmers and those from developing countries. Hence, there is an urgent need to search for cheaper and environmentally cleaner sources of energy that would sustainably permit intensive cultivation and result in maximum profits. Another important concern of the BFT system is the development of off-flavors (geosmin and 2methylisoborneol) that lower the quality and market cost of BFT-produced fish and shrimps. These off-flavors develop as a result of high turbidity, filamentous cyanobacteria, and Actinomycetes. Transferring fish and shrimps to clean running water before harvest would alleviate this problem but this is costly and unsustainable. However, Schrader et al. [105] suggested that lowering the feeding application rates could decrease the production of off-flavors, particularly 2-methylisoborneol (MIB) in channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus). Another strategy is to introduce certain microorganisms, such as those from the Bacillaceae family, into the BFT system designs as bioreactors. These have been reported to play a vital role in the degradation of geosmin and MIB [106,107].
