# A Review on Development of Liquid Cooling System for Central Processing Unit (CPU)

CorpusID: 230590098 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4749052dbd1080d904fad51628152b33ac75864d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4749052dbd1080d904fad51628152b33ac75864d)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s1) Working Fluid
(p1.0) The development of working fluid had been actively studied to increase the thermal performance of the cooling system in electronic devices. Air-and water-cooling system are favorably used today for CPU cooling. However, the heat dissipation capacity of conventional air-cooled heatsinks is limited because of non-uniform temperature distribution in the base of heatsinks [5]. The most common working fluid used for liquid cooling is deionized water. It is cheap and better heat capacity than the air-cooling system. Moreover, ethylene glycol is one of the base fluids can be used. Ethylene glycol has a structure similar to water but has a lower freezing point and higher boiling point. Azmi et al., [6] had done a review about heat transfer augmentation of ethylene glycol. During the late 90s, the application of nanoparticle provides effective ways to increase heat transfer characteristic of fluid [7]. Further development of working fluid has come out with the nanoparticle in the based fluid which is called nanofluid. Further development of enhancing heat transfer working fluid is important to decrease the high portion of energy for cooling and could increase the efficiency of heat removal [8]. Different nanoparticles have been developed and had been applied for many applications in heat transfer.
## (s5) Authors LB TEC HP TS JI Findings Chauhan &
(p5.0) Kandlikar [49] The 2° dual taper angle has the best performance which can maintain the surface temperature at 45.5 °C with a heat transfer coefficient of 22.5 kW/m2 °C Kumar & Singh [50] / Inlet/outlet arrangement with flow inlet angle θ = 105° has more uniform flow distribution in heat sink thus 2o lower temperature CPU compare to the conventional arrangement Zhao et al., [9] / Heat transfer performances of CPU with staggered arrangement grooves can be improved by 4.2% at best compared with that with aligned arrangement grooves. LB = Liquid Block (Channel Design) TEC = Thermoelectric Cooler HP = Heat Pipe TS = Thermosiphon JI = Jet Impingement
## (s6) Heat Sink Design
(p6.0) The performance of the liquid cooling system is affected by the design of the heat sink and the type of working fluid used. Uniform cooling distribution is the most important motivation for the further development of heat sink design in water block. The better uniform cooling distribution will prevent the hotspot problem. The hotspot is where heat is concentrated at one spot where heat is failed to be dissipated. The parallel channel is used for conventional liquid block.

(p6.1) A comprehensive study about the effect of fin spacing on mini channel heat sinks for microprocessor cooling had been done by Jajja et al., [43]. Five different heat sinks with fin spacings of 0.2 mm, 0.5 mm, 1.0 mm, and 1.5 mm along with a flat plate heat sink and 0.5 LPM, 0.75 LPM and 1.0 LPM flow rate were investigated. They found that decreasing the fin spacing of the heat sinks increased the overall heat transfer coefficient while thermal resistance decreased. A significant finding, they found that 0.2 mm fin spacing at a flow rate of 1.0 L/min shows about 9% lower than the best-reported base temperature of 40 °C using a nanofluid with 3D Galaxy II from Gigabyte with the thermal design power of 125 W [25]. Other than that, for a flat plate heat sink, the maximum thermal resistance was 0.216 K/W that was reduced to as little as 0.03 K/W by using a heat sink of 0.2 mm fin spacing.

(p6.2) Next, the configuration on the inlet and outlet arrangement had been studied. In conventional liquid block inlet and outlet arrangement, working fluid enters the liquid block vertically upward and getting out vertically downward from the outlet. Initially, Lu et al., [36] had studied the effect of the inlet location on the performance of parallel-channel cold-plate. A total of five inlet configurations have bet set up which are I-, Z-, ]-, L-, and T-arrangement. The conventional liquid block is similar to I-arrangement. The results show that the I-and T-arrangement give the best heat transfer performance due to their impingement configuration. Maldistribution from I-arrangement could be solved by increasing the number of channels on cold-plate. On the other hand, one of the researchers S. Kumar, P.K. Singh [50] come out with a novel inlet and outlet arrangement with different flow inlet angles. This is the further work of the Z-arrangement. The inlet angles used are θ = 90°, θ = 105°, and θ = 120°. Configuration of inlet and outlet arrangement is to ensure better flow distribution and heat transfer performance. In this design, working fluid enter the liquid block horizontally with different flow inlet angle. The results show that proposed inlet/outlet arrangement with flow inlet angle θ = 105° has more uniform flow distribution in heat sink. Conventional arrangement has highest value of maldistribution. Furthermore, temperature drop of 2 °C has been noticed with the proposed flow arrangement as compared to conventional flow arrangement for the same volumetric flow rate. The inlet and outlet arrangement do not significantly affect cooling performance. Therefore, inlet and outlet arrangements can be used for the arrangement of the cooling system in the desktop. Therefore, one of the research by Zhao et al., [9] had experimentally studied the thermohydraulic performance of nanofluids in a CPU heat sink with different designs that are rectangular grooves and cylindrical bulges. The effect of rectangular grooves depth (1mm, 2mm) and cylindrical bulges arrangement which is aligned and staggered. It is found that large depth rectangular grooves and staggered arrangement cylindrical bulges are enhanced heat transfer performance. Furthermore, the mass fraction with 0.3% and 0.4% are the best heat transfer for cooling for both heat sink design.
## (s7) Thermoelectric Coolers (TECs)
(p7.0) Thermoelectric consists of two categories which are thermoelectric generators (TEGs) and thermoelectric coolers (TECs) [51]. TEGs transform heat energy into electrical energy. Seebeck effect is a phenomenon that occurs where voltage is generated which a temperature difference between two different electrical conductors or semiconductors. Meanwhile, TECs dissipated heat by using electric through the Peltier effect. The Peltier effect is described as a phenomenon whereby heat is dissipated or absorbed when electric current flows across a junction between two materials. There are many commercialize thermoelectric Peltier available on the market. Usually, TEC is used for cooling electronic devices. Figure 1 shows the mechanism of the Pielter effect in TEC. Among conventional TEC that are usually being used, there are three types of TEC modeling available which are single-stage thermoelectric coolers, multi-stage thermoelectric coolers, trapezoid, and annular thermoelectric coolers. TEC is widely being used for cooling CPU to increase the CPU cooling performance while decreasing the noise of the cooling system. The application of TEC could reduce the noise to less than 40dB with a power consumption of 130 W to cool the CPU in Kumar et al., [45]. As the TEC is a very simple yet high cooling performance device, researchers are interested to combine with different cooling applications. This will increase the cooling performance and more heat can be absorbed from the electronic device.

(p7.1) Tan and Demirel [45] had carried out the study with a heat sink, water cooling system and thermoelectric cooler comparatively to examine the temperature and performance of the CPU and motherboard. The Peltier or thermoelectric cooler (TEC) module was proposed for cooling the CPU to increase the CPU cooling power and decrease the noise of the cooling system. ATEC1-12706 Peltier module with 2⁄90 W power and 4⁄4⁄0.5 cm size was used under 12 V DC voltage to cool the CPU and Northbridge chipset. TEC has the lowest average CPU and motherboard temperature compare to the water-cooling system and air-cooling using a heat sink. The temperature difference of 5°C reveals that the thermoelectric cooler is more effective than the water-cooling system.

(p7.2) Siddique et al., [47] carried out an experimental analysis with a liquid-based thermoelectric electronic cooling system, using two developed aluminium heat exchangers. An Ethylene-Glycol based fluid was used as the coolant in the cooling system. The results show that a large aluminium heat exchanger shows better performance compared to the small one. The commercially found cooling system performed the worst performance. The temperature variation was between 29-30 o C, which is nearly 2 o C less than the commercial cooling system and showed steady performance.

(p7.3) Huang et al., [38] had studied the thermal performance of a thermoelectric water-cooling device for electronic equipment. The influences of heat load and the thermoelectric cooler's current on the cooling performance of the thermoelectric device are experimentally and theoretically determined. Besides, this study verifies that the thermal performance of the conventional water-cooling device can be effectively enhanced by integrating it with the thermoelectric cooler when the heat load is below 57W. Higher heat loads decrease the efficiency of the TEC as the Peltier effect cannot overcome a high heat load. Low temperature different from TEC cold side and hot side decreases the efficiency of TEC in the cooling system. The further cooling system needs to be studied to cool down heat load more than 57W.

(p7.4) Naphon and Wiriyasart [37] study on the liquid cooling in the mini-rectangular fin heat sink with and without thermoelectric for CPU. The de-ionized water is used as the coolant. The de-ionized water was pumped into the mini-rectangular fin heat sink which installed on the hot side of thermoelectric. Water cooling without thermoelectric gives a larger CPU temperature drop while the energy consumption slightly increases. Thermoelectric has a significant effect on the CPU cooling of the PC. However, energy consumption is also increased. Further study needs to be done to manage energy consumption by TEC.

(p7.5) Khonsue [41] had carried out an experimental investigation on liquid cooling in the microchannel fin heat sink with and without thermoelectric for CPU of the personal computer. The de-ionized water is used as the coolant. The experiments are performed at no load and full load conditions within 60 min after a steady state. The cooling system with thermoelectric gives the highest efficiency where 77% enhancement on no load and 22.21% enhancement on full load compared to the air-cooling system.
## (s8) Heat Pipe
(p8.0) The Heat pipe work by transferring energy from one point to another using working fluid or coolant. The heat pipe is a device with highly effective thermal conductors due to their high heat transfer for condensation and boiling. The heat pipe is considered one of the best cooling devices due to its high thermal conductivity, reliability and cost-effectiveness [52]. There are many types of heat pipes which are pulsating heat pipe, rotating heat pipe, oscillating heat pipe, wick heat pipe and thermosyphon and many more [53]. Usually, the heat pipe is divided into three parts which are the evaporator section, adiabatic (transport) section and condenser section. Heat dissipated at the external heat pipe parts will transfer to working fluid in evaporator parts. The heated working fluid will flow through the adiabatic section to the condenser. Vaporize working fluid will condense in condenser part where latent heat of vaporization is released to the heat sink. The capillary pressure/action is responsible to transport working fluid to the evaporator. Not enough capillary pressure to supply working fluid to evaporator could disrupt the heat pipe system. The wicked heat pipe is defined as a heat pipe with working fluid flow by using a capillary wick. The capillary-driven heat pipe, loop heat pipe (LHP) and capillary pumped loop heat pipe (CPLHP). Heat pipe for electronic cooling is usually in mini/micro size. Therefore, this type of heat pipe is very suitable to apply in a laptop and notebook which has limited space.

(p8.1) Putra et al., [44] proposed the design of a heat pipe of CPU cooling using a coral biomaterial wick structure. Heat pipe was made from copper pipe and the wick structure was made from tabulating coral with a mean pore diameter of 52.95 μm. This design is compared with wick structure fabricated from sintered Cu-powder with a mean pore diameter of 58.57 µm. This wick structure will transport the working fluid naturally during heat transfer. The used of coral as wick structured can improve the performance of heat transfer while decrease the CPU temperature for 38.6 % at the maximum heat load compared to a conventional copper heat sink. This method also decreased the temperature of the simulator plate by as much as 44.25 °C compared to a heat pipe composed of a sintered Cupowder wick.

(p8.2) Yousefi et al., [42] had studied the effects of inclination angle and nanofluids on heat transfer performance of a CPU cooling heat pipe. It is shown that the inclination angle of the unit has a significant effect on the cooling process since it directly influences the operation of the evaporator. It is observed that as the CPU temperature increases, the threshold angle decreases from 60° to 30°. At 10 W, the presence of nanofluid has reduced the thermal resistance by 15%, while at 25 W, the thermal resistance has dropped by 22%. It is shown that nanofluid and the inclination of heat pipe help significantly the heat transfer performance of the heat pipe. Only a low concentration of nanofluid could be used to prevent clogging at the wicked part.

(p8.3) Thermosyphon is one of the heat pipes that been used in electronics cooling. The mechanisms of thermosyphon are similar to a typical heat pipe as mention above and do not require any mechanical devices such as pumps [54]. In this system, the condenser is placed above the evaporator. The liquid flows from the condenser to the evaporator by using gravity force which means this type of heat pipe is wickless. After that, the vapor will flow to the condenser upwards due to lower density and pressure force. Therefore, the lesser cost is needed to fabricate this type of heat pipe than wick heat pipe. There are also thermosyphon with wick, but the major force flow is gravity force.

(p8.4) Stable circulation of working fluid in thermosyphon is very important for better efficiency of cooling. Chauhan and Kandlikar [49] had proposed a dual taper thermosiphon to increase the stability of fluid flow in thermosyphon. The tapered section in the flow domain helps in pressure recovery. So, stable fluid could be established. The dual taper design has a smaller flow length and results in less expansion. This characteristic helps in establishing a more efficient vapor removal mechanism with stable fluid flow. The 2° dual taper angle performed the best among all taper angles tested and was able to dissipate a maximum of 280 W without reaching critical heat flux. The surface temperature was maintained at 45.5 °C with a heat transfer coefficient of 22.5 kW/m 2 °C. This type of heat pipe is suitable to apply in CPU cooling as long as the arrangement of the condenser is above evaporator so gravity will make sure the working fluid flows properly. Unfortunately, this type of cooling is not yet available in commercial due to the limit of the specific arrangement of the components.
## (s9) Jet Impingement
(p9.0) Jet impingement cooling method is one of the promising developments in the heat transfer application. As its name, this method involves high velocity forced convection by ejecting coolant directly onto a heated surface through a convergent nozzle [55]. Due to its high heat transfer rate, this method could benefit from the electronic cooling application. To the current development, several parameters that had been studied by researchers that affect the cooling performance which is jet to target distance, flow region (Reynold's number), surrounding (confined, semi-confined), surface shape (rough or smooth, incline or flat, etc.) and fluid type. To support this, Singh [56] had comprehensively studied the heat transfer of jet impingement with novel surface roughness. Variable involve in the research are jet to jet spacing, jet to target distance and Reynold's number. The results show that concentric surface roughness has higher heat transfer and fin effectiveness compared to traditional cubic and cylindrical roughness. Furthermore, as the jet to jet spacing, jet to target distance and Reynold's number increase, the Nusselt's number also increases. Therefore, heat transfer is increased.

(p9.1) For electronic cooling such as CPU, the best configuration to apply this method is by combining heat sink and jet impingement. Naphon and Wongwise [39] had studied on jet liquid impingement heat transfer characteristics in the mini-rectangular fin heat sink for CPU cooling. A larger velocity in the heat sink results in a higher heat transfer coefficient. It is found that the CPU temperatures obtained from the jet liquid impingement cooling system are lower than those from the conventional liquid system. However, this technique requires higher energy consumption.

(p9.2) Next, Muszynski & Andrzejczyk [46] had studied the heat transfer performance of a microjetmicrochannel cooling module. The tests were conducted under steady-state conditions for a singlephase liquid cooling system. The results achieved for the jet impingement experimental data were compared to standard cooling techniques. The hybrid microjet -microchannel module has higher heat removal compare to the traditional heat sink with forced air convection. The jet impingement heat transfer is dominant in 90% of total channel length
