# Original Research Investigating the Role of Religious Orientation in Mental Health: A Review of Educational Studies

CorpusID: 233452889 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1cce97724d996e051a38de2811fbaba4884e0ea5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1cce97724d996e051a38de2811fbaba4884e0ea5)

Fields: Education, Psychology

## (s3) McKinnon
(p3.0) According to Allport, the true religion is the religion of people who, without trying to make meaningless demonstrations and with real knowledge and insight, have fully identified themselves and on this principle, there is no desire to pretend and show off to get the gifts of the world and everyday situations. Allport's art was that as a social psychologist, he was able to study social psychology studies on racial bias by considering one's religious orientation by presenting a theory of internal and external orientation toward religion in humans. Allport's division regarding one's religious orientation has been able to attract a lot of attention in recent years and can be used as an effective theory in studies where religion is considered by psychologists (Neyrinck, Lens, Vansteenkiste, & Soenens, 2010).

(p3.1) According to Allport, people with an inner religious orientation consider religion as a goal while internalizing religious values. In such an orientation, religion finds autonomous and independent action and is motivated to excel. For people who are internally religious, secular needs, no matter how important, are of the utmost importance. These people try to harmonize their needs with their religious beliefs and duties as much as possible. People in this type of religious orientation are those in whom religiosity is the main motivation and belief in God is the basis of their actions and behavior. They worship God not only out of a desire to achieve something, but their goal is holiness and thanksgiving to God (You & Lim, 2019).

(p3.2) Allport believes that external religious orientation is a kind of religious attitude that is utilitarian and serves a person and protects his interests. These people may use religion in various ways to achieve their personal goals, including: to provide security, peace of mind, socialization and entertainment, social dignity and self-righteousness, and so on. They either do not firmly believe in their religious beliefs or they select and shape them according to their needs (You & Lim, 2019).

(p3.3) Research on religion and its relationship to mental health is expanding rapidly; In 2001, about 1,200 studies quantitatively examined the relationship between some aspects of religion and mental health, and in 2010, more than 2,000 studies were published in this field (Koenig & Büssing, 2010). This article focuses on studies that have been done in educational and academic situations. Therefore, the results of research that has been done in universities and schools and on students have been mainly reviewed. Butt (2014)in a study explored the relationship among emotional intelligence, religious orientation and mental health of university students. It was assumed that emotional intelligence would be a better predictor of psychological well-being than religious orientation. Results indicated significant positive relationship among emotional intelligence, religious orientation, and psychological well-being while emotional intelligence and religious orientation both have significant negative association with psychological distress. Results of multiple regression indicated that emotional intelligence and religious orientation have significant effect on psychological distress. Moreover, emotional intelligence was a better predictor of psychological well-being than religious orientation. They concluded there was a weakness relationship between religious orientation and mental anxiety and depression. Therefore, it needs to improve knowledge of student about advantages of religious orientation.

(p3.4) AbdAleati, Zaharim, and Mydin (2016) to assess the role of religion in mental health outcomes. A comprehensive literature search was conducted using medical and psychological databases on the relationship between religiosity and mental health. Seventy-four articles in the English and Arabic languages published between January 2000 and March 2012 were chosen. Despite the controversial relationship between religion and psychiatry, psychology, and medical care, there has been a growing interest in the role which spirituality and religion play in mental health. The findings of past research indicated that religion could play a significant role in many situations, as religious beliefs and rules influence the believer's life and health care. Most of the past literature in this area reported that there is a significant association between religious beliefs and practices and mental health.

(p3.5) Hovey, Hurtado, Morales, and Seligman (2014) examined whether various dimensions of religion-based support (social interaction, instrumental, and emotional) mediated the relationship between religiosity and mental health in college students in the Midwest United States. The results revealed that support dimensions, perceived emotional support was the strongest predictor of decreased hopelessness, depression, and suicide behaviors; and the relationships among intrinsic religiosity and the mental health variables were fully mediated by emotional support. These findings provide strong support to the notion that the relationship between religiosity and mental health can be reduced to mediators such as social support.

(p3.6) Saleem and Saleem (2017) examined a sample of 120 medical students from Federal Medical and Dental College and 120 non-medical students from International Islamic University, Islamabad. Purposive sampling was used. The respondents accomplished religious orientation scale and scale of psychological well-being scale along with a demographic data sheet. In order to assess the study variables, linear regression and t test were used. The findings indicated that religiosity is a strong predictor of psychological well-being. Extrinsic and intrinsic religiosity predicts psychological well-being among the students. The results showed a significant difference in psychological well-being between medical and non-medical students. No significant difference was found in religiosity of medical and non-medical students. The gender differences in religiosity and psychological well-being were found to be insignificant. The results highlight that psychological well-being is predicted by religiosity. Habib, Donald, and Hutchinson (2018) investigated the association between religious involvement and life satisfaction in a multi-religious population of undergraduate medical students of the University of the West Indies. They used a cross-sectional design to assess 228 undergraduates (50 males and 178 females) on religiosity, religious well-being and life satisfaction using the Religious Orientation Test, Religious Well-Being subscale and the Satisfaction with Life Scale, respectively. Results indicate Christians registered higher religiosity and religious well-being but non-Christians reported significantly higher life satisfaction. Muslim and Hindu scores on religiosity, religious well-being and life satisfaction were not statistically different. Females scored higher than males on religiosity and significantly higher on religious well-being; nevertheless, there was no significant difference between males and females on life satisfaction.

(p3.7) Sadeghi, Azadi, Abouee-Mehrizi, and Jafari (2019) investigated whether there was any relationship between religiosity with stress, anxiety, and depression among the students of Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Iran. To this end, the total number of 282 students were selected using a two-stage stratified sampling method to fulfill univariate religiosity questionnaire and Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale-21 (DASS-21).

(p3.8) Findings revealed that out of four dimensions of religiosity, only ritual dimension was found to have a significant correlation with stress. According to results, the correlation between other dimensions of religiosity (belief, emotional, and consequential (and aspects of mental health found to be not statistically significant.  Sillick and Cathcart (2014) in a study entitled "The relationship between religious orientation and happiness: the mediating role of purpose in life" investigated relationship between religious orientation and happiness in university students of Australia. Three hundred and forty-two university students participated in the study.

(p3.9) The results indicate that for women, purpose in life mediates the relationship between intrinsic religious orientation and happiness and for men, purpose in life mediates the relationship between extrinsic social religious orientation and happiness. The results are unexpected as intrinsic religious orientation negatively predicted happiness, whereas extrinsic social religious orientation positively predicted happiness. These findings recommend that further studies are needed to advance the recognizing of these complex connections. Gardner, Krägeloh, and Henning (2014) investigated the relationship between perceived stress, quality of life (QOL), and religious coping in a sample of 114 Muslim university students in New Zealand. International Muslim students had higher levels of spirituality/religiousness than national Muslim students, and used more positive and negative religious coping methods. For international students, positive religious coping was positively associated to QOL and lack of stress, while, for national students, negative religious coping was negatively correlated to the QOL and increased stress. This different pattern may relate to the ethnic background of the participants, and the results of the present study thus highlight that Muslims studying at universities overseas can certainly not be considered as a homogenous group. Galek, Flannelly, Ellison, Silton, and Jankowski (2015) examined the relations among religious commitment, belief in meaning and purpose in life, and psychiatric symptoms among the overall public using data from the 2010 Baylor Religion Survey (BRS). The main hypothesis of the study, supported identity theory, was that religious commitment would interact with belief in meaning and purpose in their net relations on psychiatric symptoms: general anxiety, social anxiety, paranoia, obsession, and compulsion. Specially, it had been hypothesized that believing life lacks meaning and purpose will have a more pernicious relationship among highly religious individuals, than it'll among individuals who are less religious. The results approved the central hypothesis of the study for 4 of the 5 classes of psychiatric symptoms.
## (s4) Bolghan-Abadi, Ghofrani, and Abde-Khodaei (2014) investigated the spiritual intelligence role in predicting
(p4.0) Quchan University students' quality of life in Iran. So as to gather data, a sample of 143 students of Quechan University was selected randomly enrolled for 2012 academic year. The instruments of the info collecting are World Health Organization Quality of Life (WHOQOL) and Spiritual Intelligence Questionnaire. For analyzing the data, the SD, and Pearson's coefficient of correlation in descriptive level, and in inferential level, the regression test was used. The results of the study show that the spiritual intelligence has effective role on forecasting quality of life. Jafari Manesh, Ranjbaran, Najafi, Jafari Manesh, and Alibazi (2015), during a study investigated the connection between spiritual health and religious orientation with emotional adjustment of admitted adolescents in hospitals. Results of this study showed that between religious orientation and emotional adjustment there was no significant relationship. Nevertheless, a significant relationship was found between spiritual health and emotional adjustment indicating adolescents with higher spiritual health had better emotional adjustment.
