# Coronavirus Disease and Cardiovascular Disease: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 235372003 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f51fc3022e3baa0fe13963ccb709be39162fb66e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f51fc3022e3baa0fe13963ccb709be39162fb66e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Overactivation of the immune system
(p4.0) Replication of virus following the host cell fusion and this invasion of alveolar surfaces would result in alveolitis and the invasion of the cardiac muscle cells results in edema and lysis of the cardiomyocytes, which further lead to release of proinflammatory cytokines [22]. The deposition of pro-inflammatory cytokines and the filtration of inflammatory cells at the site of injury causes "inflammatory storms" which warrants an overactivation of the immune system. This leads to damage of cardiomyocytes and decreases the adherence of the atherosclerotic plaques in coronary vessels. All these mechanisms predispose to cardiovascular events [22]. Huang et al. reported the cytokine profiles of COVID-19 infected subjects with elevated Interleukin (IL)-2, IL-7, interferon-γ, and tumor necrosis factor α [11]. Virus associated was reported to be associated with increased COVID-19 fatality in a multicentric study among infected subjects in Wuhan, China, where significant differences in ferritin levels and IL-6 were between survivors and non-survivors [19]. In autopsy findings, cytokine storm induced by the inflammatory response syndrome to COVID-19 was discussed to have resulted in cardiac interstitial mononuclear inflammatory infiltrates [23,24].
## (s5) Decreased partial pressure of oxygen in blood
(p5.0) Damage to alveolar cells in COVID-19 patients results in hypoxemia. As the partial pressure and saturation of oxygen falls consistently there is deposition of oxygen free radicals, which on circulation across the body damages the cardiomyocytes. Another mechanism is the activation of NADPH oxidase enzymatic complex by the downregulation of ACE2 and corresponding upregulation of Ang-II in COVID-19. Ang-II binds to Angiotensin Type I Receptor (AT1R) which stimulates the activity of NADPH oxidase that reduces oxygen to superoxide. While clear underlying mechanisms for stimulation of NADPH oxidase are complex, it is known to occur at the genetic, transcriptional, and posttranscriptional levels involving multitude of signaling molecules and scaffolding proteins [25]. ACE2 deficiency was shown to increase NADPH oxidase activity and resulted in oxidative stress in the study conducted by Wysocki et al. [26]. To accommodate for the metabolic demands, blood flow intensifies increasing the individual's risk for heart failure. Furthermore, hypoxemia is an independent predecessor for inflammatory response that promotes "inflammatory storm" and contribute toward incidence of cardiovascular events [27].
## (s6) Elevated catecholamine levels in plasma
(p6.0) An initial response to viral invasion is the activation of immune system, and the interaction between viral and host cells is a complex phenomenon. Besides, stimulation of α1-adrenoceptors by catecholamines can reinforce the vasoconstriction caused by excess Ang-II as a result of downregulation of ACE2 and could contribute toward a significant increase in vascular resistance. Moreover, catecholamines stimulate β1-adrenoceptors in the kidney to increase renin secretion that consequently increases Ang-II resulting in further deterioration of cardiovascular health. Response from the emotional perspective such as anxiety, fear also lead to increased production of catecholamines the concentration in plasma of which is directly related to hypertension, coronary artery disease, and cardiac failure. Increased level of catecholamine levels in plasma also has the implication of myocardial toxicity that could result in circulatory disturbances and arrhythmias [26]. Although a direct study of catecholamines among COVID-19 subjects could offer useful insights, the scope for these observations is hampered by severe illness such as respiratory failure, compromised cardiovascular health, and shock and more so among those on adrenaline infusion.
## (s7) Cardiovascular manifestations in COVID-19
(p7.0) Although it is known that SARS-CoV 2 primarily affects the respiratory system, the negative impact COVID-19 has on cardiovascular health cannot be overstated. It has been thoroughly established in literature that cardiac manifestations contribute significantly towards COVID-19 case fatality rates [27][28][29]. The following are the most common cardiac manifestations observed among COVID-19 patients.
