# A Survey on Image Segmentation Using Deep Learning

CorpusID: 234564606 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0eee5962c2380368ab1466bf03b4fe40934d28be](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0eee5962c2380368ab1466bf03b4fe40934d28be)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Physics

## (s1) Survey of Existing Research
(p1.0) Nilakshi Devi and Kaustubh Bhattacharyya et al. [1] reveals the actual fact that considering the numerous disadvantages of manual detection of brain tumour , the researchers have now turned their attention toward using soft computing tools within the detection process to form the detection more robust and fewer time consuming. Too much of human interaction within the manual detection leads to chaotic results in the detection process which becomes a risk to the patient's life.

(p1.1) Shrutika Santosh Akshata Raut Swati Kulkarni et al. [2] The proposed work is based mainly on thresholding, application of morphological operations and extraction of the tumour region for further analysis. Thresholding technique is the application of `T' which is a constant over an image. When we apply the threshold constant `T' over an entire image, the process is called as global thresholding whereas when we change the value of `T' over an image, that process is called as variable thresholding. The image of the brain is obtained from the MRI scanning.

(p1.2) Sergio Pereira et al. [3] had proposed a novel Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based method for brain tumour segmentation in MR images. Author had worked initially on MRI scan converted it into the grayscale image so that it becomes easy to process after that converted to the binary format using thresholding segmentation. Then applied watershed algorithm to group the same intensity pixels. Then morphological operations are applied to recognize the tumour.
