# Mesenchymal Stem Cell Secretome for Dermatology Application: A Review

CorpusID: 239048624 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c36b11b980fbbb02c78f350fac7ea16e1b05175a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c36b11b980fbbb02c78f350fac7ea16e1b05175a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The skin is the largest organ of the body and serves as the first defense against various disorders and external stimuli causing susceptibility to infection and inflammation. 1 Various skin problems are often found, ranging from acute to chronic skin disorders that can impair the structure and function of the skin to triggering various reactions on the skin. In chronic skin conditions, such as infection, inflammation, ultraviolet (UV) exposure and others, general therapy is not able to restore the function and structure of injured skin tissue under normal circumstances. Thus, triggering the development of more effective therapies. 2 The development of stem cell-based therapies continues to today, especially in skin disease therapy. Stem cells, in particular mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), can secrete trophic factors responsible for regenerating tissue and repairing tissue damage. [3][4][5] However, this therapy using MSCs shows low cell survival and engraftment rates after the transplant process, cell retention, and, in case of mutations from stem cells, can lead to cancer. 1,2,6,7 The main mechanism of action of MSCs is associated with the paracrine effect of important factors secreted by secretome. Because of awareness related to the work of MSCs based on the secretion of its secretome, it can be used as an alternative to overcome problems related to the use of living cells. 8 Secretome is a bioactive molecule secreted by MSCs in conditioned media. It contains a large number of growth factors, cytokines, and various macromolecules and extracellular vesicles including microvesicles and exosomes that can stimulate various biological reactions, especially in modulation of various new tissue formations. [8][9][10][11][12] These factors play an important role in communication between cells and are involved in a variety of physiological processes, including signal transduction to provide a biological response. 13 Therapy using secretome can answer challenges related to the problem of living cell use. The secretome's ability to regenerate and repair damaged tissues makes it one of the alternatives related to the handling of various skin problems that have been widely reported in various studies. So, in this article, we will review the use of secretome for skin application is described in Table 1.
## (s3) Isolation and Secretome Culture
(p3.0) Isolation is the first step in obtaining a secretome. Secretome of MSCs can be isolated from various adult tissues, including the spinal cord, 38 adipose tissue, 39 skin tissue, 16 peripheral blood, 21 and neonatal tissue, such as Wharton jelly, 40 umbilical cord, 17 amniotic membrane, 41 and placenta. 42 The isolation process is done to obtain the network that is being used. After the isolation process, cell culture is carried out. Based on Park et al, cell cultures were carried out by incubating isolated cells for 5 hours at a temperature of 37°C in the growth medium using Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), which contains 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), to provide cell nutrition needs and 250 U/mL collagenase type 1. It was then filtered with 40 μm strainer cells and then planted in a growth medium (ie, basal growth of medium EBM-2 endothelial cells and equipped with EGM-2 supplements at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 ). 2,38,43 Preparation of Secretome Secretome preparation was performed when the cell reached 80-90% confluence, and it was then washed  [14] Human immortalised keratinocytes (HaCaTs) In vitro [4,5] Human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HDMECs)

(p3.1) In vitro [14] Human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs) In vitro [8,15] Human endothelial cell In vitro [8] Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) In vitro [16] L929 Fibroblast In vitro [5] Wistar rats In vivo [17,18] C57BL/6J mice In vivo [19] Lepr db/db mice In vivo [20] Porcine models/ pigs In vivo [21] Rabbit ear In vivo [22] Female SCID Mice 8-9 weeks In vivo [4] Male volunteers Clinic Phase 1 [23] 2. Photoprotection Human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs) In vitro [24,25] Normal human dermal fibroblast (NHDF) In vitro [26] Human dermal fibroblast (HFF-1) In vitro [27] Human immortalized keratinocytes (HaCaTs) In vitro [28] NIH-3T3 cell In vitro [29] Nude mice In vivo [24,28] Human Skin Clinical test [30] 3. Hair Growth Human follicle dermal papilla cells (HFDPCs) In vitro [31][32][33] Human epithelial keratinocytes (HEKs) In vitro [31] Outer root sheath cells (ORC) In vitro [34] C3H/NeH mice In vivo [31,34] C57BL/6 mice In vivo [33,35] Nude with PBS two times and incubated in DMEM (without FBS and antibiotics). Conditioned medium, or secretome, was collected after being incubated for 48 hours and centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 3 minutes two times, then filtered with a syringe filter 0.45 μm to remove debris and dead cells. The obtained conditioned medium was stored at −80°C before use in testing. 2,44 In some circumstances, due to the concentration of bioactive factors is low in the culture medium to produce a therapeutic effect, there are several methods were used to increase the secretion of these factors, namely culture in hypoxic conditions 44,45 and planting in a two-(2D) or threedimensional (3D) matrix. 17 Culturing MSCs in hypoxic in vitro conditions can increase the proliferation and migration effects of keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts, which are related to the upregulation of angiogenesis factors, such as VEGF and bFGF, and increased collagen production compared to normoxia. [45][46][47] Sun et al stated that protein levels in hypoxic cultures were 15 times greater than those in normal cultures. 48 In 3D cultures, there was an increase in re-epithelialization related to success in wound closure as compared to normal cultures. 49 To identify the various proteins contained in the secretome, analysis techniques were required. Analysis techniques were performed to identify various proteins contained in the secretome. Conventional ELISA methods and the multiplex method were generally used. 27 These methods can identify a number of proteins contained in the secretome, such as growth factors and cytokines. 50 
## (s5) Wound Healing
(p5.0) Wound healing is a natural process of the body that repairs and regenerates damaged tissues and consists of three main phases-inflammation, proliferation, and remodeling that occur in overlap. Wound healing is still a challenge in clinical management therapy problems, especially in chronic conditions. 2 The use of secretome as an alternative therapy in dealing with skin injuries has been widely reported, including accelerating wound closure. 42 Various studies to assess the benefits of secretome to wound healing have been done, both in vitro and in vivo. In vitro testing is generally done by looking at the migration and proliferation capabilities of cells. Use based on cell models has been tested using components of different types of skin cells, such as human immortalized keratinocytes (HaCaTs), 14 human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs), 15 human foreskin fibroblasts (HFFs), 66 human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HDMECs), 14 and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). 16 Cell migration capability can be determined using the assay migration method and/or starch assay. 2 This test was conducted by comparing the speed of wound closure between control and treatment groups. To confirm the effects of cell migration, it can also be done by identifying the expression levels of MMP2 and MMP9, both of which are involved in the migration processes of cells. 2 The proliferation ability of cells can be curated using the assay proliferation method, WST-1 assay and MTT assay. 2,14,15 This test aims to see if there is an increase in viability of the cells after secretome administration. Another supporting method can also be done by looking at the ability of angiogenesis using the angiogenesis assay. 16 Secretome from a variety of different sources (such as bone marrow, adipose tissue, neonatal tissue, skin tissue and peripheral blood) have been shown to improve the migration ability of various dermal cells, such as fibroblasts, endothelial cells and keratinocytes, and the epidermis was able to stimulate the proliferation of these cells in vitro. 19,67 Research by Miranda et al also stated that secretome from umbilical cord tissue-derived (UCX ® ) was able to increase HDF and HaCaT cell migration based on scratch test results. 4 Sera et al also noted that there was an increase in expression of ki67 markers involved in cell proliferation by treatment using secretome with MTT assay method. 2 The use of secretome was also able to modulate tube formation based on in vitro angiogenesis tests along with the migration and proliferation HUVECs. 16,[68][69][70] The speed of healing of wounds could be attributed to the trophic effects of MSCs, which affect dermal fibroblasts and keratinocytes. 5 Interestingly, Topouzi et al used secretome from the dermal papilla fibroblast follicles for wound healing therapy and showed that the wound healing increased by 1.8 times faster than control. 57 In vivo experimental animal models can be used in the form of mice, 53 rats, 55 and pigs. 21 This method has been tested on animal models with various conditions, such as chronic wounds, 58 burns, 38 diabetic foot ulcers, 71 skin ulcers, 53 and radiation wounds, 72 which require special handlers. The results showed that wound treatment with secretome was able to accelerate wound healing by increasing the effect of cell migration and proliferation and triggering angiogenesis, re-epithelialization, neovascularization and deposition of collagen that play a role in the wound healing process. 53,[73][74][75] According to Bari et al, secretome components in ADSC such as decorin (Dcn) and tenascin (Tnc) play an important role in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) regulation. 53 Various studies have been conducted to support data related to the benefits of secretome in vivo. Hackers et al studied the effects of secretome from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (SecPBMCs) and PBMC apoptosis (Apo-SecPBMC) on models of pigs with burns, showing an increase in the number of CD31+, which is especially greater in treatment with Apo-SecPBMCs, as well as a decrease in the number of mast cells in the wound area. 21 Using the same secretome source, Mildner et al found that there was a significant increase in the number of CD31+ cells that play a role in the angiogenesis process in the SecPBMCs group. 19 Similarly, Wagner et al revealed that the use of secretome from PBMCs is a promising therapy in improving wound healing that has been tested on Lepr db/db mice. 20 Secretome of adipose stromal stem cell (ASCs) in hypoxia showed a greater reduction in wound area compared to that in normoxia. 47 The use of SecPBMCs has been further thoroughly related to toxicity testing using animal models of mice (assessing systemic toxicity) and mini pigs (local toxicity studies). The results showed that the minimum dose and  VEGF, IL-6, EGF, uPAR, MCP-3, G-CSF, and Tie-2, Promoted angiogenesis (CD31), epithelialization, and decreased wound area [52] Tnc, Dcn and EGFR. Accelerated re-epithelialization and deposition of collagen [53] MAPC-CM HGF, VEGF Increased keratinocytes, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells as well as cell proliferation [14] WJSC-CM EGF Enhanced proliferation and cell migration as well angiogenesis [54] BMSC-CM VEGF and angiopoietin-1 Stimulated cell proliferation, and decreased level of granulation tissue and fibrous [39,54] EGF, bFGF, Increased proliferation and cell migration as well as fibroblast in diabetic wounds [15] PBMCs-CM CD31+, α-SMA+ Increased the thickness of epidermis, angiogenesis, and reduced the level of mast cells [17,[19][20][21] UCSC-CM/ UCX ® HGF, IL-6, FGF-2, TGF-β1, G-CSF, VEFG-A Improved angiogenesis, elastin formation capillary maturation and vascularity level, [17,55] DPSC-CM Angiogenin, EGF, bFGF, IL-6, IL 8, PDGF-AA, VEGF, HGF, GM-CSF Increased migration and proliferation and angiogenesis cell [56] DPFi-CM sAXL and CCL19 Enhanced re-epithelialization and wound closure [57] Fetal dermal cells-CM VEGF, IL-8, HGF, CXCL-12, CCL-2, CXCL1 Improved angiogenesis, re-epithelialization and neovascularization [16] 2.

(p5.1) Photoprotection BMSC-CM VEGF, TGF β Stimulated procollagen synthesis, suppressed the production of MMP1 and CPD formation [24] ADSC-CM TGF β-1 PDGF-AA Increased procollagen synthesis, inhibited MMP1 and MMP9 production, sub G1 phase and cellular apoptosis as well as enhanced skin hydration effect and, improved mRNA expression [25,28,[58][59][60] UCSC-Exo
## (s9) 1407
(p9.0) activity, cellular aging and cellular apoptosis, intracellular ROS levels, and pyrimidine cyclobutane dimer assay (CPD). 26,27,29,58,78 Wang et al reported that there was an increase in cell proliferation from adipose-derived stem cells (ADSC-CM) use, as well as a decrease in the number of cells undergoing apoptosis and a decrease in cellular aging in HDFs. 58 Kim et al also found ADSC-CM can decrease the number of cell deaths from apoptosis (characterized by a decrease in the sub-G1 phase) and increase collagen I synthesis, as well as inhibit the production of MMP1 in HDFs. 60 Using the same method of sub-GI assay, Dewi et al also reported a reduction in the percentage of apoptosis after treatment with the human umbilical cord blood mesenchymal stem cell (hUCB-MSC-CM) conformation 5%, 10% and 20% from 94.2% to 46.8%, 31.8% and 31.5%, respectively. 29 The use of secretome was able to reduce intracellular ROS levels using the DCFDA fluorescent assay, 26 as well as able to increase cell migration and reduce the level of formation of CPD in vitro. 27 The secretome of ADSCs had the effect of providing photoprotection. This is related to the content of biological factors that play a role in particular platelet-derived growth factor AA (PDGF-AA), which can promote deposition and remodeling of the extracellular matrix. 25 This effect is also associated with the content of TGF-β1 in the secretome, which can stimulate mRNA expression and increase collagen production. 59 This mechanism is also related to the upregulated expression of wnt3a and catenin in the Wnt/βcatenin signaling pathway, which is associated with increased expression of TGF-β2 (which is important for the synthesis of procollagen type I). 79 Other tests performed on the test animals, which were generally nude mice, pertained to UVB exposure. The results revealed a reduction in wrinkles and skin distress by improving skin hydration after macroscopic use of secretome and increased collagen synthesis based on Masson trichrome analysis. 24,27,28 In some studies, it has been reported that secretome can be used as an active ingredient in cosmetics, reminding us of its benefits in regenerating the skin. Generally, research utilizes secretome as a skin care therapy to prevent various aging factors, including photoaging. Amirthalingam et al formulated secretome as an antiaging cosmetic product in the form of semi-solid serum preparations, with the following doses used 0.25%, 0.5% and 1%. 27 Similar research by Kim et al utilized secretome as raw material in the manufacture of cosmetics applied using an air brush, with secretome concentration as high as 5%. The results showed a reduction in test parameters, such as wrinkles, and increased skin moisture. 80 Similarly, Kim et al also used secretome as a raw material cosmetic material in the form of cream preparations. The secretome concentration used was 1%, which was contoured in 3D culture. The use of secretome can increase collagen synthesis greater than control and reduced aging by improving skin elasticity. 30 
## (s11) Other Application
(p11.0) Secretome is reported to have antimicrobial activity. Antimicrobial is a compound that can inhibit or suppress the growth of microbes. Various drugs that are resistant to microbes continue to increase. The use of secretome can be one of the alternatives to prevent drug resistance. In some studies, secretome is known to release antimicrobial peptides such as cathelicidin LL-37, calprotectin, hepcidin, RNase3, lipocalin-2 and human β-defensins. 37 Yagi et al reported secretome of adipose tissue is able to suppress the growth of S. aureus through increased activity of cathelicidin. 65 Harman et al investigated the antibacterial effects of secretome on bacteria found in skin wounds, tested using S. aureus and E. coli. The results showed that the use of secretome can inhibit the growth of gram-positive bacteria S. aureus and gram negative E. coli from the production of secreted factors that can affect bacterial membranes. 90
