# Multimodal Technologies and Interaction A Systematic Literature Review on the User Experience Design for Game-Based Interventions via 3D Virtual Worlds in K-12 Education A Systematic Literature Review on the User Experience Design for Game-Based Interventions via 3D Virtual Worlds in K-12 Education. Multimodal Technol

CorpusID: 235679897 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5de8b7e0bfd74f178abd1ae83dc476e670e64ea7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5de8b7e0bfd74f178abd1ae83dc476e670e64ea7)

Fields: Education, Psychology, Computer Science

## (s2) Knowledge Acquisition and Skill Training in Game-Based Learning Settings
(p2.0) There is a broad agreement among educators, scholars and researchers that GBL has immense potential in this contemporary era. On these grounds, much discussion has begun to define and classify the main characteristics of computer games. By aggregating and blending different terms identified in previous reviews [37][38][39], we suggest that computer games need to satisfy the following criteria: (a) provide ample opportunities for interaction both between the users and the users and the digital content and (b) offer immediate and continuous feedback to the engaged users (players). The first criterion is achieved by integrating preset rules and constraints or via predefined objectives and challenges that the players must attain, whereas the provided feedback is usually associated with visual changes made within the environment as a response to users' actions [3].
## (s6) Materials and Methods
(p6.0) The guidelines and protocol templates proposed by Kitchenham et al. [43] were used in this review for two reasons: (a) this study is one of the most well-documented and cited works for conducting a systematic review and (b) it entails specific steps for the presentation of an unbiased synthesis and interpretation made by reading findings from previous works in a balanced manner. Additionally, the main software tool to extract the information in this systematic review's protocol was StArt (State of the Art through Systematic Review).
## (s7) Rationale and Research Questions
(p7.0) This systematic review presents evidence provided exclusively by experimental studies (empirical, case, and pilot studies), which analyzed the game development process to assist game designers and UX and interaction designers concerning some of the most important key aspects and perspectives of using 3DVWs for the development of games in different K-12 learning subjects. It also considers the challenges provided by Read and Markopoulos [44]. The first challenge is associated with the lack of explicit design models and guidelines that can be suggested for the design of interactive artefacts with a focus on Child-Computer Interaction (CCI) and more broadly, the Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) field of research. The second is related to K-12 students' participation, specifically as users, on how to pave a pathway to understand better the demands and support of interactive technology on UX design issues that are still underexplored. The same authors claimed, additionally, that there is a lively interest to understand factors affecting theory, design and practices pertaining to children's participation. Particularly, the concepts are related to the "Theory to Design" process which is associated with theoretical works and interaction design practices that can facilitate students' cognitive and emotional participation. Such processes reflect a shift in the general UX/ID community, not only to fully understand instructional practices' effectiveness, but also what motivates children to become engaged and learn actively within specific contexts [45]. Within GBL contexts developed in 3DVWs, students can learn by doing, and therefore practice their knowledge gained from the theoretical parts of courses to avoid becoming passive recipients of the instructor's guidance. Thus, the research questions (RQs) formulated to fulfill the main purpose of this review are as follows:

(p7.1) • RQ1: What is the most frequent set of learning and game mechanics adopted in game prototypes? • RQ2: What in-game events and trends are of great interest to instructional designers for effective teaching interventions? • RQ3: What elements and underpinning attributes were provided as the most crucial for students to be cognitively and emotionally engaged in educational gameplay within different instructional settings? • RQ4: What research methods and data collection instruments were utilized to measure cognitive, affective, and behavioral aspects of learning?
## (s9) Study Search and Selection Criteria
(p9.0) During the search strategy, eight electronic databases were selected to search for scientific articles. Figure 1 depicts the four steps based on the PRISMA statement [47] to select the studies, which were finally reviewed. After identifying articles using the various search procedures described above and removing duplicates, several sources included and excluded at each phase should be tabulated. One option for presenting information regarding thirty (n = 30) articles that met this review's inclusion criteria is illustrated in Figure 1. All articles were subject to first and second-round screening. As Table 2 shows, articles which did not meet the eligibility criteria were screened out in hierarchical order, depending on the type of article, study concept, and focus, and lastly on population and sample. When all articles were aggregated, the three authors discussed with consensus any possible disagreements in the selection of studies. 
## (s15) Game Events and Trends (RQ2: What In-Game Events and Trends Are of Great Interest to Instructional Designers for Effective Teaching Interventions?)
(p15.0) To answer the RQ2, this review adapted the guidelines provided by Jabbar and Felicia [50] to identify how the design of game-based activities may affect students' learning and engagement. More specifically, we collected and analyzed the learning subject, type, genre, and technical features of the virtual world games of the included studies.

(p15.1) The analysis revealed that game-based interventions with 3DVWs in PE have taken place in subjects of both Natural Science and Social sciences. The majority of recorded games took place in STEM fields (n = 9), such as Computer Science (n = 3), Science (n = 2), Mathematics (n = 2), and Environmental Education (n = 2). The second cluster of 'gameful' tasks in PE orbited around fields of Humanities such as Language (n = 2), Literacy (n = 2), and Culture (n = 1). This wide dispersion is an indication of the potential fitness of the medium for multiple fields and disciplines. It is of great importance to mention that two studies reported multiple case studies involving gameful experiences in multiple domains [8,18].

(p15.2) Two game types in primary education were applied in 3DVWs: roleplaying games (RPG) (n = 10) and puzzles (n = 2). Puzzles were used to set up simpler spaces for skills exercise and problem-solving (e.g., [9,11]). RPGs enabled more elaborate stories with multiple levels and non-player characters (NPCs) (e.g., [8,19]). Other studies also note that RPGs enabled more elaborate stories with multiple levels and pedagogical agents or NPCs (e.g., [9,11,19]). The predominant game genre was Science Fiction (n = 4), whereas Mystery (n = 3) and Fantasy (n = 2) follow.

(p15.3) Multiplayer games tended to allow non-linear and collaborative exploration of the narrative and activities (e.g., [9,19]), while single-player games were often combined with a linear structure of gameplay (e.g., [13,14]). Multiplayer platforms were not always used for collaborative tasks, as in certain cases students participated simultaneously in multiple instances of the game. Some notable, advanced game features that were applied in PE were the following: (a) sophisticated 3D platform providing incentives for engagement with multiple gameful learning experiences via avatars to facilitate the player's identification [8], (b) the interactive, context-aware behavior of the game environment reflecting players' decisions [10], (c) the increasing complexity of tasks through subsequent game levels in problem-based settings [13], and (d) an active approach toward a story, prompting students to create stories in 3DVWs [17].

(p15.4) Previous studies related to Science (n = 10), Technology (n = 6), and Mathematics (n = 1) dominated in secondary education contexts; an outcome that confirms the crucial role that 3DVWs play in these subject areas. Nevertheless, few studies were identified from other fields, such as the Humanities (Language learning, n = 2). Regarding the game genre and type, most studies can be classified under the Science fiction category with elements that originate from RPG (n = 12), simulations (n = 3), and puzzles (n = 2).
## (s16) Primary Education Secondary Education
(p16.0) Multiplayer: Taking advantage of the affordance that 3DVWs have so as to structure interest-driven shared spaces in which users can occupy the same environment and generate visual effects (e.g., [8,17]).
## (s18) Design Elements (RQ3: What Elements and Underpinning Attributes Were Provided as the Most Crucial for Students to Be Cognitively and Emotionally Engaged in Educational Gameplay within Different Instructional Settings?)
(p18.0) To analyze the trends and key drivers of engagement created by the gaming features in 3DVWs as well as the external factors affecting engagement and learning to answer RQ3, we also utilized the classification provided by Jabbar and Felicia [50]. We definitively coded motivational, interactive, and fun elements corresponding to usefulness, interactivity, and playfulness, respectively. Following this, we classified the included games in terms of their learning and motivational outcomes, as well as their position in the cognitive and affective learning phases. Indicatively, the same authors discern three cognitive learning phases, including knowledge acquisition, practicing and processing, and knowledge application. In the first phase, students can actively understand the content by searching and skimming. While processing, they can explore content more deeply and master essential skills that lead to understanding, e.g., by observing visuals or intensive reading. In the final phase, students could cultivate learning, subject-area, or problem-solving skills through strategies, such as analysis, synthesis, and inference.

(p18.1) All game prototypes in primary education settings featured one common motivational element; they operated around specific objectives that dictated the player's action. Several of them offered a degree of the player's freedom through choices (n = 6), decisions in structured dialogs or simple patterns of exploration (e.g., [13,17]). Games with more complex gameplay had specific rules (n = 3) that governed the flow of the game and the progression between levels [8,10]. Similarly, all included prototypes applied predominantly the interactive elements of roleplaying, utilizing various resources and objects of 3DVWs (e.g., [12,16]). More advanced implementations also deployed conflicts that the player had to solve (e.g., [8,13]). The recorded fun elements of game prototypes are presented in Figure 5. The common denominator was the combination of a story with a series of academically meaningful challenges that players had to face (e.g., [12,19]). More advanced implementations involved non-player characters [9,10], as well as the freedom of playful roaming, exploration, and action in the open environment of 3DVWs [16,18].

(p18.2) Examining the cognitive and affective impact of gameful experiences in 3DVWs, we noticed that seven of the twelve included studies opted to use them for knowledge application related to higher-order skills cultivation. For instance, Jakoš and Verber [11] provided a series of coding skill-building tasks, translated in the programmed movement of a flying carpet in a fantasy setting. The educational game prototypes in primary education addressed the learning phases that can be seen in Figure 5. Some games activated knowledge acquisition and processing used a 3DVW as a "canvas" to provide information and materials that were supplemented with additional offline activities linked with the curriculum (e.g., [12,18]). As a result, students were able to master subject-area specific skills, such as programming [12] and language [19] (Figure 6). In certain cases, learners could build horizontal, transferable learning skills, such as data collection, hypothesis formulation, and testing [8] as well as problem-solving skills [10]. Two articles combined multiple cognitive outcomes. Fokides and Chachlaki [9] featured both content acquisition and understanding while Kamarainen et al. [10] addressed subject-area and problem-solving skills.

(p18.3) In the affective domain, it was evident that not all researchers and practitioners chose to pursue any motivational outcomes; certain gameful applications (n = 4) focused exclusively on cognitive stimuli and the setting to provide specific knowledge application activities (e.g., [14,15]). GBL contexts in the majority of previous studies were active in the affective domain aimed at facilitating a profound behavioral change (n = 5) related to a specific role-model or modeled set of values [10,11]. Another cluster of experiences positively impacted students' attitudes and awareness toward the studied subject (e.g., [9,16]).

(p18.4) Although the nature of the games and the respective disciplines differ, a set of common motivational elements (objectives) and emotional engagement techniques (rules) is identified across all (n = 18) the secondary education studies. However, because of the cognitive maturity and abilities that adolescents have, the abovementioned features were embedded in a way that did not restrict their freedom to make their own choices (n = 18). The above notwithstanding, studies related to Computer Science and Mathematics education had some means of progress control (n = 6) though such mechanisms were in place to facilitate the learning process and thus, enabled students to achieve the desired outcomes (e.g., [1,6,32,33]).
## (s21) Limitations and Future Work
(p21.0) There are some limitations worth noting in this review. First, due to the often-sparse definitions of 3DVWs, we searched specific databases that include peer-reviewed international journals without considering other articles, which have been published in conference proceedings or book chapters. Second, many articles had a small sample size of participants with limited aspects, and thus, their results could not be easily generalized. Based on this review's results, a limited number of studies (e.g., [5,32]) investigated factors affecting students' behavior and engagement in 3DVWs-supported instruction, such as the age distinction and the socio-cognitive background, to understand better any potential association between their performance and willingness to learn actively. There was no information gathered regarding the roles that instructors/educators and researchers had within the educational 3DVWs, how they obtained information during the experimentation process, or how they mitigated the impact of their presence during the teaching and learning process.

(p21.1) In terms of future lines of research, firstly, we propose controlled mixed-method longitudinal studies on 3DVWs-supported instruction with a larger sample size to investigate the efficacy of game prototypes. Secondly, the combination of 3DVWs with data analytics and tracking tools are recommended to have a more holistic research approach and measure students' learning performance and engagement toward personalized immersive learning. Such an action can assist UX researchers, designers, and developers to investigate any further differences and any association related to students' engagement and learning outcomes or performances using 3DVWs in contrast to other commercial immersive VR applications with similar features.

(p21.2) Due to the limited number of studies, which utilized mixed research methods, less evidence could be gained about the students' assessment measures. For example, there were fewer studies that gathered and presented data based on students' observation in sessions. To this end, we can gain information focusing on any game-based treatment where observation would confirm its appropriateness and effectiveness. Another interesting finding can be observed in the potential students' activities, collaboration with other peers and instructors, or even their engagement of low and high performing students when compared to any typical lecture-based teaching practices in control classrooms. With this in mind, instructors and educators can associate any student activity (collaboratively or not) to understand if any active participation is truly related to their learning outcomes and/or performance.
