# δ 15 N-stable isotope analysis of NH x : An overview on analytical measurements, source sampling and its source apportionment

CorpusID: 232292032 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99bacc851ab5729f9dea4a4c8ab95f3926a28c91](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99bacc851ab5729f9dea4a4c8ab95f3926a28c91)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine

## (s6) Conclusions and suggestions
(p6.0) In this article, we highlighted that the overlapping and large variability in source signatures of different sources (e.g., livestock waste, urban traffic etc.) were likely due to differences between NH 3 collection methods used in previous studies. Notably, discrepancies between δ 15 N (NH 3 ) source signatures measured in the field and in the laboratory (e.g., for livestock waste or urban traffic) indicate that collecting a representative sample for multiple NH 3 emission sources remains a challenge. Moreover, this study highlights potential uncertainties in current approaches to isotope-based source apportionment of NH 4 + and NH 3 . In this regard, the following suggestions could reduce uncertainties in future studies:

(p6.1) 1) More field studies are necessary to refine the δ 15 N (NH 3 ) source profile of NH 3 emission sources with parallel sampling where possible, with comparison between various active samplers (e.g., scrubbers, denuders) and passive samplers to verify if δ 15 N(NH 3 ) measurements are representative of emission sources.

(p6.2) 2) Nitrogen equilibrium isotope fractionation factors (ε NH þ 4 -NH 3 , also known as isotopic enrichment factor) between NH 3 (gas) and NH 4 + (particle)  (Walters et al., 2019b). More field and laboratory studies are necessary to validate field and theoretically predicted isotopic fractionation between NH 3 gas-to-particle conversions in the atmosphere . With validation, prediction of initial δ 15 N(NH 3 ) from δ 15 N (NH 4 + ) values can be conducted with more certainty, for isotope-based source apportionment of NH 4 + . 3) Transport of air mass may alter δ 15 N(NH 3 ) values in ambient atmosphere (Yeatman et al., 2001;Felix et al., 2017;Savard et al., 2017) under various environmental (e.g., T, RH, pH) and atmospheric neutralization conditions (e.g., NH 3 -rich, NH 3 -poor conditions). Simultaneous measurements of δ 15 N(NH 3 ) and δ 15 N(NH 4 + ) values using validated sample collection method in a vertical tower (at varying heights) could be conducted to increase understanding of such effects on δ 15 N(NH 3 ) values and their isotopic fractionation. The consideration of such effects during prediction of initial δ 15 N(NH 3 ) values may not only help to improve the isotope-based method but also support our understanding of NH x dynamics in the atmosphere. Notes: a) Including livestock waste and fertilizer application. b) Including urban wastes and fossil fuel related sources. "*" notes that measured δ 15 N(NH 3 ) values were compared to relative proportion of emission inventory data. "**" Including contribution from biomass burning and wild fire (1%). "***" Include contribution from urban traffic. "_" Marked no information is available in the cell.
