# Comptes Rendus Physique Modeling the mechanical properties of nanoparticles: a review Comptes Rendus Physique Modeling the mechanical properties of nanoparticles: a review

CorpusID: 236369926 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12fe362a30bcba67419d4768203fdf2d3bebd812](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12fe362a30bcba67419d4768203fdf2d3bebd812)

Fields: Engineering, Physics, Materials Science

## (s1) How to model the mechanics of nanoparticles?
(p1.0) Although the interest in modeling NPs mechanics is quite recent, computational materials science techniques such as DFT, MD and molecular statics (MS), discrete dislocation dynamics (DDD) and FEM, have already been applied to the field ( Figure 1). While DFT simulations are generally restricted to the investigation of small clusters of atoms (see [36][37][38][39] for examples), MD appears as the most popular modeling method due to its ability to describe atomic-scale elementary deformation processes (dislocation nucleation, twinning) in virtual samples with sizes comparable to the experiments.
## (s2) Atomistic simulations
(p2.0) MS and MD are atomic-scale methods both based on classical mechanics. They make use of interatomic potentials that connect the energy of a subset of atoms (pair, triplet or more) to interatomic intrinsic properties (distance, angles, charges, etc.). In MS simulations, the local energy minimum of a system is computed from convergence algorithms such as the conjugate gradient, the Hessian-free truncated Newton method or damped dynamics algorithms [40][41][42]. Various spatial configurations of atoms are consecutively tested during the energy minimisation in a time-independent manner. As a consequence, velocities and accelerations of atoms are not defined in MS simulations i.e., MS are static, 0K-like, simulations. While the outcome of MS appears as a single minimum energy configuration, the method can still be used in an iterative manner e.g., to mimic a NP compression test, applied strain or stress being increased between each energy minimisation. This approach, called "quasi-static simulation", has been rarely used to investigate NPs properties. In the same way, minimum energy path methods such as the nudged-elastic-band (NEB) [40] or the activation-relaxation technique (ART) [43] that focus on optimizing configuration trajectories (from an initial to a final state) are not often applied to NP mechanics modeling but usually to the cases of nanowires or pillars [44][45][46]. From our knowledge, NEB was only recently used to compute the site dependence of dislocation nucleation activation barrier, at the surface of ceramic nanoparticles [47].

(p2.1) MD simulations focus on integrating the displacement of atoms along time. The second Newton's law is integrated using a Verlet-like algorithm to derive t + 1 velocities and positions. Thus, dynamic runs (equilibration, compression or tensile tests) can easily be performed with MD assuming the correct setup of a few parameters, such as the integration timestep that is commonly about a few fs i.e., a fraction of the atomic vibration period. Assuming a CPU time per MD step that scales with the number of atoms, it is obvious that the MD physical time (generally about 1-100 ns) can not be compared to usual experimental timescales that are of a few seconds or minutes in the case of NPs compression tests. To offset the timescale issue and achieve a significant amount of strain during a virtual nanomechanical test, MD simulations are usually performed at extremely high strain rates i.e., in the 10 7 -10 9 /s range, way over experimental conditions of deformation. While it is known to have only a limited impact on the elastic deformation of NPs, it can significantly influence the elementary deformation processes and the nucleation stress. Despite this potential artifact, as it will be discussed in the next sections, MD was regularly employed to investigate various kinds of NPs including crystalline metals, ceramics and semi-conductors, providing valuable piece of information about NP deformation processes necessary to interpret in situ TEM and SEM experiments.
## (s3) Nanomechanics using MD
(p3.0) As mentioned in the introduction, nanoindentation and nanocompression are the two main experimental tests developed to probe NP mechanical properties. Both make use of an indenter tip (made out of diamond, sapphire or tungsten carbide), that can either indent the flat top surface of a faceted NP directly (see e.g., the work of Kovalenko et al. [48]), or after etching leading to the so-called "flat punch" shape used for nanocompression [15,32]. Both tests were modeled by MD using mainly two approaches for the design of indenter and substrate: (i) the "frozen atoms" approach and (ii) the "virtual force field" approach. While both approaches rely on the application of a force field on surface and subsurface NP atoms, they are slightly different in terms of applied mechanical constraints. On the one hand, in the "frozen atoms" approach, the user simply designs a flat punch, a spherical or a Berkovitch indenter, made out of an infinitely tough, frozen, group of atoms. This last feature is easily achieved in whatever MD code cancelling the forces acting on these atoms or not accounting for them during time integration. Thus, the rigid block of atoms yields a repulsive force field (at short distance) that will be used to compress the NP. In this case, the compression force can be retrieved from the atomic interactions between the NP and the frozen block atoms. On the other hand, the "virtual force field" approach makes use of an explicit analytical formulation of a directional force field. For example, in the popular LAMMPS code [49], one can set a virtual indenter using a force defined by F (r ) = −K (r − R) 2 , Figure 2. Nanosphere with rough surfaces designed for atomistic simulations using spherical harmonics.

(p3.1) where K is a rigidity constant and (r − R) the distance between the indenter position R and the atoms that depends on the indenter shape. In the case of a flat punch, the LAMMPS indenter is axis-aligned and infinite. It acts as a wall that exerts the same repulsive force on every atoms that are at same (r − R) distance from the wall. The main difference between both approaches relies on the directional aspect of the force fields i.e., the "virtual force field" approach is generally axisaligned while the use of a rigid block of atoms leads to multi-directional as well as additional attractive forces.

(p3.2) Nanoindentation experiments are characterized either by displacement-or load-controlled setups [50,51]. For the sake of simplicity, the displacement-controlled model is preferred in MD nanocompression simulations even if a load-controlled feedback loop could easily be implemented. A displacement-controlled simulation is designed by imposing a displacement of a given amplitude per MD step to the indenter. As a consequence, stress-strain curves modeled by MD are characterized by stress loads and drops similar to those observed in displacement-control experiments at the nanoscale. At first order, displacement-controlled simulations can be compared to load-controlled experiments if accounting for stress-strain curve maxima only [10]. However, one can note that stress instabilities are not observed in load-controlled experiments that rely on smoother dislocation dynamics.
## (s4) Stress and strain definitions
(p4.0) The force vs. displacement curve is the "fingerprint" of the NP mechanical response. It is the most straightforward outcome to get from a nanocompression experiment and is particularly used in MD or FEM simulations, especially in the case of spherical NPs for which the elastic properties can be fitted with the Hertz model [52,53]. Force vs. displacement experimental data can be transposed into stress and strain assuming some knowledge about sample dimension variations (contact surface and height), affordable using e.g., the digital image correlation (DIC) technique. While engineering and true strains are easily retrieved from nanocompression simulation (either from the instantaneous position of the indenter or height of the NP), the stress definition is more challenging (see discussion in [54], when applied to MD nanocompression tests). Thanks to the cumulative work done on micropillars, we know that the compressive stress i.e., the force recorded by a sensor divided by the contact surface, is the relevant observable for nanocompression tests as the near contact region is where most of plasticity events start from (assuming the lack of subsequent extrinsic stress concentrators). While the contact force is a direct outcome of both experiments and simulations, the contact surface is more complex to measure. In in situ experiments, the initial dimensions of a NP can be measured using a SEM/TEM camera to define the engineering compressive stresses. More recently, the DIC method was used to calculate onthe-fly NP dimensions when compressed inside the TEM (see e.g., [15]). Nevertheless, DIC measures rely on 2D-side projections that only allow for NP edge length measurements, and not for the top surface area that is only approximated in this case. However, several methods exist to determine top surface area in MD nanocompression tests. The most simple ones rely on the initial sample (or simulation cell) shape and dimensions to deduce the engineering stress. To go further and measure the true stress, one can monitor the box dimension changes assuming the use of shrink-wrapped boundary conditions. However, this method remains approximate as it does not rely on the real shape of the NP and neglects the possible surface shape changes induced by localized and heterogeneous plastic events (e.g., nanotwinning). A more precise method consists in computing rigorously the NP top surface area based on the atomic positions. This can be done using the Delaunay triangulation of the atomic positions as shown e.g., in [54,55]. These last approaches can be combined to a probe sphere method to account for irregular contacts [55] as e.g., for nanoporous or rough surfaces. While this last method might be precise, one can argue about its connection to experiments, where such details in the contacts cannot yet be reached.
## (s5) NP design
(p5.0) NPs are characterized by various shapes such as sphere, cube or faceted shapes (polyhedrons), that rely on both the material considered and the fabrication route. In the simulations, simple "cutting" algorithms are commonly used to model basic shapes, including faceted NPs retrieved from e.g., the Wulff theory. While this approach allows for various NP designs, it suffers from several drawbacks such as surface flatness and particularly sharp edges. Hybrid approaches using various theories (roughness, spherical harmonics) as well as a combination of meshing and atomistic simulation tools can also be used (see e.g., Figure 2). The influence of the sample design on the mechanical properties at the nanoscale being more and more discussed in the atomistic simulation community, several authors tried to build more realistic samples including the use of a blunting parameter [54,56] or extruding some of the edge atoms [18], to round NPs edges and corners. Pre-heating up to a significant amount of the melting temperature is also performed to allow NPs surface reorganisation and integrate randomness in MD simulations [57,58]. In the literature, few experimental methods such as X-ray tomography and atom probe allow to gain information about the sample geometry that can be used in the simulation [59][60][61]. However, while the resolution of the X-ray tomography is restricted to larger scale simulations such as FEM, atom probe is very difficult to apply to nano-objects (especially NPs) due to the needlelike processing of the sample. Up to now, Bragg coherent diffraction [62] and TEM (together with DIC) are the only methods able to characterize NPs surface and shape with a resolution close to the nm. From the authors' knowledge, these methods are not yet used for the design of NPs in simulations due to their complexity.
## (s7) Nanoparticles under compression: probing the strength of crystalline nanoparticles
(p7.0) As mentioned in the previous section, stress and strain can easily be retrieved from any nanocompression simulation while taking into account the contact force and area as well as geometry variations. Figure 4 shows a few examples of stress-strain curves for different kinds of NP. Common characteristics to all curves are high stress values and a first monotonic regime extending over a   [58]. Note that reported stress values often correspond to true stresses, with a minority of them being engineering stresses.
## (s9) Nano-ductility
(p9.0) Thus, decreasing size makes particles stronger. While this paradigm has attracted a substantial attention since the early-2000s and the work of Uchic et al. [20], it has been known for more than four decades that materials get stronger and even more ductile when smaller leading to a size-induced brittle-to-ductile transition (BDT) [30,111,112]. Kendall [30] demonstrated how the cracking force of a particle quickly rises as the particle size decreases below a critical value using a simple approach derived from the Griffith energy criterion. The conditions required for breakage rely on the elastic energy availability in the system i.e., under a certain size and a too low amount of elastic energy to relax, the material has no other choice but to plastically deform. While the Kendall model leads to mm-size transition in polymers, it is close or below the µm for originally brittle materials such as chlorides or oxides. So at first order, the critical size for the BDT only depends on the critical stress intensity factor K IC and hardness H of the material [113]. Gerberich and co-workers also showed how the fracture toughness of silicon increases when the size is lowered [26,28]. Thus, failure is generally postponed to larger strains in NPs (when compared to the bulk material) leaving room to a more ductile behavior. In the following, we will thus mostly focus on the elementary plastic deformation processes occurring in NPs rather than on breakage.

(p9.1) The plastic deformation of NPs is firstly driven by dislocation nucleation processes. Indeed, while bulk material engineering relies on managing dislocation multiplication and their meanfree path playing with defects contents, NPs, that benefit from soft fabrication routes (such as epitaxy deposition or dewetting), are generally dislocation-free meaning that something has to nucleate to initiate the plastic deformation. The question of this something depends on the material and possibly on the NP size: mostly dislocations (either partial or perfect) but also nanotwins or new phases (including amorphized domains). In fact, nucleation operates first in pristine NPs whatever the something is. In the following, we describe the most common plastic deformation processes happening in MD simulations of NPs compression tests, as reported in the literature. In particular, we focus on the nucleation process rather than on the following dislocation or twin dynamics, for which MD simulations are less relevant due to the high strain-rate.
## (s10) FCC metals
(p10.0) Most of the literature content about modeling mechanics of NPs concerns monoatomic metals, with a particular focus on FCC metals where 1/6〈112〉{111} partial dislocations nucleate first, generally from the surface of the sample [10,52,55,95,102,105,114]. Due to the high symmetry of the NP design in MD simulations, several partial dislocations can nucleate simultaneously from a unique nucleation region (i.e., in different slip systems) or from different edges or corners of the NP. When the compression axis is along 〈100〉, the first event leads to the formation of a pyramidal dislocation structure (Figure 7a) located in the indenter sub-region due to a simultaneous activation of three slip systems (see e.g., [52]). The first nucleation event can be followed by various elementary deformation processes such as the nucleation of subsequent partial dislocations and nanotwinning (Figures 7b-c). Feruz and Mordehai [95] investigated several FCC metal faceted NPs under 〈111〉 compression using MD and highlighted the various mechanisms operating after the nucleation of the first Shockley dislocation: (i) nucleation of a correlated trailing partial as in Au (also observed in [10]) or (ii) nucleation of a subsequent leading partial in an adjacent slip plane leading to the formation of an extrinsic stacking fault (nanotwin embryo) as observed in Cu, Ni (confirmed in [55]) and Ag. These various processes are shown Figures 7d-i. Despite the wide set of FCC metal NPs investigated, the authors did not observe any explicit correlation between material properties (in particular, the stacking fault energy) and the related dislocation process. As compared to the rest of the literature, Cu shows various activated processes as nanotwins in Wulff-shaped NPs with compression axis along 〈111〉 [95] and 〈100〉oriented nanospheres [52] or the nucleation of correlated partial dislocations in 〈111〉-oriented nanospheres [52]. These results confirm that, unlike nanocrystalline materials [115], a stacking fault energy-based criterion is not enough for dislocation nucleation in FCC NPs, and that a detailed analysis of the influence of the contact region, the shape and size of the NP, on the stress concentration, is required.
## (s14) Ceramics
(p14.0) Finally, a few crystalline ceramic NPs were also studied recently in the light of applications in materials engineering (sintering of nanocrystalline ceramics) and catalysis. In particular, 〈100〉oriented MgO nanocubes were deformed using in situ TEM nanocompression and MD simulations [15]. MgO is a model ceramic with the B1 rock-salt structure used to develop experimental protocols and models that later apply to more complex systems [136]. MgO bulk single crystals are characterized by dislocation slip in 1/2〈110〉{110} and 1/2〈110〉{100}, respectively activated at low and large shear stresses [137][138][139][140]. In MgO NP compression simulations, perfect 1/2〈110〉{110} dislocations were observed to nucleate from the corners and edges of the nanocubes, providing solid foundations for the interpretation of the 45°slip traces observed in situ in TEM experiments. These results are in good agreement with γ-surface calculations in low-Miller index planes that allows for a first order picture of dislocation nucleation in the rock-salt structure [15]. In addition, Amodeo and colleagues [47] performed NEB simulations to investigate the site dependence of dislocation nucleation activation energy at the surface of MgO nanocubes. Their results confirm the corners and edges propensity to 1/2〈110〉{110} nucleation including a full-mapping of activation energy and nucleation frequency at various temperatures.

(p14.1) CeO 2 is another ceramics widely investigated for its ability to store and release oxygen (via a reduction of CeO 2 ceria into Ce 2 O 3 ), crucial for catalysis applications. Most of the atomistic simulations related to the mechanics of ceria nano-objects (NPs, but also wires) were made by Sayle and collaborators (see e.g., [57,58,[141][142][143][144]). CeO 2 exhibits the (cubic) fluorite structure i.e., a combination of two cerium FCC and oxygen simple cubic sublattices. In contrast with MgO NPs that are mostly cubic-shaped, CeO 2 NPs can exhibit various geometries, including truncated octahedrons, polyhedrons and cubes (or cuboids), due to the instability of the fluorite {100} surfaces. Thus, to simplify the numerical sample design, the Sayle's group developed an amorphization/crystallization method either leading to polycrystalline polyhedral NPs (see e.g., [57]) or single crystalline cuboïdal NPs when making use of an original cubic-shape seed [58], in agreement with TEM observations. Sizes of modelled NPs are below the 10 nm range. MD compression simulations show that the plastic deformation of single crystalline CeO 2 NPs is first controlled by an amorphization process before the first dislocation nucleation event takes place, whereas polycristalline NPs show grain boundary-mediated plasticity (including Σ3 and Σ11) and Ostwald ripening.

(p14.2) Finally, α-alumina Al 2 O 3 nanospheres were also investigated using MD simulations [145]. α-alumina is a renowned ceramics that exhibits a complex HCP structure (30 atoms per unit cell), particularly used for biomedical applications [146]. In this study, the authors performed MD compression simulations of 10 nm α-alumina single-and bi-crystalline NPs along the 〈0001〉 direction to interpret TEM observations. While single crystals deform by rhombohedral {1102} slip, a typical slip system of bulk alumina, bi-crystals with a grain boundary parallel to compression axis yield by void nucleation and fracture ( Figure 10). These results confirm experimental results in which large NPs containing pre-existing defects as dislocations and grain boundaries are more prone to crack than lower-sized pristine NPs.
## (s15) Nucleation and multiplication
(p15.0) Overall, this special kind of deformation is referred to as "nucleation-controlled plasticity" in the literature, especially when related to dislocation or twinning. The nucleation process generally operates from defective regions as surfaces that behave as sources for the heterogeneous dislocation nucleation process or for phase transformation initiation. Nevertheless, rare cases of homogeneous nucleation were also recently discussed in NPs [18,54,56]. Homogeneous nucleation in NPs emerges from stress concentration that relies in part on the global shape of the NP. While nanocubes exhibit homogeneous stress distribution, it is not the case of faceted NPs or even nanospheres that show more spread stress distributions (see e.g., Figure 12 in [56] for a shape-dependent picture of the von Mises stress in NPs using MD or Figure 5 in [101] for a FEM picture of stress heterogeneity in rounded NPs). It also relies on the local contact between the modeled indenter and the surface of the NP. As discussed e.g., in [54], when the indenter contacts the top of the NP during nanocompression, the top first layers of atoms are elastically shifted downward, compressing those underneath. Depending on each layer area, this process can lead to local stress concentration and underlayer bending responsible for a progressive increase of shear stress, layer after layer, inside the NP. Nevertheless, the heterogeneous vs. homogeneous dislocation nucleation process is still under debate in NPs. For example, while the compression of 〈100〉-oriented Si and Nb nanospheres leads to homogeneous dislocation nucleation [56,102], it is not the case for similarly oriented Cu and Al NPs that exhibit nucleation from the surface [52,105]. Thus, a more in-depth investigation of the parameters responsible for the heterogeneous-to-homogeneous nucleation transition is required to optimize models as those proposed in [54,97,105].

(p15.1) Finally, from an experimental point of view, raising the size of NPs up to 1 or several hundreds of nm reduces the possibility to get them pristine. Indeed, large NPs often contain pre-existing dislocations (see e.g., [147]) that should help to promote plastic deformation, in a similar manner as to what happens in nano-and micropillars. Jennings et al. [148] emphasized a dislocation nucleation-to-multiplication transition in Cu nanopillars increasing the diameter of the sample in the 100 nm range (depending on the strain rate) using SEM compression experiments. Thus, as for other nano-objects, NPs should be characterized by a size-dependent transition from dislocation nucleation to multiplication which has, to our knowledge, not been discussed in the literature up to now (at least from a modeling point of view). Figure 11. Distribution of atomic displacements, normalized by the size, in highly porous silica nanospheres, for a compression strain of 0.15. This figure shows that the plastic deformation becomes more homogeneous when the NP size decreases. Reproduced from [158] with permission.
## (s16) Mechanics of nanoparticles with non-crystalline or complex structures
(p16.0) In the previous section we focused on single-crystalline NPs, which concern most of published works. Here, we discuss the available results on the mechanical properties of NPs made of amorphous materials, obtained from numerical simulations. Furthermore, experimental advances now allow to investigate more complex systems, such as core-shell, hollow, or nanostructured NPs [4,[149][150][151][152][153][154][155][156][157]. This section also includes the available information from numerical simulations for these NPs.
## (s17) Non-crystalline NPs
(p17.0) A few atomistic simulations dedicated to the investigation of the mechanical properties of noncrystalline NPs recently appeared in literature. Compared to works reported in previous sections, only the spherical NPs were considered. These studies revealed several interesting and sometimes apparently contradictory features. For instance, Kilymis and co-workers investigated the mechanical properties of amorphous silicon NPs with two different diameters, 16 nm and 34 nm, averaged over 5 configurations for each size [159]. They found a maximum stress reduction of about 5-6% from large to small NPs, for two different temperatures i.e., smaller is softer, unlike for crystalline materials. The authors cautioned against a significant dispersion among stressstrains curves of all computed systems, which may deceptively amplify the stress difference. Issa et al. also reported a slight decrease of the stress associated with the strain hardening stage of the compression of silica NPs, when their diameter varies from 30 nm to 5 nm [160]. No prospective mechanisms causing this size effect have been suggested in both studies. The calculated stiffness of highly porous silica NPs was also shown to depend on size, with the softest response for the smallest systems [158]. The authors conclude that the increasing number of dangling ligaments at the NP surface leads to softer NPs for decreasing sizes. However, coarse-grained molecular dynamics investigations of the mechanical compression of polyethylene NPs show a different picture, the stiffness increasing when the NP diameter decreases from 40 nm to 5 nm [161]. In this case, it is the increase of density close to the surface that is assumed to be the main factor. Finally, the size was shown to have little or no influence on the mechanical properties of carbon-based NPs, which might be due to the limited range of sizes investigated [162,163]. The existence of a general size effect for the mechanical properties of non-crystalline NPs is therefore not clearly demonstrated on the basis of available simulations. The current information tends to suggest that this potential size effect could critically depend on multiple factors, like for instance the density and connectivity for polymer NPs. To a certain extent the size effect for non-crystalline NPs, if it exists, is likely material dependent.

(p17.1) Unlike crystals, the density of most disordered materials can be substantially altered by compression, and analysis were performed to determine the amount of densification. For silica NPs it is found that the density continuously increases up to 78% at a 0.9 strain [160]. A similar phenomenon occurred for highly porous silica NPs [158], and for diesel soot NPs, with a 50% densification at 0.6 strain for the latter [19,164]. Successive compressions of these two systems allow to reach even higher densities as well as an increase of hardness [19,158,164]. In the case of soot NPs, it was proposed that this hardening is caused by a growing proportion of sp 3 hybridized carbon atoms [19,164] during compression. The influence of cross-linking between the hydrocarbonated molecules constituting the soot was also recently put forward [163]. Conversely, for an already dense material like amorphous silicon, only a 2% density increase at a compression strain of 0.3 is observed [159]. In the latter case, the matter pushed by the flat-punch indenter tends to flow and escape from the sides.

(p17.2) The available literature includes limited in-depth information on mechanisms operating during the plastic deformation of non-crystalline NPs. Gonçalves et al. examined the structural evolution of highly porous silica NPs, and in particular the respective role of ligaments and interconnected regions in the mechanical response [158]. They also show that the deformation becomes more homogeneous as the NP size decreases (Figure 11). A seemingly opposite behavior is observed for a-Si NPs [159]. The compression yields an increase of 5-fold coordinated atoms, which are the main carriers for plastic deformation in amorphous silicon [165]. However, those appear to be homogeneously distributed in the NP, with no influence of the NP size [159]. Furthermore, plastic deformation proceeds without the formation of localized shear bands, unlike in bulk amorphous silicon [166].
## (s18) Core-shell and hollow nanoparticles
(p18.0) Core-shell NPs offer additional challenges to investigate due to the large number of possible configurations obtained by combining two different materials. The width of the shell is also a new tunable parameter to account for. Among all possible combinations, there are two special cases of core-shell NPs. First, the shell can be very thin compared to the NP diameter i.e., it is akin to a coating. These shells can be added to protect the NP core in harsh environment or to bring new functionalities [4]. The shell could also be made of a native oxide layer covering the NPs, formed before the NP compression. A second special case includes hollow NPs, which could be considered as a core-shell NPs with a missing core.

(p18.1) The investigation of mechanical properties of core-shell NPs is a very recent research field, and the number of dedicated atomistic simulations is currently limited. Available works already reveal several interesting facts. First, it was shown that the shell thickness can significantly influence the elastic response. The stiffness of the compressed NPs depends on the relative proportion of materials constituting the core and the shell. Increasing the width of a shell made of a harder material than in the core makes the NP stiffer [90,[167][168][169] (Figure 13a). Conversely, the compression of a NP made of a crystalline Ni core covered by a softer amorphous Ni shell shows a softening compared to a pure crystalline Ni NP [55]. However, the elastic modulus does not vary with changing the shell thickness in that last case. The NP strength can also depend on the shell thickness [55,90], as well as on the size of grains for a polycrystalline system [170].

(p18.2) A similar shell thickness effect was reported by Yang et al. for the specific case of hollow Si NPs [167]. The authors also proposed that there could be an optimal thickness value for which the strength could be higher than the full NP made of the same material, although no explanation for this behavior is given. Furthermore the hollow structure raises the apparent elasticity limit [167]. Such an increase of critical strains and stresses was also recently described for hollow NPs made of layered BN nanosheets [156]. Finally it is noteworthy that these results are in qualitative agreement with experiments performed on comparable hollow NP systems [154,157,171].
## (s20) Conclusions
(p20.0) The last decade has witnessed a significant amount of studies of the mechanical properties of NPs using numerical simulations. Diverse materials were considered, among which a majority of works dedicated to FCC metals and silicon. A synthesis of the results described in the preceding sections allows for drawing a few broad conclusions. First, a qualitative agreement between experiments and these simulations seems to be achieved. In fact, most studies come to the same conclusion that NPs are characterized by very high strength values, close or apparently higher than the theoretical strength of the bulk material [172]. The reasons are now well established and similar to the ones brought forward for nanowires: due the low available volume, NPs are close to be in a pristine state, with no or few pre-existing defects. Also, small volumes hinder plasticity mechanisms operating in the bulk. The effect, maybe even stronger in NPs than in nanowires or nanopillars, is mostly correctly captured by simulations, especially at the atomic scale. Extending the comparison between experiments and simulations to the strength values themselves, a good agreement is only obtained for a limited number of cases. This is somewhat not surprising given the differences between the real NPs and the models used in the simulations, or the use of interatomic potentials with limited accuracy at high stress for some classes of materials.

(p20.1) Undoubtedly, simulations are also interesting tools to supplement experiments. For instance a perfect control over the characteristics of the NPs is intrinsic to modeling. Furthermore, it allows for examining the influence of additional parameters such as the shape or the influence of the surface state in a statistical manner, especially with an increased repeatability when compared to experiments. Hence, available works demonstrated that the NP shape is as critical as the size when dealing with mechanical properties, and that it has a definite effect on the apparent strength size exponent and on activated plasticity mechanisms.

(p20.2) Another feature is the full access to the data produced during simulations. For example, positions and velocities of all atoms are known at each time step during the compression in a NP within a molecular dynamics simulation. It allows for an unequivocal identification of the plasticity mechanisms, which is more difficult to do in experiments. In this respect, several new mechanisms apparently specific to NPs, probably related to the high levels of involved stresses, have been discovered. This is especially true for silicon NPs. In FCC metals, the competition between dislocations mediated plasticity and twinning also seems largely dependent on the NP characteristics.
## (s21) Challenges and future trends
(p21.0) Simulations of NP mechanical properties are unfortunately impeded by several issues, and finding ways to improve or circumvent each of those constitute challenges that should be overcome in the future. The first ones are related to size and time limitations of atomistic simulations. Thanks to the continuous growth of computational power and the development of efficiently parallelized simulation codes, at the time of writing of this paper it is possible to compute the dynamical compression of NPs with diameters of several tens of nanometers, containing millions of atoms, using empirical interatomic potentials. These sizes overlap with the smallest NP samples reported in experiments, allowing for a direct comparison. However, it would be interesting to model systems with sizes of a few hundreds of nanometers, which are common in these studies. Hopefully, such sizes will be accessible in the near future in atomistic simulations. Aside from the computation power increase, multiscale modeling techniques could also be interesting options. In that way, coarse-grained dynamics have already been used to model relatively small polymer particles [161]. Coupling atomistic calculations with DDD [173] could also have a great potential. Moreover, the development of DDD-based hybrid approaches (as coupled to FEM) could provide a valuable upgrade about the modeling of NPs mechanics, especially about the dislocation dynamics after yielding and the possible formation of dislocation microstructures inside the nanocrystal.

(p21.1) The physical timescale is a well-known limitation of most of the simulations. The gap between the standard strain rate and the one commonly used in these simulations is so large that it is doubtful it could be filled by solely relying on computational power growth. Several techniques have been developed aiming at extending the timescale accessible to atomistic simulations (see for instance [174,175] and the chapter III in [176]). However, it remains to be seen whether these methods can be successfully used to investigate the mechanical properties of NPs. Being able to slow the compression rate closer to experimental levels would be extremely useful to ensure that the plasticity mechanisms observed in simulations are not critically dependent on the high strain rates.

(p21.2) Obviously, larger NP size and/or longer simulations would imply a substantial increase of the data produced during the calculations, which is already huge. For NPs with sizes of a few tens of nanometers and strain rates of 10 −8 s −1 , it is hardly possible (and meaningless) to store all the information associated with a single compression MD run. Therefore, it is necessary to make clever guesses about the frequency at which the data should be recorded. Another option would be to make as many analyses as possible during the course of the simulation [177]. Dealing with such a large amount of data certainly constitutes an issue for future investigations.

(p21.3) A last challenge is the availability of accurate potentials to describe interatomic interactions. They must be reliable enough to describe correctly highly distorted or specific atomic configurations as occurring in dislocation cores or at the NP surfaces/vertices, in high stress conditions. For FCC metals, it is now acknowledged that EAM-type potentials fulfill these criteria. Significant progresses have been made to describe BCC metals with these potentials too. However, for covalent materials and HCP metals, there is still room for improvement with respect to the available potentials. Potential prospects include machine learning potentials [178], which have been the subject of intense research recently. Although usually highly accurate, these potentials come with a substantial additional computational cost, that is currently prohibitive to deal with million atom systems. There is also a growing need to describe multicomponent systems, such as alloyed NPs, core-shell or coated NPs, for which there are often no available potentials. REAXXFF [179] or COMB [180] potentials have been developed specifically for this purpose, but again, the computational cost is much higher than with usual potentials. However, they might be useful to check the results obtained with simpler potentials for specific cases. Finally, for very small NPs, one might consider to use electronic structure methods like density functional tight binding [181], or even density functional theory [39].

(p21.4) As written before, one strength of simulations is the full control over the characteristics of the NP model. Although most of the reported works involve perfect shaped NPs with bare surface and pristine interior, it would be beneficial to try to make these models more realistic i.e., closer to experimental samples. For instance, Amodeo and Lizoul studied how the mechanical properties changed when cubic nanocrystals become more rounded and closer to real NP [54]. The latter can also exhibit surfaces with roughness, passivating impurities, oxidation, or disordered layers, which could noticeably influence mechanical properties. Furthermore, it is possible to introduce pre-existing defects into the bulk of the NP prior to compression. For instance, Kiani and coworkers showed that the behavior of compressed core-shell nanocubes was critically dependent on the presence of threading dislocations at the core-shell interface [182]. All these various aspects could be implemented in future simulations, and would help to develop a statistical theory taking into account the influence of surfaces and defects on the mechanical properties.

(p21.5) Finally, looking back at Figure 5, it appears that our knowledge is scarce for certain categories of materials. This includes for instance HCP metals, systems with a complex architecture like NP made of folded 2D layers, or NPs made of disordered materials. NPs made of brittle materials other than silicon or MgO are also insufficiently characterized, while they become more and more important in materials science engineering. Gaining further knowledge would maybe help to better understand the BDT transition occurring in these materials below a given size. Hopefully, these shortcomings will be remediated in the years to come.
