# atmosphere Statistical Approaches for Forecasting Primary Air Pollutants: A Review

CorpusID: 236343312 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00d1cfbe3eaea0a83f5db73ff247ba5d0200e435](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00d1cfbe3eaea0a83f5db73ff247ba5d0200e435)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Air pollution not only has direct impacts on animals, plants, and human health but also has indirect negative effects on ecosystems and material circulation. Scholars have found that the non-accidental mortality of patients with cardiovascular and respiratory diseases is closely related to the concentration of particulate matter (PM) in the atmosphere [1], and an increase in black carbon levels can increase the mortality of coronary heart disease [2]. Moreover, mountain fires, the ozone hole, and global warming are considered relevant to air quality deterioration [3,4]. To better understand and manage the risks associated with air pollution, an accurate prediction of the trend of air pollution is crucial.
## (s17) Particulate Matter (PM)
(p17.0) PM2.5 and PM10 are the pollutants of greatest concern. In recent years, the number of studies on PM1 or finer PM has increased [28,29]. For these pollutants, when conducting statistical prediction, ANNs are the most widely applied method. The ANN interpolation method has significant advantages in most cases, especially under the condition of limited air quality network density [30]. However, for solving the problem of air pollution source allocation, the BP-ANN method requires as many emission sources as possible to complete training [31].
## (s20) Multiple Pollutants and AQI
(p20.0) The focus of mixed pollutants is not on the accuracy of prediction methods but is mainly on obtaining more information on pollutant concentrations and distribution. With the development of science and technology, researchers are no longer satisfied to predict only single pollutants but also attempt to predict multiple pollutants. The research object of multiple pollutants is to holistically study common and wide-ranging pollutants such as PM2.5, NO 2 , BC, O 3 , and SO 2 to comprehensively reflect the overall level of air pollution and provide a basis for environmental management. Therefore, the application of the AQI is urgently needed for the overall evaluation of air quality. Common air quality prediction models usually predict multiple pollutants first and then calculate the air quality index [72,73]. The prediction effect of multiple pollutants is an important premise of the AQI prediction model.

(p20.1) The study of multiple pollutants is often complicated by the difference in the prediction effect of different pollutants. For example, the prediction results of a composite pollution LUR model developed by Huang et al. [64] can explain 87%, 83%, 72%, and 65% of NO 2 , SO 2 , PM2.5, and O 3 , respectively. The correlation between the types of pollutants, seasons, and meteorological variables at different altitudes is also different. The sensitivity of pollutants to meteorological variables is higher in winter than in other seasons, and the sensitivity of ozone to meteorological variables is also different from the other two pollutants [74]. Therefore, improving the overall prediction accuracy of composite pollution models is very difficult.
## (s21) Air Pollutants and Their Health Impacts
(p21.0) Combining prediction models with environmental risk and exposure assessment is an important direction of air pollution prediction. By studying the relationship between pollutants and human health/the environment, the potential impacts of future air pollution can be evaluated. Meanwhile, using a stable and timely warning platform to predict the probability of pollution events or extreme pollution situations can provide an important basis for decision-makers [75].

(p21.1) Based on data of PM2.5 and the numbers of emergency and inpatient hospital visits for respiratory cardiovascular disease in New York City in 2004-2006, Weber et al. [16] found that high PM2.5 exposure was associated with an increased risk of asthma, cardinal infarction, and heart failure. Long-term exposure to air pollutants has adverse effects on the lung function of LTRs, although macrolides may ameliorate this effect [76]. Air pollution also has adverse effects on fetal development. During the critical period of 2-8 weeks of pregnancy, exposure to PM with a diameter of less than 2.5 microns (PM2.5) seriously affects the development of the heart of the fetus [77]. By studying the relationship between the behavior rating and exposure to black carbon (BC) and fine particulate matter (PM2.5) in children aged 0-6 years, Harris et al. [78] concluded that air pollution may affect the development and function of the brain, thus affecting children's problems.

(p21.2) To better evaluate the impact of air pollution on different activity spaces, scholars focused on two spatial scales: (1) special places (industrial areas, mining areas, urban traffic light intersections, outdoor bus stations, road construction sites, etc.), and (2) urban-scale air pollution prediction. The prediction of air pollution in special places has a more direct impact on people's production and life. For example, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)-which are emitted during combustion and have carcinogenic and genotoxic effects-are the focus of the prediction of indoor air pollution [79]. Additionally, the assessment of the impact of temple incense on increased exposure to PMS and PAHs can provide guidance for the healthy lifestyles of residents [80]. Moreover, in the vicinity of industrial and traffic pollution sources, the concentration prediction and impact assessment of heavy metals and PM can provide a scientific basis for urban planning and design for urban managers. For example, it is possible to predict atmospheric heavy metal concentrations based on the biomagnetism of tree leaves [81].
