# A Review of Studies of Geomagnetic Storms and Auroral/Magnetospheric Substorms Based on the Electric Current Approach

CorpusID: 231148626 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9a535b127a1058ba5d05aabf074ca69a35e749e4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9a535b127a1058ba5d05aabf074ca69a35e749e4)

Fields: Physics

## (s2) CHAPMAN'S STUDY OF THE FORMATION OF THE MAGNETOSPHERE
(p2.0) Chapman worked at the Greenwich Observatory a little after Maunder and learned Maunder's work. He decided to theorize Maunder's finding, namely, how Maunder's stream could cause geomagnetic storms. This work began with his graduate student Ferraro (Chapman and Ferraro, 1931).

(p2.1) Actually, Chapman had an earlier study on geomagnetic storms under the assumption of an electron beam, which was seriously criticized by Lindemann, who noted that an electron beam would disperse itself by its electrostatic force, but suggested FIGURE 1 | A schematic presentation, indicating the role of the magnetosphere, receiving solar wind disturbances as the input and producing geomagnetic storms and auroral substorms as the output.
## (s3) EARLY STUDIES
(p3.0) The nature of the interaction between the solar wind and the magnetosphere is one of the problems which has been seriously discussed until today. In this article, by taking the electric current approach, it is proposed that the interaction between the solar wind and the magnetosphere constitutes a dynamo, which supplies electric power (Poynting flux) for geomagnetic storms and auroras. The magnetic field line approach considers that this interaction causes the transfer of some of the day side magnetic field lines back to the magnetotail. It will be seen in Electric Current Approach; the dynamo approach is better in understanding subsequent processes in causing auroral substorms.

(p3.1) However, after the publication of the research by Chapman and Ferraro (1931) on the formation of the magnetosphere, no possible way for the particle entry was found until the 1960s. For example, I suggested once that one possibility for the entry of solar particles might be that the solar wind contains neutral hydrogen atoms, because they have no difficulty of crossing the magnetopause and could become ring current particles by exchanging the charge with terrestrial protons.

(p3.2) Since there was no simple way for the protons to enter or for the energy transfer at that time (except that Axford and Hines (1961) suggested a "viscous" interaction), I decided to reexamine Chapman's definition of the standard geomagnetic storm ( Figure 5). After examining a large number of geomagnetic storm records, it was found that geomagnetic storms develop in a great variety of ways, not necessarily in the standard way. In some cases, after a large ssc indicating the arrival of intense solar gas clouds, there occurs no main phase; such disturbances are thus not included in the list of geomagnetic storms (they are called a sudden impulse, si). In other extreme cases, an intense main phase occurs without ssc (without the impact of a strong solar wind (they are called gradually commencing storms, "sg"); such disturbances without ssc are also not listed as geomagnetic storms, because of no ssc); there are a variety of cases between the above two cases, Figure 5A.

(p3.3) Based on such a variety in the development of geomagnetic storms, I convinced Chapman that there must be some "unknown" factor in the solar wind or CMEs, which determines the development of the main phase (Akasofu and Chapman, 1963).
## (s4) Auroral Oval
(p4.0) It had long been believed for almost 100 years that the aurora is distributed along an annular belt, called "the auroral zone", which is an annular belt centered at the geomagnetic pole (Loomis, 1860; Figure 6A). Feldstein (1963) found that the belt is considerably deformed from the annular belt and called it the auroral oval ( Figure 6B); Loomis did not have auroral data in the highest latitude.

(p4.1) However, his oval had not been easily accepted for a long time, because the auroral zone had been believed in for almost 100 years. In 1959, I made a number of visual auroral observations and noted the auroral distribution was somewhat different from Loomis' auroral zone, because auroral arcs appear always from the northern sky and shift southward as the evening progresses. Thus, I supported Feldstein's oval by setting up the Alaska meridian chain of all-sky cameras, which can "scan" the polar sky once a day (the largest scanning device on Earth); this was my first research supported by the National Science Foundation. However, this observation could not convince many of my colleagues.
## (s5) The Main Phase and the Ring Current
(p5.0) Chapman and Ferraro tried to understand the cause of the main phase, although they could not find a way for solar wind protons to enter the magnetosphere. However, they thought that there must a westward current around Earth to explain the main phase (H component) decrease. They tried to examine only the stability of such a circular current round Earth, the ring current (Chapman and Ferraro, 1933).
## (s7) Morphology
(p7.0) It had long been thought that auroras were relatively quiet (quiet arcs, a curtain-shaped luminous structure) in evening hours, active in midnight hours (violent motions of arcs) and became patchy (disintegration of arcs, often referred to "break-up") and that the Earth (and observers) rotated under such a sequence of the pattern once a night, observing the sequence of quiet to active to patchy auroras in one night. Thus, it was thought that auroral activities had a fixed pattern with respect to local time under which the Earth rotated once a day. This had been believed firmly for decades by most auroral researchers.

(p7.1) However, examining all-sky films from a few stations, I found that such a pattern (the sequence of quiet-active-patches) occurs often twice or thrice in one night. (Since the Earth does not rotate a few times a night) I decided to examine simultaneous Siberian (evening) and Canadian (morning) films, when auroras over Fairbanks (College) (midnight) became active on the basis of the IGY all-sky films.

(p7.2) I found that auroras repeat a fairly systematic activity over the whole polar region several times in 24 h (thus, a few times in one evening at a station). This particular auroral activity is called the auroral substorm (Akasofu, 1964); I sent my article first to Journal of Geophysical Research, but it was rejected. Thus, I sent it to Planetary Space Science (the editor then was D. R. Bates). It was the time when auroral research meant a study of auroral emissions (lines, bands), and all-sky cameras were not considered as a serious instrument, compared with sophisticated optical instruments.
## (s9) ELECTRIC CURRENT APPROACH
(p9.0) In this section, we introduce the electric current approach in studying specifically auroral substorms. Alfven (1967) proposed the electric current approach by stating: "in many cases the physical basis of the phenomena is better understood if the discussion is centered around the picture of the current lines (rather than the magnetic field line approach)".

(p9.1) In the electric current approach, we consider that natural electromagnetic phenomena are caused by a chain of processes, consisting of power supply (dynamo), transmission (currents/circuits), and dissipation (most of observed phenomena, such as auroral substorms and solar flares); Figure 10.
## (s14) DD Current
(p14.0) It was found that the DD current is found to be a two eddy current, namely, a two-cell current in the polar ionosphere (Figure 14), which is the ionospheric manifestation of plasma convection ( Figure 15A) and also which has driven the electric field across the magnetosphere (directed from the morning side to the evening side), Axford and Hines (1961). This magnetospheric convection induces the ionospheric convection, but in the lower ionosphere (the E-layer) electrons carry the current, because ions become immobile by the neutral particles. The electrons flow along the convection contours, but in the direction opposite to the convection. Actually, it is an improved version of Chapman's SD current ( Figure 15D) and is greatly distorted by the anisotropic conductivity of the ionosphere.

(p14.1) The current pattern is confirmed by the superDarn observation (Bristow and Jensen, 2007), which observes the convection pattern of plasma in the ionosphere; compare Figures 15B,C. It may be noted that in his 1961 paper, Dungey attempted to explain the SD current by a convective motion of magnetic field lines ( Figure 15E).
## (s16) Joule Heating Dissipation
(p16.0) In any study of natural electromagnetic phenomena, the amount of dissipation is one of the major subjects. In auroral/ magnetospheric substorms, the main dissipation occurs as the Joule heating in the ionosphere. Thus, it is crucial to study the Joule heating on the basis of the distribution of the ionospheric current, Figure 17; note that 1 mW/m 2 1 erg/cm 2 s (Ahn et al., 1983).

(p16.1) The Joule heat production rate is proportional to the ionospheric current intensity. The Joule heat production is the main dissipation process for substorms and is proportional to the current intensity I in the ionosphere {the Joule heat production rate δ [ I 2 /σ (I/σ)I ∞ I]}; this is because the fieldaligned currents (connected to the UL field-aligned currents) produce the ionization in the ionosphere; σ denotes the conductivity of the ionosphere.

(p16.2) Actually, until Ahn et al. (1983) estimated the amount of the joule heat dissipation and its rate (Figure 10), there was no definitive estimate of the energy consumed by a substorm and its rate; all theoretical studies of magnetic reconnection before 1986 had been made without knowing accurately the amount of the output and its rate.
