# Data Driven: An Overview and Practical Measures for Organizations

CorpusID: 234173516 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d312ccad8524c9e67ab3f4af64233004f66a25eb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d312ccad8524c9e67ab3f4af64233004f66a25eb)

Fields: Business, Computer Science

## (s1) 2.A. Collection and accessing the Data.
(p1.0) Data is a key enabler for smart manufacturing and datadriven organizations. However, data in its raw form is not so useful in providing good information. These need to be "turned" into something more valuable, and this is usually done in several stages. The different stages of data collection, storage, analysis, and visualization can be referred to as the "data life cycle" [14].

(p1.1) The collection of the data is the beginning of all. The data collected must be the right data and must be relevant to the solution of the issue that the company wants to solve. Such data must be easy to obtain, must be accurate, clear, and impartial and, above all, reliable. Unfortunately, such data can lead to numerous inaccuracies and errors, which requires a previous assessment and cleaning step, to make them reliable. If used in the way they were obtained, there is a great chance of generating false information and leading to wrong actions in companies, which could result in losses. This step of cleaning and processing the data is very time consuming, difficult, and expensive, and can require 80% of the time of a data scientist, whereas the construction of the models, the analysis of the results and conclusions take only 20% of the time. The data alone is not enough. And a small amount of clean and reliable data can be more valuable than a huge amount of raw data that has not been cleaned or treated [13], [15].
## (s11) 2.C. Data-Analysis and Maturity
(p11.0) Data analysis is the basis of what is also known as process mining. This is a field of studies that deals with the discovery of processes, verification of compliance and improvement using data from that process. By considering records (or labeled data) in large quantities, it is possible to discover an accurate representation of the model. Such a model can be used to discover possible deviations from the process from the use of new data not yet processed. Such models can be improved through the use and learning from new data [14]. Data-Analysis concerns the transformation of data (assets) into competitive perceptions (information) that will serve as beacons for decisions and actions. There is a total of six types of analysis, starting with the simplest to the most complex [13]:

(p11.1) • Descriptive: Describes a data set in a quantitative way, however it does not describe anything about the data population from which that set originates. Its objective is only to describe numerically the main characteristics of the sample;
## (s15) III. EXAMPLES OF DATA-DRIVEN APPROACHES FOR SOLVING PROBLEMS
(p15.0) In this section, some examples of data-driven approaches to solving problems will be explored. It is intended to give a practical view of how the information obtained from the data can provide superior results compared to other forms of decision making. Examples are related to Materials Science, Industrial Productivity, Energy (Gas, Oil and Wind) and Health (wearable devices).

(p15.1) On a new data-driven solution method, without the use of models, used in variational brittle fracture mechanics, the idea was to remove the assumptions of fracture modeling from the formulation and let the behavior constituting the fracture be guided exclusively by a set of material data, while maintaining the epistemic fracture laws that come from variational principles. The results obtained showed excellent agreement with those obtained via counterparts based on standard fracture mechanics. Another important point was the excellent robustness regarding noise in the data set used, despite the quality of these data being sensitive to noise [22]. A data-based approach was shown to diagnose production bottlenecks, using combined knowledge of maintenance and data science. Perceptions about these bottlenecks are obtained using artificial intelligence techniques such as machine learning, and real-world data sets extracted directly from the production line. The tool built in this way helps its users to plan specific maintenance actions to improve the availability of process bottlenecks and thus improve process productivity [23].
