# animals Recent Advances on Early Detection of Heat Strain in Dairy Cows Using Animal-Based Indicators: A Review

CorpusID: 233388460 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8dc6a6305ce4bbf039455d20331debc0a824df4a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8dc6a6305ce4bbf039455d20331debc0a824df4a)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Thermoregulation is of importance for homeotherms to maintain homeothermy and homeostasis by keeping the balance between the production and loss of body heat [1]. Heat production in dairy cows mainly comes from basal metabolism, rumen fermentation, nutrient absorption, growth, lactation, gestation, immunization, and exercise [2]. Heat loss is mainly through heat transfer mechanisms: Conduction, convection, radiation, and evaporation [1,2].

(p0.1) Cows can maintain a balance of heat production and heat dissipation in the thermoneutral zone (TNZ), in which cows perform the lowest physiological and immune costs, and the highest productivity [1]. When the thermal environment exceeds TNZ and suppresses the efficiency of non-evaporative heat loss, evaporative heat loss, or both [3,4], various mechanisms are activated in dairy cows to dissipate excess heat and maintain homeothermy [5]. In the present review, "heat stress" represents the sum of external stressors, forcing the animal to exceed its TNZ. Environmental thermal stressors consist of ambient temperature (AT), relative humidity (RH), wind speed, and radiation, where AT plays the leading role [6]. "Heat strain" is used to represent the overall response resulting from heat stress. These two terms are separated since many internal animal factors can alter dairy cows' sensitivity to heat exposure.
## (s2) Core Body Temperature
(p2.0) Core body temperature (CBT) is the most commonly used animal-based indicator of heat strain in dairy cows, in which rectal temperature (RT) plays a leading role [18]. Normally, the range of CBT of homeotherms is very narrow with a circadian rhythm due to the effort of the thermoregulation [25]. When cows are heat-stressed, their CBT increases abnormally if they fail to dissipate excess body heat. The latest measurement methods and thresholds of CBT are listed in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.  Traditionally, RT is measured manually with a digital thermometer inserted 9 cm into the rectum for calves and 15 cm for the cows [60]. This procedure is both time-and labor-consuming and cannot achieve a measurement in real-time [34]. More importantly, this invasive operation would cause additional stress to cattle, biasing the results. Gaughan et al. [61] used a temperature data logger (Smart Reader 8, ARC Systems, Brisbane) to continuously measure temperature rectally. Spiers et al. [27] used a stainless-steel thermistor probe attached to a recorder (Cole Parmer Instruments, Chicago, IL, USA) to measure RT. Reuter et al. [28] designed a device consisting of an indwelling data logger supported by a custom-fabricated aluminum tail harness to achieve an automated measurement for RT. However, due to the potential damage to the tail and the influence of fecal temperature, this device is not widely used [9,35]. Debnath et al. [30] achieved a real-time measurement for RT in dairy cows using a radiofrequency-based digital thermometer. Lees et al. [29] developed an intra-rectal device to measure RT continuously for 23 h in grazing heifers. This device consists of a data logger (iButton DS1922L, Maxim Integrated, San Jose, CA, USA) and a soft polyethylene piping. As summarized by Burfeind et al. [62], the measurement of RT could be biased by the type of thermometer, the depth into the rectum, and the operation itself.

(p2.1) A daily temperature circadian rhythm in cattle older than two months was observed with RT at dusk up to 1.4 • C higher than that in dawn [60]. It is noted by Tresoldi et al. [36] that RT measured a few times a day may result in a relatively lower daily average, especially when measuring only once in the morning. Except for circadian rhythm, many heat-producing events (e.g., feeding, exercise, estrus) would lead to an increased RT [30,60]. Therefore, it is of importance to avoid potential bias from these interfering events when determining the onset of heat strain.

(p2.2) Many studies treated environmental indicators (e.g., THI) as a categorical variable to test the RT differences among different levels of heat exposure [26,63]. Other studies adopted similar methods by separating the records into different levels according to climate conditions (e.g., hot versus moderate, summer versus spring) [34,64]. These methods could find a strong association between RT and environmental parameters, but could not obtain accurate environmental and RT thresholds.
## (s3) Vaginal Temperature
(p3.0) Vaginal temperature (VT) is another representative CBT. The traditional measurement of VT is very similar to that of RT and many efforts have been made to achieve automated measurements. Various temperature data loggers used in conjunction with support devices have been fixed into cows' vaginas. A plastic anchor was first introduced as a support device by Hillman et al. [65] and further validated by Lee et al. [31]. It is demonstrated that long-finger plastic anchors were superior due to better stability when inserted in the vagina [31]. However, the application of these anchors may be difficult due to inaccessibility [35]. The most popular way is to use a modified vaginal controlled internal drug release insert, in which various data loggers are placed [32,33,35]. The prices of data loggers vary distinctly. When considering elevated VT thresholds, inexpensive data loggers failed to correctly classify animals compared with an expensive and high-accurate data logger [36].
## (s6) Subcutaneous Temperature
(p6.0) Subcutaneous temperature (ST) is also a candidate to represent CBT since heat-stressed cows would drive more blood from the core to the peripheral body parts [1,41]. In general, measuring temperatures subcutaneously requires the use of implantable sensors and wireless transmission. The ST can vary among different implantation locations and many efforts have been made to determine the best locations for measuring accurate CBT in cattle [40,90,91]. Reid et al. [91] used implantable radiofrequency identification (RFID) microchips measuring temperature in three sites, subcutaneously at the base of the ear, posterior to the poll, and beneath the umbilical fold. They demonstrated that the temperatures at the base of the ear correlated most with RT with coefficients of 0.30 during heat stress and 0.20 during TNZ. Similarly, Chung et al. [41] designed a real-time measurement for ear base temperature by using implantable sensors and wearable RFID scanners in conjunction. In addition, they utilized RFID technology, long-range wireless technology, and Wi-Fi technology to develop a wireless communication network aiming to increase efficiency and lower human involvement. Furthermore, a long short-term memory network was applied to predict VT by using THI and ST. Their results show that the correlation coefficients between temperatures recorded under the ear base and in the vagina of three dairy cows ranged from 0.58 to 0.85. The selected machine learning algorithm could predict CBT better than linear regression with a lower root mean square error (0.081 • C versus 0.137 • C).

(p6.1) Lee et al. [90] measured ST in seven Holstein steers using button-shaped data loggers (iButton DS1922L, Maxim Integrated, San Jose, CA, USA) in three sites (lateral neck, upper, and lower scapula). Due to the lack of wireless transmission, temperatures recorded were not available until recovered from an explant surgery. Their long-term results (during a whole summer and winter) show that STs were 1.39 to 1.65 • C lower than the RT and might have been influenced by AT and animal stillness; among three test locations, the ST recorded near the upper scapula had the smallest mean difference from RT. In a recent study of dairy calves [44], temperatures recorded subcutaneously in three sites (the ear scutulum, the upper scapula, and intramuscularly in the trapezius muscle of the neck) were found very different from RT. Iwasaki et al. [40] implanted wireless thermistor sensors based on Bluetooth TM 4.0 in more locations to find the best location for measuring CBT. Specifically, three endoceliac and seven subcutaneous locations were selected, and machine learning was further applied to predict CBT from STs. The results show that ST under the tail base was a good indicator due to its high correlation with RT (r = 0.62) and the correlation coefficient could be further increased to 0.93 by introducing a back-propagation type neural network with the input of seven STs and AT.

(p6.2) Basically, previous studies in ST aim to predict gold standard CBT (i.e., RT and VT), and some locations very related to AT were considered to interfere with the prediction. In fact, the STs of the peripheral parts respond to the thermal changes earlier than RT or VT. To date, very few studies have attempted to use ST directly as a more sensitive indicator of heat strain. In addition, although adverse events were not reported by almost all relative studies, very few of them observed the impact of implantation on health over a long-term period. It is also unclear whether the implanted sensors can be recycled from slaughterhouses or have any impact on food safety. The cost and complexity limit their further applications to research instead of practical production.
## (s9) Respiration-Based Indicators
(p9.0) Respiration-based indicators (i.e., RR, panting score (PS)) are considered to be relevant indicators for assessing heat strain in dairy cows just like RT. Indeed, panting, along with sweating, contributes to increased evaporative heat losses that are used to maintain homeothermy in cattle. More importantly, the respiratory system starts to help dissipate heat before CBTs measured rectally or vaginally begin to rise [8,61,114,115]. Respirationbased indicators may be the most appropriate indicators to early monitor heat strain in dairy cows due to high sensitivity to stressors and cost-effective measurement [115]. The latest measurement methods and thresholds of respiration-based indicators are listed in Tables 3 and 4, respectively.  
## (s10) Respiration Rate
(p10.0) The traditional method to measure RR is to count the movements of the flank manually and convert it into breaths per minute (BPM). Obviously, such a visual observation is both time-and labor-consuming [118]. In addition, the interaction between people and cows when measuring may bias the result [116]. Many efforts have been made recently with the hope to design automatic measurement methods for RR. Generally, these new methods can be categorized into wearable and non-wearable devices.
## (s11) Panting Score
(p11.0) Panting-as an important physiological pathway of evaporative heat loss-has long been proposed to describe heat strain in dairy cows [132]. The main panting characteristics include increased RR, chest movement, drooling, mouth opened, tongue protruding, and neck extended [123]. With the accumulation of heat load in dairy cattle (manifested as a rising RR), cows first exhibited drooling, following by open mouth and protruding tongue [131]. PS has been developed and refined as a numerical scale to grade the obvious respiratory dynamics and behaviors [59,88,123,124]. A recent study utilized a score consisting of RR and various panting characteristics to assess heat strain in grazing dairy cows [133]. This score is very similar to PS, using a 0 to 4 scale, where 0 represents that the cow is under no heat strain and 4 represents that the cow is moribund. The PS per se, as a scoring system, has a good ability to assess heat strain in cattle. Existing panting scoring systems often provide corresponding RR thresholds, e.g., PS 1 (slight panting) corresponding to a RR of 60 BPM [123]. Thermal indices (heat load index (HLI) and dairy heat load index (DHLI)) have been developed based on PS due to its high association with the thermal environment [88,123].

(p11.1) To measure PS, trained observers would rate a cow's respiratory dynamics according to the numerical scale, and the process would take about 10 s per observation per cow. Although measuring PS is relatively easier than RR, the inter-observer difference can be an important source of error. Accelerometer-based ear tags and neck collars have been designed to measure a series of behaviors including "heavy breathing". The capacity of a commercially available collar has been validated to accurately reflect heat strain in dairy cows [8]. "Heavy breathing" detected by this tag is defined by characteristic movements (e.g., forward-backward heaving, increased RR, increased chest movement). Their results show that the proportion of cows breathing heavily was consistent with the change of mean CBT in both dry and lactating cows. An accelerometer-based ear tag from the same manufacturer was also validated in steers [124]. The visual measurement of PS and sensor-recorded "heavy breathing" were compared. The sensor was designed to give a single output within seven behaviors for every single minute, probably leading to a high false-negative rate by rating breathing heavily cows as other more prominent behaviors. Although data processing was conducted to mitigate this systematic underestimation, low sensitivities were still yielded for all PS data, PS1, and PS2 (59%, 54%, and 82%, respectively). The higher sensitivity for PS2 indicates that mild symptoms were hard to detect. In fact, the determination of "heavy breathing" in these devices is most likely to be based on a default threshold of the frequency of respiratory movements. Therefore, the original output of these devices is probably much closer to RR, and "heavy breathing" can be seen as the extended results of RR. As proposed by both Bar et al. [8] and Islam et al. [124], these accelerometer-based sensors have difficulties in detecting slight panting (PS1) and only give a binary result. Although the detection of panting or not is enough for the start of heat abatement protocol, more sophisticated classification would be more informative for customized interventions. Further studies can therefore focus on increasing the sensitivity and classification of the sensor.
## (s13) Measurement Feasibility of Different Animal-Based Indicators
(p13.0) In pursuit of PLF and animal welfare, an ideal measurement method for heat strainrelated data should be automatic, accurate, continuous, remote, non-invasive, low-cost, and real-time [14,99,100]. Non-contact measurements based on infrared thermometry are non-invasive to dairy cows but difficult to achieve real-time measurement at the herd level. They are more suitable for monitoring at specific locations such as calf islands, calf feeders, and milking parlors.

(p13.1) Indwelling devices measuring CBT rectally and vaginally cannot work for a long time due to the interference with normal physiological activities, making them more appropriate for short-term temperature monitoring. Although implantable devices can measure CBT subcutaneously, their cost and long-term safety should be further examined. Notably, ear canal sensors and rumen boluses are more appropriate for being less invasive. However, commercially available products should be further validated on the function of detecting heat strain in dairy cows.

(p13.2) Wearable devices are most promising since they can measure BST and RR noninvasively in real-time, and can further forecast CBT through machine learning algorithms. BST is more difficult to measure relative to RR due to various influencing factors. Currently, few wearable devices on the market can measure BST and RR. Some commercially available accelerometer-based ear tags and collars can measure "heavy breathing" [8,124]. In practical farms, there is a need for measuring comprehensive respiratory dynamics including both frequency and depth. These functions should preferably be integrated into existing commercial devices. In the future, the battery life, biocompatibility, stability, remote transmission, and accuracy of devices should be improved.
## (s14) Sensitivity of Different Animal-Based Indicators to Heat Stress
(p14.0) As discussed above, many candidate physiological indicators may reflect heat strain in dairy cows. However, these animal-based indicators play different roles in different stages of coping with heat stress. Some of them (e.g., BST and RR) represent the effort made by the thermoregulatory mechanism while CBT is more like the result of thermoregulation [134].

(p14.1) From a thermodynamics point of view, homeotherms take two ways to dissipate body heat, which are sensible heat loss (non-evaporation) and latent heat loss (evaporation). The former consists of conduction, convection, and radiation. The latter consists of respiratory evaporation and cutaneous evaporation, where cutaneous evaporation accounts for up to 80% of total latent heat loss in lactating Holstein cows raised in a tropical environment [4]. However, cutaneous evaporation is more difficult to measure in practice than respiratory evaporation. When AT increases beyond the upper critical temperature of TNZ, the nonevaporative ways of heat loss appear to be far less efficient [1]. When the AT is close to or higher than 32 • C, Holstein cows even start to gain heat from the ambient environment through sensible heat transfer [3]. As the thermal environment continues to deteriorate, cows can succumb to hyperthermia with an increased CBT at some point, where they fail to maintain thermoneutrality [1].

(p14.2) From a physiological point of view, when the AT rises in the first place, homeotherm will take three main physiological procedures to increase heat dissipation, i.e., vasodilatation, sweating, and panting. The first one is to drive more blood from the core to the skin and peripheral to increase the BST so that promote sensible heat loss. The remaining two procedures are to promote evaporation [1,5]. Only when all these preliminary efforts fail to dissipate excess body heat would CBT increase abnormally [114,125]. When the increase in BST and RR is effective to keep thermoneutrality, RT can remain unchanged [135].

(p14.3) This temporal sequence responding to heat stress is supported by many studies that BST and RR increased at lower THI threshold relative to CBT, and BST responded even before RR due to direct contact with the ambient environment [19,45,48,49]. In addition, RR started to increase approximately an hour earlier than RT [61]. Panting responded about 15 min earlier than CBT both when increasing and decreasing [8]. This evidence supports the increase in CBT as a consequence of failed thermoregulation.
## (s16) Development of Critical Thresholds
(p16.0) The most commonly used models to describe the relationship between environmental indicators and animal-based physiological indicators are piecewise regression models and polynomial models. Although polynomial models or other nonparametric models (e.g., generalized additive model) may bring better fitting results, they cannot directly provide easy-to-interpret slope estimates and thresholds. In contrast, the result of the piecewise function is more explanatory and can provide more useful information, including the threshold, the slope before the threshold, and the slope after the threshold. By introducing more phases into the piecewise model, more thresholds corresponding to different severity of heat strain could be identified, providing more options for cooling.

(p16.1) In the previous studies, the consideration of the plateau period is quite different when using piecewise functions. The assumption of the plateau could have a great impact on the results. Li et al. [47] and Peng et al. [45] collected data from the same dairy farm and both used segmented regression to obtain heat strain thresholds for RT in dairy cows. The former assumed the existence of a plateau while the latter did not. The THI thresholds were 70 and 74.1, respectively. As the experimental condition and animal status were almost identical, it can be inferred that the introduction of the plateau period could lower the THI threshold to a certain extent. In fact, the decision should base on the changing law of specific physiological indicators. For example, it is suitable to use a plateau to fit CBT as the normal CBT of homeotherms fluctuates within a narrow range. Other physiological indicators that are more sensitive to the thermal environment, such as BST and RR, may not have a significant plateau.

(p16.2) In addition, the thermal condition (THI range) during the testing days is of key importance to the results. For example, Dado-Senn et al. [49] and Kovács et al. [50] both used piecewise regression models to determine the THI thresholds for RT, RR, and BST in dairy calves. However, the THI thresholds of the former were between 65 and 69, while the THI thresholds of the latter were between 82.4 and 88.1. It is mostly because that the former was conducted under a broader range of thermal exposures (THI 60-85), while the environment during the latter study was much hotter (the average THI was greater than 80 for three out of four days). Therefore, the thresholds obtained by the latter may be the points at which heat strain was aggravated rather than triggered.

(p16.3) Many studies only measured heat strain-related data once or twice a day, which may affect the accuracy of the threshold. If the physiological indicators change more frequently than the frequency of measurements, it is difficult to observe the real effect [28]. Continuous measurement is not only beneficial for threshold acquisition but also beneficial for early detection of heat strain. A broader range of thermal exposure and more frequent measurements are therefore needed for future studies on early detection of heat strain.

(p16.4) Various factors have an impact on the sensitivity to heat stress, including internal animal factors (e.g., age, breed, productivity, lactation stage, parity, body posture, circadian rhythm, previous thermal exposure, acclimation) [1,19,27] and external management factors (e.g., milking, cooling, nutrition, shading) [32,49,146]. Therefore, it is difficult to assess the heat strain status of a herd based on a generic threshold. To deal with these dilemmas, efforts have been made to adjust or customize the thresholds according to various animal and management factors. The HLI was developed for feedlot beef cattle by Gaughan et al. [88]. Genotype, coat color, health status, acclimatization, shade, days on feed, manure management, and drinking water temperature were considered when determining the HLI threshold for reference animals and further threshold adjustments. Other studies also tried to customize heat strain threshold according to productivity [55], posture [19], or cooling strategy [49]. Notably, the difference in sensitivity to heat stress manifests both in environmental and physiological levels. For instance, high-producing cows may enter heat strain in a lower THI and a higher RT [55,95]. Further studies are required to evaluate and customize heat strain thresholds based on different internal and external influencing factors that have an impact on the sensitivity to heat stress.

(p16.5) Most of the present critical thresholds assume that physiological indicators change simultaneously with the thermal environment and do not consider the cumulative effect of heat exposure. It is generally assumed that this accumulative effect only makes sense after the trigger point of heat strain. For the early detection of heat strain, due to the sensitivity of the selected indicators, the effect of time may be negligible. However, for the prediction of long-term effects such as milk production, the duration of heat exposure is an indispensable factor [17]. In addition, when dairy cows have long been exposed to heat stress, some of them may adapt to heat stress and can better dissipate excess body heat, manifesting as increased RR and BST, and restored milk yield [129]. Therefore, existing RR and BST thresholds may be exaggerated to some extent if lots of thermotolerant data were used for thresholds development.
## (s17) Individual Monitoring to Help Precision Management
(p17.0) After obtaining the thresholds on both physiological and environmental dimensions, it is important to assess how to use them in practice. Currently, the most popular method is to evaluate the heat strain level of the entire herd indirectly through the thermal index calculated from easily accessible meteorological data, such as data from the nearby weather station, or the average value from temperature and humidity sensors placed in the barn. However, given the large differences in the microclimate to which individual dairy cows are exposed [147], a more accurate way is to measure and evaluate the microclimate by placing more sensors and dividing the barn into smaller measuring and controlling units. Through the internet of things (IoT) technology, the cooling facilities in a certain unit can be monitored continuously and the heat strain of the herd can be managed more effectively and efficiently.

(p17.1) Environmental indicators neither truly reflect how animals respond to the changes in the thermal environment nor show whether animals are being adequately cooled [14]. It has been reported that both CBT and RR remained high even when THI was low at night [53]. In addition, there are large differences in the sensitivity to the thermal environment among individual animals [1,27], even within the same subgroup [124]. A large amount of energy used for cooling measures may be wasted on low-risk animals. Therefore, direct monitoring of animal-based physiological indicators at the individual level should help better manage heat strain. At present, many large-scale commercial dairy farms have used smart ear tags or collars to monitor multiple physiological behaviors of individual cows. Combined with positioning technology (e.g., RFID technology), the nearby cooling facilities can be turned on automatically when a large proportion of cows breathing heavily in a small area. Such an IoT system is very promising not only because it could detect heat strain more accurately and earlier based on animal's feeling, but also because it could save energy. In addition, the heat strain screening system in the passage to the parlor could achieve an automatic separation of heat-stressed cows [148].

(p17.2) Combining environmental indicators and various physiological indicators to evaluate heat strain from multiple perspectives also has a good prospect. Due to different physiological dynamics, it is possible to distinguish heat strain from other events that may lead to increased body temperature and accelerated breathing, including exercise [30], diseases (e.g., infectious disease [91]), physiological processes (e.g., estrous [149]), and management factors (e.g., bringing cows to the milking parlor [96]).
