# Atherosclerotic Renal Artery Stenosis: A Review

CorpusID: 238745358 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6c462c46a1e0caac08ed26a7f9abe8007ed1c9cd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6c462c46a1e0caac08ed26a7f9abe8007ed1c9cd)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Magnetic Resonance Angiography
(p5.0) MR imaging (MRI) does not expose the patient to radiation or iodinated contrast. Gadolinium-based contrast material is used for image enhancement, and those with impaired renal function have a risk of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis when exposed to gadolinium. Claustrophobia and certain MRI incompatible, implantable devices may preclude MRA. 3 Compared with DSA, MRA has a sensitivity of 90 to 100% of and a specificity of 76 to 94% for diagnosing RAS.
## (s9) Options for Revascularization
(p9.0) Renal artery angioplasty and stenting is the preferred modality of revascularization over open revascularization at present. Stenting is associated with better technical success and lower restenosis rates compared with balloon angioplasty alone. 3 Endovascular techniques are rapidly evolving and studies using drug-eluting stents have reported lower restenosis rates when compared with bare metal stents. 25 Cherr et al 26 reported a large series of patients with ARAS who were managed surgically. Aortorenal bypass, splanchnorenal bypass, renal artery reimplantation, and endarterectomies were the types of operations performed for revascularization of the kidneys. The perioperative mortality was 4.6% and the morbidity was 16%. The main perioperative complications were myocardial infarction, stroke, arrhythmia, pneumonia, and renal impairment.

(p9.1) In the current endovascular era, open surgery is reserved when percutaneous intervention fails, for patients with complex renal artery anatomy, and for those who need concomitant open surgery for aortic pathologies such as an aneurysm. 4
