# Compositions of Digraphs: A Survey

CorpusID: 232307782 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0f9d033302ecdf2b13a551e39503860a8058be41](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0f9d033302ecdf2b13a551e39503860a8058be41)

Fields: Mathematics

## (s4) Connectivity
(p4.0) Let T 1 be the set of all semicomplete digraphs T satisfying the following: there exists a vertex u such that uv, vu ∈ A(T ) for any v ∈ V (T ) \ {u}. The following result concerns the structure of a minimal separator in a strong semicomplete composition Q = T [H 1 , . . . , H t ] when T ∈ T 1 .

(p4.1) Theorem 2.1 [58] Let Q = T [H 1 , . . . , H t ] be a strong semicomplete composition with T ∈ T 1 . Then every minimal separator S of Q induces in U (Q) a subgraph which consists of some connected components of U (Q). Moreover, each vertex s ∈ S is adjacent to every vertex of Q − S.

(p4.2) Note that the above result may not hold when T ∈ T 1 . Consider the following example [58]: let T be a semicomplete digraph such that for each j ∈ [t], u 1 u j , u j u 1 ∈ A(T ) and H i is a cycle of length four: u i,1 , u i,2 , u i,3 , u i,4 , u i,1 .

(p4.3) is a minimal separator of Q, and U (Q) consists of 2t components (each component is an edge). Clearly, the edge {u 1,1 , u 1,3 } is one such component, however, u 1,1 ∈ S and u 1,3 ∈ S.
## (s13) Path subdigraphs
(p13.0) The following structural characterization of longest cycles in extended semicomplete digraphs was extensively used.     The following nice property holds for several classes of digraphs (such as semicomplete multipartite digraphs [31]): For a digraph D with a 1-pathcycle subdigraph F = P 1 ∪ C 1 ∪ · · · ∪ C t , there exists a path P of D such that V (P ) = V (P 1 ) ∪ ( t j=1 V (C j )). However, this property does not hold for a general semicomplete composition, according to the following example: Let Q = T [H 1 , H 2 ] be a strong semicomplete composition such that H 1 is a path and H 2 consists of a set of disjoint cycles C 1 , . . . , C t , where |V (H 1 )| ≤ t − 2. Clearly, F = H 1 ∪ C 1 ∪ · · · ∪ C t is a 1-path-cycle subdigraph but there is no path P such that V (P ) = V (H 1 ) ∪ ( t j=1 V (C j )). Hence, one may try to study the following question. 
## (s16) Hamiltonian cycles
(p16.0) With a similar argument to that of Theorem 4.2, Sun and Jin provided the first characterization of Hamiltonian semicomplete compositions which extends a characterization of Hamiltonian quasi-transitive digraphs given by Bang-Jensen and Huang [13].

(p16.1) Theorem 5.1 [58] Let Q = T [H 1 , . . . , H t ] be a semicomplete composition. Then Q has a Hamiltonian cycle if and only if it is strong and contains a cycle factor F = C 1 ∪ · · · ∪ C k , such that no V (C i ) is completely contained in a connected component of U (Q).
## (s17) Pancyclicity
(p17.0) Gutin characterized pancyclic and vertex-pancyclic extended semicomplete digraphs. (b) D is vertex-pancyclic if and only if it is pancyclic and either k > 3 or k = 3 and D contains two cycles C, C ′ of length 2 such that C ∪ C ′ has vertices in each of the three connected components of U (D).

(p17.1) The next two lemmas by Bang-Jensen and Huang [13] concern cycles in triangular digraphs.   Recall that Theorem 5.2 states that a strong extended semicomplete digraph D has a cycle C which contains all vertices of F, where F is a cycle subdigraph of D. In particular, if V (F) is maximum, then V (C) = V (F) and C is a longest cycle of D. Gutin also got the following result on strong semicomplete bipartite digraphs.
## (s19) .1 The existence of prescribed acyclic spanning subdigraphs
(p19.0) It is well known that a tournament T contains an x− y Hamiltonian path if and only if there is an acyclic spanning subdigraph R (not necessarily induced) such that for each vertex z of T , R contains an x − z path and a z − y path [60]. Bang-Jensen and Huang [13] proved that if a quasitransitive digraph has both in-and out-branchings then it always contains such an acyclic spanning subdigraph. For semicomplete compositions, we give the following sufficient condition to guarantee the existence of this type of subdigraph. Theorem 6.1 Let Q = T [H 1 , . . . , H t ] be a semicomplete composition. Then it contains an acyclic spanning subdigraph R with a source x and a sink y such that for each vertex z of Q, R contains an x − z path and a z − y path, if one of the following assertions holds:
