# materials Powder Bed Fusion Additive Manufacturing Using Critical Raw Materials: A Review

CorpusID: 232086481 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4c0776cb66db3f8621cae42f6bc3d07c9b800ba6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4c0776cb66db3f8621cae42f6bc3d07c9b800ba6)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s3) Metal Powders for Additive Manufacturing
(p3.0) Metallic elemental and alloy powders' grain shape, size distribution, surface morphology and composition, and overall purity are of great importance in the production of good quality and fully dense components [34,35]. This is valid not only for the freshly manufactured powders but for the powders after storage and recycling. Even for the materials with no tendency to easily react with oxygen, the presence of surface oxide can strongly impact the properties of additively manufactured components (e.g., [36,37]).

(p3.1) The characterization of powders is commonly performed using different analytical techniques including X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Auger electron spectroscopy (AES), scanning/transmission electron microscopy (SEM/TEM), electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD), and X-ray diffraction (XRD). These techniques are limited in terms of either spatial or lateral resolution or chemical information of phases and hence often need to be done together to obtain more meaningful information [38]. Both the characteristics of the metal powder and the type of the AM process determine the properties of the product. Since powder is commonly recycled during AM, the characterization of powder properties is performed not only for the as-received samples but also at regular intervals throughout the manufacturing process.
## (s4) Production of Metal Powders for Additive Manufacturing
(p4.0) Metal powders can be produced using several methods, some of which are solid-state reduction, milling, electrolysis, chemical processes, and atomization [39]. Atomization so far is the most common route for producing metal powders for AM, dominating the market for powder bed AM. Corresponding atomization technologies are well established. They allow producing powders with different grain sizes in adequate shapes from a variety of metallic materials. These methods are quite cost-competitive and allow for bulk production of powders for both AM and traditional powder metallurgy. The first stage of the overall production chain involves traditional mining and extraction of ore to form a pure or alloyed bulk metal product (ingot, wire, rod). The second stage is powder production itself (atomization process), which is followed by sifting into different fractions, size and shape classification, and validation. For PBF, additional flow tests are commonly added to the validation protocol.

(p4.1) The specific atomization process can be different depending on the chosen AM technology. Gas and plasma atomization producing particles of quite regular, close to spherical, shape with rather small porosity and high uniformity are the most relevant ones for the powder-based AM (see Figure 4a,b). Annual powder production using water atomization so far well exceeds the volumes produced by gas atomization. However, water atomization results in particles with a highly irregular morphology as the particles solidify faster than their spheroidization time. The resulting powders can contain trapped water and, with some metallic materials, metal hydrides. This renders the water atomization process unsuitable for AM [26]. uum induction melting, plasma arc melting, induction drip melting, or direct plasma heating [39]. Though ideal powder grain shape is near-spherical, depending on the method of powder production used, nonspherical particles, joined particles, particles with different intrinsic morphology (e.g., "tear-drop" shapes), and irregularly shaped particles may occur [32]. In some cases, fractions of irregularly shaped grains can be accepted for AM precursor materials if they do not strongly disturb the powder flowability or apparent density. 
## (s9) Mechanical Spheroidization of Metal Powders
(p9.0) Certain strategies for improving the powders having irregular shapes after atomization were reported, including mechanical spheroidization of the grains [47]. The flowability of irregularly shaped powders can be significantly improved by tapering sharp edges on the particles through high-speed blending or high-shear milling. Nonetheless, the particles produced by this method are only quasi-spherical, which may limit the applications of such powders. In addition, this method should be used with certain care due to potential mechanical and mechano-chemical effects such as particle surface strengthening and compaction, the formation of oxide and nitride surface films, and changes in material microstructure. Such changes can affect the AM process parameters and the quality of manufactured materials and components.
## (s10) Metal Powders Processed in Additive Manufacturing
(p10.0) There is a wide range of metallic powders that are already used in AM. The choice of powder depends on the desired properties of the product and employed AM technology. Some of the common metal powders utilized in AM are nickel, steel, aluminum, cobaltchromium, and titanium alloys. This publication describes issues regarding materials, most of which are not specific to the group of critical materials. However, it should be remembered that not all alloying elements for these materials belong to the critical materials, and in many cases, the CRMs' share in such alloys is relatively small. However, with growing demand for the additive manufacturing of such alloys, they are widely accepted by the industry when produced by more traditional methods [48].
## (s11) Tungsten Alloys
(p11.0) Tungsten (W) has the highest melting and boiling point among other elements and the lowest thermal expansion coefficient (CTE) among metals [49]. It is mainly produced from wolframite and scheelite; the main producer is China, having about 50% of the world's reserves.
## (s12) Chromium and Cobalt Alloys
(p12.0) Despite strategic importance and widespread use, chromium was not included in the CRMs lists released in 2011 and 2017. The main chromium producers are South Africa (producing about two-fifths of the chromite ores and concentrates), together with Kazakhstan (producing one-third of Cr). India, Russia, and Turkey are also substantial producers of Cr.

(p12.1) Significant chromium demand comes for the production of iron-based alloys. As one of the major alloying elements in stainless steel, Cr content ranges between mass fractions of 10.5% and 30% [13]. Owing to its strong reactivity with oxygen, it provides the ability to passivate the surface by an adherent, insoluble, ultrathin layer that protects the underlying metal against attacks of the corrosive agents, mainly acids and/or chloride-containing environments. Cr is also responsible for surface self-healing in presence of oxygen [13].
## (s21) Ceramic Powders for Slurry-Based Methods
(p21.0) Slurry-based ceramic 3D printing technologies generally involve fine ceramic particles dispersed in liquid or binder in the form of relatively low viscosity inks or viscous pastes. The slurry content can be additively manufactured by photopolymerization, inkjet printing, or extrusion [117]. All slurry methods are commonly multistep ones, initially producing nondense semifinished parts that are commonly called "green bodies", followed by debinding and firing processes yielding final components.
## (s22) Ceramic Powders for Porous Bone Implants
(p22.0) While research on ceramic scaffolds for bone regeneration has progressed rapidly, the clinical outcome of these synthetic bone implants remains limited, especially for major load-bearing applications. These scaffolds should not only provide adequate mechanical support but also possess sufficient porosity to facilitate nutrient/metabolite transportation and bone tissue ingrowth [125]. At the same time, ceramic implant-scaffolds have a great potential for replacing metallic ones due to their advanced biocompatibility, reducing the dependence on certain CRMs traditionally used in metallic implants in future orthopedics.

(p22.1) One of the additive manufacturing techniques, direct ink writing (DIW), also known as robocasting, has attracted considerable attention in bone tissue engineering. In the robocasting fabrication method, a filament or ink is extruded through a nozzle in a layerwise fashion and ultimately forms a 3-D mesh structure with interpenetrating struts. After the initial layer is created, the X-Y stage is incremented in the Z-direction and another layer is deposited. This process is repeated until the desired scaffold structure is created. While robocasting can fabricate regular and controllable patterns in the X-Y plane, its ability to maintain high precision with sophisticated structures in the Z-direction is restricted due to depositing ceramic struts on top of one another [126]. This technique has been used to fabricate scaffolds with a wide variety of ceramic materials such as bioactive glass [127], hydroxyapatite (HA), calcium phosphates [128], calcium silicate (CSi), and Sr-HT Gahnite [129], as well as other composite materials, exhibiting significant potential. Polylactide or polycaprolactone scaffolds with pore sizes ranging between 200 and 500 µm and hydroxyapatite content of up to 70 wt %, as well as scaffolds containing bioactive glasses, were also 3D-printed [130,131].

(p22.2) Ceramic scaffolds and implants for osteogenesis are based mainly on hydroxyapatite since this is the inorganic component of bone. The usual fabrication technique for ceramic implants is the sintering of the ceramic powder at high temperatures.
## (s23) Powder Handling Safety Issues
(p23.0) Safety precautions in handling CRM-containing powders used in AM are always mandatory. Many of the CRM-containing materials are listed as "dangerous" in quite different ways, so studying the safety precautions and safety data sheets related to the involved chemical elements and materials is advised. Handling with care, i.e., avoiding spillage and anything promoting contaminating the air with fine material powders, is always advised. Fine particles can cause severe dysfunctions, skin problems, lung diseases, or cancer upon exposure or inhalation. Prolonged exposure to some of the metals was linked to the onset of Alzheimer's disease [135]. Special powder-safe respirators should be used to prevent small particles from reaching the bronchus and lungs, and powder-free gloves should protect the hands.

(p23.1) In addition to potential health risks, metal powders are combustible and flammable; when aerated, they present a risk for explosion. Facilities where metallic powders are kept or handled should have proper protection from electrostatic and electrical sparks (including nonstatic flooring, special clothing and shoes for the staff, grounding wires, and special vacuum cleaners, as the majority of domestic vacuum cleaners have spark-producing electric motors). Additionally, only specialized fire extinguishers rated for combusting metals should be used in such facilities.

(p23.2) At the same time, with correctly deployed preventive measures and proper handling protocol implementation in corresponding AM facilities, levels of danger are no higher than those found in many common industrial facilities.
## (s24) Additive Manufacturing Processes
(p24.0) The main consolidation mechanisms of AM technologies are partial melting, full melting, and solid-state sintering, which might act together, and it is not always obvious what consolidation mechanism is dominating [136].

(p24.1) The role of additive manufacturing is going to increase as the world enters the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The following key advantages of the AM methods will define their fundamental role in future manufacturing: Additive manufacturing is capable of extremely high flexibility in producing small and medium series of complex parts, complemented by seamless switching to the manufacturing of the parts with a completely different design. Manufacturing capacity with the AM methods is highly scalable, which would be beneficial to both industrial giants and small and medium enterprises (SMEs). AM methods allow not only a higher flexibility to achieve any desirable shape but also cost-and time-effective functionalization and individualization of the parts. The digital nature of the design for AM allows for reducing cost and time for component modification which reduces the need for inventory as they can be manufactured on demand using the library of digital files. With the development of the "service points" for additive manufacturing across the world, there is a potential for a significant reduction in transportation costs for raw materials and, especially, manufactured components. Recycling of the precursor powders can be almost completely performed at the manufacturing sites. The high degree of recyclability of the powders, along with other aspects of material and energy saving, allows for significantly decreasing the environmental impacts of industrial production. Along with the possibility of reducing the amounts of CRMs per component, and with newly developed materials with the ability to avoid using them, additive manufacturing will be a major contributing factor in solving the CRMs problem and reaching the goals set by EU Commission.
## (s26) Recycling of Metal Powders for Additive Manufacturing
(p26.0) Powder recyclability is a crucial parameter of powder lifecycle and overall manufacturing efficiency. In metal-based processes (PBF, LENS) the microstructure of the virgin (not recycled) powder has a certain tendency to change due to repetitive reuse and recycling [14,166,167]. The flowability and powder morphology can change because of thermal cycling during processing and mechanical impacts during layer deposition, powder recovery, and sifting. Increased temperatures of the powder in the AM process can force surfaces of powder to react with ambient atmospheric gases or their residual content in the protection volume. An increase in oxygen content in the powder often results in reducing the mechanical performance of the printed metal parts [14,166]. Most often, powders are passed through a sieve before being used again. That may cause particle deformation and breakage of the grains that form joining necks. Recycled powders show a minor decrease in the amount of fine (<10 µm) particles, a slight increase in average particle diameter, and a slightly wider grain size distribution [14,168,169]. Sieving also can remove some of the satellites, leading in some cases to better flowability of the recycled powders.

(p26.1) Additional contamination by impurities coming from the sieves and vessels, foreign bodies, or interstitial elements may be introduced to the powder as a result of handling during pre-or post-processing stages [26]. It is clear that the amount of powder belonging to each separate virgin batch constantly decreases as part of it forms solid components. At some point, the volume of the powder becomes lower than the minimum demanded by the AM machine. Three strategies are commonly used: topping up the reused powder with virgin one, saving small batches of recycled powders and mixing them for further manufacturing, and using recycled powder from a virgin batch without topping or mixing at all. The third option is preferable for manufacturing parts destined for critical applications. However, there is no consensus on which of the first two options should be preferred and in which cases. Nevertheless, it is agreed that each recycled powder should have its "passport" stating the date of virgin batch purchase and its initial elemental content, history of the builds using it, number of recycling procedures, and results of regular powder analysis. It is also clear that for increasing powder lifetime, the recycling process and storage conditions for the powder, including humidity and temperature control and specialized ventilation with filtering of the incoming air control in the operating rooms, should be strictly regulated.
## (s30) Hybrid Manufacturing Technologies
(p30.0) Hybrid manufacturing is commonly described as the combination of additive manufacturing and subtractive manufacturing in a single machine or a set of closely linked machines in a single production line [222,223]. Manufacturing of the component in such a case could start from a billet or a plate and be followed by pre-machining, manufacturing, and post-machining stages, where AM technology is used in one or more of these stages. Each of the stages most efficiently uses its best advantages, thus producing a final product with high complexity, high precision, and best surface finish. In hybrid manufacturing mode, parts with precise complex geometry, multimaterial components, parts with conformal cooling channels, multimaterial tools, etc., can be produced with high efficiency and optimized use of precursor materials. Lightweight structures, turbine blades, different housings, structural elements, and multimaterial components for the aerospace and automotive industries can be manufactured by optimizing the use of CRMs and increasing the buy-to-fly ratio [224]. Different medical tools, fixation elements, and implants with patient-specific and functionally optimized geometries and elements for optimal tissue ingrowth, biocompatible and bacteria-hostile surfaces, and suitable mechanical properties can be efficiently produced by AM, while their precision elements (threaded holes, sliding balls with mirror surface finish, etc.) can be effectively completed by traditional machining. Many of the post-processing stages such as additional machining, polishing, heat treatment, and surface modifications that today are separated from AM technology can be included in the hybrid manufacturing systems.

(p30.1) Reduced consumption of CRMs can also be obtained using repair welding and repair additive manufacturing of worn out or damaged products, so the need for new parts is significantly reduced [225,226]. This option is increasingly utilized in the industrial tooling sector, where an improved repair welding (cladding) technology and proper selection of materials can lead to the restoration of the tool several times. This approach not only reduces the use of CRMs but also saves other resources and reduces the waste and greenhouse gas footprint of the manufacturing.
## (s32) D Laser Shock Peening
(p32.0) As mentioned, the SLM process is a very attractive technology for fabricating components with very complex spatial shapes, such as near-net-shape parts that are impossible or prohibitively complicated to produce through conventional production routes [264]. Indeed, optimization of the AM processing of such components resulted in achieving only slightly lower static mechanical properties than those obtained with conventional processes. However, as with other processes that include layer-by-layer crystallization and solidification, the generation of tensile residual stresses (TRSs) can be considered one of the major deficiencies of many AM methods. In such processes, external energy is supplied with high local density to the last processed layer, leading to the temperature gradients and anisotropic partial annealing of the processed components. Except for the case of EBM, where the build is kept at a strongly elevated temperature, this results in a significant accumulation of TRSs or even considerable component distortion [265]. A considerable effort was devoted to the reduction of TRSs in laser-based technologies, including in situ heating (preheating or high-energy laser re-melting) or post-annealing. This strategy is successful to some degree, and up to 70% reduction of TRS with annealing was reported by Mercelis and Kruth [266]. The main drawback of these methods is that they cannot completely remove either tensile or compressive residual stresses (CRSs). Alternative approaches were tested, and several options emerged: shot peening (SP), laser shock peening (LSP), and 3D laser shock peening (3D LSP) [265].
