# genealogy The Historical Trauma and Resilience of Individuals of Mexican Ancestry in the United States: A Scoping Literature Review and Emerging Conceptual Framework

CorpusID: 233663271 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c01d7782b548c832e132e653784bbb61755e1875](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c01d7782b548c832e132e653784bbb61755e1875)

Fields: History, Sociology, Psychology

## (s9) Inter-Generational Transmission of Trauma
(p9.0) The aftermath of historical trauma has been examined using a multi-level and intergenerational lens. This framework discusses (1) the ramifications of HTEs at the individual, family, and community level, (2) the vehicles that facilitated the transmission of these impacts across generations, and (3) behavioral responses to the trauma prompted by such exposures (Evans-Campbell 2008). At the individual level, this transmission has been linked to increased vulnerability to behavioral health problems, including post-traumatic stress disorder, survivor's guilt, anxiety, depression, obesity, and SUDs. At the familylevel, manifestations of historical trauma include communication impairments, stress around parenting, and attachment disorders in children. The impact at the communitylevel includes the abandonment of traditional cultural activities, loss of traditional rites of passage, and erasure of traditional values and health practices (Evans-Campbell 2008).
## (s10) Colonial Trauma Response
(p10.0) Reactions to HTEs have been discussed as historical trauma response (HTR), also known as colonial trauma response (CTR). This concept refers to emotions and behaviors that stem from direct or indirect exposure to traumatic events (Evans-Campbell 2008). In general, historical trauma research indicates that even though such events took place in the distant past, their consequences continue to affect the survivor's descendants (Mohatt et al. 2014). This research suggests that descendants of survivors from historical trauma may experience cognitive dissonance from discrepancies or disconnections between current social conditions, historical facts known to them, and the stress reactions and coping responses exhibited by their parents and grandparents, especially when they are under duress (Prussing 2014). Often the survival skills that emerged at the onset of HTEs do not match the coping skills needed to deal with present conditions. From the perspective of the descendants of HT survivors, this mismatch may be experienced as post-colonial stress/suffering in their communities (Evans-Campbell 2008; White 1998).
## (s17) Colonial Trauma Responses
(p17.0) Behavioral health scholars focused on American Indigenous people argue that the erasure of indigenous heritage is the legacy of colonization, a legacy that is embedded in the fabric of society, including education and other public venues (Evans-Campbell 2008; Walters et al. 2011). The denial of traumatic experiences represents a normative reaction that follows after such exposures (Cohen et al. 2012). During the colonial era, embracing indigenous identity was perceived as a threat to the physical and psychological integrity of the survivors (Anzaldúa et al. 2003;Talebreza-May 2015;Zentella 2004Zentella , 2009Zentella , 2014. Therefore denying indigenous heritage by adopting the colonial identity was a way to ensure survival, and secure greater social mobility, a survival strategy that was passed down across generations (Caminero-Santangelo 2004; De la Peña 2002; Van Dijk 2019). The fact that the slogan of one contemporary social movement of the indigenous people of México is "Estamos Vivos/We are Alive" points to the public denial of their existence.
## (s24) Thematic Analysis
(p24.0) Thematic analysis is often used to analyze qualitative data, such as interview transcripts or a collection of interrelated sources. The main purpose of this approach is to identify common themes, topics, ideas, and patterns of meaning across the sources (Clarke et al. 2015;Maguire and Delahunt 2017). There are various approaches to conducting thematic analysis. One common approach follows a six-step process: (1) familiarization with materials, (2) preliminary coding, (3) generating themes, (4) reviewing and refining themes, (5) defining and naming themes, and (6) 
## (s27) Search Strategy
(p27.0) The search process started with a set of broad keywords, concepts, and phrases, which were explored to expand or restrict subsequent searches (Arksey and O'Malley 2005). The initial set of keywords included the following: ("Mexican" OR "Mexican American" OR "Mexican Indigenous" OR "Mexican American Indian,") AND ("mental health" OR "substance abuse,") AND "historical trauma." The searches were conducted in six major databases: Academic Search Complete, Social Work Abstracts, Psych INFO, Web of Science, SCOPUS, and Google Scholar. Initially only three sources were identified, however, through a recursive search process, conducted from January through October 2018, over 100 candidate sources were identified, ultimately leading to sixteen selected sources. These sources includes a variety of methodologies and theoretical frameworks.
## (s28) Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
(p28.0) The selection of sources followed a three-stage screening protocol. First, a screening was conducted to identify the keywords or their semantic equivalents in (a) the title of the study, then, (b) in the abstract, and finally (c) in the entire body of the paper. The references were also screened manually to identify relevant sources (Levac et al. 2010). The eligibility criteria were defined as follows:
## (s33) 5.
(p33.0) Exceptions to inclusion criteria of publication period were adjusted for some sources because the work was either a seminal paper that was highly cited across the selected sources (Anzaldúa et al. 2003), or because other studies in the same series of papers by an author were included in the selected sources (Zentella 2004). The criteria for inclusion of IMA-US was slightly modified for a few studies, because even though these sources did not explicitly mention inclusion of IMA-US in the sample, their presence was implied in the body of the paper (Brave Heart et al. 2011;Cromer et al. 2018;Grayshield et al. 2015;Mohatt et al. 2014;Whitbeck et al. 2004); for example, these studies indicated that the geographical location in which the study took place is highly populated by IMA-US, such studies mentioned the inclusion of unaffiliated indigenous tribes, which are often Mexican communities. In one study, a co-author identified as an IMA-US, and included a positionality statement regarding her heritage (Grayshield et al. 2015) as motivation for the study (see bottom of Table 1).
## (s39) Theoretical Characteristics
(p39.0) The use of conceptual models varied; the majority of articles explicitly link historical trauma to IMA-US (Carvajal and Young 2009;Estrada 2009;Stevens et al. 2015), but other sources focused on related models that can be traced to the HT (see Figure 2). For example, the Indigenist Stress and Coping Model (Estrada 2009;Stevens et al. 2015) and the multi-level transmission for exploring impacts of historical trauma on individuals, families, and communities Stevens et al. 2015). Some of these models advanced our understanding of the mechanisms of transmission and impact from exposure to HTEs, with the concepts of historical loss (Whitbeck et al. 2004), survivance (Cromer et al. 2018;Grayshield et al. 2015;Ramirez and Hammack 2014), and land-based frameworks (Talebreza-May 2015; Zentella 2004Zentella , 2009Zentella , 2014. The concept of an ambiguous homeland (Perez and Arnold-Berkovits 2018) was the focus of one study, but this theme was evoked in other studies that discussed immigration issues, border movement, and land displacement (Anzaldúa et al. 2003;Hanna 2017;Stevens et al. 2015). Impacts from HTEs were also indirectly discussed with concepts of acculturation and minority stress (Carvajal and Young 2009;Perez and Arnold-Berkovits 2018;Stevens et al. 2015).

(p39.1) Some sources present innovative conceptual maps that expanded on different aspects of historical trauma, these introduced concepts remarking the impact from HTEs on individual and collective identities. For example, the concept of split-mind, a term that expresses psychological symptoms from mestizaje (Anzaldúa et al. 2003), similar to those of children born from sexual assault (Van Ee and Kleber 2013). Related concepts described identitydisorder syndromes included el desmadre/the chaos or the demothering, this concept refers to the disruption caused by the Spanish invaders, it represents the sense of loss that a child experiences when forcibly removed from the mother Zentella (2009Zentella ( , 2014. Concepts refer to as hidden identity and Hispanic Identity as a Jail Identity represent the need to hide the indigenous identity in order to protect it from colonizers, and to ensure survival during the colonial period (Talebreza-May 2015; Zentella 2004Zentella , 2009Zentella , 2014. The discussion of specific intergenerational trauma transmission and responses included, SUDs, mental health problems. The main venues for transmission included popular culture and oral tradition (Carvajal and Young 2009;Hanna et al. 2017;Stevens et al. 2015). Concepts related to the history of broken land treaties and current health disparities included institutional betrayal and institutional mistrust Ramirez and Hammack 2014;Talebreza-May 2015;Zentella 2004). Concepts of Indigenous methodologies, feminist, and critical race theory were included in several sources (Cromer et al. 2018;Grayshield et al. 2015). 
## (s40) Thematic Summary
(p40.0) This set of sources discusses how historical trauma events (i.e., Spanish invasion, colonization, and US-Mexican war) laid the foundation for the current problems of IMA-US, including poverty, low educational attainment, and limited access to adequate health-care services (Estrada 2009;Hanna et al. 2017;Ramirez and Hammack 2014;Stevens et al. 2015;Talebreza-May 2015;Zentella 2004Zentella , 2009Zentella , 2014. Many of the sources also provided integrative reviews of historical trauma research; these sources advocated for the use of the historical trauma framework in previously colonized populations, and extended the definition of indigenous to IMA-US, since they are descendants from the original inhabitants of the Americas (Brave Heart et al. 2011;Mohatt et al. 2014;Whitbeck et al. 2004). One dimension that all articles had in common was their focus on the HTEs of Mesoamerica and its effects on mental health. Highlights of these findings are presented in Table 2.
## (s42) The invasion and colonisation of pre-colonial México (1519-1521)
(p42.0) The first major chapter of adversity for Mexican people started with the Spanish invasion (1519-1521). This period was characterized by their decimation, forced slavery, and the destruction of their cultural legacy, including writings, architecture, and artifacts (De la Peña 2006;Zentella 2009). This epistemicide also involved the suppression of mother tongues, culture, Indigenous identity, and wellness traditions. This invasion was followed by the colonial period, which lasted over 300 years, resulting in new mixed races, namely the Spanish-Indigenous, among many others (Anzaldúa et al. 2003;Hoskins and Padrón 2017;Zentella 2014).
## (s45) Post-US-México War Era/ California Gold Rush.
(p45.0) The California Gold Rush is the saddest chapter in the history of adversity for Mexican descendants of the original inhabitants of present day Southwest (Ramirez and Hammack 2014). The California Indians endured colonial violence three times. First by Spain, then by the postcolonial government of México, and later by the U. S. (Estrada 2009;Ramirez and Hammack 2014;Talebreza-May 2015). When México lost roughly half of its territory to the United States, many of the native communities that had been already displaced and colonized by Spain faced a new wave of displacement and forced assimilation (Estrada 2009;Ramirez and Hammack 2014;Talebreza-May 2015). This time, they were forced to mirror the values and culture of the Anglo population (Anzaldúa et al. 2003;Ramirez and Hammack 2014;Talebreza-May 2015;Zentella 2009). They were persecuted and almost exterminated by brutal forms. However, elders in that community have preserved and transmitted narratives of survivance to younger generations, these inter-generational transmissions that have strengthen the Indigenous and resilient identity (Ramirez and Hammack 2014).
## (s46) Mechanisms of Transmission of Historical Trauma for IMA-US
(p46.0) The selected sources did not present sufficient empirical evidence for mechanisms of transmission of trauma narratives for IMA-US. However, these sources discussed how narratives of HTEs have been recorded and preserved through archival documents, including oral tradition (Anzaldúa et al. 2003;Grayshield et al. 2015;Ramirez and Hammack 2014;Talebreza-May 2015;Zentella 2004), family systems (e.g., parenting) (Estrada 2009;Hanna et al. 2017;Stevens et al. 2015), and popular culture (Zentella 2014).
## (s49) Responses to Historical Trauma Events and Narratives for IMA-US
(p49.0) Historical trauma responses, also known as colonial stress responses, have been defined as behavioral reactions to the atrocities of the colonial era (Evans-Campbell 2008). Historical trauma responses are not well known in the behavioral health literature for IMA-US. Even though research in related populations indicate a link between historical trauma and mental health and SUDs, this research has not been replicated for IMA-US. In general, behavioral health issues for IMA-US represent a public health concern, because the demands for specialty healthcare services exceed the available resources available to this population (Satcher 2000). Moreover, the number of qualified health care providers is also lagging (Gómez García et al. 2019). The works cited here discusses the dynamics that may play a role in health care disparities for IMA-US, mistrust in social welfare agencies and SUDs (Carvajal and Young 2009;Estrada 2009;Hanna et al. 2017;Stevens et al. 2015;Talebreza-May 2015), these are discussed in the next section. Mistrust in social welfare agencies was discussed as both risk and protective factor. The discussion of adaptive mechanisms also included narratives of survivance, pride in ethnic heritage and identities, engagement in cultural practices (e.g., kinship, oral tradition, dance, storytelling, traditional health practices) and respect for elders, these topic is addressed in Section 4.7, which provides recommendations for healing from HT (Cromer et al. 2018;Grayshield et al. 2015;Ramirez and Hammack 2014).
## (s52) Community Engagement in the Development of Resilience-based Interventions.
(p52.0) The recommendations for healing from historical trauma include the importance of partnership with affected communities. Prior research has shown that community engagement in research process yields more comprehensive and sustainable interventions (Wallerstein and Duran 2010). These sources recommend engaging key stakeholders (i.e., parents, grandparents, local leaders) in the development of resilience-based interventions for younger generations (Cromer et al. 2018;Grayshield et al. 2015;Ramirez and Hammack 2014). Customarily, elders have played a vital role in the preservation and dissemination of cultural practices, including indigenous knowledge and traditions (Cromer et al. 2018;Grayshield et al. 2015;Ramirez and Hammack 2014). They also have played a role in the socialization of younger generations, particularly in nurturing intergenerational connections and fostering healing. These wellness, spiritual and traditional values and practices, have been disseminated through oral tradition. Findings from a small qualitative study conducted by Ramirez and Hammack (2014) suggest that the connection between the grandmothers and the youth was critical in the preservation of Indigenous identity. The cited sources argue that elders possess a rich memory of the strengths and coping skills that have been crafted for many generations to deal with colonial oppression (Cromer et al. 2018;Grayshield et al. 2015;Ramirez and Hammack 2014). The authors hold that implementing engagement strategies rooted in the history, traditional beliefs, and health practices may result in higher retention rates in healthcare services, because these practices have a greater chance to be adopted by the users, since these have been embraced by these communities for many generations (Cromer et al. 2018;Grayshield et al. 2015;Ramirez and Hammack 2014).

(p52.1) 3. Designing Therapeutic Spaces to Heal from Historical Trauma. Another recommendation to recover from the consequences of historical trauma is through engagement of these communities in culturally appropriate treatment settings and modalities. Talebreza-May (2015) emphasized the need to design sanctuary spaces that are free from artifacts and behaviors resembling colonial ideology. Examples of elements that can foster safe spaces include the use of language, images, and concepts resembling the sentiments of the population for any significant historical events or milestones relevant to the target population. Most importantly, these therapeutic spaces must be created engaging expert knowledge on the historical experiences of the target population Hanna et al. (2017); Talebreza-May (2015); Zentella (2014).
## (s53) Discussion
(p53.0) Over ten years ago, Estrada (2009) posed the question "can the concept of historical trauma be fruitfully applied to examine health issues among IMA-US?" This question has been answered affirmative by the works presented here. However, there are many more questions that follow. For example, can historical trauma research inform assessment, diagnosis and treatment for IMA-US? Can HT research help us to identify downstream manifestations of the denial of HTEs, resulting from unresolved grief? 9 Would the validation of these trauma narratives provide an effective intervention, perhaps by restoring the right to grieve the collective losses resulting from these events? The reviewed sources convey the need to further examine this topic by discussing the impossibility of grieving, and articulating the suspicion that unresolved grief could potentially appear in alternative forms, such as attachment issues (Carvajal and Young 2009;Ramirez and Hammack 2014;Talebreza-May 2015), a sense of ambiguous loss of the homeland (Perez and Arnold-Berkovits 2018), other land-based disorders (Zentella 2004(Zentella , 2009(Zentella , 2014 and internalized oppression 10 (Estrada 2009).
## (s55) Conclusions
(p55.0) The historically-grounded research reviewed here provides rich archival evidence of the history of colonial trauma for IMA-US. This work suggests that underutilization of social and healthcare services reflects historically motivated mistrust in social welfare institutions. This is congruent with findings in ethics, sociology and history literature (Cacari-Stone and Avila 2012; Glenn and Tam 2004;McLaren 2007). The small but growing body of research synthesized and interpreted here, makes the case that a historical perspective in the study any population with traumatic histories is essential for optimal diagnosis and treatment (Brave Heart et al. 2011;Kirmayer et al. 2011;Mohatt et al. 2014). Examining narratives of past mass trauma may be especially relevant in the conceptualization of health interventions for previously colonized groups (Brave Heart et al. 2011;Evans-Campbell 2008;Gone 2013;Kirmayer et al. 2011). For IMA-US, these trauma narratives have been depicted in traditional music, paintings, and in the social discourse, among other venues (Anzaldúa et al. 2003;Cromer et al. 2018;Grayshield et al. 2015;Ramirez and Hammack 2014;Zentella 2004Zentella , 2014. These cultural sources and artifacts shed light on the prevalence of historical trauma recollections in their collective memory (Van Dijk 1983;Zentella 2004Zentella , 2009Zentella , 2014. IMA-US have contributed significantly to the economic, intellectual, social, and cultural life of the United States. If the systemic barriers to accessing adequate healthcare services are not comprehensively addressed, the health disparities may worsen for all, but especially for those subgroups with higher rates of mental and/or substance use disorders (Krieger et al. 2010).
