# R E V I E W 3D Printing of Micro-and Nanoscale Bone Substitutes: A Review on Technical and Translational Perspectives

CorpusID: 235695688 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/09f40e9de7114d673f331f84c51b9d2c52548543](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/09f40e9de7114d673f331f84c51b9d2c52548543)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Bone and its related disorders represent a majority of chronic diseases in patients over the age of 40 years and still exist as a critical clinical concern. 1 Even though bones possess a limited regeneration capacity, their inability to repair large segmental bone defects remains an unmet clinical challenge. Bone tumor resection, traffic accidents, rarefaction of bone, and osteomyelitis are some of the main reasons that bone injuries. 2,3 Annually, more than 2.5 million reconstructive surgery procedures are carried out worldwide in response to these primary causes of bone damage and defects. 4,5 Autologous bone grafting has still been considered the "gold standard" in orthopedic trauma for repairing large defective bones. However, the hurdles of autologous bone grafting are the limited availability of autologous bones, the time required to harvest the graft, molding problems, the morbidity of the donor site, graft resorption, and the high risk of fracture. On the other hand, allo-and xeno-grafts face the challenge of insufficient levels of cellularity, immune rejection, and the possibility of disease transmission. 6 These limitations are hampering their extensive use in clinical applications. 7 Hence, it is imperative to develop alternative strategies for the efficient repair of bone.
## (s4) Stereolithography Appearance
(p4.0) As the earliest rapid prototyping technology, SLA is the only photocurable 3D printing technology that is currently capable of printing large-size models. 51 The principle of SLA is similar to SLS; both of them are variations of laserassisted 3D printing technology. The main difference between these techniques lies in different types of lasers and raw printing materials. The commonly used printing materials in SLA for artificial bone engineering are photosensitive resins. However, due to the presence of light residue of the initiator during the printing process, some of the photosensitive resins show cytotoxicity and low biocompatibility in vivo. Therefore, SLA printed artificial bone is often used in the preoperative simulation, and preparation of teaching mold, but less commonly used for in vivo experiments. In recent years, to improve the application of SLA, a mixture of photosensitive resins and other biological materials, such as poly (propylene fumarate) (PPF) and gelatin, has been used as raw materials. Among them, PPF showed excellent mechanical properties and was biodegradable, non-toxic with adjustable characteristics, and has been used in many preclinical applications, including repair of bone defects. Nettleton et al 52 printed PPF scaffolds using SLA technology, implanted the scaffolds into the calvarial defects of critical size in rats, and evaluated the bone regeneration. A significant increase in bone growth was observed at 4 weeks postoperation, and bone continued to grow at 12 weeks without inducing a long-term inflammatory response.

(p4.1) To explore the feasibility of in-situ 3D printing for the treatment of diseases, such as bone and cartilage defects, Li et al 53 used SLA to print alginate gel scaffolds for the defects of humerus injury and found a strong osteogenic effect. Furthermore, Le Guéhennec et al 54 used SLA technology to print scaffolds to evaluate the biocompatibility and osteoinductive properties of hydroxyapatite (HA) and hydroxyapatite-tri calcium phosphate (HA-TCP) scaffolds in vivo and in vitro. The materials used for printing were mixtures of bioceramics and organic components (polyfunctional acrylic resin and photoinitiator) and the scaffolds were printed in the form of pellets. In vitro experiments showed that these materials induced biomimetic cell behavior after 3 days of culture, and the viability of cells indicated that they did not induce cytotoxicity. In the in vivo experiments, calcium phosphate pellets were subperiosteally implanted into defects in a calvarial rat model, and the result showed that all animals recovered without complications. Although pellet volumes showed an initial decrease, they were further maintained stable over the course of 3-6 months. New bone formation was detected initially at 3 months post-implantation. In another study, Danilevicius et al 55 designed and made complex, geometrically controlled 3D scaffolds with SLA. The pore sizes of the scaffolds ranged from 25 to 110 μm, the porosity was 70%, 82%, 86%, and 90%, respectively. Among them, osteoblasts demonstrated strong adhesion and proliferation ability on the scaffolds with 86% porosity with the highest proliferation efficiency.
## (s13) DovePress
(p13.0) International Journal of Nanomedicine 2021:16 cardiovascular devices, as well as orthopedic implants including artificial hips, knee joints, and regularly used in dental applications owing to their unique mechanical characteristics, high strength, high-temperature, wear and corrosion resistance, flexibility, in addition to excellent biocompatibility, which marks these materials as good load-bearing implants. 88,89 SLM technique is most commonly used with CoCr alloys. 89 Hazlehurst et al 90 evaluated the stress shielding attributes of orthopedic implants that resemble the behavior of bone. Thus, SLM was used to fabricate square pore cobalt-chrome-molybdenum (CoCrMo) cellular structures, characterized by porosity extending between 25% and 95% and effective elastic moduli. The results revealed that the alloy stiffness and strength were quite comparable to those of the human femur. The CoCrMo cellular structures showed an effective elastic modulus with a volumetric porosity of 65% and above. 90   Figure 4. 91 It is naturally present in two enantiomeric forms, that is, the L-and D-optical isomers. 92 It can be obtained by fermentation of renewable forms of sugar derivatives which make it eco-friendly, thereby enabling its usage in the human body. 93 The common fermentation processes mostly generate the L-isomer but sometimes an equal quantity of L-and D-type of lactic acids can be present, which is termed as meso-lactic acid. PLA made up of meso-lactic acid is called poly-DL-lactic acid (PDLLA) or meso-PLA. 92,94 On the other hand, PLA that is solely comprised of L-lactic acid or D-lactic acid is called poly-L-lactide (PLLA) or poly-D-lactide (PDLA), respectively. The commercially available PLA is a copolymer of PLLA and PDLA. 94 PLA, along with its copolymers finds extensive uses in orthopedic regenerative engineering applications, for instance, sutures, and bone fixation devices, including but not limited to screws, rods, pins, and plates. These polymeric materials exhibit good mechanical strength, versatility in fabrication, renewability, biocompatibility, and excellent biodegradability. 92,95,96 Even though PLA has an extensive range of applications, there are certain drawbacks such as its brittle nature and poor thermal stability. 93 However, several methods have been adapted to decrease PLA brittleness, mainly by blending PLA with a variety of polymers such as PCL, polyethylene oxide (PEO), and polyethylene glycol (PEG). 91,97 Poly-ε-Caprolactone PCL is an aliphatic polyester, comprising repeating units of hexanoate (Figure 4). 98,99 It is semi-crystalline at room and human body temperatures and possesses a melting point of close to 60°C and a glass transition temperature (Tg) of −60°C. 100 PCL is a hydrophobic material soluble in organic solvents, and its low melting point and compatibility with other biomaterials make it readily processable. [100][101][102] PCL is frequently used as the primary material in long-term implants utilized for cartilage, bone, tendon and ligaments, cardiovascular tissue, blood vessels, skin, and nerve tissue scaffolds for various tissue engineering applications. 98,100,101,103 The versatility of PCL is due to its mechanical and physicochemical properties, which can be adapted to fit in the target application. 98,104 Although biodegradable, PCL is highly stable in comparison with polylactides. This stability arises from the fact that it possesses a lesser number of ester bonds per monomer, and thereby, its degradation time is 2−5 years. 100 Mainly the degradation of the material depends upon molecular weight, shape, and residual monomer content. FDM is one of the most frequently applied 3D printing techniques with PCL. Daentzer et al 105 
## (s15) Ceramic Biomaterials Calcium Phosphate
(p15.0) Calcium phosphate (CaP) bioceramics find numerous applications in orthopedics, for use as implants, bone grafting materials, and coatings on dental and orthopedic prostheses. [122][123][124] Among other calcium phosphates, tricalcium phosphate (TCP) [(Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 ], otherwise known as tribasic calcium phosphate, has been widely used owing to its high osteoconductivity, bioresorbable nature, bioactivity, and excellent biocompatibility. 122 
## (s17) 4301
(p17.0) TCP scaffolds with precise internal architecture, with pore sizes ranging from 500 to 1000 μm. Two weeks after implantation of the scaffolds into a rat model of a femoral defect, the evaluation showed that new bone formation occurred in the central fibrous zone, histologically called the fibrous interzone (FIZ) present between the pores, and the mechanical strength was obtained by microwave sintering of the TCP scaffolds. 126 Hydroxyapatite (HA), with the chemical formula [Ca 10 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 ], is a naturally occurring mineral form of calcium apatite that is frequently used in bone regeneration as implant materials, bone graft materials, and bone fillers. 127,128 The nature of HA is quite comparable to the mineral component of bones, teeth, and mineralized cartilage. 129 HA has been widely used in hard tissue repair or regeneration, dental prosthetics, hip replacements, dental implants, bone conduction implants, and bone grafts due to its bioactivity, biocompatibility, and excellent osteoconductivity. 127,130 Figure 6 shows SEM images of 3D-printed hydroxyapatite scaffolds with their porous structures. 131 Luo et al 132 evaluated that strontium-doped hydroxyapatite (Sr-HAP) based 3D-printed scaffolds for repairing calvarial defects in rabbits. In this study, Sr-HAP was produced using collagen type I and citrate. Micro-CT imaging showed that no significant differences were present between the scaffolds fabricated with strontium and without strontium. The results revealed that 12 weeks after surgery, the Sr-HAP group presented greater bone growth than the control, as well as improved cell adhesion and proliferation, with increased alkaline phosphatase activity, and enhanced osteogenic capacity. 132
## (s19) Metallic Nanomaterials
(p19.0) Metallic scaffolds have vast potential for healing bones in load-bearing areas because of their mechanical properties. However, the development of biodegradable metallic implants is a complicated process due to the specific medical requirements for the patients depending on the type of bone, location of the defect, healing rate of the bone. 149 Titanium (Ti) and its alloys are broadly used as implants in clinical orthopedic applications due to their stable nature and excellent biocompatibility. 150,151 Nonetheless, Ti-based alloys have some limitations as implant material such as non-biodegradability because of its superior corrosion resistance and high stiffness, which may result in implant failure. 152 In comparison with Tibased metals, iron (Fe)-based metals are the most commonly used biodegradable metals and it exhibits mechanical characteristics resembling that of natural bone. 153,154 However, Fe exhibits a relatively slower rate of degradation, which gives an adequate period for new bone ingrowth, while also providing the required mechanical support. 155,156 The biocompatibility of Fe needs further research, thereby limiting its applications in bone tissue regeneration. To overcome this limitation, bioceramic surface coating is one of the approaches which can enhance biocompatibility. 155 HA coating on metallic implants shows magnificent bone integration because it is the chief mineral component of bone. 157,158 To evaluate their property, Yang et al 159 applied nanostructured HA onto 3D-printed Fe scaffolds for better bone regeneration. In this study, the pure Fe scaffold was fabricated by the use of the 3D-printing method and then the surface was modified with HA. This surface modification allowed for the survival of rabbit bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs). These scaffolds possessed high porosities, while the compressive yield strength and Young's modulus corresponded to those seen in natural bone. The scaffolds showed a high binding ability to bone, enhanced viability, alkaline phosphatase activity, and osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs cultured on the scaffold. Therefore, for load-bearing bones, 3D-printed Fe scaffolds coated with nano-HA may be a favorable choice for bone regeneration. 159
## (s23) Ceramic Based Nanomaterials
(p23.0) Nanoceramics with their crystallographic structure and strong atomic bonds have gained attention in bone repair owing to their superior characteristics such as high thermal stability, high corrosion resistance, chemical stability, biocompatibility, stability, increased hardness, cell-matrix interaction, strength, and wear resistance. [190][191][192] In comparison with conventional ceramics, nanoceramics possessed distinctive properties such as processing, mechanical, and surface characteristics, which make them suitable materials for bone tissue engineering applications. 193 Nevertheless, there are certain limitations of nanoceramic materials such as weak tensile modulus, brittle nature, and lower toughness. To overcome these drawbacks, nanoceramic materials were incorporated into polymer matrices. 190 Mondal et al 194 evaluated the 3D printed PLA scaffold with reinforced nano-HA bioceramics. The scaffolds were 3D printed in 0°, 45°, and 90° printing angles on the XY plane. This study revealed that the 90° orientation provided PLA scaffolds with maximum compressive stress and porosity, along with enhanced cell attachment and proliferation capability. These results showed that HA nanoparticles enhanced scaffold surface activity and mechanical strength making them a suitable material for bone tissue engineering. 194
