# The Weak Ring of the COVID-19 Pandemic: The Elderly (A Literature Review)

CorpusID: 235251864 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ebce142cde0fcd5473fd62ef5ee66c6d7719c8b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ebce142cde0fcd5473fd62ef5ee66c6d7719c8b)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s1) Method
(p1.0) The PRISMA flow chart illustrating the selection process for all included and excluded studies were given in Figure 1. Total of 561 studies were examined detected by database scan. 60 out of 463 studies were examined according to the research criteria and common results from these studies were given. The review was performed in accordance with Preferred Recording Items for Systematic Review and Meta-analysis (PRISMA) Statements [18]. Studies that did not directly or indirectly address the elderly population were excluded. Publications with the language of publication in English were examined and publications in other languages were not included in the study.
## (s2) Literature search
(p2.0) A literature review of studies examining older adults and COVID-19 issues was conducted. PubMed and Web of Science were selected from databases indexing world health sciences research studies. The search period was planned to cover the years 15  been clinically confirmed [4]. Individuals of all ages can become infected with SARS-CoV-2, but adults of middle age and older are the most affected. The elderly is more likely to have the disease and the symptoms [5,6]. Older age is also associated with increased mortality. According to the China Center for Disease Control and Prevention, it has been reported that the mortality rate of all cases is 2.3%, while the mortality rate between the ages of 70 and 79 is 8%, and those aged 80 and over are 15% [7]. In an analysis conducted in the United Kingdom, the risk of death of individuals aged 80 and over was found to be 20 times higher than the death risk of individuals aged 50 to 59 [8]. In the United States, 67% of 2449 patients diagnosed with COVID-19 between February 12 and March 16 in 2020 were older than 45. Similar to the findings in China, the death rate was the highest among older people, with 80% of deaths occurring among older people. In a research conducted; individuals aged 18 to 34 years were reported to account for only 5% of adults hospitalized for COVID-19, with a death rate of 2.7%. Morbid obesity, hypertension and male gender were reported to be highly associated with these deaths [9,10]. In the elderly, due to age-related physiological changes, the immune system weakens and insufficient response occurs.

(p2.1) Increased risk of invasion by pathogenic organisms is observed due to changes in the barriers formed by the skin, lungs and gastrointestinal system. The risk of intracellular pathogen detection increases due to the loss of the proliferative capacity of immune cells and the reduced production of specific cytokines such as interleukin 2. After infection, cells in the elderly have impaired defense system against fungal and viral pathogens due to impaired signal transduction after cytokine binding. They give reduced antibody response to vaccines associated with decreases in CD8 and CD4 cell populations and changes in B cell biology. Accordingly, the infection causes antibody responses associated with impaired immunoglobulin production and reduction in B cells [11][12][13]. Older adults with chronic diseases such as diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or heart failure are more immune compromised, resulting in greater susceptibility to common infections and poorer vaccine responses. The risk of infection in elderly patients generally increases in other social areas such as social settings, crowded places, day care centers and elderly nursing homes [14,15]. Comorbidities associated with severe disease can be listed as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, hypertension, chronic lung disease, cancer (especially hematological malignancies, lung cancer and metastases), chronic kidney disease, obesity, and smoking.

(p2.2) Among patients with advanced age and these medical comorbidities, COVID-19 infection is severe. For example, in the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak that occurred in several long-term care facilities in Washington State, the  According to the literature, the results of the studies evaluating the negative effects of COVID-19 on the elderly in many aspects are shown in Figure 2. In the study with lowest participant (n: 93) the mean age is 73 and the outcome of the study is interpretation of increased loneliness, sleep problems and psychological problems in the elderly [42]. At the same time, in the study with highest participant (n: 6186) the participants mean age is 36 including the elderly population and the outcome of the study is increased loneliness [43,44]. The highest mean age (82) of the participants is seen in study of face-to-face survey in Norway [45].
## (s4) Results
(p4.0) According to PRISMA guideline; 60 studies were examined and 8 of them was given as an example in Table  1 Table 1. elderly to pain and created a weakness in their struggle [51]. It was obligatory for patients who needed physiotherapy to direct their treatment to home-based applications, but their treatment was interrupted during the restriction period. In a study conducted in patients with Parkinson's, it was found that depressive thoughts of patients who could not receive physical therapy increased and their treatment was disrupted during the pandemic [55].
