# Effect of Metal Nanopowders on the Performance of Solid Rocket Propellants: A Review

CorpusID: 239248911 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c7a2f9faa45e03b68ca3ed402af7750216556a3b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c7a2f9faa45e03b68ca3ed402af7750216556a3b)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s2) Coating of nAl
(p2.0) The materials for surface coating of nAl powders are mostly inorganic materials, organic materials, energetic materials (such as carbon, metal, and metal oxide coating), polymer coating, etc. Coating of nAl can form core-shell structures, and core-shell structured nano metals have gained considerable attention due to their improved material properties and combined multiple functionalities. Core-shell structured nano energetic materials mainly include core-shell structured explosives and metastable intermolecular complex (MICs). For core-shell explosives, the "shell" acts as a protective "coat" on sensitive explosives, making them more resistant to external stimuli such as high temperature, friction, impact, static electricity, and compression. For core-shell structured MICs, the fuel and oxidizer are like a well-matched "gear"; they have large and close contact with each other, so that the thermite reaction is easier and more complete than other structured MICs, resulting in increased heat output and improved reactivity. Figure 1 schematically illustrates the advantages of core-shell structured particles. Figure 1. Schematic of core-shell structured nEMs advantages. Reproduced from [24], with permission from Wiley, 2020.
## (s3) Carbon Coating
(p3.0) Carbon-coated nAl powder (nAl@C) was first used by Rouff [25]. Generally, carbon is stable at low temperatures, and it can be oxidized to CO 2 at high temperatures without increasing the load of solid propellant. Thus, it is a good coating agent for nAl powders. For instance, one thin carbon coating using either a laser induced plasma or a DC plasma-arc was investigated, and the carbon coating was created by injecting ethylene (C 2 H 4 ) directly downstream of the plasma. The elemental composition of nAl@C was measured in real time with a recently developed quantitative single particle mass spectrometer (SPMS). It was found that the nAl@C features a layer of 1-3 nm thickness [26]. Another example is [27], where nAl@C was prepared under a methane and Ar gas atmosphere using laser-induction complex heating method: a core-shell structure of nanoparticles with 20-40 nm diameters and 3-8 nm thickness was obtained.
## (s4) Metal Coating
(p4.0) nAl can be coated with metals, such as B, nickel (Ni), etc. When B is used as the surface coating of nAl, the gasification of metal particles can be promoted during the heating process, and an extra exothermic enthalpy of (2.1-4.1) J g −1 can also be obtained [28]. For example, when nAl powder is coated with B (nAl@B), the dispersion of nAl@B improves, the onset oxygen temperature increases by 30-40 • C, and the heat of combustion of Al also increases due to the AlB 2 coating layer. Moreover, the active Al content of nAl@B shows little change after storage in air with 70% humidity for one year [29].
## (s9) Fluoride Coating
(p9.0) Based on theoretical calculations, fluorine was proposed as an additional oxidizer to change the reaction rates and Al combustion mechanisms. A typical preparation process is shown in Figure 3 [54]. It was found that the underwater explosion energy increases with increasing fluorine content in the binder, while it decreases with increasing binder content [55]. Thus, nAl powders prepared by EEW method were coated with 5%, 10%, and 15% of fluororubber (nAl@F). Results show that the specific surface area of the nAl@F powders is slightly larger than that of the passivated nAl powders, while the active Al content is up to 85.85%. Fluororubber coatings chemically adsorb on the surface of nAl powder, which enhances the thermal stability of nAl and prevents further oxidation. The fluororubber also promotes the combustion of nAl powders, and the heat of combustion of the nAl@F is higher than that of nAl powders. The effect of nAl@F on the combustion properties of HTPB-based fuels was also investigated [57]. The results showed that nAl@F powder has a certain promoting effect on the regression rate of the fuel, and this effect is independent of the oxidizer mass flux. The regression rate of the fuel with nAl@F is 13% higher than that of the fuel without nAl@F over the oxygen mass flux range of 100-380 kg·m −2 ·s −1 . In another instance, the effect of morphology, structure, and active Al content of the coated nAl particles with phenolic resin (PF), fluororubber (Viton B), and shellac through a solvent/nonsolvent method were investigated. The results indicated that the coated nAl particles have coreshell structures, and the thickness of the coating film is 5-15 nm. Viton B coating has a much better protective effect by the active Al content. The energy amount and energy release rate of nAl@PF, nAl@Viton B, and nAl@shellac particles were larger than those of the raw nAl [58].
## (s22) Prospects and Future Trends of Metal Nanopowders
(p22.0) For Al nanopowders, the steady burning rates are not affected by particles in the micrometric range (Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) ≤ 2 m 2 g −1 ) but strongly increased by decreasing size particles over the explored nanometric range; for very small particles, the appreciable decrease in active metal hinders a further increase in steady burning rate. Pressure exponents showed only minor changes within the limits of strand burner experiments conducted under standard operating conditions. Additionally, for ignition, an appreciable decrease is found for nAl particles in the range 0.1-0.2 µm, while little effect was observed for µAl. The minute nAl powder manifest a strong reactivity mainly due to their increased specific surface, notwithstanding the simultaneous decrease in active Al content (typically, from 99.6% of 17 µm Al to 88.2% for nAl produced by electrical explosion of wires) [98]. Within the current rocket propulsion technology, ultrafine particles, such as in the range 50-150 nm, are preferable to true nanosized particles. Maybe this will change in the future, but not in the short term [99].
