# Critical Perspectives Assessing the Risks to Bats from Plant Protection Products: A Review of the Recent European Food Safety Authority Statement Regarding Toxicity and Exposure Routes

CorpusID: 237468569 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92f706157f1eb026a10f3075193df786e1ccdc41](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92f706157f1eb026a10f3075193df786e1ccdc41)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s2) BIOACCUMULATION
(p2.0) In terms of bioaccumulation, the focus in the EFSA bat statement was to investigate whether there is greater concern for bats than for birds or ground-dwelling mammals and, therefore, whether the existing secondary poisoning risk assessment scheme within the EFSA (2009) is sufficiently protective. This concern predominantly arises due to the occurrence of hibernation and torpor (controlled reduction of body temperature and metabolic rate reducing energy expenditure) in bats. Bats accumulate stores of brown and white fats during active periods that are then metabolized and used as energy during hibernation and torpor as well as during arousal from these states. The EFSA bat statement postulates that high fat consumption during hibernation may expose bats to mobilized accumulated lipophilic active substances, potentially increasing the risk of direct mortality. For example, a study by Clark and Krynitsky (1983) investigating dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE) observed high residues in brown fats, which were metabolized during hibernation and resulted in markedly increased DDE concentrations in the body. Although no toxic effects were identified in the study, Clark and Krynitsky (1983) questioned whether such effects may occur in the event of higher initial fat concentrations or for more toxic active substances. We do not consider it useful to refer to such legacy compounds for the assessment of current pesticide chemistry, with problematic compounds such as these now being screened out during the mandatory assessment of persistence, bioaccumulation, and toxicity (PBT).
## (s4) Oral exposure
(p4.0) Food intake rates. The food-intake rate (FIR) is a key driver in determining the extent of dietary exposure, and therefore the data used for FIR calculation is critical. The EFSA bat statement attempts to estimate bat-specific values based on consumption of contaminated food, to calculate shortcut values that are directly compared with those in the EFSA statement (2009).

(p4.1) For the purposes of a bat-specific FIR calculation, the authors of the EFSA bat statement have used data from two studies-one on Myotis lucifugus (Kurta & Kunz, 1988) and the other on Plecotus auritus (McLean & Speakman, 1999). Myotis lucifugus is an endangered species of insectivorous microbat found in North America, and P. auritus is a small Eurasian insectivorous species of bat found across Europe. The daily energy requirement and weight of lactating M. lucifugus was chosen for use in the FIR/body weight calculation, because the data from that study was stated to be more reliable and the species more representative of European bat species based on their size. The relevance of the approach taken is considered in detail below.
