# -NC-ND license Can ozone inactivate SARS-CoV-2? A review of mechanisms and performance on viruses

CorpusID: 232220006 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6cc7d38a5991fe3f4863b87da9ed834728391048](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6cc7d38a5991fe3f4863b87da9ed834728391048)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s5) Mechanisms of viral inactivation by ozone
(p5.0) Ozone is a powerful oxidizing agent with many industrial applications for water and air treatment among others (Martinelli et al., 2017;Wei et al., 2017). Even though the lethality of O 3 against viruses is widely known, the understanding of the inactivation mechanisms still remains limited. Most of this knowledge comes from studies dealing with virus disinfection by ozone in water, although it might be expected that it can be extrapolated to the disinfection in other media such as aerosols or solid surfaces, as similar principles may apply .
## (s7) Main results and comparison of references
(p7.0) 19 works have been found to fulfill the described requirements in their study of the inactivation of viruses in aerosols and fomites by means of ozone in gas-phase. This number was expected to be higher due to the relevant interest of the topic and the well-known effectivity of O 3 as disinfectant in aqueous phase (Hirneisen et al., 2010;Khadre et al., 2001). Table 1 and Table 2 summarize the main results of these publications. The papers working with viruses present on aerosols (Table 1) focused on confirming the ozone efficacy as general disinfectant and determining the optimal application conditions (Dubuis et al., 2020;Tseng and Li, 2006;Vyskocil et al., 2020) and defining the ozone attack mechanism (de Mik and de Groot, 1977). Noteworthy was the work carried out by Dubuis et al. (2020), who proposed using ozone at low concentration for disinfecting air ducts or rooms. Authors studied the effectiveness of ozone for inactivating four types of phages and a norovirus at low ozone doses and different humidity. They achieved up to 3-4 log 10 reduction in all viruses tested with exposures between 0.023 and 0.158 mg L -1 min. Similar work was done by Tseng and Li (2006), who studied the effects of ozone concentration, contact time, different capsid architecture and relative humidity on inactivating four airborne bacteriophage viruses. Authors found that ozone was effective for all the tested viruses. Survival fraction of viruses decreased exponentially with ozone dose, being for 90% of inactivation 2 times higher than that for 99%. For all viruses, the required ozone dose at 85% relative humidity (RH) was lower than that at 55%.
## (s23) Mechanisms of viral inactivation by ozone
(p23.0) Ozone is a powerful oxidizing agent with many industrial applications for water and air treatment among others (Martinelli et al., 2017;Wei et al., 2017). Even though the lethality of O 3 against viruses is widely known, the understanding of the inactivation mechanisms still remains limited. Most of this knowledge comes from studies dealing with virus disinfection by ozone in water, although it might be expected that it can be extrapolated to the disinfection in other media such as aerosols or solid surfaces, as similar principles may apply .
## (s25) Main results and comparison of references
(p25.0) 19 works have been found to fulfill the described requirements in their study of the inactivation of viruses in aerosols and fomites by means of ozone in gas-phase. This number was expected to be higher due to the relevant interest of the topic and the well-known effectivity of O 3 as disinfectant in aqueous phase (Hirneisen et al., 2010;Khadre et al., 2001). Table 1 and Table 2 summarize the main results of these publications. The papers working with viruses present on aerosols (Table 1) focused on confirming the ozone efficacy as general disinfectant and determining the optimal application conditions (Dubuis et al., 2020;Tseng and Li, 2006;Vyskocil et al., 2020) and defining the ozone attack mechanism (de Mik and de Groot, 1977). Noteworthy was the work carried out by Dubuis et al. (2020), who proposed using ozone at low concentration for disinfecting air ducts or rooms. Authors studied the effectiveness of ozone for inactivating four types of phages and a norovirus at low ozone doses and different humidity. They achieved up to 3-4 log 10 reduction in all viruses tested with exposures between 0.023 and 0.158 mg L -1 min. Similar work was done by Tseng and Li (2006), who studied the effects of ozone concentration, contact time, different capsid architecture and relative humidity on inactivating four airborne bacteriophage viruses. Authors found that ozone was effective for all the tested viruses. Survival fraction of viruses decreased exponentially with ozone dose, being for 90% of inactivation 2 times higher than that for 99%. For all viruses, the required ozone dose at 85% relative humidity (RH) was lower than that at 55%.
## (s41) Mechanisms of viral inactivation by ozone
(p41.0) Ozone is a powerful oxidizing agent with many industrial applications for water and air treatment among others (Martinelli et al., 2017;Wei et al., 2017). Even though the lethality of O 3 against viruses is widely known, the understanding of the inactivation mechanisms still remains limited. Most of this knowledge comes from studies dealing with virus disinfection by ozone in water, although it might be expected that it can be extrapolated to the disinfection in other media such as aerosols or solid surfaces, as similar principles may apply .
## (s43) Main results and comparison of references
(p43.0) 19 works have been found to fulfill the described requirements in their study of the inactivation of viruses in aerosols and fomites by means of ozone in gas-phase. This number was expected to be higher due to the relevant interest of the topic and the well-known effectivity of O 3 as disinfectant in aqueous phase (Hirneisen et al., 2010;Khadre et al., 2001). Table 1 and Table 2 summarize the main results of these publications. The papers working with viruses present on aerosols (Table 1) focused on confirming the ozone efficacy as general disinfectant and determining the optimal application conditions (Dubuis et al., 2020;Tseng and Li, 2006;Vyskocil et al., 2020) and defining the ozone attack mechanism (de Mik and de Groot, 1977). Noteworthy was the work carried out by Dubuis et al. (2020), who proposed using ozone at low concentration for disinfecting air ducts or rooms. Authors studied the effectiveness of ozone for inactivating four types of phages and a norovirus at low ozone doses and different humidity. They achieved up to 3-4 log 10 reduction in all viruses tested with exposures between 0.023 and 0.158 mg L -1 min. Similar work was done by Tseng and Li (2006), who studied the effects of ozone concentration, contact time, different capsid architecture and relative humidity on inactivating four airborne bacteriophage viruses. Authors found that ozone was effective for all the tested viruses. Survival fraction of viruses decreased exponentially with ozone dose, being for 90% of inactivation 2 times higher than that for 99%. For all viruses, the required ozone dose at 85% relative humidity (RH) was lower than that at 55%.
## (s59) Mechanisms of viral inactivation by ozone
(p59.0) Ozone is a powerful oxidizing agent with many industrial applications for water and air treatment among others (Martinelli et al., 2017;Wei et al., 2017). Even though the lethality of O 3 against viruses is widely known, the understanding of the inactivation mechanisms still remains limited. Most of this knowledge comes from studies dealing with virus disinfection by ozone in water, although it might be expected that it can be extrapolated to the disinfection in other media such as aerosols or solid surfaces, as similar principles may apply .
## (s61) Main results and comparison of references
(p61.0) 19 works have been found to fulfill the described requirements in their study of the inactivation of viruses in aerosols and fomites by means of ozone in gas-phase. This number was expected to be higher due to the relevant interest of the topic and the well-known effectivity of O 3 as disinfectant in aqueous phase (Hirneisen et al., 2010;Khadre et al., 2001). Table 1 and Table 2 summarize the main results of these publications. The papers working with viruses present on aerosols (Table 1) focused on confirming the ozone efficacy as general disinfectant and determining the optimal application conditions (Dubuis et al., 2020;Tseng and Li, 2006;Vyskocil et al., 2020) and defining the ozone attack mechanism (de Mik and de Groot, 1977). Noteworthy was the work carried out by Dubuis et al. (2020), who proposed using ozone at low concentration for disinfecting air ducts or rooms. Authors studied the effectiveness of ozone for inactivating four types of phages and a norovirus at low ozone doses and different humidity. They achieved up to 3-4 log 10 reduction in all viruses tested with exposures between 0.023 and 0.158 mg L -1 min. Similar work was done by Tseng and Li (2006), who studied the effects of ozone concentration, contact time, different capsid architecture and relative humidity on inactivating four airborne bacteriophage viruses. Authors found that ozone was effective for all the tested viruses. Survival fraction of viruses decreased exponentially with ozone dose, being for 90% of inactivation 2 times higher than that for 99%. For all viruses, the required ozone dose at 85% relative humidity (RH) was lower than that at 55%.
## (s77) Mechanisms of viral inactivation by ozone
(p77.0) Ozone is a powerful oxidizing agent with many industrial applications for water and air treatment among others (Martinelli et al., 2017;Wei et al., 2017). Even though the lethality of O 3 against viruses is widely known, the understanding of the inactivation mechanisms still remains limited. Most of this knowledge comes from studies dealing with virus disinfection by ozone in water, although it might be expected that it can be extrapolated to the disinfection in other media such as aerosols or solid surfaces, as similar principles may apply .
## (s79) Main results and comparison of references
(p79.0) 19 works have been found to fulfill the described requirements in their study of the inactivation of viruses in aerosols and fomites by means of ozone in gas-phase. This number was expected to be higher due to the relevant interest of the topic and the well-known effectivity of O 3 as disinfectant in aqueous phase (Hirneisen et al., 2010;Khadre et al., 2001). Table 1 and Table 2 summarize the main results of these publications. The papers working with viruses present on aerosols (Table 1) focused on confirming the ozone efficacy as general disinfectant and determining the optimal application conditions (Dubuis et al., 2020;Tseng and Li, 2006;Vyskocil et al., 2020) and defining the ozone attack mechanism (de Mik and de Groot, 1977). Noteworthy was the work carried out by Dubuis et al. (2020), who proposed using ozone at low concentration for disinfecting air ducts or rooms. Authors studied the effectiveness of ozone for inactivating four types of phages and a norovirus at low ozone doses and different humidity. They achieved up to 3-4 log 10 reduction in all viruses tested with exposures between 0.023 and 0.158 mg L -1 min. Similar work was done by Tseng and Li (2006), who studied the effects of ozone concentration, contact time, different capsid architecture and relative humidity on inactivating four airborne bacteriophage viruses. Authors found that ozone was effective for all the tested viruses. Survival fraction of viruses decreased exponentially with ozone dose, being for 90% of inactivation 2 times higher than that for 99%. For all viruses, the required ozone dose at 85% relative humidity (RH) was lower than that at 55%.
