# polymers Interfacial Phenomena in Multi-Micro-/Nanolayered Polymer Coextrusion: A Review of Fundamental and Engineering Aspects

CorpusID: 231759900 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/89fc7c0dc3eb5cfccb562c99c29403edfb2f8ef6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/89fc7c0dc3eb5cfccb562c99c29403edfb2f8ef6)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s2) Interfacial Diffusion
(p2.0) When two polymers are brought into contact at a temperature above the glass transition temperature, particularly at the melt state, the movement of polymer chains across the interface results in an interdiffusion process driven by the entropic advantage between components [26][27][28][29]. Interdiffusion has been an important issue in multicomponent polymer blends and multilayered composites. The presence of interdiffusion enhances polymer-polymer adhesion and stabilizes the interfaces [26,30,31]. This phenomenon is also important in controlling the glass transition temperatures [32,33], microstructure development [5,34], gas permeability [35], and mechanical [30], optical [4], and electric properties [36] of multicomponent polymer products.
## (s4) Interdiffusion in Micro-/Nanolayer Coextrusion
(p4.0) Interdiffusion also occurs in multilayer coextrusion, in which a resulting interphase is generated by localized interlayer mixing [4,35,36]. This interdiffusion behavior in multilayer coextrusion can be viewed in Figure 2, which illustrates the coextrusion of nylon with two different grades of ethylene vinyl alcohol (EVOH) with different ethylene contents: EVOH44 (44 mol% ethylene) and EVOH24 (24 mol% ethylene) [40]. Obviously, well-defined layer boundaries with sharp interfaces can be observed in 17-layered films, and 129-layered films show a diffused interphase, but the two polymer components are still visible in this sample. When the number of layers increases to 1025, however, completely interdiffused nylon/EVOH layers are observed therein. This clearly indicates the existence of interdiffusion during coextrusion due to the intermixing of component layers. Miscibility between the nylon and EVOH melts causes the layers to diffuse from the time that they are combined in the feedblock until the melt is quenched after exiting the die. Coextrusion through an increasing number of layer-multiplying dies increases the number of layer interfaces and prolongs the melt contact time while decreasing the layer thicknesses. The degree of interlayer interdiffusion rapidly increases and, after several multiplications, forces the entire melt toward a homogeneous blend. A few studies have addressed theories describing the interdiffusion phenomenon during practical coextrusion processing. In a pioneering work, Baer and his coworkers studied interdiffusion in a microlayered system of polycarbonate (PC) and copolyester (KODAR) and proposed an interdiffusion model to explain the diffusion occurring during the coextrusion process [41]. An interfacial composition profile can be calculated via Fick's equation as follows:

(p4.1) where W i is the weight fraction of species i, t is the diffusion time, x is the position, and D m is the mutual diffusion coefficient. Only one-half layers of the two components were considered due to the symmetry of the layered structure. Many assumptions equivalent to the case of weakly interacting polymer pairs were used in this analysis. There are some assumptions: (i) the mutual diffusion coefficient is dependent on temperature but independent of the composition; (ii) the position of the interface between adjacent layers is constant; and (iii) the initial interface is sharp, and the composition gradient at the boundaries of the interdiffusion element is equal to zero:
## (s6) Interfacial Slip
(p6.0) Most commercial polymers are immiscible, and the interfacial region between them may be of a lower density than the constituent bulk materials. A significant slip can, therefore, occur during the flow due to reduced entanglements at their interface [52]. Especially for the cases in which components in a layered material have little compatibility or adhesion, densitometry variations within layered films with high numbers of layer interfaces can result in nontrivial interphase volumes. Interphases with reduced polymer chain entanglements have been demonstrated to induce interfacial instability, when films are processed under high shear rates through a mechanism assigned to the interfacial slip.

(p6.1) Interfacial slip in multilayer systems was ever studied using coextruded polypropylene (PP)/polystyrene (PS) multilayers with closely matched viscosities [3,53,54]. An obvious deviation was found in the measured pressure drops of multilayers from those of the homopolymers as well as in the nominal viscosity, especially for larger numbers of layers ( Figure 5) [53]. These deviations increased with the flow rate. These data are strong evidence for apparent slip, indicating a thin, low-viscosity layer between the PP and PS interfaces. Significant layer instability, characterized by layer breakup and/or delamination, was found in nanolayered samples, which could result from interfacial slip ( Figure 5). Besides, with another multilayered system of PS/PMMA (smaller Flory-Huggins parameter χ than PP/PS), a slight pressure drop and slip velocity decreased with the interfacial width [3]. In addition, the incorporation of a premade polystyreneblock-ethyl-ethylene-diblock copolymer P(S-b-EE) to the PP/PS system could suppress the interfacial slip [3]. The interfacial slip phenomenon suggests the importance of interfacial interactions and adequate adhesion in multilayered polymers during processing, beyond the common expectation of matching viscosities. Eliminating the possibility of interfacial slip is of remarkable importance if highly regular and continuous layer architecture is required for the target properties.
## (s7) Layer Breakup in Nanolayer Coextrusion
(p7.0) The layer breakup phenomenon has been observed in many nanolayered systems during coextrusion, with layers breaking spontaneously during the process and losing their integrity [33,51,[55][56][57]. This breakup phenomenon has been observed in different polymer pairs, and the layer-continuity limit appeared to be system dependent. Hiltner and coworkers found that efforts to obtain PMMA nanolayers thinner than 5 nm resulted in layer breakup and instability in polycarbonate (PC)/PMMA multilayers [33]. Meanwhile, in a PP/PS system, the layers break up when the layer thickness is thinner than 25 nm PP/PS [56]. Layer breakup alters the layered structure and can even adversely affect the final properties. In the presence of layer breakup, Hiltner and coworkers observed a reduction in the barrier property of PP/poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) nanolayer film [58]. For the moment, the mechanism governing layer breakup in nanolayers is still lacking in the open literature. Interfacial distortions (viscous encapsulation or secondary flows) during coextrusion might be generally responsible for the layer breakup. In addition, interfacial instabilities due to an initial disturbance at the interfaces may be amplified along the flow in the die, which can also induce layer ruptures [59]. In addition, material characteristics have also been demonstrated to contribute to the layer breakup. With a PS/PMMA multilayer system, Bironeau et al. recently reported the existence of a critical layer thickness of around 10 nm, below which the layers break up [51]. They attributed this breakup phenomenon to small interfacial disturbances that are amplified by van der Waals disjoining forces. The critical layer thickness is independent of the processing parameters, but presumably dependent only on material characteristics. In another system of poly(vinylidene fluorideco-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP)/polycarbonate (PC) with substantial rheological mismatch, at a nominal layer thickness below 160 nm, layers break up into microsheets and droplets triggered by viscoelastic differences between component melts (Figure 6), which dramatically alters the resulting dielectric properties [60]. Nevertheless, a clear mechanism responsible for layer breakup in the multilayered polymers still remains as an open question. More experimental and theoretical studies still need to be performed in order to better understand this phenomenon in the multilayer coextrusion process.  
## (s9) Basic Theories
(p9.0) Considerable efforts have been dedicated to understanding the fundamental kinetics and mechanisms of interfacial reaction over the past 20 years. Theoretically, many studies are based on a planar interface in a simple model bilayer under static conditions, and the reaction kinetics reported can be generally categorized under two different mechanisms: a reaction-controlled mechanism and a diffusion-controlled mechanism. Fredrickson and Milner [61,62] studied the coupling reactions occurring at the interface between two symmetrical polymers (with the same degree of polymerization, N A = N B ). The formation of copolymers, i.e., reactive coupling kinetics at polymer-polymer interfaces, was predicted to take place in three stages as follows. (i) At early times, the kinetics of the coupling reaction at the interface between reactive moieties controls the amount of copolymers at the interface, which (interfacial coverage) grows linearly with time. (ii) At intermediate times, the saturation of copolymers at the interface remains negligible, but a depletion hole of reactants builds up around the interface; the growth is dominated by the diffusion of the more dilute reactive species to the interface. (iii) For longer times, copolymers gradually form a copolymer layer at the interface. This interfacial copolymer layer generates a significant chemical potential barrier for unreacted homopolymers that strongly suppresses and controls the kinetics of the reaction by limiting the diffusion of reactive moieties to the interface for further reaction. O'Shaughnessy et al. [63,64] argued that the reaction over the first two steps should depend on the reactivity of the functional groups, especially for the reaction with weakly reactive pairs at the very beginning of the process. Nevertheless, they agreed on the third regime regarding the formation of an energy barrier resulting from the accumulation of copolymers at the interface. Generally speaking, the reaction-controlled mechanism is believed to be more appropriate in describing the short-time reaction for polymers with low reactivity. On the other hand, the diffusion-controlled mechanism is suitable in situations in which a reaction with high reactivity takes place over a longer time period. The transition from reaction-controlled kinetics to diffusion-controlled kinetics can be expected for reactions with high reactivity [65].
## (s11) Reaction under Equilibrium Conditions
(p11.0) Macosko and coworkers performed a considerable number of studies on the interfacial reactions and morphological development at polymer-polymer interfaces under equilibrium conditions (without flows) [2]. For example, they examined the changes in the interfacial morphology upon the coupling reaction between aliphatic amine-terminated polystyrene (PS-NH 2 ) and anhydride-terminated poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMAah) [66]. A roughening interface can be observed after 20 min annealing as a result of the coupling reaction (Figure 7). Another interesting observation is that a lamellar microstructure appears at the interface of the thin domains after 1 h annealing, which indicates the formation of a PS-PMMA block copolymer. The interfacial roughening is explained by the large decrease in interfacial tension due to the creation of copolymers at the interface. The authors also supposed that local fluctuations might be induced by thermal fluctuations when block copolymer coverage at the interface decreases below the saturation level. This creates a new interfacial area that allows new reactive moieties to reach the interface and new copolymers to be formed. Interfacial instabilities continuously create a new interface in such a way that the interface becomes rough. 
## (s13) Effects of Oscillatory Shear Flow
(p13.0) Oscillatory shear amplitude and angular frequency also have a substantial influence on the interfacial reaction kinetics and morphology development [71]. A smaller strain amplitude (γ 0 ) and angular frequency (ω) were found to enhance the extent of reaction and the generation of an interphase. By contrast, at larger strains and angular frequencies, oscillatory shearing inhibits the diffusion of polymer chains to the interface and thus also inhibits reactions therein. In addition, a large strain can generate alternating layers of PS-mCOOH/PMMA-graft-PS copolymer, which act as a barrier for the diffusion of reactive chains to the interface, thereby restricting interfacial reactions. On the other hand, a higher ω can break the interface and generate a multilayer of graft copolymer. In this situation, even though a lower ω is applied again, further reaction does not occur; this inhibition, therefore, becomes a permanent obstacle to further interfacial reactions. Additionally, it is observed that the perpendicular shear force greatly enhances the roughness of the interface as compared with parallel shear force applied to a reactive bilayer [72]. Here, the perpendicular shearing applied to the reactive bilayer also leads to the formation of microemulsions that could markedly stabilize the interfacial morphology.
## (s14) Interfacial Reaction in Multilayer Coextrusion
(p14.0) Macosko and coworkers [73] investigated the interfacial coupling reaction during coextrusion with a 640-layer PS-NH 2 /anthracene-labeled anhydride-terminal PMMA (PMMAanh-anth) system prepared by multilayer coextrusion. They found that a significant amount of PS-b-PMMA copolymers are formed during coextrusion, such that the interfaces were almost saturated with the block copolymers formed in situ. The interface became roughened, and interfacial emulsification could be observed due to high block copolymer coverage. Coextrusion processing significantly accelerated the coupling reaction of PS-NH 2 /PMMAanh and reduced the reaction time by more than three orders of magnitude as compared with that under quiescent annealing. The external flow under coextrusion could overcome the combined effects of high surface energy of the functional groups and slow diffusion, increasing the functional group concentration in the interfaces. In particular, the extensional deformation could be more important than shear in accelerating coupling. Flow-accelerated interfacial reaction kinetics were also noticed in other layered systems [74,75]. In a recent study, the compressive flow in coextrusion was demonstrated to play a crucial role in accelerating the coupling reaction [76]. Strikingly, coextrusion with compressive flow resulted in a reaction rate two orders of magnitude faster than that without compressive flow and enabled stronger adhesion. Besides, mechanical properties of coextruded multilayers with in-situ compatibilization reactions are significantly enhanced [7,77,78]. As illustrated by Figure 9, coextruded layers of polyurethane (PU) and functional polyethylene (PE) with amine groups (NHR) exhibit dramatically the higher peel strength at a shorter reaction time in comparison with these produced from lamination process [79]. This acceleration was attributed to the combined extensional and compressive flows in coextrusion that overcome the diffusion barrier at the interface and forcing reactive species to penetrate the interface. The interfacial reinforcement in the real micro-/nanolayer coextrusion show a strong dependence on the reaction time and the number of layers [13,80]. The resulting large enhancement in interfacial stress with the number of layers, characterized by an extensional strain hardening behavior, is attributed to the increased density of copolymers at the interfaces.

(p14.1) Lamnawar and coworkers [81][82][83] prepared multilayer films of PA6/PP and EVOH/PP systems with maleic anhydride-grafted polypropylene (PP-g-AM) as a tie layer using reactive coextrusion. The macromolecular architecture of the copolymers formed at the interfaces critically influences the interfacial morphology evolution, viscoelasticity and processability of layered systems. Specifically, the interface in the pure grafting case of PA6/PP-g-AM bilayer is relatively flat, while the interface in EVOH/PP-g-AM bilayer is irregular and rough due to the presence of mixed grafting and cross-linking reactions. Particularly, under real coextrusion flows, with these copolymers of complex architecture, interfacial roughness and irregularities are further enlarged in the die exit as compared to those in the feedblock due to the accelerated reaction kinetics ( Figure 10). Additionally, the higher surface density of the EVOH-co-PP-g-MA copolymers generated at the interfaces further leads to an optical grainy defect and a loss of transparency in the resulting multilayer films [82,84].  
## (s16) Confined Crystallization
(p16.0) Geometrical/spatial confinement in multilayer coextrusion remarkably alters the crystallization behaviors and morphology within the confined crystalline polymer layers [25]. When layer thickness decreases, the crystalline morphology is gradually changed from a three-dimensional (3D) spherulite morphology into one-dimensional (1D) lamellar morphology. The confined crystallization in multilayer coextrusion has been observed in many systems with semicrystalline polymers as confined materials, including polypropylene (PP) [90,91], polyethylene (PE) [92,93], poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) [94], and poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) [23,95], typically confined by amorphous rigid polymers with the higher glass transition temperatures (e.g., PS) (i.e., confining materials). When the layer thickness decreases below the diameter of spherulites (100 µm), the lamellae organize into flattened/compressed spherulites as discoids, and the lamellae usually have a preferred in-plane orientation, such as edge-on morphology. For example, PEO confined by PS forms in-plane crystals with an improved orientation by reducing the layer thickness and even crystallizes into a single, in-plane, high aspect ratio lamellae crystal when layer thickness reaches the scale of lamellae thickness ( Figure 11) [25,96]. With further reduction in the layer thickness, the lamellae display edge-on morphology. In addition, a substantial reduction in permeability (by more than two orders of magnitude) has been noticed under confinement due to increased tortuosity of the diffusion pathway through the highly oriented lamellae [96]. With other crystalline polymers such as PVDF, geometrical confinement can induce other types of crystal morphologies and lamellar orientation [25,97,98]. It has been generally accepted that this confinement in the PVDF-containing multilayers greatly affects the resulting dielectric properties when used as capacitors [99][100][101]. 
## (s17) Confined Glass Transition Dynamics
(p17.0) Confinement at the layer-layer interfaces also influences the glass transitions of ascoextruded multilayer films [102]. For instance, a merging in glass transition temperatures (T g ) with increasing the number of layers was ever observed in PC/PMMA multilayer films, especially when the individual layer thicknesses were below 10 nm [32,33]. In particular, the degree of confinement depends on the layer thickness and the correction length scale of the confined layer materials. Delbreilh and coworkers [103] investigated molecular mobility at the glass transition evolution in PC/PMMA multilayered films from micro-to nanoscale, including the glass transition temperature (T g ) and cooperatively rearranging region (CRR) size. The molecular mobility in each polymer is found to be altered in entirely different ways as the layer thickness becomes thinner than 125 nm, whereby the constituent polymers exist as two-dimensional layers under these conditions. PC exhibits a drastic decrease in cooperativity volume at the glass transition due to the confinement effect associated with conformational changes in the macromolecular chain. By contrast, slight modifications were observed for PMMA, due to the weaker intermolecular interactions in the main chains compared to those of PC. However, in a recent study with PC/PMMA multilayered films with layer thickness as thin as 4 nm, Casalini et al. recently reported an absence of geometric confinement effects on dynamic correlation (CCR size) of PMMA (i.e., the same as the bulk), especially when the confinement length scale (layer thickness) approaches or is less than the correlation length scale (ξ) (Figure 12a) [104]. Neither the fragility nor the breadth of the relaxation dispersion was affected by the geometric confinement therein (Figure 12b,c). More significantly, the dynamic correlation volume/length representing the cooperativity of the dynamics was also unaffected. Instead, the increase in the local segmental relaxation time and glass transition temperature of PMMA with decreasing layer thickness was primarily attributed to its intermixing with the high-T g component (PC) at the extended interfacial region. 
