# A review of the evidence base for utilizing Child-Pugh criteria for guiding dosing of anticancer drugs in patients with cancer and liver impairment

CorpusID: 235370423 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5db912fb76aeb031c91a289dd959bdf4404f132](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5db912fb76aeb031c91a289dd959bdf4404f132)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) The liver is critically important for the metabolism and excretion of many anticancer drugs 1,2 and liver disease and/ or liver impairment in patients with cancer can alter drug pharmacokinetics, necessitating dose modification. Depending on the drug administered, impairment may slow the breakdown of active or toxic metabolites (i.e. increasing drug toxicity) or the activation of prodrugs (i.e. decreasing drug effectiveness). 3 Additionally, varying etiologies of liver impairment, such as liver metastases, previous anticancer treatments, cirrhosis, or hepatitis, may differently impact the pharmacokinetics of drugs. 3,4 The narrow therapeutic index of many anticancer drugs, 5 the possible toxicities from incorrect dosing, and the potential loss of efficacy from underdosing, all demonstrate the importance of determining the correct starting dose of drugs in patients with cancer and liver impairment.
## (s4) Dosing guidance for patients with liver impairment: prescribing information and SmPCs
(p4.0) According to the prescribing information and SmPCs of the 39 oncologic small molecule and cytotoxic drugs examined, recommendations for initial dosing in patients with liver impairment were based on liver function tests alone for 26% (10/39) of drugs and Child-Pugh scores alone for 46% (18/39) of drugs ( Figure 2; Supplementary Table S2, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2021.100162). Guidance was not specified (i.e. criteria defining liver impairment were not specified or specific guidance was not given) for 13% (5/39) of drugs; and guidance was based on both Child-Pugh scores and liver function tests for the remaining drugs (15%; 6/39) ( Figure 2; Supplementary Recommendations from the FDA and EMA are summarized separately because 7 of the 39 treatments did not have publicly available SmPCs at the time of manuscript preparation (August 2020). Based on the various drugs' prescribing information (FDA) documents, 31% (12/39) of drugs had recommendations based on liver function tests alone, 38% (15/39) had recommendations based on Child-Pugh scores alone, and the criteria for recommendations (or recommendations themselves) were not specified for 26% (10/39) of drugs ( Figure 2). Only copanlisib and osimertinib had recommendations based on both Child-Pugh scores and liver function tests ( Figure 2). Of the 32 with available SmPCs, these documents included dosing recommendations based on Child-Pugh scores alone in 63% (20/32) of drugs and liver function tests alone in 25% (8/32) of drugs. Specific recommendations/criteria for recommendations were not explicit in 6% (2/32) of drugs, and only osimertinib and venetoclax had recommendations for both Child-Pugh scores and liver function tests.

(p4.1) Comparison of pivotal trial data and dosing guidance summarized in prescribing information and/or SmPCs Of the 75 pivotal published studies referred to within the prescribing information and SmPCs of reviewed drugs, the full protocol was published along with the manuscript 71% (53/75) of the time (Supplementary Table S2  In the case of lenvatinib, the Child-Pugh criteria were used in an HCC trial protocol (REFLECT); however, liver function tests were also used as inclusion criteria. 11 For cabozantinib, the METEOR study in renal cell carcinoma excluded patients who were classified as having Child-Pugh class B or C; however, inclusion criteria were based on liver function tests. 12 And although the CELESTIAL study in HCC (cabozantinib was indicated for HCC in 2019) allowed the inclusion of patients classified as having Child-Pugh class A, liver function tests were also included as part of the entry criteria. 13 Overall, for 92% (22/24) of drugs where Child-Pugh scores were used for specific dosing recommendations in either the prescribing information or SmPCs (or both), Child-Pugh criteria had not been used in the pivotal trial.
## (s6) CONCLUSION
(p6.0) A variety of possible criteria may help clinicians assess liver function in patients with cancer. 1 The number of FDA and EMA dosing recommendations based on Child-Pugh criteria alone is concerning, given that only 8% of drugs approved by the FDA from 2014 to 2018 had pivotal trials that used the Child-Pugh criteria within their inclusion and exclusion criteria. Moreover, only 42% (10/24) of drugs (that used Child-Pugh criteria for dosing recommendations in prescribing information and/or SmPCs) had a peer-reviewed publication describing dosing and pharmacokinetics according to Child-Pugh criteria, and all these studies were limited in size (33 patients). In addition, of these pharmacokinetics studies involving the Child-Pugh criteria only 3 out of these 10 recruited patients with cancer (Table 1; Figure 3).
