# Flying Free: A Research Overview of Deep Learning in Drone Navigation Autonomy

CorpusID: 236298796 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1e33066557b26f24113450c9a852f7821aea874](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1e33066557b26f24113450c9a852f7821aea874)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s4) Features of Autonomy
(p4.0) We identified that autonomous navigation features fall into three distinct groups: "Awareness", which details the vehicle's understanding of its surroundings, which can be collected via non-specific sensors; "Basic Navigation", which includes the functionality expected from autonomous navigation, such as avoiding relevant obstacles and collision avoidance strategies; and "Expanded Navigation", which covers features with a higher development depth such as pathway planning and multiple use case autonomous navigation. These groupings and their more detailed functional features are listed in Figure 3, as identified for Level 4 automation. In addition, we note that common engineering features are a useful category for this overview of navigation capability, and we include these as a fourth category for analysis. This is done to acknowledge projects in the research pool that are aimed at achieving a goal within a given hardware limitation, such as optimisations for lower-end hardware and independence from subsystems such as wireless networks [7]. 
## (s13) Engineering
(p13.0) This group heading does not tie directly into Level 4 autonomous navigation, but captures additional challenges that apply to a portion of the covered research. It encompasses any feature that advances the robustness of drone physical implementation or addresses any common limitations related to drone hardware in the context of autonomous flight [7]. These feature mappings are visible in Table 4. •
## (s18) Areas of Concentrated Research Effort
(p18.0) The most common project archetype seen throughout the research pool follows DNNbased autonomous movement with a quad rotor drone trained from bespoke data [7] or transfer-learned from a pretrained network [25]. The most frequent focus of research work within the research pool was for basic autonomous movements. Though the quality of various implementations and methods of acquiring results differ, solutions trended towards the same structure of approximately 75-95% navigational accuracy inside the project's use case. Whilst this is a wide range of navigational accuracy achievement and exact tasks will differ across individual research works, the high levels of accuracy for DNN-based navigation policies indicate that they are effective in the environments that they are trained for. Most projects took the approach of reducing complexity either by not relying on subsystems such as GPS or network access, and/or by partially or fully focusing on optimising network efficiency for on-board operation. Most projects also avoided the use of any additional sensors, instead relying on a single camera system. No papers in the research pool considered the use of dual cameras for spatial awareness, which defied author expectations.
## (s20) Issues
(p20.0) Most research works explain their approach to model training and testing, explaining the chosen ground truth, labels and descriptions of how the navigation system interfaces with the CNN model. One issue to highlight, however, is a lack of uniformity of metrics in the domain. Some papers evaluate their approach using environment-specific metrics, such as the number of successful laps [46] and performance at different speeds [23]. In the DNN research space, the inclusion of visual descriptions of architectures and evaluation results comparing similar architectural or function-level approaches is crucial to the explainability of the project. The use of research work-specific metrics, when displayed without connection to a more common metric such as accuracy, makes it difficult to compare the performance of autonomous navigation approaches across the domain.

(p20.1) Another typical issue found in the research pool is various computer and electronic engineering hurdles not attempted too be overcome, not addressed, or the solutions carefully designed to work inside the boundaries of such hurdles. This reduces the robustness of the implementation and potentially limits the use cases in which the solution can operate. Power consumption, data processing, latency, sensor design and communication are all areas affected by this issue. We suggest that drone autonomy research projects could benefit greatly from interdisciplinary interaction.   
