# antioxidants The Impact of a Plant-Based Diet on Gestational Diabetes: A Review

CorpusID: 233389819 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/da6723ce9ecfa6f1b8836435bfe2fb2863e96627](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/da6723ce9ecfa6f1b8836435bfe2fb2863e96627)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) The Impact of a Plant-Based Diet on Gestational Diabetes
(p1.0) The term "plant-based" presents a wide definition as it could either partially include a limited amount of foods derived from animals or include only plant foods such as fruits, vegetables, and legumes [28].

(p1.1) A MedDiet is characterized by food derived from plants without a complete exclusion of animal-source foods. In contrast, both vegetarian and vegan diets exclude meat, chicken, and fish, and a vegan diet additionally excludes dairy and eggs.
## (s6) Oxidative Stress and Insulin Resistance
(p6.0) Oxidative stress remains an important factor in the development of insulin resistance. It represents a normal aspect of a healthy pregnancy, although an abnormal consumption of antioxidants could impair several energetic pathways. Moreover, this aspect is fairly recognized as a critical factor for several pregnancy diseases [95].

(p6.1) Oxidative stress is characterized by a disbalance between antioxidant defenses and oxidant production. The latter category involves ROS radicals, such as superoxide radical (O 2− ), nitric oxide radical (NO), and hydroxyl radical (˙HO−), and non-radicals, such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) and peroxynitrite (ONOO − ) [25].
## (s7) The Effects of a Plant-Based Diet on Oxidative Stress
(p7.0) Environment and lifestyle concur to achieve a healthy pregnancy. Moreover, intrauterine development seems to be crucial for preventing several diseases, such as cardiovascular and renal diseases, T2D, and neurological impairment [21]. This particular condition has been studied and defined as "early life programming" [112].

(p7.1) Given the above, the role of the maternal diet, along with sleep quality, physical activity, and avoiding smoking and pollutants, is crucial for the fetus. New evidence has been raised about the benefit of dietary patterns, such as a plant-based diet, on maternal outcomes in pregnancy [113]. Women following a plant-based diet seem to incur in a reduction in pregnancy hypertensive disorders and GDM thanks to the increased intake of fibers [45,114].

(p7.2) Plant-based diets represent a new approach for promoting health. However, the term "plant-based" has a fairly broad definition, as it could either partially include a limited amount of foods derived from animals or include only plant foods such as fruits, nuts, grains, vegetables, and legumes [28].
