# A global comparison of implementation and effectiveness of materiovigilance program: overview of regulations

CorpusID: 237495336 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d8acb409281d45d724f8f79d76599a61d0e06ddf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d8acb409281d45d724f8f79d76599a61d0e06ddf)

Fields: Medicine

## (s16) Reporting of medical devices
(p16.0) The CFDA oversees China's post-approval surveillance system, which is carried out at regional levels by the department of health. The fact that this surveillance system works in tandem with the central approach is one of its distinguishing features (Kramer et al. 2014). When an adverse event related to medical device occurs, regulatory authorities and health department will act as first liners. Although the responsibility of collecting adverse event reports and to report them timely to regulatory authorities is of the Ministry of Health (MOH) and CFDA. The places in China without a provisional structure have their regional departments to serve with the same role as that of CFDA and MOH.

(p16.1) The CFDA's National Centre for ADR Monitoring is in charge of collecting and analyzing adverse event reports from all regions and provinces. Every region, as well as provinces, has an ADR institution with better data access than the national ADR center; however, the ADR institutions are less capable analytically.

(p16.2) Injury reports must be filed to local institutions of monitoring in 15 days. As a result, it is up to these institutions to report death-related reports to National Centre for ADR. The submission of reports to the Ministry of Health and the Canadian Food and Drug Administration (CFDA) is considered complete now. Once per quarter, all the injury related reports must be only submitted to MOH and the CFDA (Pharma to Market 2020). However, all distributors, manufacturers of medical devices can bypass the step of submitting reports to the regional institutions first and can directly submit them to the national level authorities. However, they should notify the regional institutions as well. By the end of January each year, producers of Class-2 and 3 devices submit adverse event reports for the previous year to local institutions of monitoring. Then, the institutions will forward the reports to MOH and the CFDA by the end of March the same year.

(p16.3) On the 3rd of April 2020, the China NMPA had released adverse events reporting guidance for medical devices. The requirements that were decided in decisions on medical equipment adverse tracking and re-evaluation were included in the guidelines. These were issued so as to improvise the medical device monitoring system and to control the risk associated in post-marketing of medical devices (Pharma to Market 2020). The purpose of these guidelines was to set up protocols for a monitoring system that included department designation, emergency care in the case of a serious event, and device management.

(p16.4) In May 2020, an updated document was published that contained guidelines on adverse event monitoring for medical devices, and it comprised all the new regulations that were being made in this document. Table 4 comprises the new regulations that were included in document (Qual Tech 2020).
## (s22) Reporting of medical devices
(p22.0) In Japan, as soon as an adverse event occurs, it is captured by the MAH. Then, within 15 days, the MAH reports AE15, i.e., an ADR that caused death or any serious health damage to the patient which is not listed elsewhere. Any foreign death event or serious case that is already listed is denoted as AE30, and it is reported within 30 days by the MAH (Handa et al. 2015).
## (s28) Marketing in India
(p28.0) The product can be marketed in India when this registration is complete, and the license is provided. Any change, adverse events, or recall of the same device that is being marketed in India must be reported to the authorized Indian representative (Sanjana et al. 2016).
## (s29) Reporting of adverse events from medical devices
(p29.0) Reporting of adverse events associated with medical devices is done by various mediums. Any serious, non-serious, frequent, rare, known, or unknown events can be reported, although it should have relevance with the ADR. Currently, India's materiovigilance system has 26 dedicated monitoring centers for adverse outcome related to medical device that report incidents on a voluntary basis (Shukla et al. 2020). Additionally, around 270 adverse reaction monitoring centers created under the pharmacovigilance program in India have requested to submit the adverse events related to medical devices. Therefore, once any commission enrolls a hospital or a medical institute as a monitoring center, the available research associate will start collecting and sending the adverse events related to medical devices to the commission. The research associate's responsibility will be to liaise between the patient and consumer, record, validate the reported incident/s and report the case to commission, and inform the manufacturer of the medical device. There is a MDAE (Medical Device Adverse Event) reporting form in which reporting of any medical device associated adverse events may be reported (Kalaiselvan et al. 2015). This form consists of initial description, details of the adverse event occurred, and associated risks to the patient. It can be downloaded from the website of the IPC. Adverse events can also be reported by PvPI (Pharmacovigilance Program of India) helpline number (Kalaiselvan et al. 2014). The healthcare professionals, patients can duly report the MDAE form to either NCC or SCTIMST. Any suspected serious adverse events must be reported to CDSCO and commission within 15 calendar days from the occurring of an event. After filling the MDAE form, it can be directly submitted to either the SCTIMST or the NCC. At the commission, each report that is being received is first segregated into initial, final, and a follow-up report. The reports are allotted with a unique reference number. Until a conclusion is made, the commission seeks additional information from the patient or reporter. These reports are evaluated by professionally trained staff members present at the panel to ensure that the data is comprehensive, valid, and of high quality. They are further evaluated by external subject expert group, and then it is forwarded to the core technical committee to prepare any necessary recommendations. The recommendations being made are then forwarded to the CDSCO for any regulatory action. After forwarding it to CDSCO, it is then forwarded to WHO-UMC (Uppsala Monitoring Center), where its entry is done in "vigiflow." If the data is determined to be missing, the report is forwarded to the reporter or monitoring center, along with any relevant comments, so it can be completed and amended accordingly. The confidentiality of patients is strictly safeguarded while examining and evaluating case reports. Table 5 shows the comparison of medical device regulations and the assigned timelines for various countries across the world.
## (s30) Challenges in regulating medical devices
(p30.0) Mutual control is the foundation of the relationship between policy and creativity. Effective regulations clearly control the mechanism of innovation in a given area. Technical developments and improvements, on the other hand, have significant effects on regulation. This relationship must be seen as an effective tool in reforming the existing regulations. The adjustment of laws thoroughly affects the changes in the technological, social, and economic circumstances affecting it.

(p30.1) When it comes to medical devices and the regulatory changes that are now being debated, the focus should be on ensuring improved patient safety. In the context of determining compliance, this also reflects increased economic pressure on medical equipment manufacturers. The question now is whether such reforms will put a significant strain on small and midsize enterprises (which are indeed the primary innovators in the areas of pharmaceutical devices), to the point where development will be limited, or whether they will end up serving as a strong catalyst for more innovation, as several other examples of well-enforced legislation have done. Transparent innovation is a popular trend in a variety of industries, including the medical device industry. Open innovations have become the dominant model for connecting developing technologies and markets. In the field of medical equipment, the value of open innovations is proved, for example, by the fact that patients will provide impulses for long-term progress (Gupta 2015).
## (s31) Conclusion and future perspectives
(p31.0) In the past few years, the usage of medical devices is seen to be very recurrent by the healthcare professionals globally. Materiovigilance programs by various countries are indeed good initiatives to ensure safety of medical devices being used. Its emphatic implementation has covered the safety of medical devices along with the well-being of patients. Medical device regulation plays a vital role in ensuring efficacy, safety, and performance of the device so that it is made accessible in the marketplace for refining community health. A safer and effective device will automatically lift the faith and confidence of customers over the device. As discussed in the review, devices are classified based on their risks, and thus, accordingly their reporting and regulation need to be carried out.

(p31.1) Some of the authors have already produced some fantastic work in the past. Chauhan et al. (2019) examined the risks involved with the use of various types of medical devices, as well as the necessity for a materiovigilance program, with a focus on medical device adverse event reporting. In addition, few papers (Meher 2018;Deshwal et al. 2020;Hoda et al. 2020) have summarized the concept and viewpoint of materiovigilance in India solely. Furthermore, Manu and Anand (2021) compared the medical device laws in India to those in the European Union. Mirel et al. (2014) conducted a study to see if Romania is harmonizing its medical device monitoring framework with European Directives. All the research described earlier in this thread lacked a global comparison, which is a vital prerequisite at this time to harmonize medical device laws around the world. Our article can be used as a comprehensive global guide to medical devices, which include the history of medical devices, their classification, marketing status, problems, and current regulatory issues encountered by developed countries around the world, with a focus on the regulatory position in India.

(p31.2) As of now, in some countries, the medical device adverse event reporting form is only available in English. But in future, this might be available in various languages. Especially, this problem is faced in a country like India, where there are diverse languages in use. So, to enhance the participation of patients in reporting, it should be available in all the spoken languages. In coming years, the focus will be shifted from cost to value, and this will not be just about the device. By 2030, medical devices will play an active role globally in bringing value by connecting with the patients and customers. This will probably require a change from treatment and cure to prevention by smart solutions as well as services that will bring down the cost and will improve outcomes.

(p31.3) Medical devices are subject to stringent legislation to ensure patient safety and to reduce, as often as possible, the health hazards involved with the use of goods that are also technologically advanced. The requirements for classifying the risk are grounded on the expected intent and usage of the medical equipment and ensuring that a greater degree of control is extended to high-risk devices, whereas comparatively low-risk devices are subject only to risk-proportionate regulations. Although manufacturers must identify their products within the required risk level, regulatory bodies function as a mediator in interpreting the conditions imposed on a specific product. Global regulators and national legislatures influence nearly all facets of the production and manufacturing of medical devices; from development and design, preclinical, and national legislation process. The stakeholders are expected to consider the macroeconomic context with variables in terms of supply and usage while determining the degree of venture effectiveness and returns on investment in modernization in the medical devices market. The inclusion of the medical product into the proper risk class may assist the provider in defining & setting up discrete company procedures or in planning for any future restrictions, laws, and regulations that need to be followed. All such policies will optimize the process of design and production and help create an economic success of the business along with a competitive growth. At the beginning of the design and production of a medical product, the best strategy would be to demonstrate the fiscal budget of putting the device on the marketplace.

(p31.4) There is always room to improve patient and user safety by reducing the occurrence of adverse events, finding solutions for improving the use and efficiency of medical devices, and establishing a nationwide system to monitor patient safety. Like medicinal products, there is a requirement to scrutinize the benefit-risk ratio of the medical devices used and to converse safety data on the usage of medical devices to numerous stakeholders to reduce risks. Likewise, there should be a nationwide center of excellence for activities related to materiovigilance which can track and monitor the safety and efficiency of these medical equipment.

(p31.5) For a materiovigilance program to succeed, the manufacturers, regulatory authorities, healthcare professionals, and patients/caregivers need to work in close collaboration. Appropriate reporting of any device-related adverse events is crucial to the materiovigilance program and for establishing patient safety. The continuous collection of adverse reactions and signal detection process will help generate data about the risks and the benefits of the devices, and therefore, a benefitrisk ratio will be established. Since, materiovigilance is an ongoing process, the data generated over the years will help the healthcare professionals and patients make better informed decisions. The prescribers will have a better knowledge and understanding of the expected adverse reactions, thus, preventing repetition of such occurrences. This will reduce the burden of device-related morbidity and mortality on the healthcare system. The economic burden on the patients will be reduced as the adverse reaction will be mitigated efficiently.

(p31.6) The pool of data generated over the years will be helpful for the medical device manufacturers in making the devices safer and in the development of other related medical devices. As the manufacturers start to develop better medical devices, the patients will have more treatment choices. They will have greater sense of peace as they will be better informed about the devices they use. As a result, the patient compliance will increase, thus, improving the patient health and public health.

(p31.7) The communications between the regulatory authorities of different regions will have a major role to play in the success of materiovigilance. To strengthen the evidence on the risks and benefits, the regulatory authorities of different regions of the world will need to seamlessly communicate the information regarding the safety and efficacy of medical devices to strengthen evidence related to the benefit-risk of medical devices. With the streamlined exchange and collection of information, the marketing authorization holders will be able to develop better risk mitigation strategies to efficiently manage the risks of the devices. As more information becomes available, the regulatory authorities will be able to make better decision regarding the use of medical devices.

(p31.8) The future holds a lot for the medical device industry as medical device companies found different opportunities even during COVID's early economic downturn. The biggest impact of the pandemic on the MedTech business, according to many industry insiders, has been the acceleration of trends that were already well advanced in previous years. Changes in working patterns and consumer behavior have facilitated the demand for remote technologies, and the interaction between patients and physicians has evolved as well. The medical device market is more than equipped to accommodate this demand for user-friendly diagnostics and monitoring equipment, as the COVID-19 epidemic proved. Rapid improvements in Artificial Intelligence, remote monitoring, device connectivity, and data collecting have allowed MedTech businesses to appropriately respond to the need for crucial products like personal protective equipment (PPE) and ventilators. The sector has played a key role in relieving pressure on overburdened healthcare systems by being able to quickly scale up R&D and manufacturing operations.

(p31.9) The sector's main problem is now to figure out how to best use data to improve medical outcomes while still protecting patient privacy. Medical device makers and regulators must work together to develop infrastructure with agreed-upon expectations and boundaries if this aim is to be achieved.

(p31.10) Governments, too, have a significant role to play. The government of the UK, for example, has introduced incentives (such as the elimination of VAT and import levies on critical medical equipment) to help the country's medical device sector throughout the pandemic. Beyond COVID, the UK aspires to be a global leader in medical device technology, with plans to invest tens of billions in the future years.

(p31.11) By 2025, the worldwide medical device business is anticipated to be worth $612.7 billion (£440.5 billion), with a 5.4% compound annual growth rate. We may expect substantial growth in product sectors such as wearable health technology, robotics nanotechnology, and extended reality gadgets, because of rising customer demand and technological innovation. Artificial intelligence is also allowing for the development of increasingly complex data-driven algorithms, such as autonomous diagnostics. Despite recent setbacks, medical device firms of all sizes have plenty of opportunity.
