# Application of arti icial intelligence in the managemet of diabetes mellitus -An overview Production and Hosted by

CorpusID: 233363811 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66fc463895635c9dd07662c20814e8bebade1dbb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66fc463895635c9dd07662c20814e8bebade1dbb)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Arti icial Intelligence is de ined as "the science of mimicking human intelligence by the use of advanced computational systems". AI encompasses a comprehensive array of procedures to support human intellect and performing different tasks of thinking, such as perceiving visual images, recognizing speech patterns, ability to perform decisionmaking activities and language conversion abilities (Rigla et al., 2018). AI covers a broad variety of novel algorithms in terms of deep learning, machine learning, and cognition based computing.
## (s5) Case based reasoning (CBR)
(p5.0) CBR (Matthias and Godfrey, 1994) is an evolutionary learning strategy. Each time a task is inished it is effectively stored for the future retrievals. While various metrics and strategies can be used for each of the CBR cycle steps, there are only a few that can render the CBR method automatic. 
## (s8) Machine learning
(p8.0) The Machine learning is another form arti icial intelligence (AI). The systems have their ability to learn and evolve automatically from their inherent experience without the use of explicit software programming. Machine learning focuses on computer systems being created that can access data and use it to learn about themselves. Machine learning has following applications (Kolodner, 1993).
## (s9) Arti icial neural network
(p9.0) New advances in arti icial intelligence (AI) allow arti icial neural networks (ANNs) to learn to solve composite problems in a short time. Neural networks are undergoing a revitalization that not only transmutes AI but also brings new insights into biological processes around neural computation. The Adaptive Arti icial Neural Network is a nonparametric strategy for categorizing subjects as safe or unhealthy within the medical sector based on input variables. The arti icial neural networks are in luenced by a complex human brain structure (Tresp et al., 1999).
## (s10) Decision tree algorithm
(p10.0) The general concept underlying the construction of a decision tree is that, features are divided into subsets (nodes), each of which is homogeneous with respect to the result of interest. Decision Tree Algorithm is part of the directed learning algorithms family. It is used for solving regression problems and classi ication problems. The Decision Tree algorithm builds a training model that automatically predict the target variable. In diabetes, DT has been widely extended to a wide variety of functions, such as type 2 diabetes monitoring and blood glucose detection (Rasekaba et al., 2015).
## (s11) Genetic algorithm
(p11.0) GA uses the principle of natural selection and Mendelian genetics. GA is a theoretical search tool, able to ef iciently traverse broad search spaces, unlike other search algorithms that perform a small, greedy search. The three operators of GA are: reproduction, crossover, and mutation. Initial population of individuals is created at random as a irst phase of GA. Within the genetic domain the individual are called chromosomes and is represented as 0s and 1s string (Reddy et al., 2016).
## (s17) CSME)
(p17.0) CSME has no visible symptoms so Patients can be unaware that they are affected. Exudates begin to leak from the damaged vessels that form in the retina due to diabetes which ultimately leads to spongy retina (Nayak et al., 2009). The patient's vision is not adversely impaired as the exudate sites are well away from the fovea.
