# Computational modelling of the scoliotic spine: A literature review

CorpusID: 235404190 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/033f72bdcc0ae6329db76748e06920c0be015c4c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/033f72bdcc0ae6329db76748e06920c0be015c4c)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s2) | 2D FEM models
(p2.0) Two-dimensional (2D) models have been used in preliminary studies and to study large numbers of spine shapes. Galbusera et al. investigated the influence of sagittal balance on lumbar loading. Galbusera et al. 22 simulated many (1000) different spine profiles and included muscle forces . This approach enabled them to investigate trends rather than specific cases, and to showed that the C7 plumb line, the sacral slope, and the lumbar lordosis are all critical factors affecting the lumbar loading. The C7 plumb line is the horizontal distance between a vertical line passing through F I G U R E 1 Flowchart of article selection the centre of C7 and S1 23 ; the sacral slope is the angle between the upper sacral plate and the horizontal. 24 The author would direct the Reader to Jackson and McManus 23 and Duval-Beaupère et al. 24 for the respective definitions.

(p2.1) Zanjani-Pour et al. 25 developed a 2D model with a poroelastic intervertebral disc (IVD). Their results showed that pore pressure was highly sensitive to the applied vertical translation and marginally sensitive to the Young's modulus of the annulus and the porosity of the nucleus.
## (s3) | 3D FEM Models
(p3.0) Geometry Most models are created from computed tomography (CT) scans, either directly or by the scaling of a previous model, however, the musculature is rarely included. A few studies have focused on the creation and validation of models. 26,27 The model developed from CT images by Mills and Sarigul-Klijn is one of the first young (20 years) female models. 27 This provided an initial model for future studies on the young female spine.

(p3.1) The natural curvature of the spine affects its response to loading. Naserkhaki et al. 28 showed the degree of lumbar lordosis substantially affected the load sharing in the facet joints and the ligaments when a follower load (a compressive force which acts along a line which follows the curvature of the spine) and moment were applied. Based on the investigation of 480 different curvatures, increasing lordosis correlated strongly with higher anterior-posterior shear loads in the IVDs, in particular the L5-S1 and L1-L2 IVDs. 29 Others 30,31 investigated the influence of the IVD geometry on the facet joint forces (FJF), the intradiscal pressure (IDP), range of motion (RoM) and kinematics. These studies highlighted that the FJF, IDP and RoM are most sensitive to the disc height, width and sagittal dimension, the influence of each geometrical parameter depended on the movement.
## (s4) Constitutive equations
(p4.0) The material properties are an especially important consideration when creating a subject-specific model due to the natural variation between subjects, which will be exacerbated by pathologies; however, these are most commonly taken from literature. Jebaseelan et al. 32 investigated the sensitivity of displacement and deformation of the spinal components to different material parameters under different loading conditions of a L1-S1 model of an eight-year-old. The material parameter the response was most sensitive to depended on the loading condition, for example the model was most sensitive to IVD properties in compression but to ligament properties in flexion. A sensitivity study of the RoM and the IDP to the IVD material model showed less than a 3% difference between linear and non-linear (hyperelastic Mooney-Rivlin for the nucleus pulposus and the annular ground substance and non-linear stress-strain curves from literature for the fibres) models. 26 They found no significant difference between the results for the linear and non-linear models when a compression of 300 N and flexion 7.5 Nm were simultaneously applied. 26 Typically, 300 N is less than 0.5 body weight hence, linear models will only have a limited applicability.

(p4.1) The use of generic material parameters from literature is a common simplification in many lumbar spine models. 33 Schmidt et al. established a method for calibrating the material coefficients of the annulus fibrosus to represent a specific specimen based on the RoM, concluding that only one specific set of parameters would correctly predict the RoM for multiple loading conditions. 33 However, Naserkhaki et al. 34 used eight different databases as the source for the material parameters of ligaments and were unable to predict the RoM, IDP, ligament force/deformation and FJF within one SD of the mean from in vivo and in vitro data. They suggested validation using solely RoM is insufficient because of the large variation of ligament material properties between subjects.

(p4.2) As Fan et al. 35 noted, poroelasticity is an important consideration under vibrational loads in order to observe the time-dependent vibrational characteristics; however, in most studies the porous material properties were not modelled.
## (s5) Boundary conditions
(p5.0) The term "boundary conditions" refers to the forces and kinematics defined by the researcher for a part or all of the simulation. This should not be confounded with initial conditions which are the forces and kinematics of the model in the first instant of a simulation. Both force and displacement have been used as boundary conditions, force boundary conditions are often applied via follower loads which require careful tuning; while displacement boundary conditions require kinematic data, which can be challenging to gather.

(p5.1) Boundary conditions in terms of displacements has been derived from quantitative fluoroscopy, 36 plane radiographs, 37 stereophotogrammetry 38 and motion capture. 39 Quantitative fluoroscopy allows continuous imaging and is accurate for motions over 3.9 however is limited to 2D imaging 40 ; alternatively biplanar fluoroscopy enables threedimensional (3D) imaging, however, exposure to high radiation dosage is a concern 41 ; stereophotogrammetry has been accurate to 0.5 but the subject must be stationary during the imaging process 42 ; single plane radiographs have achieved similar accuracy and are less invasive but are limited to static images in 2D 43 ; motion capture provides a continuous position, however, suffers from associated soft tissue artefacts. 44 Zanjani-Pour et al. 36 predicted IVD stresses consistent with literature using displacement boundary conditions. However further work is needed to reduce errors in mapping the motion . Dehghan-Hamani et al. 37 used displacement boundary conditions to validate a model against the loading in the ligaments and IVDs. Validation against FJF proved challenging due to lack of data and the difficulty in modelling the facets. 37 Shojaei et al. 45 suggested that displacement boundary conditions could be used in conjunction with optimisation techniques to estimate of muscle forces in FEMs.

(p5.2) Boundary conditions can also be applied in terms of loads, which can represent body weight, muscle forces, and external loads. For simpler representation of the local muscle forces, Rohlmann et al. 46 lumped them together into a single follower load-loads that represent body weight and occasionally muscle forces and intra-abdominal forces. 47 They were then able to include individual loads for a few global muscles and simulated realistic results. However representing the local muscles with a follower load caused the IDP to be slightly larger than it should have been. 46 Investigations have demonstrated alterations to the follower load path substantially influenced the deformation the spinal segment undergoes, thus the path should be optimised in order to achieve more realistic motions and load-carrying capabilities. [48][49][50] Studies have modified the location of the path to optimise it such that bending moments and shear loads were minimised 50 or the predicted RoM, IDP and disc bulging matched those reported in the literature, 49 both studies concluded the path should be posterior to the centre of the disc. Inclusion of a follower load influenced and limited the possible position of the centre of rotation (CoR), 34 through which the follower load should ideally pass. 50 Foresto et al. 51 found spinal stability was only maintained if the path passed through a specific region for a given posture. In addition to the posture the optimal path was influenced by the magnitude of the follower load. 50 Dreischarf et al. 52 simulated realistic motions by optimising the magnitude to minimise the intervertebral rotations, in another study the magnitude was optimised to minimise the IVJ load. 51 In a number of studies the follower load has been assumed to be task independent. 16,28,53 According to Azari et al. 54 this is not the case. They used a hybrid L4-L5 model to determine the follower load for specific tasks. Hybrid models have used MBM to calculate the muscle forces which are then applied as force vectors at the relevant attachment points in the FEM. 55,56 Occasionally, the muscles and the intra-abdominal pressure are explicitly modelled, with various degrees of complexity. 29,57,58 One approach is to combine a FEM and an optimization method to calculate muscle forces. 29,39,45,51 In other cases muscles are modelled simply using tension elements 57 while a more sophisticated model has also accounted for the muscle geometry and architecture. 58 Inclusion of the muscles and the intra-abdominal pressure decreased the predicted stress in the IVDs. 57,58 Non-linearities It is generally accepted that the biomechanical properties of soft tissues show marked non-linearities, although there has been little investigation into the error caused by neglecting such non-linearities. Linear 36 and non-linear elements 39 have been used to model the IVJ, a lumped parameter which represents some or all of the passive components (IVD, ligaments, cartilages) between two adjacent vertebrae.
## (s6) Personalisation
(p6.0) Models can be personalised by the geometry, the material properties and the loading conditions; the extent of personalisation of each can vary, both geometric and material personalisation has been shown to be crucial for accurate simulations. As Naserkhaki et al. 28 noted, to fully personalise a model in all of these aspects is nearly impossible. Personalisation of the curvature of the spine was an important factor in the load sharing between the various spinal components and in the spine stiffness as it determined the disc wedging. However, personalisation of the curvature was insufficient to accurately predict the load sharing. 28 Scaling of a model to personalise existing models was not suitable for estimating FJF due to high sensitivity to the facet surface shape and orientation. 37 Despite personalisation of passive joint properties based on subject sex, age, body weight and height, when simulating motions involving large angles substantial differences in shear and compression loads were still present. 47 Of the parameters personalised, body weight had the greatest affect. 60 Rather, the predictions were most sensitive to trunk flexion angle, load and moment magnitude, and loading asymmetry. 61 Sex and body height had little impact. 61 Thus, to accurately predict spinal loads these subject-specific parameters need to be accurately represented.

(p6.1) However, using the predictions from personalised models to infer the mechanical behaviour of the spine in the wider population is limited as there is much inter-subject variability in such models. 62 A brief overview of the FEM modelling of the healthy spine has been presented. The present paper aims to address the modelling of the scoliotic spine thus a more in-depth review of healthy FEM spine modelling is outside the present scope. Recently, both Ghezelbash et al. 63 and Dreischarf et al. 16 have conducted literature reviews that focus on the in vitro, in vivo (respectively) and in silico studies (both); the Author recommends referring to these reviews for greater depth.
## (s8) Geometry
(p8.0) The majority of scoliotic spine FEMs are developed from planar and tomographic radiographic images (Table 1) and include the entire spine in the model (Table 2); however, the rib cage was rarely included. The curvature and rib cage have played important roles in the loading of the spine. Development from radiographic images enables a high level of geometrical detail to be captured, including the facets which require manual segmentation as automatic segmentation tools cannot yet detect the gap between articulating cartilages. 99 In the creation of such models, geometric uncertainty due to user identification of landmarks and bony structures needs to be considered. Little and Adam measured intra-observer geometric uncertainty. The most substantial geometrical uncertainty was in the angle of the facet joints in the coronal plane, and consequently the endplate angle, which was comparable to the accepted clinical variation. The effect of the operator-dependent geometrical uncertainty was minimal on all the measured output parameters except the estimated IDP. 83 The geometrical variation of the intravertebral disc space was important in determining the degree of deformity and the extent of possible correction. 84 As the authors stress, these results are intra-observer rather than inter-observer variations and sensitivity of the parameters was only tested for a fulcrum bending test. 83 Inter-observer uncertainty could be greater than the intra-observer uncertainty and the effect could be greater under different loading conditions. Manual segmentation of the spine is a time consuming process. 76 Hadagali et al. 76 proposed a semi-automatic technique to morph an already segmented spine onto a scoliotic spine based on landmark selection using a dual-kriging method (see References 100,101 for further details). Jobidon-Lavergne et al. have also investigated the used of an automatic segmentation method. Additionally, they investigated the possibility of using the pre-operative shape to enable intra-operative surgery planning, by registration of the pre-operative geometry onto intra-operative images. 80 Geometries are often constructed from pre-operative standing images, which may result in a different geometry to the intra-operative one, as scoliotic curvature reduces when in a prone position. 74 Accounting for the difference could improve surgical simulation predictions. 74 Simulations have modelled the reduction in curvature due to prone positioning, and patient weight and surgical bed configuration. 72 Scoliotic spines are categorised by different types of curves. The importance of accounting for the curvature type was demonstrated by Jia et al. They modelled three different curve types, under axial vibrational loading (exposure to vibrations has been associated with spinal problems), there was a different response for each type. 78 Validation proved challenging, and the model excluded any poroelastic effects which as discussed earlier can be important under vibrational loading. Other studies have further evidenced the importance of the curve type. Thoracic curve types have been shown to lead to asymmetric pressure distributions in the lumbar IVD. 91 Curve type and severity influenced the centre of pressure in the S1 endplate; lumbar curves affected the sacral loading more so than other curve types. 87 Scoliotic severity also affected the FJF; under compression and a bending moment higher FJFs were predicted on the convex and concave side when the Cobb angle was above and below 20 . 92 Very few studies have included the rib cage (Table 2). However Jia et al. showed that the rib cage played an important role in the stabilisation of the spine, especially the scoliotic one, and reduced the maximum Von Mises stresses and displacements. 79 The rib cage, ligaments, vertebrae and IVD were examined and the magnitude of the maximum Von Mises stress and displacements reduction ranged between 19.7%-53.4% (in axial compression an increase of 31.5%) and 2.1%-16.9%, respectively, depending on the loading direction. 79 
## (s9) Constitutive equations
(p9.0) The material properties of both bone and soft tissues are often taken from literature measurements without personalisation (Table 1). In the case of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) this presents a twofold problem, firstly there is very little literature data on the mechanical properties of adolescent tissues. Secondly, there has been very little consideration regarding potential differences between the tissue properties of scoliotic and non-scoliotic subjects. Cheuk et al. suggested there could be differences in the stiffness and failure load of bone. Using personalised micro-FE they found the scoliotic subjects had weaker bones; however, this is potentially accounted for by differences in levels of physical activity and calcium intake, 102 regardless of the cause the differences need to be accounted for in models. Although the study was performed on the radii rather than vertebrae, other studies have suggested changes in bone properties of the radii are reflected in changes in the vertebrae. 102 A review paper by Li et al. supported the view that lower bone quality was prevalent in scoliotic subjects, 103 building on this Song et al. investigated the effect of low bone quality.

(p9.1) With a geometrically personalised scoliotic model, three different Young's moduli were assigned to the cortical and cancellous bone. They found that lower bone quality elevated the asymmetrical loading affect, already present due to the curvature of the scoliotic spine. 91 Berger et al. determined personalised IVJ stiffnesses for five AIS subjects from in vivo spinal suspension tests using a FEM. Despite simplifying the joint as a lumped parameter, this still demonstrated a statistically significant difference in subject-specific stiffnesses. 67 Zheng et al. created a geometrically personalised degenerative scoliotic model, they used two sets of material properties one represented normal young subjects and the other represented elderly degenerative scoliotic subjects. 97 They simulated an ex vivo study conducted on young and elderly non-scoliotic spines (data for scoliotic cases was not available) and compared the predicted motion to the measured motion. The model representing elderly degenerative scoliosis predicted a difference in motion of up to 24% compared to ex vivo data of the elderly nonscoliotic spines, a similar difference was observed between the model representing normal young subjects and the ex vivo data of young non-scoliotic spines. Zheng et al. suggested this evidenced the need for pathology-specific material properties. 97 
## (s10) Boundary conditions
(p10.0) While healthy spine FEM have used displacement and force boundary conditions scoliotic FEM used almost exclusively force boundary condition with the lowermost body completely constrained, often to simulate scoliotic correction or study vibrational effects. To simulate the scoliotic correction of patient-specific models created from CT scans of eight different patients Little et al. used intraoperative force profiles measured in vivo by strain gauge force transducers attached to the tools used to apply a compressive load between the vertebral body screws 104 during the scoliotic correction of 15 different patients. Applying one of three force profiles, the mean or the mean plus/minus one SD of the in vivo data, they were able to predict the correct Cobb angle for seven out of the eight subjects. 84 Li et al. investigated the effect of vibrational loading, an important consideration as vibrational loading increased the risk of further deformation and has contributed to lower back pain of which scoliotic subjects are at greater risk. 78,79,93 Several differences were noted between their results and similar studies on non-scoliotic spines. The scoliotic spine was less affected by the follower load, but was more sensitive to vibration with lower resonant frequencies and larger amplitudes especially in rotation. 82 These differences can probably be attributed to geometric differences because the study used literature data for the material properties which is based on healthy spines. 82 Other studies have investigated the scoliotic spine under vibrational loading, expanding the knowledge to include the effect in adult degenerative scoliosis cases, 93 the effect of curve type, 78 and of the rib cage. 79 The findings of these studies have supported those of Li et al., that the scoliotic spine has more resonant frequencies and a larger response than a healthy spine. Thus scoliotic subjects are exposed to greater risk of increasing the deformity, lesions at the resonant frequencies, 78,93 and injuries associated with vibrations. 79 Further, sagittal alignment of the scoliotic spine changed the response to be more similar to a healthy spine, which would decrease the risk for scoliotic subjects when exposed to whole body vibrations. 94 The joints applied between bodies are also an important consideration. Ye et al. investigated the simultaneous correction of scoliosis and pectus excavatum. The type of joint applied between the sternum and the clavicles influenced the behaviour of the model: with the joint fully constrained they showed a simple correction of scoliosis via spine stretching had no effect on the pectus excavatum, however with the joint free in the sagittal plane spine stretching affected the chest deformity. 95 As such, modelling solely the spine can miss important effects scoliotic corrections may have on surrounding bodies.

(p10.1) Haddas et al. used methods they had previously validated 26 to create scoliotic spine models. 77 They investigated the effect of fusion of vertebrae on load transfer. They found fusion increased the FJF and the IDP at the adjacent levels, and decreased them at the fused level. 77 As with healthy spine models, scoliotic FEMs have included intra-abdominal pressure. 87,88 They found the predicted IDP to be comparable to the IDP of non-scoliotic subjects measured in vitro and in vivo. The predicted vertebral compressive forces were closer to the predictions from other scoliotic models when the intra-abdominal pressure was included, comparison to in vitro or in vivo data was not possible due to a lack of data. 87 Muscles have been represented by a follower load, 93 or force vectors (calculated by MBMs) in hybrid models. 105 Non-linearities Some scoliotic models considered the ligaments, the nucleus pulposus, and annulus fibrosus as linear, others as nonlinear (Table 2). When the facet joints are modelled, they are often modelled as frictionless with a gap and a spring. In all cases the parameters assigned have been taken from literature. To the best of the author's knowledge there have been no studies investigating the suitability of non-linear compared to linear material properties in the case of the scoliotic spine, whereas such studies have been conducted in health spine FEM.
## (s11) Personalisation
(p11.0) Personalisation of geometry was common, and though less common material personalisation was also performed (Table 1) personalisation of both has been crucial to accurately predict scoliotic corrections. Kamal et al. compared the spines of a healthy subject and a scoliotic subject. In the subject with a Cobb angle of 24.4 higher muscle forces on the convex side were required for the equilibrium. Increased muscle forces shifted the CoR, which increased the stress in specific parts of the growth plate. 105 The geometric personalisation alone was not enough to accurately represent the scoliotic spine. 74 Personalised geometry and individually representing all the soft tissue structures and including the rib cage, was not sufficient to consistently predict a scoliotic correction within an acceptable margin. 15 This suggested patient-specific soft tissue properties are also required. 15 Additionally, Duke et al. included the effects of anaesthesia on the muscles and spine stiffness by modifying the stiffness of the IVJ, in doing so they improved the simulation predictions of the intra-operative position. 74 Personalising the spine flexibility and stiffness has substantially improved the predicted axial rotation due to a correction manoeuvre. 81 Using in vivo side bending tests to personalise the overall stiffness of the spine, some studies have predicted the post-operative curvature to within 5 of clinical measurements 13,106 ; however, an accuracy of 10 has been reported. 72 As Little and Adam noted, side bending tests rely on the patient muscle activation. They studied the characterisation of the soft tissue properties of scoliotic subjects using a fulcrum bending test (the patient lies on their side over a rigid cylinder) which has the benefit of using the subjects weight and does not rely on muscle activation. 85 They simulated a fulcrum bending test using literature-reported values for the soft tissue stiffnesses and an imaging-based geometry. For 6 out of 10 cases there was more than a 10% difference between the predicted and clinical flexibility. In these cases, the sensitivity of the predicted flexibility to the costovertebral joint stiffness was investigated. The sensitivity was subject dependent. In addition to supporting the need for patient-specific soft tissue stiffness they suggest finding the stiffness of a single tissue in this way is not possible. Rather several tissues contribute to the stiffness and it is better to consider an overall stiffness. 85 Another method to personalise the soft tissue properties is to use a suspension test. 71,80 The concept for all the personalisation methods is the same, to measure the spine curvature under a certain loading and then to simulate the action. The component material properties or lumped IVJ stiffnesses are then calibrated such that the predicted curvature is similar to the measured curvature.
## (s12) | MBMs of the healthy spine
(p12.0) Geometry MBM are often developed for a particular purpose and then used as an initial model which is modified and personalised in future studies. The curvature, rib cage and to a lesser extent the muscles have to be accounted for in order to obtain realistic results; the most suitable method of positioning the IVJ location is still being studied.

(p12.1) Bruno et al. developed and validated a fully articulated MBM of the entire thoracolumbar spine. 107 Other fully articulated whole spine models exist, 108 as well as ones which assume a rigid thorax. [109][110][111] Models of just the lumbar spine are most common. 112,113 A common assumption in spine models is that the thoracic region can be treated as rigid or the rib cage structure can be excluded. 111,[113][114][115] Ignasiak et al. compared the loading and motion for a model with and without a rib cage. The comparison showed the rigid thorax assumption was suitable in activities where there was little thoracic deformation 116 and was only suitable for predictions of the lower lumbar spine. 108 Modelling the articulation of the rib cage improved the accuracy of the results. 108 Bruno et al. used an MBM of the entire thoracolumbar spine to investigate the effect of lumbar lordosis and thoracic kyphosis on the risk of vertebral fracture. The curvature affected the loading more than the muscle forces, 14 the effect of which is influenced by the muscle cross-sectional areas. 14 The position of the CoR of the IVJ affected the joint and muscle forces. 114,118 A sensitivity study by Abouhossein et al. showed variations of the CoR location by 1-5 mm lead to differences of 66% in shear load and 10% in the axial force in the IVD. 119 Abouhossein et al. and Senteler et al. postulated that the CoR may migrate during motion, 114,118 potentially to minimise the joint reaction forces. 114 Abouhossein et al. suggested that the migration is necessary to predict the kinematics of the spine. 118 While the literature supports the concept of CoR migration there is a lack of direct evidence. 114,118 Identification of component parameters The IVJ has been modelled without stiffness, with linear stiffness and with non-linear stiffness, studies have established the inclusion of a stiffness is essential for accurate simulations, whether modelling the joint as a lumped parameter is suitable or not is still unclear.

(p12.2) In addition to the location of the joint that defines the IVJ, the stiffness plays a critical role in characterising the flexibility of the spine. Simply including the stiffness of the joint reduced the muscle activation and the IDP, improving agreement with in vivo results. 120 Incorrect implementation of the IVD stiffness in OpenSim led to specious moments so Christophy et al. developed a new element which used the change in the relative displacement rather than the relative displacement to calculate the force the IVD would apply. 121 Often all the passive stiffness components are modelled as a single lumped parameter. The impact of the lumped parameter simplification depended on the direction of motion. 120 Simply modelling the ligaments seemed to improve predictions in flexion. 120 The ligament stiffness also affected the location of the estimated CoR, if it is allowed to migrate. 118 Muscles played an important role in the stabilisation of the spine. The muscles have been shown to have a notable effect on both the magnitude and the distribution of the intervertebral forces. 119 Han et al. incorporated muscles, ligaments, and rotational disc stiffness into an existing MBM, without any material personalisation. They simulated an upright posture and compared predicted joint reaction forces and muscle activation to in vivo measurements from literature of vertebral body replacement implant forces, IDP and muscle activation. This showed a considerable improvement in muscle force and joint reaction predictions on the base model, which demonstrated the importance of the passive soft tissue structures in spine models. 122 
## (s14) Non-linearities
(p14.0) Studies of the spine using MBM have simulated joints with no stiffness 107,111,123 or with linear stiffness. 116,122 The IVJ has often been modelled with a non-linear stiffness. 113,115,118,120,122,124 Byrne et al. investigated the effect of the linear stiffness assumption by comparing the predicted compressive and shear joint reaction forces for no stiffness, linear stiffness and non-linear stiffness for a flexion-extension motion under different external loads (4.5 and 13.6 kg), in different neutral positions (supine and upright), and different kinematics (dynamic stereo X-ray and motion at each joint defined as a fraction of the total motion [rhythm based]). 113 The trends were similar for both neutral positions. The linear model tended to predict larger joint reaction forces than the non-linear model, the difference between the prediction increased towards the end of the motion. Generally, a larger difference was seen in the predicted forces for the 4.5 kg than the 13.6 kg external load. The differences in predicted forces between the non-linear and the linear model was smaller for the rhythm based than the dynamic stereo X-ray-based kinematics. 113 Bryne et al. also found using a nonlinear stiffness instead of linear stiffness had a minimal effect on the muscle activation. 113 Wang et al. introduced a model with a highly sophisticated IVJ that accounted for the non-linearity, the stabilising effect of the rib cage, the stiffening effect due to compression from the follower load, and the multi-segment interaction in the thoracic spine. They used this to simulate in vivo experiments and accurately predicted the RoM. 124 This work demonstrated the numerous factors that need considering when modelling the IVJ.
## (s17) Identification of component parameters
(p17.0) The IVJ is most commonly represented as a lumped parameter and personalised based on in vivo side bending tests, doing so has resulted in accurate predictions of scoliotic corrections, however unlike the healthy MBMs CoR migration is rarely considered. Petite et al. used a model with initial, literature based, linear stiffnesses at the joints to develop a method to personalise the IVJ stiffness of a scoliotic spine. They optimised the stiffness to minimise the difference between the predicted and measured Ferguson angle of an in vivo side bending test. The personalisation based on the in vivo side bending test resulted in more than a 40% increase in lumbar and thoracic stiffness compared to cadaver specimens and showed high inter-subject variability. 140 This suggests for scoliotic models to provide accurate predictions the IVJ stiffness needs personalisation.

(p17.1) In the correction of scoliosis, the disc stiffness can increase due to fusion by inserting bone grafts at the IVD. 132 Desroches et al. attempted to account for this. They created a patient-specific model using the personalisation method developed by Petit et al. and expanded it to include six degrees of freedom. Desroches et al. increased the IVD stiffness to represent the bone graft and performed a sensitivity study which showed that the rod shape and implant positioning had a greater impact on the predictions than the IVD stiffness. It is also worth noting that a higher IVD stiffness led to better predicted correction in the sagittal plane but worse in the coronal. 132 This suggests the material properties are highly anisotropic, therefore, to accurately predict the behaviour in all directions this may need to be accounted for. To the best of the author's knowledge there have been no studies examining the effect of the non-uniform spatial distribution of the material properties of the IVD in MBM.
## (s18) Boundary conditions
(p18.0) There have been few studies on the suitability of the boundary conditions applied and few studies in scenarios not involving a correction manoeuvre. Desroches et al. analysed the impact of constraining the axial rotation of the upper most vertebra, showing it had no impact on the predicted post-operative spinal shape. However, correction of the segments outside of the instrumented region were sensitive to the boundary conditions. 132 Thus, the suitability of the boundary conditions applied is dependent on the spinal region being investigated.

(p18.1) Schmid et al. used their model to investigate the compressive loading at the spinal joints under different loading conditions. They found the compressive load to be sensitive to both load magnitude and direction relative to the scoliotic curvature. 142 Incorporating gait analysis with an MBM, the intervertebral forces in the lumbar region during gait have been shown to be substantially higher than in simple standing. 119 Non-linearities When the IVD stiffness is included, it is often a linear and lumped parameter (Table 3), the impact the non-linearity may have has been studied in greater detail with healthy MBMs. This is only suitable for a limited RoM and could result in inaccurate predictions when simulating surgeries where large rotations and loads are present. 136 Jalalian et al. developed a method to characterise a non-linear stiffness for the IVD using a 2D model. The non-linear stiffness resulted in better shape predictions for all motions, the improvement being more pronounced for larger motions. It was also able to provide accurate predictions for shapes not used in the characterisation of the stiffness. While limited to only being in 2D they suggest the method could easily be expanded to 3D if suitable data is available. 136 Personalisation Often the geometry was personalised from radiographs, and in comparison, to the healthy MBM the stiffness of the IVJ has been personalised more frequently. Side bending test and fulcrum bending tests have been used to personalise, the stiffness of the IVJ (Table 4) determining the correct loading directions when simulating these tests was important when personalising the stiffness. Jalalian et al. investigated the direction in which the force in the frontal plane should be applied to simulate lateral bending, specifically how it should be personalised to an individual. Personalising the line of action of the force based on the location of the inflexion points measured from radiographs improved the bending prediction. As they note in the context of lateral bending tests, the line of action is crucial as it determines the loads and moments. Incorrect lines of action would potentially lead to inferior characterisation of the IVJ stiffness. 135 The study by Jalalian et al. used X-rays of left and right bending and erect positions to personalise their model. They were able to establish a relationship between the bent and erect positions and were able to accurately predict positions which were not used in the characterisation. 137 This is important if models are to be predictive.
## (s19) | Validation of scoliotic spine models
(p19.0) Verification and validation are two very important steps in building credibility of numerical models 148,149 Verification, not to be confused with validation, is the process of ensuring the equations of which the computer models comprise are being solved correctly. [149][150][151] Model verification is in fact the quantification of the error due the numerical approximations introduced by the mathematical model. 148,152 Verification can be achieved through benchmark testing (i.e., solving problems with known solutions), comparisons against results from other software which is known to be valid, and by ensuring physical laws (such as mass conservation) are respected. 148,149,151 In FEMs this may require convergence analysis and in MBMs ensuring that the uncertainty falls within pre-defined thresholds. 149,151,152 Hence verification should be implicit within published studies. Validation of numerical models is the process of establishing that the model is representative of reality. [148][149][150] Ideally, a quantitative comparison should be performed between the model prediction and measurements from a dedicated validation experiment. 153,154 Validation is especially important when the models may be used to aid clinical decisionmaking as the extent of inaccuracy in the model will influence the risk the patient is subject to-less-accurate predictions may lead to poorer clinical decisions. 150 Validation has been very challenging in this area due to a lack of data, validation of the surgical correction is often done by comparing the predicted outcome to the clinical one, however this limits the predictive capability of the models outside of that particular scenario.

(p19.1) Many scoliotic models are validated by simulating the surgical intervention performed and then comparing predicted curvature to the post-operative curvature 13,15,70,[72][73][74]81,84,106,[127][128][129][131][132][133]139 or by simulating a bending test and comparing the predicted curvature to the measured curvature from radiographic images. 69,85,96,[134][135][136][137]140 Predicted Cobb angles within 5 of the clinically measured values are often predicted and are considered acceptable as it corresponds to the clinical accuracy. 155 The downside of this method is that it only offers retrospective validation of the models 132 and in the case of postoperative radiographs only for the procedure performed. In the simulation of scoliotic corrections, if data on the reaction forces at the bone/instrumentation interface was available it could be used for validation 128,132 ; however, collection of this data was challenging 70 meaning direct validation for patient-specific models using these parameters was rarely done. Rather, predicted forces can be examined to see if they are in line with the literature data, 128,132 although this is a much weaker validation.

(p19.2) In vivo, in vitro, and/or in silico literature data has been used for validation. Model predictions are compared to the reported RoM, 68,78,79,97,119 muscle activation 142 or force, 130 IDP, 73,105,130 screw pull out forces, 73 loads on the vertebrae, 88 shear stresses within the IVD, 105 and IVD stiffness. 67 These parameters have been compared to the values reported in literature, sometimes to a single data set from literature and the standard deviation on that data if it is available. 68,78,97,130 Some studies have compared to multiple data sets reported in the literature and the range represented by these sets. 79,105,142 In certain cases only a qualitative comparison was performed. 88 Additionally, there is a lack of standardisation in the in vivo and in vitro testing of spines, 156 therefore the variability and lack of data limits the extent of possible validation. Hence, larger sample sizes and more standardised testing methods would enable more robust testing of the accuracy of model predictions. Ideally, the model should be validated under the same conditions in which it is being used: therefore, validation would be performed using data from scoliotic spines. 119 Unfortunately, a lack of in vivo and in vitro data from scoliotic subjects means scoliotic models have only been validated against normal spine data. 79,105 Alternatively, studies have used models which have been previously validated 12,141,145,147 or developed a new scoliotic spine model using methods validated previously for creating healthy 77,78 or scoliotic spine models. 143,146 While it is not ideal to use a model in a context far from the one for which it was validated, in some cases this is unavoidable due to the lack of in vivo or in vitro data.

(p19.3) When validating against forces acting on the vertebrae and IDP (for subjects between 6 and 18 years old) direct validation was not possible for scoliotic and non-scoliotic alike due to a lack of literature data. 122,123 Further, validation using the FJF was challenging due to the conflicting and limited data available within the literature. 26 Large and conclusive data sets for IDP and FJF would significantly aid the validation of spine models, 26,27 and data sets from scoliotic spines would greatly support the verification of scoliotic spine models.
## (s20) | Applications of FEM and MBM to scoliotic spine surgery
(p20.0) Scoliotic models have been widely applied to simulate surgical corrections, and to investigate surgical techniques and instrumentation. Some FEMs with a software platform to aid the development of surgical devices and methods for the correction of scoliosis have been developed. 73,75,83 Aubin et al. developed a MBM spine surgery simulator capable of simulating five different manoeuvres and designed to be used by clinicians. 128 This was based on a geometrically patient-specific model which had been used to compare predicted and clinical outcomes of a Cotrel-Dubousset surgical manoeuvre 127 and incorporated a method to characterise patient-specific flexibility. 140 Using this simulator, Majdouline et al. conducted a series of studies 11,12 to find the optimal instrumentation configuration which aimed to meet the optimal outcomes recommended by several different surgeons. La Barbera et al. expanded on this work by considering a greater variety of instrumentation options such as different rod contours and screw patterns as well as a more clinically relevant measure of mobility. 138 These studies highlighted the lack of consensus on the optimal outcome of scoliosis surgery as multiple optimal solutions were found. 12,138 The complexity of using such models to find an optimal correction method was demonstrated by Martino et al. who varied five surgical parameters and performed a statistical analysis which found that each parameter had a statistically significant influence on either the implant-vertebra force or a geometrical parameter used to measure the degree of correction. 139 The spine surgery simulator developed by Aubin et al. has been used to show that pedicle screws allow larger curvature correction than hooks. 141 More recent studies have demonstrated the importance of screw type, with the most suitable screw type being dependent on the individual case. 145 Screw type influences the degree of correction and the loading, with monoaxial screws allowing better correction but experiencing higher post-operative vertebra-implant loads than multiaxial screws. 70,139 Several studies 69,70,86,98,139,146 have simulated the surgical correction of scoliosis to investigate the effect of increasing screw density, concluding that increasing the number of screws did not necessarily improve the correction. The effect of screw density depended on the side of the curve to which it is applied. 132 Le Navéaux et al. focused on the effect of screw density for the case of a main thoracic curve. Examining changing densities on each side of the curve, they found increased density on the concave side improved the correction, while increasing density on the convex side had little affect. 106 Some studies have shown lower screw density could achieve lower 86,106,132,139 or similar 70 interoperative loads at the screws as higher density constructs; however, the results from the study by Wang et al. showed lower screw density increased the stress. 146 The literature is more divided over the effect of screw density on the bone-instrumentation stress post-operatively, with some studies showing a reduction in stress with increasing density 70,98 and others an increase in stress with increasing density. 69,106 Clin et al. offered an explanation for this disagreement: while the increase in screw density might be expected to reduce the stress, increased screw density also increased the number of constraints between the rod and the vertebrae, potentially increasing the stress. 70 In addition to the effect density has, the choice of the level at which to attach the screws 96,98,146 and the anterior-posterior position 71,106 played an important role in the stresses and corrections. Increases in correction force was shown to lead to greater Cobb angle correction, 95 until a certain point, when adjacent end plate come into contact. 84,86 Increasing rod diameter and curvature has been seen to increase the intra-operative screw forces. 89,144 It can also improve the degree of correction in certain planes, 89,144 while simultaneously increasing kyphosis. 144 In another study, changes in rod shape had a significant effect on the degree of correction for one patient but not for another. 132 Choice of rod material has influenced scoliotic correction. Rods made from shape memory materials have achieved similar correction to conventional rods but required lower insertion forces and generated lower post-operative stresses at the bone-instrumentation interface. 147 In AIS, growing rods have been used to allow growth to continue while reducing scoliotic curvature. This treatment requires multiple interventions to change the length of the rods, which frequently break. More frequent distractions reduced the risk of rod failure, while higher distraction forces increased the risk but resulted in greater curvature correction and greater growth. 64,65 An optimal frequency and distraction force exists which balances growth and the stresses in the rod, 64 which depended on the IVD stiffness as well. 65 Within the context of growing rods, Rohlmann et al. investigated the effect of screw type on the post-operative motion, assuming a perfect correction, that is, a spine in a healthy configuration. 90 Tethers can be used to correct scoliosis. The effectiveness of anterior tethers and costovertebral tethers has been compared, showing the anterior tethers provided better correction of the coronal deformity and axial rotation. 66 Increasing the cable tension reduced the thoracic Cobb angle and increased the stresses in the growth plate. 71 Fusion is used in the correction of severe scoliosis. Haddas et al. investigated the effect of fusion on the RoM, the IDP and the FJF at the fused and adjacent levels. 77 Similarly, Pasha et al. studied the effect of fusion in adolescents and looked at the stress distribution and the centre of pressure in the endplates. 88 The levels selected for fusion had a substantial effect on the curvature correction and the specifics of which were unique to each case and are highly dependent to the instrumentation strategy and curvature. 141 Differences between the simulated corrections and the clinically observed corrections can be due to assumptions such as determining rod shapes from post-operative scans. 96,131,139 Scoliotic models have also been used to investigate the effect of different surgical techniques on known postoperative complications such as proximal junctional kyphosis 68,129,131,133 and in cases when pectus excavatum is also present. 95 
