# Protein Source and Muscle Health in Older Adults: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 232102317 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f3327c6389619304d64428c86af3d8754cc94a49](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f3327c6389619304d64428c86af3d8754cc94a49)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s3) Muscle Response to Animal Versus Plant Protein Sources May Not Differ at Higher Protein Intakes
(p3.0) Research comparing the anabolic properties of the various plant-and animal-based protein sources is important to determine whether specific nutrition regimens can be formulated to maximize the muscle health of older adults. Differences between milk protein, particularly whey, versus soy protein have been well studied in adults and young adults. Table 1 illustrates selected clinical trials from the past 10 years and some notable older studies that examined the effect of differing sources of dietary protein on muscle outcomes. It has been shown that soy protein ingestion results in a lower MPS compared to whey [53,56] during both rested and post-exercise conditions. Volek, et al. [57] conducted an experiment on 63 randomized healthy adults that performed whole body resistance training program and consume isocaloric supplements containing carbohydrate, whey (24 g), or soy protein (24 g) for 9 months. The authors show that whey supplementation significantly increased fasting plasma leucine concentration and lean body mass gains compared to carbohydrate and soy protein supplementation regimens. However, other studies suggest when higher protein supplementation doses are consumed (>30 g) in combination with an exercise regimen, muscle outcomes are similar across protein subtypes. For example, a study where omnivorous participants followed an 8-week progressive, nonlinear resistance training protocol in addition to supplementation with 48 g of either rice or whey protein isolate showed that there was no difference in body composition and exercise performance [58]. Similarly, other studies with isonitrogenous supplementation of 33 g soy or whey protein resulted in similar increases in muscle mass after exercise training in omnivorous participants [59,60]. A meta-analysis conducted by Messina, et al. [61] concluded that soy protein supplementation did not yield any differences in lean body mass and strength in response to resistance exercise training in healthy omnivorous adults between the age of 18 to 70 years compared to whey protein. However, the authors noted that the independent influence of age or sex could not be identified, and, thus, they recommend more research, specifically among older individuals. In a diet study of whole foods without an exercise intervention, Campbell, et al. [62] show that older women who consumed an omnivorous diet (1.0 ± 0.08 g/kgbodyweight/day of protein) gained more lean body mass over 12-weeks compared to those consuming a lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet (0.78 ± 0.1 g/kgbodyweight/day of protein). In subsequent research [63], they found that the observed difference was attenuated by increasing the amount of protein consumed by the lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet to 1.15 g/kgbodyweight/day. Although these findings do not directly compare animal versus strictly plant protein diets, the results suggest that ingestion of higher amounts of total dietary protein may overcome the different properties of animal versus plant proteins and their influence on muscle outcomes.

(p3.1) It is important to note that high protein intake in older populations may not be suitable for individuals with reduced renal function due to increased filtration burden from greater protein intake. Higher protein consumption has been shown to exacerbate a declining renal function under conditions of modestly impaired renal function [73]. Older adults with severe kidney disease (estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate < 30 mL/min) and who are not on dialysis, are recommended to limit their protein intake until they receive dialysis [27]. More importantly, initial onset of chronic kidney disease is often asymptomatic. Precautionary measures (e.g., routine serum creatinine or blood urea nitrogen test) may be needed in individuals with comorbidities before engaging in a high protein diet regimen [74].
## (s4) Supplementation with Leucine and Essential Amino Acids May Benefit Older Adults with Low Protein Intake
(p4.0) Various amino acids, such as β-alanine, L-glutamine, L-arginine, L-leucine and its bioactive form (hydroxymethyl butyrate) have been studied for nutritional management of sarcopenia because they are anti-catabolic and anabolic in nature [80]. For example, studies have shown that supplementation of β-alanine [81][82][83][84] may prevent and delay the progression of sarcopenia by addressing the systemic depletion of carnosine (β-alanyll-histidine), a dipeptide that acts as a pH buffer and is predominantly found in skeletal muscle. However, of these substrates, leucine is the most well studied, and requires greater understanding regarding adequate dosing and short-term versus long-term effects on muscle health [80]. Therefore, this review will discuss research surrounding the effects of leucine supplementation in older adults with low protein intake.

(p4.1) Certain EAAs elicit more MPS, notably leucine, compared to others by activating the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway [85]. It is important to note that mTOR activation is the key regulator of human MPS in response to increased EAA availability [86]. Leucine not only activates MPS through mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) [85], but also activates MPS through a mTORC1-independent processes [87,88]. But, it is important to note that leucine alone does not stimulate MPS; and actually require other amino acid to sustain anabolism [89]. For comparison, whey, casein, egg, soy, and pea protein isolate have 8.6 g, 5.8 g, 3.6 g, 5.0 g, 5.7 g of leucine per 100 g of food, respectively [79]. Research has shown that MPS response to suboptimal doses of protein (6.25 g of whey protein), but with supplementation of leucine (to reach a total of 3.0 g of leucine in dose) is similar to ingestion of 25 g of whey protein in healthy young men [64]. Thus, food or supplements that are highest in leucine, like whey protein, could be used to maximize the potential MPS response. It may also be possible to spike plant protein supplementation with adequate leucine content to match anabolic responses seen with whey protein alone. For example, supplementation of wheat protein with leucine to match the amount of leucine content in whey protein resulted in an equalized rate of MPS in adult rats [90]. A study in older adults consuming lower protein meals (0.81 ± 0.04 g protein/kg/day) supplemented with 4 g of leucine per meal 3 times a day for 2 weeks demonstrated improved muscle protein synthesis, acutely [65]. Similarly, Engelen et al. [66] demonstrated that consumption of branched chain amino acid (BCAA) spiked soy protein significantly increased whole-body protein synthesis in patients suffering from a chronic wasting disease (e.g., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)) when compared with soy protein alone. Moreover, a recent clinical trial reported that leucine requirements that was determined by indicator amino acid oxidation method (IAAO) with L-1[1-13C] phenylalanine as the indicator in healthy older adult males and females >60 y, reported that their requirement was 77.8 mg/kgbodyweight/day for male and 78.2 mg/kgbodyweight/day for female which is double that of the current international RDA for leucine (39 mg/kgbodyweight/day) [91]. Overall, as older adults typically consume below the optimal EAA dosage at each meal (due to overall low protein consumption and/or lack of high-quality protein intakes [21,92]), supplementation with a protein high in leucine may be needed to assist in forestalling age-related muscle loss.

(p4.2) Although supplemental leucine doses of 3.0 g have been shown to increase MPS, there are observed limits to how efficacious leucine can be towards MPS. Moore et al. [93] tested the leucine dose-response relationship and threshold theory through a dose-response study using 0 g, 5 g, 10 g, 20 g, and 40 g of albumin in exercised young men on MPS outcomes where the blood amino acid level after exercise peaked around 1-h post-ingestion. The authors showed that MPS increased in a dose-dependent manner in response to dietary protein ingestion and reached the maximum MPS response at 20 g of albumin (which contains approximately 1.7 g of leucine, 0.25 g protein/kgbodyweight); and these results are supported by two other studies [94,95]. Further, Moore et al. [93] observed no significant additional increase in MPS at higher doses (40 g of albumin, 3.4 g of leucine). They noted that leucine oxidation significantly increased above the level of maximum MPS, which suggests that the additional leucine was unable to be utilized [93,95]. Overall, the maximal MPS response in older adults was observed at~35-40 g of protein post-exercise [96] and 20 g at rest [93]. At the same time, the benefit of increased leucine content diminishes as the amount of total protein increases [97,98] and supplying excess leucine, or any essential amino acids for that matter, will result in plateauing of the MPS response [93,95,99,100]. In addition, the long-term effect of leucine supplementation on muscle health remains unclear. Supplementation of leucine in exercised older adults [101] could increase MPS response up to 24-h after supplementation; however, the acute increase in MPS was not associated with increases in lean body mass [102]. A 3-month study in healthy older men (71 ± 4 year) [67] and a 6-month study in diabetic older men (71 ± 1 year) [68] showed supplementation with 7.5 g leucine per day did not increase skeletal muscle mass or strength. Similarly, in a separate study of 21 adults ≥ 65 year, supplementation with 15 g of EAAs twice a day during bed rest resulted in improvements in MPS to a similar level observed pre-bedrest; however, the augmentation of MPS did not prevent muscle loss as measured by DXA [69]. Another exercise and leucine-rich-EAA supplementation (3 g twice a day) study among 155 sarcopenic older women (≥75 year) showed significantly improved walking speed after a comprehensive training program twice a week for 3 months, but neither lean mass nor strength improvements were observed [70]. Therefore, the long-term benefits of leucine supplementation on muscle health and functionality remains to be determined. Even though higher total protein intakes may compensate for varying leucine intake in adults meeting the dietary guidelines for protein, older adults with chronically low protein intakes may be a subgroup that would additionally benefit from leucine supplementation.
## (s5) Associations between Whole Food Sources of Protein and Muscle Outcomes in Humans
(p5.0) With studies demonstrating short-term MPS response differs by protein quality, digestibility, and leucine content, there is a need to examine the relation of usual protein intake with muscle health among older adults [43]. In addition, it is important to examine the effects of plant protein sources on muscle within the context of usual dietary patterns as there is increasing interest in plant-based diets due to their known healthful effects on metabolic health [103]. Consuming greater amounts of protein, regardless of source, could compensate for the lower EAA content of plant-sourced proteins. In addition, incomplete proteins can be combined in the diet to form complete EAA profiles. For example, grain proteins are typically lower in lysine and higher in methionine. In contrast, beans are typically lower in methionine, but higher in lysine. When these plant-protein foods are combined together, grain and bean proteins form an EAA profile that resembles animal protein [43]. However, postprandial blood EAA concentration following ingestion of high quality plant protein blends was not the same as whey protein when matched to its leucine content [104]. Therefore, protein quality and digestibility indexes such as PDCAAS and DIAAS do not provide information regarding the true anabolic effect of specific plant protein sources on body tissues compared to animal source counterparts. A systematic literature review by van Vliet, Burd and van Loon [43] highlighted that animal protein is generally, at an isonitrogenous amount, more superior in promoting muscle protein synthesis and leads to greater muscle mass compared to plant-sourced protein (e.g., soy and wheat). The authors show that plant-based protein offers equal benefits compared to animal-sourced protein at greater amounts of ingestion. However, this might not be the case in certain populations. In the past, studies showed that vegetarians tend to consume less daily dietary protein compared to their omnivorous counterparts and result in lower muscle mass [62,105,106]. However, it is difficult to determine whether the differences in muscle mass were due to protein-specific dietary pattern or difference in overall protein intake.

(p5.1) Epidemiological studies on the associations of dietary source of protein with measures of muscle from the past 10 years are shown in Table 2. Data from the Framingham Offspring Cohort demonstrates that total protein intake and animal protein intake, but not plant protein, are associated with muscle mass as measured by DXA in older adult men and women [107]. Specifically, higher leg lean mass was observed among participants in the highest quartile of animal protein intake compared to the lowest quartile. In the same cohort, higher total protein and animal protein intake, but not plant protein, were suggested to be protective against loss of grip strength over 6 years among adults over the age of 60; interestingly, this prospective association was not observed in adults <60 year [108]. When using dietary pattern methodology specific to protein intake, considering all other nutrients and foods consumed in combination with protein intake, no associations between source of protein intake, appendicular lean mass and quadriceps strength were observed, when total protein intake was above the RDA [109]. Chan, et al. [110] showed that quartiles of total protein intake (Q1: 69.2 ± 28.6; Q4 83.3 ± 37.0 total protein g/day) and quartiles of animal protein intake (Q1: 37.1 ± 21.1; Q4: 46.8 ± 29.1 animal protein g/day) were not associated with changes in physical performance nor lean mass over 4 years. In contrast, the authors noted that a diet low in plant-based protein (Q1: 32.1 ± 13.9; Q4: 36.5 ± 19.7 plant protein g/day) was associated with higher muscle loss compared with those in the highest quartile of plant-protein intakes. The different outcomes observed between this study of Chinese adults and studies in cohorts with Western dietary patterns, may be due to differences in type and amount of plant protein consumed, and other intakes of nutrients that may influence muscle such as vitamin D, folic acid, and antioxidants. In addition, there is a need to standardize the protein dosage measurement (e.g., comparing g/kgbodyweight/day of each protein subtype) to further understand the differential impact between animal versus plant-sourced protein on muscle health parameters. Overall, these studies suggest that source of dietary protein may not matter as long as older adults are meeting the RDA for protein, habitually.
## (s8) Future Directions and Conclusions
(p8.0) Older adults and clinically compromised individuals are at risk for sarcopenia and protein malnutrition. A tailored nutrition approach to provide adequate protein (1.2 g/kgbodyweight/day), from a mix of sources, and supplementing sufficient leucine may offset these risks. Among older adults with chronic low protein intakes, a protein or leucine supplementation may be warranted to augment inadequate daily protein intake. There are a wide variety of protein beverages available in the market with varying sourcing of protein, such as whey, soy, and pea-based protein. Unlike pea protein, whey and soy-based proteins have been studied extensively for the past decade and have shown no differences in LBM and the strength in response to resistance exercise training in adults. This review highlights the limited number of studies conducted evaluating the effect of pea protein on muscle mass, strength, and function, despite its increasing popularity in the market. Essential amino acids such as leucine are critical in improving muscle protein anabolism, muscle size, and function, which is necessary in older populations. Therefore, future research is needed to evaluate the effect of pea protein with and without additional leucine, or its limiting amino acid, supplementation on muscle physiology and performance, primarily in the older adult population. In addition, a long-term trial with a practical approach to providing a high protein diet with defined health outcomes in various population groups is needed to establish which dietary protein source would be more beneficial; especially in the context of barriers older adult populations commonly face in meeting their protein needs.

(p8.1) It is important to review total protein intakes and protein sources within the context of the whole diet. The effect of dietary protein on muscle health in the context of other dietary factors should be examined as other nutrients have been shown to influence muscle, such as vitamin D, omega-3 fatty acids, antioxidants, acid-base diets, magnesium, and probiotics [21]. For example, studies have identified the pathway in which vitamin D supports skeletal muscle health [121]. Yet supplementation with vitamin D in states of deficiency yield conflicting results related to prevention of sarcopenia [121]. However, these nutrients are outside the scope of the current review paper. Therefore, we recommend a multi-arm randomized controlled clinical trial of protein supplementation in omnivores, vegetarians, and vegans while controlling for amount of baseline total protein intake could better explain the muscle effect of protein supplementation on each dietary pattern. Further, a large epidemiological study is needed to examine the association between animal versus plant protein on muscle outcomes among protein insufficient consumers to assess if the importance of protein source is magnified at lower total dietary protein compared to populations with higher total dietary protein. In addition, research that examines the influence of different protein sources on the development of sarcopenia across the lifecycle would contribute greatly to the advancement in prevention and treatment of sarcopenia and musculoskeletal aging. Lastly, future research is needed to better understand the role protein sources on the intersection of muscle and metabolic health.

(p8.2) In conclusion, providing tailored protein recommendations to older adults at nutritional risk may help slow the development of sarcopenia and, subsequently, provide a better quality of life. Current literature suggests recommendations should be targeted towards consuming enough total protein daily, especially in populations prone to malnutrition, through dietary protein or leucine supplementation. Further research evaluating the impact of various protein sources on muscle health is needed, with particular emphasis on lesser-studied plant proteins, such as pea, corn, potato, hemp or rice protein. 
