# Purpose in the For-Profit Firm: A Review and Framework for Management Research

CorpusID: 234808799 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4bbebac0dabd555a74e90f0b1ce66ef657b97b4a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4bbebac0dabd555a74e90f0b1ce66ef657b97b4a)

Fields: Business

## (s5) Synopsis: A Definition of Purpose
(p5.0) We have introduced six research streams that describe how purpose is currently expressed in managerial communities. While some are focused on purpose as a theoretical construct, others also invoke themes that reflect the common understanding of purpose as used in organizations. By bringing these perspectives together, we seek to both frame and illuminate the meaning of purpose itself: Reducing the conceptual confusion and presenting a definition can help us advance empirical research as well as theory development.

(p5.1) We view purpose as directed, at least in part, toward a higher order goal that the firm engages with in an authentic, noninstrumentalist way and that employees find compelling (Henderson & Van den Steen, 2015). This is consistent with The World Economic Forum, which submitted that the purpose of firms ought "to produce profitable solutions to the problems of people and planet, and not to profit from producing problems for people or planet." We propose a definition of purpose in the for-profit firm that recognizes and combines the key insights from the six pillars of purpose we reviewed above. We recognize that while purpose can be defined in conceptual terms, each firm's expression of its own corporate purpose is unique. A knowledgeable observer should be able to identify a specific firm based on its purpose. We propose the following definition:

(p5.2) Purpose in the for-profit firm captures the essence of an organization's existence by explaining what value it seeks to create for its stakeholders. In doing so, purpose provides a clear definition of the firm's intent, creates the ability for stakeholders to identify with, and be inspired by, the firm's mission, vision, and values, and establishes actionable pathways and an aspirational outcome for the firm's actions.
## (s13) Generating Impact
(p13.0) Why and when does purpose matter? Ultimately, the purpose of the for-profit firm should matter for all of its stakeholders. At the macro level, entire economies, societies, and communities are likely to be deeply affected by how firms frame, formalize, and realize their purpose. As noted earlier, firms may have to make difficult tradeoffs in order to create public as well as private value, including giving up opportunities for value appropriation that may undermine their purpose. The implications of such tradeoffs are not well understood and require further research. Critical questions concern not only whom the firm ultimately decides to serve but how its decisions are viewed by its stakeholders, an area that might be informed by theories of procedural and distributive justice as well as by research on social movements and stakeholder mobilization (Akemu, Whiteman, & Kennedy, 2016;Folger & Konovsky, 1989;Quattrone, 2015). Also potentially important is the firm's time frame for realizing its purpose. How do firms weigh short-term costs against longer term potential gains or vice versa, and how do these choices affect the economies, societies, and communities in which they operate, especially in the face of major economic or social crises such as those induced by the Covid-19 pandemic (Craighead, Ketchen, & Darby, 2020)? Additional questions relate to the macro-level trends created by the prevalence and priorities of purposedriven businesses in a given economy, society, or community. These include, for example, how value creation and capture may be affected by diversity of purpose among for-profit firms versus by convergence of purpose on shared priorities, such as climate change or reducing inequality. The answers to such questions will fundamentally affect the outcomes and impact of purpose-driven firms.
## (s14) Influencing Markets and Institutions
(p14.0) The role of the wider institutional context in the realization of purpose requires more research. For instance, it has been argued that purpose can serve as a control system that reduces the need for third-party monitoring (Cady et al., 2011). By extension, this viewpoint implies that purpose can compensate, at least in part, for the absence of effective institutions. On the flipside, how companies link purpose to emerging compliance requirements is also a salient question. It is unclear, a priori, whether purpose-driven companies are more likely to become compliance-driven as regulators sharpen regulatory requirements-a topic especially important in the context of sustainability reporting. While regulation may indeed be a rising tide that lifts all boats, it could dissuade companies at the vanguard of responsible business from pushing the envelope even further.
