# Automating Laboratory Processes by Connecting Biotech and Robotic Devices-An Overview of the Current Challenges, Existing Solutions and Ongoing Developments

CorpusID: 236425030 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b0418d05b0cc868fe7a59cf6a28d81de19eff5c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b0418d05b0cc868fe7a59cf6a28d81de19eff5c)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Biotechnological products play an ever-increasing role for several sectors of the producing industry. In the medical sector, some of such processes are already established (e.g., insulin production), and also the pharma industry takes more and more advantage of biotechnology (e.g., CAR-T therapies). In food production, gene-modified plants promise higher yield using less pesticides. In a few years, meat grown in the laboratory may be found in grocery stores [1]. Another novel sector is that of synthetic biology, where biological products and their gene codes are fully engineered to create food, medicine or even replacements for technical parts [2].

(p0.1) Consequently, biotechnological production needs to become more cost-efficient, resilient, robust, reliable, and affordable for the greater population and be steadfast against competitive products on the market. Therefore, production processes must follow the development of other industry sectors, such as automotive, microelectronic or chemical, and change from partly or purely manual production steps to full automation.
## (s2) Basic Requirements for Automation
(p2.0) In this section, the basic requirements for automating a laboratory process that is so far performed manually are presented. These prerequisites address the equipment used during the execution of the protocol, the physical and software interfaces that depend on it, material transport, and the need for control software [4,14,17]. If automation was not considered during the early stages of the development cycle, these requirements represent major challenges for the operator [4].

(p2.1) Many factors need to be considered when automating a standard operating procedure (SOP). On the one hand, the overall process must be separable into modular steps that can be applicable to technical devices [10]. On the other hand, the SOP has to be automatable regarding handling of materials and containers. Therefore, a key aspect is the amount of product that will be produced by the process. The suitability of all equipment and containers depends on the desired output quantity. To avoid bottlenecks and reduce the variance in container sizes, all process steps should be dimensioned to process input materials in a similar range of quantity [17]. Furthermore, all operations must be determined with quantitative values. Information such as "shake carefully" or "add a little fluid" cannot be handled by machines and needs to be specified. In addition, many process steps depend on qualitative measurement values such as the evaluation of optical observations such as cell shape, medium color, confluence or transparency. Due to the error-proneness of manual measurements and human-induced variability, these evaluations should be performed automatically. This can be accomplished by artificial-intelligence-based algorithms for image recognition, as has been shown in several studies [11,13,18].
## (s5) Loading Devices
(p5.0) One of the automation-intended devices is the PCR device QTower3 Auto (Analytik Jena GmbH, Jena, Germany). PCR devices control genome duplication reactions by continuously heating up and cooling down the sample, mostly by using a heating plate that the sample plate is pressed into. Inserting and later removing the sample with force is difficult for robots and can result in the robot losing touch. The QTower3 Auto does not require such an insertion with force. It provides an opening drawer that moves out of the front of the device, thus offering much operating space for the robot. The sample plate is simply put onto the drawer. After it is retracted, the sample plate and heating block are connected inside of the device. Removing the sample is carried out in a similar fashion.

(p5.1) Another example is the microplate sealer ALPS3000 (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA). It takes sealing foil from a roll, cuts it into pieces and heat-attaches these onto the sample plates. The device provides a drawer with enough space for handling the plates with a robot. Hereby, no force is needed for putting or taking the material.

(p5.2) The centrifuge 4-16 KRL by Sigma (Sigma Laborzentrifugen, Osterode am Harz, Germany) has a strong shell for protection and heat-sealing with only a small opening on the top. For loading and unloading, the user needs to reach through the opening to place the sample into the device. This is problematic because a robot arm is usually thicker and less flexible than a human arm. Adapting the design of the robot's grippers solves this issue. Long grippers enable the robot to reach to the bottom of the centrifuge. However, they can be at a disadvantage when performing other operations in space-limited areas of the automated platform.

(p5.3) Another solution to this problem has been realized in the cooling storage for falcontubes, which is a custom-made device integrated in the automated platform StemCellDiscovery [13]. This device also controls its inside temperature for cooling the cell medium and has temperature-isolated walls with only a small opening at the top. As this opening is too small for a robot gripper, the device has a lifting mechanism. The tubes are vertically moved through the opening where the robot can easily take them.
## (s7) Digital Communication Interfaces
(p7.0) While the automation of custom-developed devices is quite simple when using programmable logic controllers (PLC) or microcontrollers, great caution must be taken when obtaining devices that shall be integrated into the automated environment. Some devices, even though being highly modern, complex and technically advanced, do not allow for receiving commands or sending data via a digital interface. Other devices may allow only partial automation and either enable external software to activate some but not all the available functions, or the execution of digitally triggered commands still requires manual steps, e.g., pressing a start button. The devices that provide full bilateral digital communication offer different well implemented but unfortunately not yet standardized solutions.

(p7.1) The automated PCR device QTower3 Auto (Analytik Jena GmbH, Jena, Germany) is connected via USB to the host computer. The vendor provides a dynamic link library (DLL) file that can be included in the custom control program and provides libraries containing functions to send commands and receive data.

(p7.2) The incubator Cytomat 24C-IG (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH, Waltham, MA, USA) provides a serial RS-232 interface for digital communication. In the RS-232 standard, user data are sent as a time-series of bits defined by two voltage levels that correspond to logical one and logical zero. In most applications, the RS-232 interface is becoming less important because current standards, such as Ethernet or USB, enable higher transmission rates, support greater distances and are less vulnerable to interference. However, in laboratory automation, the interface is used because of its simplicity and ease of implementation [22]. In the case of the incubator, the vendor provides a communication datasheet with commands that can be implemented in the controlling software. This device connects with a DSUB-9 plug, and other devices have USB plugs that also run the RS-232 communication protocol.

(p7.3) The pipetting robot Microlab STAR (Hamilton Company, Reno, NV, USA) provides a USB connection that only connects to the vendor-specific software VENUS. Any external control software needs to communicate with this program via comma-separated value (CSV) or Microsoft Excel files that are stored on and read from a server.

(p7.4) An interface that seems to establish itself as a standard in biotech devices is OPC DA. The bioreactor controller in-Control (Applikon Biotechnology, Delft, The Netherlands) is using it for communication. The advantage of this interface is that the user can see the supported control functions via a corresponding OPC DA client. However, a communication datasheet from the vendor is necessary for the details to the function and the required parameters. For the communication, an OPC DA-Server is needed. In the case of the in-Control, that Server is provided by Applikon Biotechnology. Furthermore, a special client is needed that must be integrated in the controlling program for enabling it to communicate with the OPC DA-Server and must be obtained separately from corresponding software providers.

(p7.5) In recent years, the communication standard of other industry branches has already moved to the communication standard OPC Unified Architecture (OPC UA), which is more flexible, universally applicable and already a standard in other branches such as, e.g., the automotive sector. The development of biotechnological devices has a delay here, as manufacturers need to obey higher requirements when certifying their software, thus major changes, such as switching to another communication standard, require more effort and need a longer time. One device already implementing an OPC UA interface is the CTS Rotea Counterflow Centrifugation System (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH, Waltham, MA, USA). It is to be expected that more devices from that manufacturer and other manufacturers will follow in the next years.

(p7.6) Some devices can be connected to the manufacturer-specific controlling software but do not provide any interface to communicate with custom software. In this case, workarounds are possible. For example, the software can be installed on a separate computer. The custom controlling software can be set to handle that computer's mouse and thus set commands in the manufacturer's software. Of course, a readout of data from that software is only possible indirectly, by letting the manufacturer's software save the data in an external file that can be read by the custom software.
