# Methodologies and evaluation of electronic travel aids for the visually impaired people: a review

CorpusID: 235245899 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c135339ec45c4e337fde8d506a66d04ba73d7622](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c135339ec45c4e337fde8d506a66d04ba73d7622)

Fields: Engineering, Psychology, Computer Science

## (s1) NAVIGATION
(p1.0) There are many integral functions which makes up an ETA. Human-machine interface, machinehuman interface, object detection, object recognition, mapping, perception and control of locomotion are some of it just to name a few [3]. However, amongst all functionality, navigation remains as one of the most necessary and fundamental requirement of an ETA system for visual impairment [12].

(p1.1) Navigation is the process of updating one's position and orientation along with a preselected route leading to a destination [13]. Factors such as position tracking, wayfinding and orientation are integral aspects of navigation. The proposed taxonomy chart which classifies the navigation system is shown in Figure 3. 
## (s2) Wayfinding
(p2.0) Wayfinding deals with the capability to select the correct route from a network of routes starting from an initial point to a destination [13]. It answers the question of "where do I go?" from the visually impaired person's point of view. Other than moving towards destination, wayfinding also includes the action of evacuation [14].
## (s3) Crowd sourcing
(p3.0) One of the methods to achieve wayfinding is through crowdsourcing. An example of crowdsourcing is shown by in [15], where they designed a smartphone application to navigate from point A to B through reliable directions from the online community. A web app of Google App Engine is developed where a sighted user can log on and provide instructions.
## (s4) Geodatabase
(p4.0) Geodatabase, which consists of paths designed for the pedestrian, land-use map, actual video recordings, filed survey and community reports are used in [1], [16], [17]. This key information is then accumulated and amalgamated to form a representation of crossings, sidewalk and real topology of a pedestrian network for users with visual disabilities.
## (s5) Geographic information system
(p5.0) Geographic information system (GIS) with visual landmarks for GIS/vision based localization is discussed in [18]. A camera with a small portable computer such as a netbook is used as its hardware. Incorporation of GPS and GIS for determination of position and orientation for navigation of the visually impaired have also been done. Other implementations of GIS in wayfinding systems include [19], [20]. GIS system may face some difficulties as nature environmental conditions are extremely difficult to measure [21].
## (s6) Orientation
(p6.0) Orientation is an ability to be aware of one's body position and heading in relation to surrounding objects, cardinal directions and one's location in the followed path [13]. Usually related to rotation of the person's body, it helps in making turns around a corner and keeping the body centre in the pathway. Different types of sensors used to accomplish orientation are discussed in this section.
## (s7) Magnetometer
(p7.0) First, we examine the sensor of magnetometer which are used to estimate heading, measure roll and pitch angles [22]. Salonikidou et al. [23] proposed a system which makes use of a magnetometer for orientation purposes. It determines the heading angle with coordinates stored in GPS as a reference before giving direction command to the user.
## (s8) Compass
(p8.0) A compass is another sensor that can enable orientation awareness. For instance, Skulimowski et al. [24] suggested the point of interest (PoI) explorer mobile application. Making use of an accelerometer and electronic compass within the smartphone, it calculates the angle and orientation of the user relative to the current position and gives direction to the target point. Nonetheless, the system does require a considerable amount of time for utilization, set to be 15 seconds for each complete scan.
## (s9) Gyroscope/IMU
(p9.0) Zheng et al. [25] have estimated the orientation by making use of the gyroscope featured in a smartphone. By solely using a gyroscope, an accurate angle is achieved; with average error of 2.73 within 6% error rate. Correct altitude is tracked within a short period of 10s. Another sample of navigation assisted by IMU can be seen in [26], [27]. Other than wayfinding, gyroscope sensor is also associated with the ability of balancing and angle determination.
## (s10) Position tracking
(p10.0) Position tracking or piloting is associated with sensing positional information and using it to determine one's location [28]. One can use an external map or cognitive map to locate oneself relative to the destination. Often referred to by the term localization, it answers the question of "where am I?" for the visually impaired. A well-known predicament, the localization cases are a necessity both within indoor and outdoor situations. 
## (s11) Beacon
(p11.0) First, we examine the use of a beacon to achieve position tracking. Cheragi et al. [29] proposed using low-cost, Bluetooth-based beacon for indoor localization named as GuideBeacon. The GuideBeacon implements received signal strength indicators (RSSI) to estimate user proximity from the sensor. In an experimental phase, the system showed reduced navigation time compared to cane users.
## (s12) GPS
(p12.0) Global positioning system (GPS) is the most commonly used technique for outdoor localization [30]. Chaccour & Badr [31] have proposed a computer vision-based technique to guide the visually impaired on navigation aspects by making use of the GPS technology and Google maps.
## (s13) RFID
(p13.0) Another method to accomplish position tracking is by using radio-frequency identification (RFID). Costa et al. [32] suggest RFID and computer vision for detection of landmarks placed on the ground. The hardware is equipped with a RFID reader connected via Bluetooth. Table 2 shows summarizes the navigation techniques of ETAs development with criteria and references. Most commonly devices to achieve navigation purposes are GPS, off-the-shelf smartphone sensors and camerabased system. GPS can be used to attain both wayfinding and path tracking information [33]- [35]. IMU, gyroscope, compass and magnetometer are commonly found in smartphone devices [25], [24]. Camera based wayfinding techniques include SLAM [36], Microsoft Kinect [37]- [39], novel liquid sound navigation [40] and FL2-0352 camera [41]. Machine learning methods which are getting numerous attention for researchers nowadays [42], [43] such as particle swarm optimization (PSO) [44] have also been implemented for navigation purposes.  [15], [16], [27], [36], [40], [45] [24], [ 25], [27], [46] [30], [32], [33] 
## (s16) Simulation
(p16.0) Initially, experiments to evaluate ETAs are done by simulation. One of the early simulation tests for visually impaired technology with stereo vision-based aid is presented in [47]. They tested the ground plane  [49] tested an algorithm for path planning within a supermarket environment with C++ simulation. A supermarket layout with numbered corners and section as point of interest (PoI) is mapped out on the system. Desired destination and current situation are given as the input from the user.
## (s20) 1755
(p20.0) The second obstruction to ETA's commercialization lies within the complex production and testing systems. Ethical approval, and recognition by clinical bodies and organizations are a must, such as the food and drug administration (FDA) in the United States. And in order to acquire clinical validity, large and well defined patient groups are needed as evidence of safety aspects of the development [59]. Therefore, more involvement and participation from each contributing party is necessary, including designers (engineers), authorities (doctors and clinicians) and the end users (visually impaired community).

(p20.1) The third factor are designed methodologies which lack user-centred philosophy and requirements. There are many cases where sophisticated innovations of the designer's concept overshadow consumer necessity. Therefore, an intensive effort must be made to see more collaboration between engineering designers, medical clinicians and visually impaired users to make the product more consumer-oriented and user-centred. There should also be a clear-cut objective which is to prioritize the needs of the visually impaired people at all costs.
