# Ethnobotanical survey of medicinal plants traded in herbal markets of Kahramanmaraş- NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

CorpusID: 232241818 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f803921254fe5275c6020dd231f75e4460ea72da](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f803921254fe5275c6020dd231f75e4460ea72da)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s4) Classification of medicinal uses
(p4.0) Ailments were grouped into eleven categories according to the recommended usage. The ailment categories are circulatory system, digestive system, endocrine system, immune system, lymphatic system, central nervous system, reproductive system, skeletal system, respiratory system, urinary system, and skin or integumentary system. Informants did not specify any use of plants for the body muscular system. Relative Frequency Citation (RFC) has been calculated to assess the consensus amongst the informants on the reported taxa. This index shows the local importance of each taxa and is given by the frequency of citation (FC, the number of informants mentioning the use of the species) divided by the total number of informants in the survey (N) (Vitalini et al., 2013).

(p4.1) This index varies from 0, when no informants refer to the plant species as useful, to 1, in the case when there are a maximum number of informants that consider a plant taxon useful (Tardío and Pardo-de-Santayana, 2008).
## (s7) Relative importance (RI)
(p7.0) Relative importance (RI) determines the importance of a plant species according to the number of uses of each plant taxa and body organ systems treated by it. Relative importance was calculated as follows (Bennett and Prance 2000):

(p7.1) where PH is the number of reported pharmacological properties, Rel PH is the relative number of pharmacological properties, BS is the number of body systems treated, and Rel BS is the relative number of body systems treated.
## (s8) Informant consensus factor (ICF)
(p8.0) Informant consensus factor expresses the consensus of informants related to the use of plant taxa in treating different use categories (Heinrich et al., 1998;Khan et al., 2015;Yaseen et al., 2015;Mushtaq et al., 2018;Sargın and Büyükcengiz, 2019). ICF ¼ ðNur À NtÞ = ðNur À 1Þ  where Nur is the number of uses reported for a disease category and Nt is the number of plant taxa used to treat the disease category.
