# Systematic Literature Review to Assess Economic Evaluations in Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) Key Points for Decision Makers

CorpusID: 239012900 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9956f07a9f838195c1760500c078b2c4c2b413fb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9956f07a9f838195c1760500c078b2c4c2b413fb)

Fields: Economics, Medicine

## (s2) Search Strategy and Selection Criteria
(p2.0) An SLR was performed to identify available economic evaluations associated with SMA. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) 2020 guidelines [50] were followed to identify and screen scientific literature and extract data (Fig. 1).

(p2.1) A comprehensive search was performed on 29 August 2019 using the following electronic databases accessed via the Ovid platform: Embase, MEDLINE ® (including Epub Ahead of Print, In-Process & Other Non-Indexed Citations and Daily update), Evidence-Based Medicine Reviews and EconLit. Additional searches (hand searching) of congress proceedings from the past 3 years, reference lists of included publications, HTA bodies and searches of additional sources and websites, such as SMA UK, were also conducted to identify relevant evidence (electronic supplementary material [ESM] Table 1). Eligibility criteria included economic value analyses conducted in any patient with SMA (Type 1, 2, 3 and/or 4) and other (non-SMA) neuromuscular disorders. As it was anticipated that there would be a small number of relevant publications involving patients with SMA, the scope was initially broad to include patients with other (non-SMA) neuromuscular disorders including, but not limited to, myodystrophy, muscular dystrophy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. The search strategies, including database search start dates, are shown in ESM Table 2. Eligibility criteria were based on the population, interventions, comparators and outcomes (PICO) framework [51] to identify relevant data (ESM Table 3). Economic evaluation study designs included cost-utility, cost-effectiveness, cost-minimisation and cost-benefit analyses. There was no restriction regarding intervention, geography, language of publication, or publication date.
## (s4) Assessment of Bias and Quality of Evidence
(p4.0) Quality assessment of primary full publications was conducted using the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) single technology appraisal specification for manufacturer submission of evidence (June 2012), as adapted from Drummond and Jefferson [52].
## (s22) Consensus in Modelling Structure and SMA Health State Classification
(p22.0) To improve consistency in cost-effectiveness modelling in SMA, it may be useful to examine the approach used in other diseases to unify models. Project HERCULES is a collaborative project between Duchenne UK and eight pharmaceutical companies to develop a cost-effectiveness model for DMD in which health states are informed by clinicians, patients and caregivers [90]. In addition to model flexibility to incorporate different input parameters, such as interventions and comparators, patient populations and treatment effects, Project HERCULES incorporates expertise from manufacturers, decision makers and clinical experts to develop a model [90]. In the past, key opinion leaders, modellers and economists liaised to develop the CORE Diabetes Model for diabetes mellitus [91], which later became a global, internetbased, interactive computer model that permits simulations of different populations of patients with diabetes in realistic clinical settings. It would be beneficial for stakeholders associated with SMA to consider a bespoke approach to economic modelling of SMA through the adoption of successful elements of approaches used elsewhere. An important consideration for future economic evaluations involves a change in the way many experts are classifying SMA (the traditional categorisation of types is based on the age of onset and highest motor milestone achieved). Increased survival and improvement of motor function have been a direct result of both DMTs and enhanced medical care and are leading to the emergence of new phenotypes [2,82,92,93]. For example, DMT use has resulted in patients with Type 1 SMA who can sit and patients with Type 2 SMA who can walk [92], which are milestones that are never achieved in natural history. Recommended terms for re-classification of SMA include 'non-sitters', 'sitters' and 'walkers', which better reflect current motor function and associated dependence on caregivers [2]. This approach to classification allows for both attainment of milestones following treatment that are never normally achieved in natural history, and also for the loss of motor function that may occur in a degenerative disease (e.g. a patient initially classified as having Type 2 SMA may become a 'non-sitter' due to disease progression). An abstract and associated poster presented by Paracha et al. at ISPOR 2020 [94] highlighted further refinement in economic models proposed for SMA. In the study by Paracha et al., the functional milestones were defined using the HINE-2 and 32-item Motor Function Measure scales for infantile-onset (Type 1) SMA and later-onset (Types 2 and 3) SMA, respectively. Moreover, the proposed Markov model for Type 1 SMA included four motor function milestones ('not sitting', 'sitting', 'standing' and 'walking') to reflect disease severity together with 'permanent ventilation' and 'death' health states. Standing was added as an intermediate health state because reliance on a caregiver may diminish or may not be required in this state, which is an important consideration both for informal costs and quality of life. The proposed Types 2/3 SMA Markov model was identical to the Type 1 SMA model, except for the removal of 'not sitting' and 'permanent ventilation' health states. Individuals could transition between these defined motor function milestones and each of the health states included a 'with or without' sub-health state to account for potential differences in quality of life and costs, which has not been included in previous models. A recently published economic model using the health states 'permanent ventilation', 'not sitting', 'walking' and 'death' assessed nusinersen treatment versus SOC for patients with infantile-onset SMA in the US [75]. This study found that nusinersen treatment achieved QALYs and life-years (LYs) (3.24 and 7.64, respectively) that were higher than SOC (QALY, 0.46; LYs, 2.40) [75]. Therefore, the application of revised SMA classification, in addition to increased understanding of the prevalence of SMA, may impact assessments of economic modelling of SMA in the future.
