# Agricultural Products Crowd Logistics: A Literature Review and Research Agenda

CorpusID: 234254503 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/10091adf530a792dd5be3060f1fa245da11165ec](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/10091adf530a792dd5be3060f1fa245da11165ec)

Fields: Business, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) APL set up a bridge between the production and consumption of agricultural products, which is vital to hundreds of millions of farmers. The development of Information and Communication technologies (ICT) has been accelerating mobile devices' penetration [1], such as mobile phones, laptop or tablet PCs, which then facilitates the current sharing economy boom. The idea of crowdsourcing provides new opportunities and innovative solutions for APL, so APCL, as an innovative business model, is emerging rapidly.

(p0.1) Related academic literature on CL has hitherto focused on three fields: innovative business model, operational mechanism and value creation in urban area or cities. APL has drawn much scholarly attention in various research areas: logistics facility and equipment, operation mode, optimization of path planning, and, finally, logistics assessment. APCL is a field worthy of extensive investigation; however, no existing study has drawn enough scholarly attention in this emerging research field in rural logistics context. In addition, no existing study has studied the relationship between logistics and rural revitalization. Based on our literature review, we summarises potential topics, possible research questions, and relating research methods.

(p0.2) The paper is organized as follows. First, we reviewed the literature of CL. Second, we reviewed the literature of APL. Third, a future research agenda is proposed in order to deepen knowledge about APCL. Finally, we come to a conclusion as well as the limitations of our work.
