# Pyrolyzed human hair: a review on synthesis, characterization and applications

CorpusID: 234101831 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ba4c782d2b421d4ebd6008de4824e3946c36290f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ba4c782d2b421d4ebd6008de4824e3946c36290f)

Fields: Chemistry, Materials Science

## (s1) Pyrolysis of organic matter and hair
(p1.0) Dense efforts have been conducted for minimizing the problem of the municipal waste like hair fiber. |Hair fiber as composite material, pest controlling agent and some biomedical applications has been minimizing the risk due to the hair fiber [8]. Another way to control this organic waste is pyrolysis. It is the process to change any organic matter in the absence of oxygen to obtain an array of solid, liquid and gas products. Pyrolysis is widely used for production of a wide range of solvents, chemicals, fuels and other products from biomass. Pyrolysis can be done into three ways; low temperature (< 550 ºC), moderate temperature (550 ºC to 800 ºC) and high temperature (>800ºC). Slow conventional pyrolysis includes irreversible thermal decomposition of the organic matter for the production of biomass as well as charcoal. Solid after the pyrolysis contain char, ash and unchanged biomass. Heating rates, temperature and quenching phenomenon determine the nature of product like fraction occupied by the organic ashes in char after pyrolysis. When the char has appropriate pore structure and surface area, it can be used in the preparation of active carbon [12,13,14]. The liquid produced from pyrolysis can be used as fuel and raw materials for synthesis of fine chemicals, fertilizers, and adhesives etc. [15,16].
