# Reappraising Elements of the Aseptic Technique in Dermatology: A Review

CorpusID: 231987818 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/db48502cd5416dc6a730cd3bac966fb71121c477](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/db48502cd5416dc6a730cd3bac966fb71121c477)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) the Dermatology Office Environment
(p4.0) The practice of antisepsis in the surgical operating room involves the adoption of strict sterile techniques. Multiple, extensive guidelines have been published regarding proper sterile technique during surgery. While exact practices may vary at each institution, sterile technique in an operating room generally includes environmental cleaning, hand hygiene, preoperative skin preparation, sterile surgical attire, and maintaining a sterile surgical field. In addition, the operating room must also have high-efficiency particulate air filters and directional airflow to minimize airborne infection [5].

(p4.1) In contrast to the traditional operating room, dermatology offices do not have strict requirements on the use of sterile technique during dermatologic surgeries, and without ventilatory systems, achieving a truly sterile environment is impossible in dermatology offices. With a shortage of scientific data, dermatologists must personally decide for themselves the degree of sterility they would like to practice during procedures. As a result, aseptic techniques vary. A survey regarding perioperative antiseptic practices among members of the American College of Mohs Surgery showed that many traditional aseptic techniques are not used among dermatologists. For example, only 35% of respondents reported utilizing a preoperative hand scrub before Mohs Surgery [6].
## (s6) surgical Instruments and Materials
(p6.0) The sterilization of surgical instruments is another component of the perioperative aseptic technique that helps reduce the potential of spreading infection. A few studies have been conducted regarding surgical instrument sterilization in dermatology offices. Nasseri and colleagues, for example, found that among 338 patients undergoing MMS, using a single  [20]. Based on these studies it is possible that lower cost, less sterile protocols could be implemented without compromising safety, but more specific recommendations and conclusive evidence is needed.
## (s8) Handwashing
(p8.0) Handwashing is an important component of both the clean and aseptic technique and, in the mid 1970s, was recognized as "the most important procedure in preventing nosocomial infections" by the US Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and was included in the CDC guidelines by the 1980s [29]. In the field of dermatology, the practice of proper hand hygiene is of particular concern because patientdepressed barrier function, associated with a variety of skin diseases, makes them more susceptible to infectious disease.

(p8.1) In addition, the skin of dermatologists or their assistants can be easily contaminated. A study sampling 13 dermatologists found all physicians' hands to be contaminated with microbial pathogens, with one hand contaminated by MRSA [30].
