# VQE Method: A Short Survey and Recent Developments

CorpusID: 232232828 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2597059cd9794c8016ae098e2c72662d3752006a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2597059cd9794c8016ae098e2c72662d3752006a)

Fields: Chemistry, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Quantum simulation of chemistry and materials is an important application for classical computing. For example, one can predict the rates of chemical reactions, determine molecular structure, and the properties of materials and molecules. It is achieved through the solution of the electronic structure Hamiltonian, which allows one to describe the properties of interacting electrons in the presence of stationary nuclei. The advent of quantum computing holds promise for significantly speeding up these calculations, which currently are done classically. This idea stems from the Feynman's postulate in the famous paper "Simulating Physics with Computers," published in 1982 [1], that to simulate quantum systems, one would need to build quantum computers to perform quantum computations, and it is much more efficient than doing it classically for correlated systems. Indeed, one cannot simply scale the calculations on classical computers or apply massive parallelism because of the exponential growth of computational requirements with the size of a chemical system and complexity.
## (s2) Introduction to VQE
(p2.0) The VQE method was introduced to mitigate the significant hardware demands needed by the QPE approach on NISQ devices. VQE is a hybrid quantum-classical algorithm, where the computational workload is shared between the classical and quantum components of the hardware. It starts with a reasonable assumption about the form of the target wave function. The most common choice is to represent a wave function in a basis of atom-centered Gaussian basis functions. However, plane wave basis sets [39] can be used as well as the recently proposed "basis-set free" approach [40]. A trial wave function or ansatz is constructed with adjustable parameters, followed by the design of a quantum circuit capable of realizing this ansatz. The ansatz parameters are then variationally adjusted until the expectation value of the electronic Hamiltonian

(p2.1) is minimized. In equation 1 ψ( θ) is the trial wave function that depends on the vector of variational parameters θ; E is the ground state energy of H el , an electronic Hamiltonian most commonly written in the second quantized form, although the first quantization representation has also been considered [41]. In this work, we focus on the second quantized form of the Hamiltonian
## (s5) Unitary Pair Coupled Cluster with Generalized Singles and Doubles Product Wave Functions
(p5.0) One of the chemistry-inspired ansatzes designed to reduce circuit length is the Unitary Pair CC with Generalized Singles and Doubles (k -UpCCGSD) method proposed by Lee et al. [55] The starting point for k -UpCCGSD is the unitary pair coupled cluster double excitations method (UpCCD), which contains a significantly smaller number of operators compared with UCCSD because it includes only twoelectron excitations from occupied spatial orbital i to unoccupied spatial orbital a:

(p5.1) where excitations are performed from occupied orbitals i to unoccupied orbitals a and α and β represent spin. It suffers less from non-variationality and is able to correctly break single bonds. However, it does not recover the dynamic correlation present in UCCD and loses invariance to rotations in occupied-occupied and virtual-virtual subspaces. To address these problems, in addition to pair double excitations, the full single excitations are included in the UpCCSD. For increased accuracy, generalized single and double excitations are included so that there is no distinction between occupied and virtual orbitals p and q when constructing excitations operators:

(p5.2) We note that UCCGSD always produces more accurate results than UCCSD but at a much higher computational cost. In UpCCGSD the cost is reduced by using only pair double excitations. UpCCGSD is inferior to UCCGSD because of the large number of missing double-excitation operators. For increased flexibility of ansatz, a product of k unitary operators is included in the k -UpCCGSD ansatz, resulting in the final expression:

(p5.3) where |φ is the reference wave function and each operatorT (k) contains an independent set of variational parameters for single and paired doubles CC amplitudes. Because of the sparsity of the UpCCGSD operator, the cost to prepare a k -UpCCGSD state scales linearly with the system size with a prefactor k. This structure also provides a way to systematically improve accuracy by increasing k.

(p5.4) The k -UpCCGSD method has been tested on H 4 , H 2 O, and N 2 molecules. Compared with the UCCSD method, k -UpCCGSD offers higher accuracy for the ground state energy with a smaller number of operators in the ansatz for all studied molecules. k -UpCCGSD can achieve chemical accuracy with k = 2 for H 4 (STO-3G and 6-31G basis sets) and H 2 O (STO-3G basis) molecules. UCCGSD is numerically exact for these systems, but it requires more operators in the ansatz. For N 2 molecule with STO-3G basis, k -UpCCGSD requires k=4 to achieve chemical accuracy, whereas UCCSD with more operators fails to come close to chemical accuracy and UCCGSD is within chemical accuracy but requires double the number of operators compared with k -UpCCGSD.
## (s6) Orbital Optimized UCC (OO-UCC) Ansatz
(p6.0) OO-UCC is another variant of the UCC approach [56] where a single-particle orbital rotation operatorκ = pq κ pq (a † p a q − a † q a p ) is introduced to the UCC energy functional,

(p6.1) (hereτ =T −T † is the UCC cluster operator) to variationally determine the coupled cluster amplitudes and also molecular orbital coefficients. Note that optimizingκ is essentially equivalent to minimizing a wave function with respect to orbital rotation parameters. Whenτ is fixed,κ can be obtained through solving a linear equation, Hκ = −g, where H and g are the electronic Hessian and gradient, respectively. In practice, the OO-UCC ansatz can be easily derived from the UCCSD-alike ansatz (also similar to the DUCC ansatz discussed in the following section), except that only doubles are included,

(p6.2) whereτ 1 andτ 2 don't commute, and the singles part eτ 1 takes the role of carrying out orbital rotations that would be variationally optimized to obtain |φ = eτ 1 |φ by using a classical computer, while the doubles part, eτ 2 , is optimized by the VQE. We note that the variational orbitals obtained from the OO-UCCD approach coincide with the commonly known Brueckner orbitals. The reported numerical testing on small molecules has shown that in comparison with conventional UCCSD ansatzes, the qubitization of the OO-UCCD ansatz allows a slight reduction in the number of VQE parameters and the circuit depth. For example, for the NH 3 molecule with the STO-3G basis set, the number of the VQE parameters and the circuit depth required in the OO-UCCD approach were 120 and 2,720, respectively, while those required by the conventional UCCSD were 135 and 2,780, respectively. Regarding accuracy, OO-UCCD maintains a similar level of accuracy to that of UCCSD for most of the small molecules except for LiH, where OO-UCCD results are closer to the full configuration interaction (FCI) results than to UCCSD.
## (s7) Double Unitary Coupled Cluster (DUCC) Ansatz
(p7.0) In modeling second-quantized problems, the major challenge comes from the sizable number of qubits that scales linearly with the size of the basis. To address this issue and enable more realistic simulations on NISQ computers, active space approximations are often employed. Along this line, Metcalf et al. [57] recently reported VQE applications based on DUCC ansatz that originate from the subsystem embedding sub-algebras coupled cluster studies [58] to constitute the effective form of the system Hamiltonian

(p7.1) where F N and H N are normal product forms of Fock and Hamiltonian operators, respectively, and σ ext =T ext −T † ext is the anti-Hermitian cluster operator constructed from the cluster operators that produce excited configuration outside of the active space when acting on the reference |φ . After the projection, the energy of the whole system, E, can be directly obtained by diagonalizing the effective Hamiltonian H eff e σint |φ = Ee σint |φ (13) with the eigenvector being the excited configurations within the active space.

(p7.2) Note that the DUCC formalism, just like the conventional CC formalism, is formally exact and independent of the choice of the active space, thus providing a systematically improvable hierarchy for implementation. Practically, the accuracy of the DUCC ansatzes depends on the approximate level of the effective Hamiltonian H eff that can be controlled through either the length of the similarity expansion e −σext He σext or the many-body terms included in σ ext (andT ext ), or both. Also, when working with the VQE algorithm, another source of approximation comes from the unitary ansatz for the active space.

(p7.3) For example, the reported DUCC-VQE algorithms include a DUCC effective Hamiltonian truncated at the second-order (see eq. (12)) and a UCCSD ansatz acting on the active space. In preliminary DUCC-VQE calculations on H 2 , Li 2 , and BeH 2 molecules [57], the DUCC Hamiltonians have been shown to significantly outperform the bare Hamiltonian on the same active space in terms of approaching closer to the FCI results.
## (s9) Quantum anti-Hermitian contracted Schrödinger equation
(p9.0) Contracted Schrödinger equation (CSE) is an approach from the classical electronic structure theory that is based on the reduced density matrix (RDM) theory and solves the contracted eigenvalue equation. The N -electron Schrödinger equation is contracted onto the space of two electrons. [72,73] The anti-Hermitian part of CSE, known as ACSE, has been used to find energies of the ground and excited states in strongly correlated systems on classical computers. [74,75,76,77,78,79] The anti-Hermitian part of the CSE reads:
## (s13) Qubit Coupled Cluster Method
(p13.0) The qubit coupled cluster (QCC) method introduced by Ryabinkin et al. [26] resembles the structure of coupled cluster; but instead of using fermionic excitations, the ansatz is built directly in the qubit space. The QCC wave function is of the form
