# A review of FinTech research

CorpusID: 235814699 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6560cdd3d3f8bb0ae739381f56d4e3ecd13fa191](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6560cdd3d3f8bb0ae739381f56d4e3ecd13fa191)

Fields: Business, Computer Science, Economics

## (s3) Research method
(p3.0) The search for previous studies to be reviewed for this paper was conducted during the period February-April 2019, using Elsevier's Scopus database of academic papers. One hundred seventy-three refereed academic papers in English were identified that included the term FinTech in their titles or keywords. From these, papers published in journals with a score of 0.12 or higher in the 2017 SCImago Journal Rank (SJR) were selected. The SJR is a measure of the scientific influence of scholarly journals. SJR scores of less than 0.12 typically indicate general magazines rather than academic journals. The reason SJR was used as a selection criterion rather than impact factor (IF) is that FinTech papers are spread over multiple fields, and it was judged that SJR, which applies weighting and correction across fields, could better identify important papers. This selection process resulted in a sample of 88 FinTech papers. Table 1 shows the number of papers reviewed in each of four categories. Type A are papers about existing financial institutions using FinTech to provide new value-added. Type B are papers about existing financial institutions using FinTech to achieve improved efficiency. Type C are papers about new entrants using FinTech to provide new value-added. And Type D are papers about new entrants using FinTech to achieve improved efficiency. 'New entrants' are defined as companies that have entered the finance industry by leveraging FinTech technology; the term 'new entrants' is used to distinguish these companies from 'existing financial institutions', which were already established in the finance industry prior to the advent of FinTech. The term 'FinTech companies' is also used for 'new entrants' in this paper. 'FinTech companies' refers to companies that provide innovative financial services, mainly to consumers, with FinTech as their core technology.

(p3.1) It can be seen that papers of Type C (provision of new value-added by new entrants) were the most numerous, while papers of Type B (improved efficiency by existing financial institutions) were the fewest in number. Table 1 also breaks down the number of papers by type of new value-added, region, and research method. 48 of 66 papers on new value-added were 'research on providing new value-added through new technologies'. By region, Asia and the EU each accounted for 26 studies. These two regions together made up 59% of the studies. The most common research method employed was the case study, which was used in 29 papers.    (2018) introduce European commercial banks that have adopted FinTech technologies in order to actively engage in corporate social responsibility (CSR) and make the banking business model more sustainable. Some researchers emphasise that enterprises should focus on technologies that are suited to their own particular situation when they accumulate FinTech technologies. Trelewicz (2017) gives the example of an existing financial institution that uses big data analytics to create new credit. Similarly, Lui and Lamb (2018) show how existing financial institutions use AI to personalise customer service and provide more efficient and customer-centric financial services. Du (2018) argues that in order to raise productivity and increase customer satisfaction, existing US credit unions should participate in the new financial ecosystem by using new mobile payment methods that FinTech technologies have made possible. Caron (2018) argues that payment providers, including existing financial institutions, must keep up with payments innovation in order to remain competitive.

(p3.2) On the other hand, other studies point out that some existing financial institutions have opted to forego learning FinTech technologies themselves and have instead partnered with or acquired FinTech companies strategically in order to participate in the new financial ecosystem that FinTech platform operators have built. Ashta and Biot-Paquerot (2018) give examples of existing banks that have developed partnerships with FinTech companies to create new services. Anagnostopoulos (2018) introduces examples of banks that recognise FinTech-driven financial business transformation as a good opportunity to offer added value and have joined the new financial ecosystem by strategically partnering with FinTech companies and seeking to influence the FinTech regulatory environment. Sinha (2017) identifies innovative FinTech technologies that banks in Singapore should adopt for the future. Similarly, Zalan and Toufaily (2017) and Coetzee (2018) also argue that existing financial institutions should enter partnerships with FinTech companies in order to acquire FinTech technologies and join the new financial ecosystem.
## (s4) Research on regulation and risks
(p4.0) Some academic papers cover system security risks and regulation needed in the financial industry to allow existing financial institutions to continue to work on FinTech service. Chiu (2017) shows how monetary policy designed to revitalise the economy by promoting competition among FinTech platform operators may neglect consumer protection, and how this requires regulation of the active pursuit of financial innovation.
## (s5) Research on society's acceptance of new value-added
(p5.0) Some academic studies explore from the user's perspective whether society can accept new FinTech technologies and the value-added they offer. Stewart and Jürjens (2018) use a technology acceptance model (TAM) to perform a factor analysis of factors that increase customer satisfaction toward FinTech services. They show that acceptance of FinTech services remains low because people who are strongly interested in controlling their own data feel uneasy about protection of personal information when using FinTech technologies. On the other hand, Duma and Gligor (2018) surveyed the 'digital native' generation (Generation Z) regarding online transactions and acceptance of virtual currencies/blockchains, and found that this generation, regardless of the complex technology underlying FinTech services, enjoys the freedom, mobility, coolness, and nimbleness that FinTech brings, and accepts innovation and continuous technological development very naturally. Pousttchi and Dehnert (2018) used a grounded theory approach to investigate the impact of digitisation on consumer decision-making in retail banking; they argue that, in order to compete with FinTech companies, existing financial institutions must use a data-driven approach that enables them to provide services to the right customers in the right way and at the right time.

(p5.1) In summary, research studies on existing financial institutions providing new value-added to customers though FinTech technologies are dominated by cases of existing financial institutions recognising the new value-added made possible by FinTech and employing it strategically in order to join the new financial ecosystem. Specifically, several academic papers point out that existing financial institution has three choices: to develop or acquire FinTech technologies on their own, to enter into partnerships with FinTech companies, or to acquire FinTech companies. Other prominent research topics found in these papers are the degree to which FinTech services are accepted by consumers, and the security measures and regulatory framework needed to protect consumer privacy and protect personal assets from criminal activity.
## (s14) Type A
(p14.0) Studies on the provision of new value-added by existing financial institutions (Type A) show that existing financial institutions are strategically incorporating FinTech in order to improve customer satisfaction, which has deteriorated in comparison to the services provided by FinTech companies. With regard to the method of incorporating FinTech, Ashta and Biot-Paquerot (2018) and Zalan and Toufaily (2017) argue that partnering with FinTech companies is an appropriate approach. Trelewicz (2017) and Lui and Lamb (2018), on the other hand, argue that financial institutions should attempt to develop FinTech technologies in-house through proactive technological investment. Which method is better could depend on the scale of available management resources: an existing financial institution that possesses abundant internal resources could carry out development in-house, while one with fewer internal resources might have no choice but to access external resources through partnerships.
## (s16) Type C
(p16.0) Studies on the provision of new value-added by new entrants (Type C) show that new entrants utilise FinTech technologies to develop solutions to social issues or to build new financial ecosystems. This category contained the largest number of papers, accounting for over half of all papers reviewed. This is likely due to the large number of Type C examples from the business world and the fact that new entrants are cooperative in providing information to researchers. In the area of solutions to social issues, numerous studies concerned financial inclusion. As Iman (2018) shows, FinTech innovation has helped impoverished nations. Accordingly, in light of their social significance and the large number of studies (16 of the 88 papers reviewed are related to financial inclusion), financial inclusion can be said to be one of the most important topics in FinTech research. At the same time, as noted by Lee and Shin (2018), FinTech companies play an important role in the development of new financial ecosystems incorporating engineers, government agencies, financial customers, and existing financial institutions that aim to improve customer satisfaction and advance the financial industry. In these ways, new entrants are developing and employing FinTech innovations to create solutions that address current social and industry issues in various regions of the world.
## (s17) Type D
(p17.0) Studies on the provision of improved efficiency by new entrants (Type D) show how new entrants, not existing financial institutions, are using FinTech innovations to provide FinTech services such as crowdfunding and P2P lending. As Jagtiani and Lemieux (2018) point out, these services are popular despite their high interest rates because they make it easier and quicker to borrow funds than through traditional bank finance. It is easier for a FinTech company to obtain permission to enter the lending business than it is to obtain a banking license. For this reason, Buchak et al. (2018) show, a kind of shadow banking system has appeared that enables even businesses that cannot secure lending at normal interest rates to borrow working capital. With this, however, comes the risk that shadow banking can lead to a severe economic downturn by destroying a region's financial system. This is an example of FinTech innovation having a serious negative effect on society. There will be a need in the future for research that evaluates the specific content of regulations in individual regions from this point of view.
## (s19) FinTech technological aspects and technological management
(p19.0) The main FinTech technologies covered in the reviewed studies are blockchain technology, authentication technologies, application programming interfaces (APIs), payment technologies, mobile technologies, big data analytics and processing and AI. The distinguishing features, methods of use, and other matters related to these are explained below.

(p19.1) The largest number of studies reviewed was about blockchain technology (followed by payment technologies, mobile technologies, and big data analytics and processing). The large number of studies on blockchain technology -15 of the 88 papers reviewedwas due to this technology's novelty and expectations that it will lead to lower costs. There were three types of papers on blockchain technology: general studies, and papers that focused on cryptocurrencies or smart contracts. Examples of that latter two are Adhami et al. (2018), on cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and ICOs, and Brammertz and Mendelowitz (2018), concerning smart contracts intended to reduce banking transaction costs. As implementation of blockchain technologies is at an early stage, related research can be expected to increase in the future.

(p19.2) There were very few studies on authentication technologies and APIs. Among the papers reviewed, none treated APIs as a distinguishing feature of FinTech technologies, and only one treated authentication technologies as such. However, although researchers appear to already consider APIs as a generic technology, APIs are essential for connecting computer systems with each other, and are therefore vital to FinTech innovation.

(p19.3) Payment technologies and mobile technologies are fundamental to FinTech. Mobile payment, a type of FinTech service that combines these two technologies, was discussed in many of the studies reviewed, probably because its use is spreading in the real world. As Du (2018) points out, mobile payment incorporates mobile devices, point-of-sale (POS) devices or near-field-communication (NFC) technologies, mobile applications and short message services (SMS).

(p19.4) Technologies for the processing and analysis of big data are used to provide new value through high-speed analysis of unstructured, informal data at the petabyte level, including various types and formats. Specifically, they are used in credit scoring systems for P2P lending, as pointed out by Tao et al. (2017), and fraud detection by auditors, as shown by Gai et al. (2018).

(p19.5) Finally, AI technology is used in forecasting and decision-making for financial services. Qi and Xiao (2018) describe a case study in which Ant Financial uses AI internally for purposes such as reducing the payment loss rate and providing outstanding customer service.
