# A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY ON THE IMPACT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES IN POWER SYSTEM OPERATION AND CONTROL

CorpusID: 238056897 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9a9068aa9e27e1da1fe658b9ee802a4c44010ecd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9a9068aa9e27e1da1fe658b9ee802a4c44010ecd)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Electrical energy has been regarded as a major industrial source for transmitting and generating power over large distances. The industries are facing challenging issues particularly in the designing of future power systems that delivers huge amount of electricity [1]. The growing electricity demand draws the attention of recent research to focus on renewables. Such growth has been accelerated by the various power system parameters such as frequency response, inertia, battery usage, stability, power loss and efficiency. Further electricity demands and RES must be balanced for maintaining safe, stabilized and dependable operation [2]. Hence it is required to analyse and investigate the impacts of RES in power system operation and control on the basis of the following directions.

(p0.1)  It is significant to determine the factors associated with the transmitting and distributing operations [3].  The importance of establishing a power reserve which balances the consumption and production must be focused.  Determination of a maximum RES which could be integrated into the power source with optimized power control parameters.
## (s2) Inertia
(p2.0) Generally, in power-systems, inertia play a significant role in the maintenance of reliability and stability of system by stabilizing the variations in frequency [14]. The conventional synchronous generation sources were displaced by the renewable energy sources that have no intrinsic inertia [15]. Further, several studies examined the impacts of the reduced inertia on various aspects of dynamic stability of the power-systems like oscillatory modes, frequency response and stability [16]. Also, compared the outcomes obtained by inertia reduction technique of the RES with other techniques, where the inertia constant is decreased for all the synchronous generators. In such way, the following articles comprehensively describes about the inertia in power systems and its impacts.

(p2.1) This study [17] presented detailed review on the VI (virtual inertia) based inverters in the modern power systems. Further, the transition from SG (synchronous generator) based traditional power generation to the converter based RES (renewable energy sources) depreciates the frequency stability of powersystems because of intermittency of PV (photovoltaic) as well as wind generation. Moreover, unlike the traditional power generation, inadequate inertia will be the major drawback for interfacing the renewable energy sources with electrical gird through powerelectronic converters. In recent years, several researchers have addressed about these problems by imitating the behaviour of synchronous generators through PWM (pulse width modulation) controller that are linked to the traditional inverter systems. Hence, these systems are called as the virtual inertia (VI) based inverters that incorporated VSM (virtual synchronous machine), synchronverter as well as VSG (virtual synchronous generator).

(p2.2) Due to the rapid increase in usage of power converter based RES (renewable energy sources), the system inertia in the interconnected power-systems will be substantially reduced, thereby increasing vulnerability of power-systems because of instability of the systems. In order to overcome these issues, this study [18] suggested a novel application of VI control for the improving the frequency stability of interconnected powersystems because of the higher penetration levels of renewable energy sources. Further, the derivative control method was introduced to high level applications of VI emulation. Therefore, the suggested VI control loop possess second order characteristics simultaneously enables inertia emulation as well as damping into interconnected powersystems, thereby enhancing the resiliency and frequency stability. Additionally, the study performed trajectory sensitivities for analysing the impacts of VI control parameters on system stability.
## (s3) Inertia of conventional power system
(p3.0) In conventional power systems, majority of the power is generated hydroelectric, coal and nuclear power. Further, the common element used in the power plants is synchronous generators. The kinetic energy which is stored in rotating parts of synchronous generators is the major property for the system stability as well as frequency dynamics [21]. Moreover, the inertia contribution is an impressive and feature of synchronous generators. In this manner, the synchronous generator maintains the synchronism as well as prevents the grid collapse. The inertia of synchronous generator is given as the following,
## (s4) Impact of renewable energy sources on the inertia of power system
(p4.0) The conventional power systems could contribute the inertia to power systems. Generally, inertia assists to limit the rate of change of frequency (ROCOF) and the contingency event. However, in the future of power systems, the loads as well as the Renewable energy sources are integrated to the grid via power-electronic converters. Therefore, the inertia of future power systems will be significantly reduced when compared to the conventional power systems. Consequently, the frequency as well as the rate of change of frequency will increase of contingency event arises [21]. Hence, the grid operators cannot maintain the stability of the system with only traditional synchronous generators. The instability problems occurs if the renewable energy system penetration level is equal of more than the synchronous generator's capacity. Additionally, the impact of the damping and lower inertia influences the performance of the grid, thereby leads to the frequency instability issues [22].
## (s5) Frequency response
(p5.0) Conventionally, the network of power-systems rely on the heavy SGs (synchronous generators) that are fuelled with the fossils fuel for generating power. The rotating frequency of generator is directly coupled with the frequency of power systems, thus this disturbance on power system network would have an significant influence in SG's rotor [23].

(p5.1) The frequency of the system serves as the primary indicator for power-balance between total load as well as total generation in power systems [24]. Further, when load/generation imbalance occurs, and the SG will absorb kinetic energy from power systems for normalising the imbalance issue, thereby resulting in frequency change [25]. When renewable energy sources replacing with the SGs (synchronous generators), the RES should participate in initial response for the low frequency events for combating the decline in the online SG [26]s.

(p5.2) The relevant integration of the wind power to power grid was involved as remarkable impact on the operation of power systems, specifically in terms of reliability as well as security because of inherent loss of inertia. The frequency control is most appropriate solution for improving the stability of the system. With respect to the grid stability as well as frequency response analysis, the study analysed the frequency response for the hypothetical imbalance between the range 5% to 20%. This study [27] suggested a realistic system for evaluating the frequency deviations by incorporating the integration of high wind power. From the experimental analysis, the study provided several influences from the wind FC (frequency control) depending upon the integration of wind-power and inertia reduction. Figure 1. Power curtailment during the overfrequency for renewable power plants

(p5.3) When power system's frequency exceeds 51.5Hz more than four seconds, the renewable power plants are discontinued from power systems. From the figure 1, it is understood that, during lower system frequency i.e. f<50Hz, the renewable power plants produce about 100% of availability power. Thus, there is no power reserved for stabilizing drop in frequency during the low-frequency. Further, the SGs (synchronous generators) provides the inertial response for combating drop in frequency, thereby providing additive power from stored kinetic energy in rotating mass. When renewable energy sources replacing with the SGs (synchronous generators), the RES should participate in initial response for the low frequency events for combating the decline in the online SGs.
## (s7) Power loss
(p7.0) The VRE (variable renewable energy) sources are adding more fluctuations to the power system. Further, the required types as well as the capacities of curtailment amount, balancing measures as well as the cost related to the system integration must be assessed to advise the policy makers. Several studies neglected storage from CSP (concentrated solar-power). This study [29] provided insights about the need for the backup capacity as well as grid by examining the integrated markets in Europe, thereby allowing for additive long term and short term storage and taking into account the concentrated solar power as dispatchable backup. The renewable energy mix system model has been introduced and implemented for accessing the hourly dispatch and capacity expansion at different levels of wind power and photovoltaic penetration. Moreover, the model outcomes represented that the integration of temporal and spatial balancing measures, which enables the wind supply as well as net photovoltaic shares 70% and 60% of annual demand. Finally, the study stated that the utilization of storage as well as grid can keep the curtailments less than 20%. Additionally, the study determined that the variable renewable energy has huge impacts on the least-cost allocation of the power plants.
## (s8) Efficiency
(p8.0) This study [30] described the benefits of RES throughout world in power generation. The renewable energy has significant scope in the power systems. Further, the RES acts as major powerhouse of the micro grids. The micro grids are small network of the power-systems with DG (distribution generation) units, that are connected in parallel. Also, the challenges involved in the integration of renewable energy sources in power systems are briefly described in the study. Moreover, the varied nature of the distribution generation produces the frequency as well as voltage deviations. Finally, the study examined the micro grid performance against various scenarios. Additionally, the micro grid's voltage is controlled by utilizing various controllers, and the outcomes were also examined. The study examined the controller performance by using Simulink/MATLAB.
## (s9) RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES
(p9.0) In an interconnected power-system, the frequency stability is considered as the major issue for the system operators. Further, frequency oscillations within the power system is denoted as the unbalance between load demand and generation that needs to be in control. A higher penetration of RES (renewable energy sources) in power system increases the uncertainties to the parameters and brings numerous technical difficulties [5]. Initially, it was demonstrated that the QODA algorithm is improved optimization method when compared to non-conventional and conventional ways. The suggested control strategy was applied for tuning PID controller parameters in presence of renewable energy sources.

(p9.1) The demand for world-wide electricity is gradually raising, thereby making use of wind and solar energy sources that reduces the adverse environmental impacts. The variable energy source has a significant role in global energy, which includes the generating capacity. This study [31] presented the challenges of integrating VRE (variable renewable energy) in accordance to energy capacity as well as power capacity of the stationary storage technology. From the analysis, the study stated that the energy storage regulations as well as the market developments that motivates the increased utilization of energy storage system is significant for successful integration of wind and solar energy. Also, the study proves that, apart from energy capacity, the power capacity of the storage system is the major factor for efficient integration of VRES.

(p9.2) This article [32] observed the impacts of penetration as well as computed maximum penetration of VRE (variable renewable energy) power plants for the time period 2019 to 2023, specifically for solar power-plants. Further, the penetration of solar power-plant for JavaeBali grid should be employed in certain areas because of the limited technical capabilities of the existing systems. The variables for determining the maximum penetration of variable renewable energy are the properties of the thermal generation units like mechanism of primary energy conversion, minimum load as well as ramping capability. From the analysis, the outcomes depicted that the penetration of variable renewable energy at 5000MWp capacity increases the requirement of grid remapping.
## (s10) Solar energy
(p10.0) Renewable energy sources (RES) play a significant role in recent years for assisting traditional power systems. This study [33] presented a performance analysis of the integrated hybrid solar photovoltaic, diesel generator as well as fuel cell power system with BESS or SCESS (battery energy storage system) or (super-capacitor energy storage system). Further, this study utilized HOMER pro software for simulating HES (hybrid energy system) on the basis of energy consumption. The simulation outcomes depicted that, when utilizing SCESS as energy storage system increased the overall performance of the system. Additionally, the hybrid energy system with super-capacitor energy storage system has 68.1% of renewable fraction. Finally, the study stated that the reduction of greenhouse gas for hybrid energy system with super-capacitor energy storage system was 83.2%.

(p10.1) Using both the solar as well as wind energy can cause a complementarity behaviour by diminishing the variable and inherent characteristics. Solar and wind energies are eminent RES (renewable energy sources), and several countries are investing in RES and also certain studies have investigated in this topic, in such way study [34] utilized wind as well as solar power for the grid integration in large scale. The integrated usage of solar and wind power in several regions results in wellbalanced power supply that is critical for safety and operability of the electrical grids.
## (s12) Wind energy
(p12.0) The contribution of wind farms in improvisation of frequency control while integrating power grid was comprehensively discussed by [36], in which the study suggested an approach of quantifying wind penetration on the basis of power fluctuation amount, which could be filtered by the wind-turbine generators as well as thermal plants. The wind farm uses the droop control and energy control methods for improvisation of frequency regulation. Further, the study used PSO algorithm for obtaining optimum results.
## (s19) RESEARCH GAP, CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
(p19.0) It is with a significant importance to provide the more practical, critical and research gaps regarding the RES in power system control and operations [59]. The major issue with RES based power generation is the deviation in the production capacity at various time intervals, flexibility in the selection of location and operation control and the size of individual units. This section identifies the research gap from the existing literatures that enable to prepare various incentive mechanism to overcome the following problems. Some of the constrains in the implementation of solutions to these problems are the requirement of sophisticated information for controlling the load and the source, thermal loading limit and physical circuit constrains and requirement of thermal management for allowing the uninterrupted power flow. The disadvantages of solar PV are the huge installation and high commission cost and a storage process such as batteries. Further the solar PV comprise charge controller, inverter, battery storage and controllable loads. The main disadvantage of wind energy is that it is affected from huge intermittent nature and hence a proper storage mechanism based on artificial intelligence has to be adopted to reduce the overall cost.

(p19.1) In general, distributed generation comprise power converts to be utilized as an interface in between the connecting grid and the energy source. These power converters controls the machines present in these generators. Some of the main challenges in implementing the various solutions are discussed below.

(p19.2) During the change of voltage range in between the secondary and primary side to maintain the grid voltage within the desired range, the major drawback is the rise of higher cost and operation. Because of the intermittent nature of the solar energy, voltage could be increased or decreased rapidly. So the system needs to rise its operating time in order to keep the voltage within the range required. This in turn affect the system lifetime. In case of controlling grid voltage, one of the major limitation is the huge reaction time when compared with the vital power generation modification from PV systems. This reaction is an important aspect in the control design that considers the switching operations. Furthermore even for the short reaction handling case, the system would be translated to switching process of the devices thereby decreasing the lifetime. Apart from this the paper [34] found few unresolved topic and unexplored points which enhance the research regarding the solar and wind complementarity are incorporation of quality assured technique to prevent measurement error that interfere in the complementarity analysis, proper definition of reference metrics for allowing the comparison of various outputs from complementarity analysis. Further the climatic change impacts could directly affect the source complementarity.

(p19.3) Power generation, transmission followed by distribution operations of the conventional power systems over a wide geographical area were performed under an individual operator with few technical complexities. Due to huge increasing energy demand, the modern power systems are generally operating around the stability margins. If a major imbalance occurs the system do not possess adequate time for closing the deficit causing the cascading failures. Few important research gaps are mentioned below

(p19.4) Consideration of deviations of few significant parameters in the modern systems like frequency response, stability, inertia indices for the assessment of reliability. Hence the existing papers should investigate the capability of extensive parameters in enhancing the security and reliability of the modern power systems. Online coordination of various control methods in the power systems could enable the decrease of power outages. The existing papers must consider a smart grid features for adopting a protective function design which is free from cyber-attacks.
## (s20) RESEARCH GAP
(p20.0) It is with a significant importance to provide the more practical, critical and research gaps regarding the RES in power system control and operations [59]. The major issue with RES based power generation is the deviation in the production capacity at various time intervals, flexibility in the selection of location and operation control and the size of individual units [60]. This section identifies the research gap from the existing literatures that enable to prepare various incentive mechanism to overcome the following problems [61]. Some of the constrains in the implementation of solutions to these problems are the requirement of sophisticated information for controlling the load and the source, thermal loading limit and physical circuit constrains and requirement of thermal management for allowing the uninterrupted power flow [62]. The disadvantages of solar PV are the huge installation and high commission cost and a storage process such as batteries [63]. Further the solar PV comprise charge controller, inverter, battery storage and controllable loads. The main disadvantage of wind energy is that it is affected from huge intermittent nature and hence a proper storage mechanism based on artificial intelligence has to be adopted to reduce the overall cost [64].
