# Overview of Beta-Lactam Allergy and the Role of the Pharmacist in Management

CorpusID: 236231880 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45207105956e01ab4883ec187b837ad583a3df95](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45207105956e01ab4883ec187b837ad583a3df95)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Risk Factors
(p2.0) Although data are currently limited in regard to the risk factors for a beta-lactam allergy, there is speculation about a correlation between the clinical and genetic risk factors of self-reported penicillin allergy. A recent case-control study identified factors such as having a family history of penicillin allergy or an IL-4 gene single nucleotide polymorphism as possible risk factors of penicillin allergy. [8] Another recent study found that HLA-DRB1*10:01 predisposed patients to an immediate hypersensitivity reaction [9]. Furthermore, other studies suggest a greater risk of penicillin allergy in females and a greater risk of beta-lactam allergy in those with a history of a prior adverse reaction to penicillin [10,11].
## (s3) Cross-Allergenicity
(p3.0) As noted earlier, all beta-lactam antibiotics share a similar chemical core ring structure. This core ring consists of a beta-lactam ring attached to a five-or six-membered ring. In addition to this core structure, beta-lactams have side chains (R1 and R2) that vary between the specific agents [12]. Because of the common core ring structure among beta-lactam antibiotics and the potential similarities in side-chains, there is a risk for cross-allergenicity among the different beta-lactam classes. Knowledge and understanding of the risk of betalactam cross-allergenicity plays an important role in selecting the appropriate antibiotic therapy for a patient with a beta lactam allergy. The rates of cross-allergenicity between penicillin and other beta-lactams can be found in Table 2.
## (s5) Initial Allergy Assessment
(p5.0) The initial management of patients with a history of beta-lactam allergy requires a detailed allergy assessment, given that many patients are inappropriately labeled as beta-lactam allergic. Oftentimes, known adverse effects of a beta-lactam are mislabeled and documented as a beta-lactam allergy. Approximately 90% of patients labeled as allergic can be de-labeled through a detailed allergy assessment or allergy testing [19,20]. The appropriate assessment of beta-lactam allergy includes the evaluation of factors such as the specific agent causing the reaction, the type, severity, and timing of the reaction, and previous tolerability of other beta-lactam agents. The de-labeling of penicillin allergy, based on historical evaluation alone, has been demonstrated to be safe and effective in patients reporting a mild, non-immune-mediated adverse drug reaction, or where subsequent tolerance to the implicated penicillin has been identified through their medical or pharmacy records [19]. Figure 1 includes a list of questions that may be appropriate to ask patients who report a beta-lactam allergy.
## (s7) Initial Allergy Assessment
(p7.0) The initial management of patients with a history of beta-lactam allergy requires a detailed allergy assessment, given that many patients are inappropriately labeled as betalactam allergic. Oftentimes, known adverse effects of a beta-lactam are mislabeled and documented as a beta-lactam allergy. Approximately 90% of patients labeled as allergic can be de-labeled through a detailed allergy assessment or allergy testing [19,20]. The appropriate assessment of beta-lactam allergy includes the evaluation of factors such as the specific agent causing the reaction, the type, severity, and timing of the reaction, and previous tolerability of other beta-lactam agents. The de-labeling of penicillin allergy, based on historical evaluation alone, has been demonstrated to be safe and effective in patients reporting a mild, non-immune-mediated adverse drug reaction, or where subsequent tolerance to the implicated penicillin has been identified through their medical or pharmacy records [19]. Figure 1 includes a list of questions that may be appropriate to ask patients who report a beta-lactam allergy. Additionally, a direct oral challenge may be an effective option in de-labeling patients with low-risk penicillin allergies and has been used in both the inpatient and outpatient setting. Direct oral challenges offer a means to de-labeling penicillin allergies in patients who are low risk or have an inaccurate allergy label without having to pursue traditional allergy testing. Appropriate risk stratification is needed to ensure the safety of a direct oral challenge; however, no standard criteria to determine low-risk allergy patients has been established. Factors such as reaction type, onset of allergy symptoms, and Additionally, a direct oral challenge may be an effective option in de-labeling patients with low-risk penicillin allergies and has been used in both the inpatient and outpatient setting. Direct oral challenges offer a means to de-labeling penicillin allergies in patients who are low risk or have an inaccurate allergy label without having to pursue traditional allergy testing. Appropriate risk stratification is needed to ensure the safety of a direct oral challenge; however, no standard criteria to determine low-risk allergy patients has been established. Factors such as reaction type, onset of allergy symptoms, and severity have been utilized to determine risk. Validated allergy phenotyping tools may be used to identify low-risk allergy patients and help to facilitate de-labeling when appropriate [21].
## (s8) Penicillin Skin Testing
(p8.0) In patients with ambiguous allergy histories, or those reporting allergies that are severe in nature, additional steps should be taken to determine the nature of their allergy and whether a beta-lactam can safely be administered. Penicillin skin testing (PST) is a safe and effective means of evaluating a penicillin allergy in these patients. It is used to detect the presence of penicillin-specific IgE and predicts the likelihood of a type I allergic reaction to penicillin [22]. PST is indicated in patients with documented or suspected type I clinical penicillin hypersensitivity. Patients with a history of desquamating type IV hypersensitivity reactions, such as SJS, TEN, or DRESS or other non-IgE-related hypersensitivity, are not candidates for PST [21]. Implementing PST requires the consideration of several logistical factors such as the development of policies and protocols, specialized training for staff, storage and preparation of PST components, and determining whether PST should be offered in the inpatient versus outpatient setting [23].

(p8.1) PST involves epicutaneous skin testing, followed by intradermal testing, and is conducted using degradation products of penicillin, known as major and minor determinants. PST offers a negative predictive value of 97-99% [24] and a positive predictive value of approximately 50% [25].

(p8.2) In patients who have a negative PST, a test dose of the beta-lactam to which the patient reported allergy should be administered in order to confirm the absence of an allergy. The patient should then be observed for 1-2 h after the test dose to confirm no immediate reaction occurs. If no reaction occurs after the observation period, the patient can receive the beta-lactam and should have their allergy information updated accordingly.
## (s9) Beta-lactam Desensitization
(p9.0) In patients with a positive PST, beta-lactam therapy may still be administered after desensitization is performed. Avoiding beta-lactam therapy in these patients can lead to the use of suboptimal therapy, as beta-lactams have been demonstrated as superior agents in the management of infections such as methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA), severe Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and syphilis [23].
## (s12) Allergy Assessment
(p12.0) As medication experts, pharmacists are uniquely poised to conduct beta-lactam allergy assessments to assist with de-labeling when appropriate. Several studies have demonstrated the benefit of having pharmacists involved in beta-lactam allergy interviews.

(p12.1) One pilot study utilized a pharmacy resident and infectious diseases clinical pharmacist to clarify a beta-lactam allergy, and, where appropriate, recommended a change to the patients' antibiotic regimen. In total, 32 patients with a documented beta-lactam allergy were interviewed, and 24 were identified as candidates for beta-lactam therapy. The intervention by the pharmacy resulted in over 65% of the patients being changed from a non-penicillin antibiotic to a cephalosporin, carbapenem, or penicillin. Although small, this study demonstrates the efficacy of a pharmacist-driven beta-lactam allergy assessment [28]. In a larger retrospective study, including 418 patients, Holmes and colleagues evaluated the impact of a pharmacy-driven assessment on the prescribing frequency of penicillin or cephalosporin antibiotics in patients with a reported beta-lactam allergy. Pharmacy staff were notified, through an alert system, of any patient with a documented penicillin allergy receiving a non-penicillin antibiotic. Upon notification, the pharmacy staff performed an allergy assessment, which included a review of previous beta-lactam tolerance, and clarification of the reaction type, severity, and timing of the allergy. The pharmacist allergy assessment resulted in increased frequency of beta-lactam prescribing in patients with previously reported beta-lactam allergy, by 12.9%, and a decrease in the days of therapy of non-penicillin antibiotic use, by 123 days of therapy per 1000 patient days, again showing the benefit of pharmacist involvement in penicillin allergy assessment [29].
## (s13) Penicillin Skin Testing
(p13.0) Pharmacists also play a role in the diagnosis of beta-lactam allergy by participating in PST. When the initial allergy assessment does not provide clear information on whether a patient has a true penicillin allergy, PST can be used as a simple means of diagnosing penicillin allergy. When pharmacists are involved in PST, the state board of the pharmacy should first be consulted to determine whether PST completed by a pharmacist falls within a pharmacist's scope of practice, as scopes vary between states. If PST is not allowable under the state board of pharmacy, the pharmacist may still serve as part of a collaborative team conducting PST [23].

(p13.1) A recent study investigated a pharmacist-driven PST service for adults at a community hospital. Twenty-two patients with documented type I allergies, who were prescribed alternative antibiotics, were identified and underwent PST by trained pharmacists. All of the skin tests were negative, with no type I reactions occurring to the test itself or to the beta-lactam antibiotic administered thereafter. Additionally, 68.2% of the patients were successfully transitioned to a beta-lactam after skin testing, leading to a decreased use of vancomycin and fluoroquinolones. The authors concluded that pharmacist-driven PST can be successfully implemented and is another means for pharmacists to expand antimicrobial stewardship practices [32].

(p13.2) Another study describes pharmacist-managed and pharmacist-administered PST incorporation into an antimicrobial stewardship program at a community hospital. Patients who were at least 18 years old, and reported a history of a type I or unknown type of allergic reaction to penicillin, occurring more than 5 years prior, were considered for inclusion. In total, PST was initiated in 90 patients, with 94% completing PST. Nearly 85% of the patients who completed PST were transitioned to a preferred beta-lactam, allowing alternative antibiotics to be avoided for a median of 11 days per patient. This study demonstrates that pharmacist-managed/-administered PST improved the utilization of preferred antibiotics and the avoidance of alternative therapy [33].

(p13.3) Additionally, Griffith and colleagues conducted a retrospective cohort study evaluating the impact of an inpatient pharmacist-and pharmacy trainee-administered penicillin allergy assessment and PST service on allergy reconciliation and antibiotic use. There was a total of 161 evaluations conducted, 74% allergy assessments and 26% PST. The reconciled allergies improved from 11% to 75% post-evaluation, and no PSTs were positive. Following PST, antibiotic therapy was optimized in 58% of the patients, the vancomycin use decreased from 44% to 17%, and the use of penicillins increased from 0% to 39% [34].
## (s15) Cross-Allergenicity/Antibiotic Selection
(p15.0) Additionally, pharmacists serve as crucial resources when it comes to educating and advising clinicians about the determinants and likelihood of cross-reactivity between penicillin-related compounds. Pharmacists, being well versed in medicinal chemistry, can make adjustments and interventions using this knowledge base. As a result, patients with a history of non-IgE-mediated, non-severe beta-lactam allergies are often able to safely receive beta-lactams that are structurally dissimilar [14]. By taking into consideration these cross-allergenicity rates, pharmacists can directly influence clinicians to determine when patients with reported beta-lactam allergies remain appropriate candidates to receive beta-lactam therapy [14].

(p15.1) In a quasi-experimental pre-post study at Aurora BayCare Medical Center, educational efforts and modified workflow were implemented for the purpose of improving allergy histories and documentation, and increasing the use of beta-lactams, when appropriate, among patients with a reported beta-lactam allergy. Pharmacists were educated on allergy mechanisms, beta-lactam cross-reactivity rates and use of the developed reference tools. Prescribers, hospitalists, and intensivists were educated on the efficacy, safety, and economic implications of the consistent avoidance of beta-lactams in patients with reported beta-lactam allergies, and current estimates of cross-reactivity rates between the beta-lactam classes. It was concluded that multidisciplinary education combined with pharmacy-led efforts to confront the challenge of beta-lactam allergies among hospitalized patients may improve allergy documentation and selection in patients with a reported beta-lactam allergy. Although the intervention was not associated with an overall reduction in non-beta-lactam use, it did increase the number of patients who were transitioned from non-beta-lactam to beta-lactam therapy. The authors suggest that the overall reduction in non-beta-lactam use was likely not observed due to the time requirement in ascertaining a sufficient allergy history and allowing for a corresponding intervention to occur, and suggest that more distinct interventions may be required to impact empiric prescribing practices [14].
