# Impacts of Dams on the Environment: A Review

CorpusID: 234149072 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e6df3127d8dfac67142a834a979bb85fbd9f9a81](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e6df3127d8dfac67142a834a979bb85fbd9f9a81)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s20) Impacts on Aquatic Ecology
(p20.0) The closing of the rivers by the dams deeply modify the local aquatic ecology, which shift from river to lake habitat. The permanent floods inundate the surrounding wetlands, forests and other habitats in the river, and this leads to further disruption of the ecosystem that occurs along the banks of the river and the estuary, as the areas surrounding the banks of the river are characterized by being the richest in biodiversity (Ward et al., 1998).

(p20.1) Dams suppress sediments that would naturally regenerate downstream ecosystems and because of this, some endemic species may or may not survive environmental changes. New species are likely to be dependent on adaptive habitats. However, dams have altered and made the main ecosystem. It adapts to this change, and it is clear from the construction of dams and reservoirs that they reduce the diversity of wildlife, either for better or for worse, and also leads to the loss of habitats for many organisms (Power et al., 1996).
## (s25) Access Roads
(p25.0) When building dams, new roads are usually created to reach the dam, and this leads to changes in land use, especially if forests are removed to create these roads in this case, this will also lead to a new problem, which is the loss of biodiversity and the acceleration of erosion. Some projects do not need to construct new access roads to the reservoir and this goes beyond the environmental impacts (Patz et al., 2000).
## (s29) Impacts during Operation Period
(p29.0) During the operation of the dam reservoir, seasonal fluctuations in the water level occur. At the end of the dry season, the water level will be at a specified height above sea level. With the first rains, the flood gates will be closed at a predetermined date to fill the reservoir to its maximum operational level during the rainy months. The rest of the year, the water level is gradually dropping. The area exposed between the maximum and minimum operating levels is known as the landing zone, and plants can develop in this zone. These plants grow naturally and consist of herbs that are prevalent in the area. Alternatively, these areas can be used for cultivation (Furey et al., 2004).
