# Revisiting nature: a review of iridoids as a potential antileishmanial class

CorpusID: 232241813 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0044ff9d2fb3c875403b441a834f97367a4fc5ea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0044ff9d2fb3c875403b441a834f97367a4fc5ea)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine, Biology

## (s2) Approaches to find new antileishmanial agents from plants
(p2.0) The aspects discussed above highlight the main reasons why leishmaniasis has the NTD status. In this sense, there is a pressing need to develop novel, safe, and affordable drugs to treat leishmaniasis in its entire clinical manifestation spectrum. To accomplish that, a classic strategy is the investigation of plants and their constituents aiming to combat the disease in question (Ullah et al. 2016). Endeavors such as plant-screening programs have identified that several plants employed in folk medicine present antileishmanial activity (Rocha et al. 2005). The study of ethnomedical knowledge of communities and natives from certain regions is another approach where potential antileishmanial extracts and plant-derived compounds may be identified (Ullah et al. 2016;Rocha et al. 2005;Scotti et al. 2016).

(p2.1) The chemical diversity and complexity of natural compounds have always fascinated researchers regarding their pharmacological potential. Plant extracts and phytochemicals of various classes have been reported to possess antileishmanial properties (Scotti et al. 2016;Boniface and Ferreira 2019;Gonçalves et al. 2020;Raj et al. 2020). Among these classes, iridoids comprise a vastly diverse group of cyclopenta[c]pyran monoterpenoids (Raj et al. 2020). Throughout the past decades, extensive investigations have been conducted and attributed various biological activities to this class, including antileishmanial properties (Raj et al. 2020;Tundis et al. 2008).

(p2.2) Taking into account these matters, the present study aims to discuss the available literature between 1991 and 2020 related to the antileishmanial activity of iridoids. In this period, a total of 32 works were published, comprising in vitro, in vivo, ex vivo, and in silico studies. The available information was gathered using different databases (Web of Science, Science-Direct, and Scopus) using the words iridoids, antileishmanial, leishmanicidal, antiparasitic, and antiprotozoal. Additional data from books were also included. All 32 publications were covered in this review, regardless of the lack of antileishmanial activity. Considering the present work aims to discuss the available data, it is appropriate to report negative results to optimize further studies. Genus Leishmania has numerous species and different forms, which may present varying susceptibilities towards the same compound; therefore, different species and forms may be investigated, and redundant studies prevented. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first review article entirely dedicated to the antileishmanial potential of the iridoid class.

(p2.3) The aspects discussed above highlight the main reasons why leishmaniasis has the NTD status. In this sense, there is a pressing need to develop novel, safe, and affordable drugs to treat leishmaniasis in its entire clinical manifestation spectrum. To accomplish that, a classic strategy is the investigation of plants and their constituents aiming to combat the disease in question (Ullah et al. 2016). Endeavors such as plant-screening programs have identified that several plants employed in folk medicine present antileishmanial activity (Rocha et al. 2005). The study of ethnomedical knowledge of communities and natives from certain regions is another approach where potential antileishmanial extracts and plant-derived compounds may be identified (Ullah et al. 2016;Rocha et al. 2005;Scotti et al. 2016).

(p2.4) The chemical diversity and complexity of natural compounds have always fascinated researchers regarding their pharmacological potential. Plant extracts and phytochemicals of various classes have been reported to possess antileishmanial properties (Scotti et al. 2016;Boniface and Ferreira 2019;Gonçalves et al. 2020;Raj et al. 2020). Among these classes, iridoids comprise a vastly diverse group of cyclopenta[c]pyran monoterpenoids (Raj et al. 2020). Throughout the past decades, extensive investigations have been conducted and attributed various biological activities to this class, including antileishmanial properties (Raj et al. 2020;Tundis et al. 2008).

(p2.5) Taking into account these matters, the present study aims to discuss the available literature between 1991 and 2020 related to the antileishmanial activity of iridoids. In this period, a total of 32 works were published, comprising in vitro, in vivo, ex vivo, and in silico studies. The available information was gathered using different databases (Web of Science, Science-Direct, and Scopus) using the words iridoids, antileishmanial, leishmanicidal, antiparasitic, and antiprotozoal. Additional data from books were also included. All 32 publications were covered in this review, regardless of the lack of antileishmanial activity. Considering the present work aims to discuss the available data, it is appropriate to report negative results to optimize further studies. Genus Leishmania has numerous species and different forms, which may present varying susceptibilities towards the same compound; therefore, different species and forms may be investigated, and redundant studies prevented. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first review article entirely dedicated to the antileishmanial potential of the iridoid class.
## (s4) Antileishmanial properties of iridoids
(p4.0) Around 22 plant species and their corresponding phytochemicals, specifically iridoids (52 substances), were analyzed in this review. With some exceptions, the majority of plants herein discussed belong to the orders Gentianales and Lamiales. In brief, the in vitro antileishmanial evaluations were performed using the promastigote and amastigote forms of Leishmania spp. parasites. Eight Leishmania species have been investigated so far: L. donovani, L. major, L. hertigi, L. enriettii, L. amazonensis, L. braziliensis, L. infantum, and L. mexicana (in order of appearance). It is important to keep in mind that the intracellular forms, amastigotes, play a key role in the emergence of leishmaniasis clinical manifestations; therefore, these forms deserve an extra attention. Some studies are dedicated to the in vivo assessment of iridoids in experimental VL models. Organ biopsies were the main objects to evaluate the parasite load after treatment termination.

(p4.1) The investigation of Nyctanthes arbor-tristis L. (Oleaceae) biological potential led to the discovery of its antileishmanial properties. The n-BuOH fraction extracted from its seeds, which exhibited antileishmanial activity in a previous screening, resulted in the subsequent isolation of the iridoid glucosides arbortristoside A (17), arbortristoside B (18), arbortristoside C (19), and 6b-hydroxyloganin (20) (Fig. 5). These isolates were evaluated both in vivo and in vitro against the amastigote forms of L. donovani. The compounds were assessed using two concentrations. All compounds presented some degree of activity in both concentrations tested, where 17 displayed a percentage of inhibition of average number of amastigotes per infected macrophage of 45.83 ± 7.21% at 30 lg/mL (52.95 lM) and 64.58 ± 3.60% at 100 lg/mL (176.55 lM). Unfortunately, 19 and 20 were toxic against macrophages at 60 lg/mL (108.59 lM and 147.64 lM, respectively). In the same test conditions, the standard drug sodium stibogluconate (1) showed a percentage of inhibition of average number of amastigotes per infected macrophage of 80% and 100% at 30 lg/mL (32.93 lM) and 100 lg/mL (109.78 lM), respectively. The in vivo studies using hamsters infected with L. donovani yielded interesting results. Iridoid glucosides 17-20 were administered via intraperitoneal at a dose of 10 mg/kg given for 5 days. The parasite burden was evaluated after spleen biopsies  Jensen (1992) and expressed as percentage of inhibition. Spleen biopsies on days 7 and 28 post treatment revealed a significant antileishmanial activity for compound 17 (79.68 ± 21.68% of inhibition on day 28). Furthermore, 17 was also administered orally at 100 mg/kg given for 5 days and produced 57% of inhibition. In contrast, no inhibition was observed for 19, indicating that the para-methoxy substituent at the cinnamoyl portion is important for the activity. As positive control, 1 administered intraperitoneally at 100 mg/kg given for 5 days exhibited 93.51% of inhibition (day 28) (Tandon et al. 1991).

(p4.2) The findings of the previous work promoted a deepen analysis concerning compounds arbortristoside A (17), arbortristoside C (19), and 6b-hydroxyloganin (20) mechanism of action ( Fig. 5). Trypanothione reductase (TryR) is a unique enzyme present in Trypanosomatids responsible for the maintenance of redox balance and homeostasis. The absence of TryR in mammalian hosts is an enormous advantage in the drug development perspective, thus being considered a validated drug target. In this work, compounds 17, 19, and 20 were isolated from N. arbor-tristis seeds and their inhibitory potential was evaluated towards TryR. All iridoid glucosides displayed competitive inhibition of TryR, showing K i values of 3.34 ± 0.03 lM, 3.24 ± 0.05 lM, and 6.49 ± 0.05 lM for isolates 17, 19, and 20, respectively. Moreover, the IC 50 values demonstrated that all compounds were able to inhibit TryR at low concentrations. Whereas 17 and 19 exhibited similar inhibition values (2.65 ± 0.05 lM and 2.29 ± 0.03 lM, respectively), 20 showed an IC 50 of 4.74 ± 0.05 lM against TryR (Shukla et al. 2011).

(p4.3) Continuing the investigation to better understand the antileishmanial activity of iridoid glucosides arbortristoside A (17), arbortristoside C (19), and 6b-hydroxyloganin (20) (Fig. 5), various experiments were conducted. Promastigote forms of L. donovani were more susceptible to 17-19, in comparison to axenic amastigote forms. The most active isolate, 17, presented an IC 50 value of 3.264 ± 0.05 lM and 7.26 ± 0.05 lM for promastigote forms and axenic amastigotes, respectively. It has been demonstrated that the iridoid glucosides 17, 19, and 20 promoted the increase of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in parasites. As a result, this redox imbalance induced oxidative stress, causing cell membrane damage and apoptosislike death in both promastigote and axenic amastigote forms. In addition, the toxicological assessment of the isolates indicated that these compounds may possess a safe profile, since low cytotoxicity was observed in human embryonic kidney (HEK 293) and mouse macrophage (J774A.1) cell lines. Low cytotoxicity towards macrophages represents a valuable finding since parasites reside inside them to replicate and persist (Shukla et al. 2012). Putting together all these data, it is evident that N. arbor-tristis is a valuable source of antileishmanial agents (Fig. 5). Its constituents 17-20, as well as its extracts, possess significant leishmanicidal activity against L. donovani. The increased ROS production in parasites, which leads to their apoptosis-like death, correlates well with the reported TryR inhibitory ability of iridoid glucosides 17 and 19.

(p4.4) The secoiridoid glucoside oleuropein (21) (Fig. 6) has been attracting substantial attention owing to its wide range of biological activities. Olive leaf extracts, which normally contains 21, are generally considered safe (Hamdi and Castellon 2005;Hassen et al. 2015). Isolated from Olea europaea L. (Oleaceae) leaves, 21 had its antileishmanial potential evaluated in vitro and in vivo. The leishmanicidal potential of 21 was investigated in three Leishmania species in vitro: L. infantum, L. donovani, and L. major. A preliminary screening showed that L. donovani promastigote forms were more susceptible to 21 (IC 50-= 77.2 ± 10.5 lg/mL, 142.82 ± 19 lM). Following  (20) these results, 21 was screened against L. donovani amastigote forms and exhibited an IC 50 value of 110 ± 32 lg/mL (203.51 ± 59 lM). Both reference drugs miltefosine (4) and paromomycin (6) were highly active against promastigote and amastigote forms of all parasites. However, 21 exhibited less cytotoxicity against mouse macrophage (J774A.1) cell lines (CC 50 = 356 ± 23 lg/mL, 658.86 ± 42 lM) than 4 (CC 50 = 143 ± 43 lg/mL, 350.83 ± 105 lM) and 6 (CC 50 = 275 ± 53 lg/mL, 385.31 ± 74 lM). Miltefosine 4 presented a selectivity index (SI) of 297.9, while 21 was less selective towards amastigotes (SI = 3.24). Albeit 21 did not present an expressive in vitro activity against the parasites, the in vivo studies demonstrated the opposite. Oleuropein 21 was able to reduce significantly the parasitic burden in BALB/c mice infected with L. donovani. In this experimental VL model, 21 was administered intraperitoneally for 28 days using three concentrations (45 mg/kg, 15 mg/kg, and 5 mg/kg of body weight). Three days after treatment termination, it was observed that 21 significantly decreased the parasitic burden in BALB/c mice spleen and liver. To verify whether 21 was able to control the infection or relapse occurred, mice were sacrificed 6 weeks after treatment completion and their parasitic burden in the liver and spleen was evaluated. Oleuropein 21 exhibited a persistent leishmanicidal action and remarkably decreased the spleen parasitic burden at 45 mg/kg (99.7%) and 15 mg/kg (99.8%), successfully inhibiting the progression of the disease. Miltefosine 4, which was used as positive control, showed similar results in the same conditions. It is appropriate to highlight 21 displayed lower in vitro cytotoxicity towards macrophages than 4, indicating a safer profile for 21 (Kyriazis et al. 2013). The study of an association between 4 and 21 would be an interesting approach for further researches.

(p4.5) The same research group investigated the possible mechanisms underlying oleuropein (21) (Fig. 6) antileishmanial action. This study not only demonstrated the ability of 21 to elevate ROS levels in both in vitro and in vivo VL models but also its capacity to increase nitric oxide production in ex vivo cultures of splenocytes and hepatocytes obtained from L. donovani-infected BALB/c mice. Interestingly, 21 also presented a protective action in in vivo conditions by elevating Leishmania-specific IgG2a/IgG1 levels, as well as a positive delayed type hypersensitivity response. An immunomodulatory effect was also attributed to 21 due to its capacity to simultaneously downregulate antioxidant enzymes in parasites and to enhance host's immune response by increasing Th1 predominance (Kyriazis et al. 2016). In another study, L. donovani promastigote forms showed morphological changes and DNA fragmentation after treatment with 21 (under in vitro conditions). The experiments indicated that 21 promotes apoptosis-like death in parasites and intracellular ROS production after 48 h treatment. According to the authors, 21 may trigger apoptosis-like death through a ROS-independent mechanism (Kyriazis et al. 2017).

(p4.6) Oleuropein (21) (Fig. 6) has also displayed cytotoxic and antiproliferative activity against L. major promastigote forms. The secoiridoid glucoside 21 exhibited a dose-dependent activity against the flagellated forms of L. major. At a dose of 250 lg/mL (462.52 lM), 21 reduced 88.5% of L. major promastigote forms, while 74.8% of parasites were killed when exposed to sodium stibogluconate (1) at 250 lg/ mL (274.45 lM). This cytotoxic action was investigated and it has been observed that 21 possesses apoptotic properties, triggering cell death through apoptosis in L. major promastigotes (Elamin and AL-Maliki 2014). Previous reports have already pointed the antiprotozoal potential of tetracyclic iridoids, more specifically against Trypanosoma brucei parasites (Kwofie et al. 2016;Suzuki et al. 2015). The phytochemical investigation of Morinda lucida Benth. (Rubiaceae) leaves yielded the isolation of three tetracyclic iridoids (22-24) (Fig. 6). Considering Leishmania spp. and The tetracyclic iridoids 22 and 24 (Fig. 6) have also showed significant activity against L. donovani (22, IC 50 = 2.94 ± 0.60 lM;

(p4.7) 24, I C 50-= 0.91 ± 0.50 lM) and L. major (22, IC 50-= 1.85 ± 0.20 lM; 24, IC 50 = 1.77 ± 0.20 lM) promastigote forms. Microscopic analysis showed important morphological changes on parasites such as flagellum loss and induced cell-rounding. Additionally, apoptotic properties were attributed to isolates 22 and 24. Likewise the previous study, these compounds were isolated from M. lucida leaves (Azerigyik et al. 2018).

(p4.8) Plumericin (25) and isoplumericin (26) (Fig. 7) are another well-known iridoids with reported antileishmanial properties. These highly functionalized iridoids were isolated from Plumeria rubra L. (syn. Plumeria bicolor Ruiz & Pav.) (Apocynaceae) stem barks and assayed against L. donovani promastigote and amastigote forms. Plumericin 25 exhibited important antileishmanial activity against promastigote (IC 50 = 3.17 ± 0.12 lM) and amastigote (IC 50-= 1.41 ± 0.03 lM) forms. Curiously, the parasites were more resistant when treated with 26 (IC 50-= 7.2 ± 0.08 lM for promastigotes; IC 50-= 4.1 ± 0.02 lM for amastigotes). The chloroform extract, which yielded the isolates 25 and 26, displayed an IC 50 of 21 ± 2.2 lg/mL against promastigotes and 14 ± 1.6 lg/mL towards intracellular amastigote forms. Cytotoxicity assessment against murine macrophage (J774G8) cell lines revealed a CC 50 value of 24 ± 0.7 lM, 20.6 ± 0.5 lM, and 75 ± 5.3 lM for 25, 26, and the chloroform extract, respectively. Plumericin 25 provoked cytopathological and morphological changes in L. donovani promastigotes, a similar action promoted by tetracyclic iridoids 22 and 24. The high activity displayed by tetracyclic iridoids 25 and 26 may be related to their propensity to undergo a Michael-type addition with biological nucleophiles (Sharma et al. 2011). Indeed, the tetracyclic iridoids 22 and 24 possess similar structural patterns and also presented cytotoxicity against macrophage cell lines (Amoa-Bosompem et al. 2016). Both isolates 25 and 26 showed less cytotoxicity against murine macrophage (J774G8) cell lines, although further studies are needed to verify their safety profile (Sharma et al. 2011).

(p4.9) Ethnomedical studies based on plants used by Peruvian Amazon region locals highlighted the antileishmanial properties of Himatanthus sucuuba (Spruce ex Mull. Arg.) Woodson (Apocynaceae). In this particular case, patients affected with CL apply H.  (27) sucuuba fresh barks and latex at the lesion site. The ethanolic extract obtained from this plant exhibited an IC 50 of 5 lg/mL against L. amazonensis amastigote forms. Further extract purifications yielded the tetracyclic iridoids plumericin (25) and isoplumericin (26) (Fig. 7). Axenic amastigotes were highly susceptible to both isolates (25, IC 50 = 0.21 lM; 26, IC 50-= 0.28 lM). This strong activity also resulted in significant cytotoxicity against BALB/3T3 and Vero cell lines. The antileishmanial activity of 25 was also investigated in macrophages infected with amastigotes, and revealed an IC 50 value of 0.9 lM. This assessment was not carried out with 26, since macrophages were affected in all tested concentrations (Castillo et al. 2007).
## (s19) Approaches to find new antileishmanial agents from plants
(p19.0) The aspects discussed above highlight the main reasons why leishmaniasis has the NTD status. In this sense, there is a pressing need to develop novel, safe, and affordable drugs to treat leishmaniasis in its entire clinical manifestation spectrum. To accomplish that, a classic strategy is the investigation of plants and their constituents aiming to combat the disease in question (Ullah et al. 2016). Endeavors such as plant-screening programs have identified that several plants employed in folk medicine present antileishmanial activity (Rocha et al. 2005). The study of ethnomedical knowledge of communities and natives from certain regions is another approach where potential antileishmanial extracts and plant-derived compounds may be identified (Ullah et al. 2016;Rocha et al. 2005;Scotti et al. 2016).

(p19.1) The chemical diversity and complexity of natural compounds have always fascinated researchers regarding their pharmacological potential. Plant extracts and phytochemicals of various classes have been reported to possess antileishmanial properties (Scotti et al. 2016;Boniface and Ferreira 2019;Gonçalves et al. 2020;Raj et al. 2020). Among these classes, iridoids comprise a vastly diverse group of cyclopenta[c]pyran monoterpenoids (Raj et al. 2020). Throughout the past decades, extensive investigations have been conducted and attributed various biological activities to this class, including antileishmanial properties (Raj et al. 2020;Tundis et al. 2008).

(p19.2) Taking into account these matters, the present study aims to discuss the available literature between 1991 and 2020 related to the antileishmanial activity of iridoids. In this period, a total of 32 works were published, comprising in vitro, in vivo, ex vivo, and in silico studies. The available information was gathered using different databases (Web of Science, Science-Direct, and Scopus) using the words iridoids, antileishmanial, leishmanicidal, antiparasitic, and antiprotozoal. Additional data from books were also included. All 32 publications were covered in this review, regardless of the lack of antileishmanial activity. Considering the present work aims to discuss the available data, it is appropriate to report negative results to optimize further studies. Genus Leishmania has numerous species and different forms, which may present varying susceptibilities towards the same compound; therefore, different species and forms may be investigated, and redundant studies prevented. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first review article entirely dedicated to the antileishmanial potential of the iridoid class.

(p19.3) The aspects discussed above highlight the main reasons why leishmaniasis has the NTD status. In this sense, there is a pressing need to develop novel, safe, and affordable drugs to treat leishmaniasis in its entire clinical manifestation spectrum. To accomplish that, a classic strategy is the investigation of plants and their constituents aiming to combat the disease in question (Ullah et al. 2016). Endeavors such as plant-screening programs have identified that several plants employed in folk medicine present antileishmanial activity (Rocha et al. 2005). The study of ethnomedical knowledge of communities and natives from certain regions is another approach where potential antileishmanial extracts and plant-derived compounds may be identified (Ullah et al. 2016;Rocha et al. 2005;Scotti et al. 2016).

(p19.4) The chemical diversity and complexity of natural compounds have always fascinated researchers regarding their pharmacological potential. Plant extracts and phytochemicals of various classes have been reported to possess antileishmanial properties (Scotti et al. 2016;Boniface and Ferreira 2019;Gonçalves et al. 2020;Raj et al. 2020). Among these classes, iridoids comprise a vastly diverse group of cyclopenta[c]pyran monoterpenoids (Raj et al. 2020). Throughout the past decades, extensive investigations have been conducted and attributed various biological activities to this class, including antileishmanial properties (Raj et al. 2020;Tundis et al. 2008).

(p19.5) Taking into account these matters, the present study aims to discuss the available literature between 1991 and 2020 related to the antileishmanial activity of iridoids. In this period, a total of 32 works were published, comprising in vitro, in vivo, ex vivo, and in silico studies. The available information was gathered using different databases (Web of Science, Science-Direct, and Scopus) using the words iridoids, antileishmanial, leishmanicidal, antiparasitic, and antiprotozoal. Additional data from books were also included. All 32 publications were covered in this review, regardless of the lack of antileishmanial activity. Considering the present work aims to discuss the available data, it is appropriate to report negative results to optimize further studies. Genus Leishmania has numerous species and different forms, which may present varying susceptibilities towards the same compound; therefore, different species and forms may be investigated, and redundant studies prevented. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first review article entirely dedicated to the antileishmanial potential of the iridoid class.
## (s21) Antileishmanial properties of iridoids
(p21.0) Around 22 plant species and their corresponding phytochemicals, specifically iridoids (52 substances), were analyzed in this review. With some exceptions, the majority of plants herein discussed belong to the orders Gentianales and Lamiales. In brief, the in vitro antileishmanial evaluations were performed using the promastigote and amastigote forms of Leishmania spp. parasites. Eight Leishmania species have been investigated so far: L. donovani, L. major, L. hertigi, L. enriettii, L. amazonensis, L. braziliensis, L. infantum, and L. mexicana (in order of appearance). It is important to keep in mind that the intracellular forms, amastigotes, play a key role in the emergence of leishmaniasis clinical manifestations; therefore, these forms deserve an extra attention. Some studies are dedicated to the in vivo assessment of iridoids in experimental VL models. Organ biopsies were the main objects to evaluate the parasite load after treatment termination.

(p21.1) The investigation of Nyctanthes arbor-tristis L. (Oleaceae) biological potential led to the discovery of its antileishmanial properties. The n-BuOH fraction extracted from its seeds, which exhibited antileishmanial activity in a previous screening, resulted in the subsequent isolation of the iridoid glucosides arbortristoside A (17), arbortristoside B (18), arbortristoside C (19), and 6b-hydroxyloganin (20) (Fig. 5). These isolates were evaluated both in vivo and in vitro against the amastigote forms of L. donovani. The compounds were assessed using two concentrations. All compounds presented some degree of activity in both concentrations tested, where 17 displayed a percentage of inhibition of average number of amastigotes per infected macrophage of 45.83 ± 7.21% at 30 lg/mL (52.95 lM) and 64.58 ± 3.60% at 100 lg/mL (176.55 lM). Unfortunately, 19 and 20 were toxic against macrophages at 60 lg/mL (108.59 lM and 147.64 lM, respectively). In the same test conditions, the standard drug sodium stibogluconate (1) showed a percentage of inhibition of average number of amastigotes per infected macrophage of 80% and 100% at 30 lg/mL (32.93 lM) and 100 lg/mL (109.78 lM), respectively. The in vivo studies using hamsters infected with L. donovani yielded interesting results. Iridoid glucosides 17-20 were administered via intraperitoneal at a dose of 10 mg/kg given for 5 days. The parasite burden was evaluated after spleen biopsies  Jensen (1992) and expressed as percentage of inhibition. Spleen biopsies on days 7 and 28 post treatment revealed a significant antileishmanial activity for compound 17 (79.68 ± 21.68% of inhibition on day 28). Furthermore, 17 was also administered orally at 100 mg/kg given for 5 days and produced 57% of inhibition. In contrast, no inhibition was observed for 19, indicating that the para-methoxy substituent at the cinnamoyl portion is important for the activity. As positive control, 1 administered intraperitoneally at 100 mg/kg given for 5 days exhibited 93.51% of inhibition (day 28) (Tandon et al. 1991).

(p21.2) The findings of the previous work promoted a deepen analysis concerning compounds arbortristoside A (17), arbortristoside C (19), and 6b-hydroxyloganin (20) mechanism of action ( Fig. 5). Trypanothione reductase (TryR) is a unique enzyme present in Trypanosomatids responsible for the maintenance of redox balance and homeostasis. The absence of TryR in mammalian hosts is an enormous advantage in the drug development perspective, thus being considered a validated drug target. In this work, compounds 17, 19, and 20 were isolated from N. arbor-tristis seeds and their inhibitory potential was evaluated towards TryR. All iridoid glucosides displayed competitive inhibition of TryR, showing K i values of 3.34 ± 0.03 lM, 3.24 ± 0.05 lM, and 6.49 ± 0.05 lM for isolates 17, 19, and 20, respectively. Moreover, the IC 50 values demonstrated that all compounds were able to inhibit TryR at low concentrations. Whereas 17 and 19 exhibited similar inhibition values (2.65 ± 0.05 lM and 2.29 ± 0.03 lM, respectively), 20 showed an IC 50 of 4.74 ± 0.05 lM against TryR (Shukla et al. 2011).

(p21.3) Continuing the investigation to better understand the antileishmanial activity of iridoid glucosides arbortristoside A (17), arbortristoside C (19), and 6b-hydroxyloganin (20) (Fig. 5), various experiments were conducted. Promastigote forms of L. donovani were more susceptible to 17-19, in comparison to axenic amastigote forms. The most active isolate, 17, presented an IC 50 value of 3.264 ± 0.05 lM and 7.26 ± 0.05 lM for promastigote forms and axenic amastigotes, respectively. It has been demonstrated that the iridoid glucosides 17, 19, and 20 promoted the increase of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in parasites. As a result, this redox imbalance induced oxidative stress, causing cell membrane damage and apoptosislike death in both promastigote and axenic amastigote forms. In addition, the toxicological assessment of the isolates indicated that these compounds may possess a safe profile, since low cytotoxicity was observed in human embryonic kidney (HEK 293) and mouse macrophage (J774A.1) cell lines. Low cytotoxicity towards macrophages represents a valuable finding since parasites reside inside them to replicate and persist (Shukla et al. 2012). Putting together all these data, it is evident that N. arbor-tristis is a valuable source of antileishmanial agents (Fig. 5). Its constituents 17-20, as well as its extracts, possess significant leishmanicidal activity against L. donovani. The increased ROS production in parasites, which leads to their apoptosis-like death, correlates well with the reported TryR inhibitory ability of iridoid glucosides 17 and 19.

(p21.4) The secoiridoid glucoside oleuropein (21) (Fig. 6) has been attracting substantial attention owing to its wide range of biological activities. Olive leaf extracts, which normally contains 21, are generally considered safe (Hamdi and Castellon 2005;Hassen et al. 2015). Isolated from Olea europaea L. (Oleaceae) leaves, 21 had its antileishmanial potential evaluated in vitro and in vivo. The leishmanicidal potential of 21 was investigated in three Leishmania species in vitro: L. infantum, L. donovani, and L. major. A preliminary screening showed that L. donovani promastigote forms were more susceptible to 21 (IC 50-= 77.2 ± 10.5 lg/mL, 142.82 ± 19 lM). Following  (20) these results, 21 was screened against L. donovani amastigote forms and exhibited an IC 50 value of 110 ± 32 lg/mL (203.51 ± 59 lM). Both reference drugs miltefosine (4) and paromomycin (6) were highly active against promastigote and amastigote forms of all parasites. However, 21 exhibited less cytotoxicity against mouse macrophage (J774A.1) cell lines (CC 50 = 356 ± 23 lg/mL, 658.86 ± 42 lM) than 4 (CC 50 = 143 ± 43 lg/mL, 350.83 ± 105 lM) and 6 (CC 50 = 275 ± 53 lg/mL, 385.31 ± 74 lM). Miltefosine 4 presented a selectivity index (SI) of 297.9, while 21 was less selective towards amastigotes (SI = 3.24). Albeit 21 did not present an expressive in vitro activity against the parasites, the in vivo studies demonstrated the opposite. Oleuropein 21 was able to reduce significantly the parasitic burden in BALB/c mice infected with L. donovani. In this experimental VL model, 21 was administered intraperitoneally for 28 days using three concentrations (45 mg/kg, 15 mg/kg, and 5 mg/kg of body weight). Three days after treatment termination, it was observed that 21 significantly decreased the parasitic burden in BALB/c mice spleen and liver. To verify whether 21 was able to control the infection or relapse occurred, mice were sacrificed 6 weeks after treatment completion and their parasitic burden in the liver and spleen was evaluated. Oleuropein 21 exhibited a persistent leishmanicidal action and remarkably decreased the spleen parasitic burden at 45 mg/kg (99.7%) and 15 mg/kg (99.8%), successfully inhibiting the progression of the disease. Miltefosine 4, which was used as positive control, showed similar results in the same conditions. It is appropriate to highlight 21 displayed lower in vitro cytotoxicity towards macrophages than 4, indicating a safer profile for 21 (Kyriazis et al. 2013). The study of an association between 4 and 21 would be an interesting approach for further researches.

(p21.5) The same research group investigated the possible mechanisms underlying oleuropein (21) (Fig. 6) antileishmanial action. This study not only demonstrated the ability of 21 to elevate ROS levels in both in vitro and in vivo VL models but also its capacity to increase nitric oxide production in ex vivo cultures of splenocytes and hepatocytes obtained from L. donovani-infected BALB/c mice. Interestingly, 21 also presented a protective action in in vivo conditions by elevating Leishmania-specific IgG2a/IgG1 levels, as well as a positive delayed type hypersensitivity response. An immunomodulatory effect was also attributed to 21 due to its capacity to simultaneously downregulate antioxidant enzymes in parasites and to enhance host's immune response by increasing Th1 predominance (Kyriazis et al. 2016). In another study, L. donovani promastigote forms showed morphological changes and DNA fragmentation after treatment with 21 (under in vitro conditions). The experiments indicated that 21 promotes apoptosis-like death in parasites and intracellular ROS production after 48 h treatment. According to the authors, 21 may trigger apoptosis-like death through a ROS-independent mechanism (Kyriazis et al. 2017).

(p21.6) Oleuropein (21) (Fig. 6) has also displayed cytotoxic and antiproliferative activity against L. major promastigote forms. The secoiridoid glucoside 21 exhibited a dose-dependent activity against the flagellated forms of L. major. At a dose of 250 lg/mL (462.52 lM), 21 reduced 88.5% of L. major promastigote forms, while 74.8% of parasites were killed when exposed to sodium stibogluconate (1) at 250 lg/ mL (274.45 lM). This cytotoxic action was investigated and it has been observed that 21 possesses apoptotic properties, triggering cell death through apoptosis in L. major promastigotes (Elamin and AL-Maliki 2014). Previous reports have already pointed the antiprotozoal potential of tetracyclic iridoids, more specifically against Trypanosoma brucei parasites (Kwofie et al. 2016;Suzuki et al. 2015). The phytochemical investigation of Morinda lucida Benth. (Rubiaceae) leaves yielded the isolation of three tetracyclic iridoids (22-24) (Fig. 6). Considering Leishmania spp. and The tetracyclic iridoids 22 and 24 (Fig. 6) have also showed significant activity against L. donovani (22, IC 50 = 2.94 ± 0.60 lM;

(p21.7) 24, I C 50-= 0.91 ± 0.50 lM) and L. major (22, IC 50-= 1.85 ± 0.20 lM; 24, IC 50 = 1.77 ± 0.20 lM) promastigote forms. Microscopic analysis showed important morphological changes on parasites such as flagellum loss and induced cell-rounding. Additionally, apoptotic properties were attributed to isolates 22 and 24. Likewise the previous study, these compounds were isolated from M. lucida leaves (Azerigyik et al. 2018).

(p21.8) Plumericin (25) and isoplumericin (26) (Fig. 7) are another well-known iridoids with reported antileishmanial properties. These highly functionalized iridoids were isolated from Plumeria rubra L. (syn. Plumeria bicolor Ruiz & Pav.) (Apocynaceae) stem barks and assayed against L. donovani promastigote and amastigote forms. Plumericin 25 exhibited important antileishmanial activity against promastigote (IC 50 = 3.17 ± 0.12 lM) and amastigote (IC 50-= 1.41 ± 0.03 lM) forms. Curiously, the parasites were more resistant when treated with 26 (IC 50-= 7.2 ± 0.08 lM for promastigotes; IC 50-= 4.1 ± 0.02 lM for amastigotes). The chloroform extract, which yielded the isolates 25 and 26, displayed an IC 50 of 21 ± 2.2 lg/mL against promastigotes and 14 ± 1.6 lg/mL towards intracellular amastigote forms. Cytotoxicity assessment against murine macrophage (J774G8) cell lines revealed a CC 50 value of 24 ± 0.7 lM, 20.6 ± 0.5 lM, and 75 ± 5.3 lM for 25, 26, and the chloroform extract, respectively. Plumericin 25 provoked cytopathological and morphological changes in L. donovani promastigotes, a similar action promoted by tetracyclic iridoids 22 and 24. The high activity displayed by tetracyclic iridoids 25 and 26 may be related to their propensity to undergo a Michael-type addition with biological nucleophiles (Sharma et al. 2011). Indeed, the tetracyclic iridoids 22 and 24 possess similar structural patterns and also presented cytotoxicity against macrophage cell lines (Amoa-Bosompem et al. 2016). Both isolates 25 and 26 showed less cytotoxicity against murine macrophage (J774G8) cell lines, although further studies are needed to verify their safety profile (Sharma et al. 2011).

(p21.9) Ethnomedical studies based on plants used by Peruvian Amazon region locals highlighted the antileishmanial properties of Himatanthus sucuuba (Spruce ex Mull. Arg.) Woodson (Apocynaceae). In this particular case, patients affected with CL apply H.  (27) sucuuba fresh barks and latex at the lesion site. The ethanolic extract obtained from this plant exhibited an IC 50 of 5 lg/mL against L. amazonensis amastigote forms. Further extract purifications yielded the tetracyclic iridoids plumericin (25) and isoplumericin (26) (Fig. 7). Axenic amastigotes were highly susceptible to both isolates (25, IC 50 = 0.21 lM; 26, IC 50-= 0.28 lM). This strong activity also resulted in significant cytotoxicity against BALB/3T3 and Vero cell lines. The antileishmanial activity of 25 was also investigated in macrophages infected with amastigotes, and revealed an IC 50 value of 0.9 lM. This assessment was not carried out with 26, since macrophages were affected in all tested concentrations (Castillo et al. 2007).
