# Gingival enlargements: A review

CorpusID: 233701199 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cb66aa4c6b73589fdd3aeb70686591c1f71166b7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cb66aa4c6b73589fdd3aeb70686591c1f71166b7)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Drug induced gingival enlargement
(p1.0) The drugs that are reported to be associated with gingival over growth are anti-convulsants, immune suppresents and calcium channel blockers (Table 1). Despite their pharmacological diversity all these drugs have similar mechanism of action at cellular level. They are known to inhibit intracellular calcium ion induced infl ux. Therefore the clinical features of gingival over growth (Figure 1), by these agents and even the histologic appearance are reported to have common characteristics such as increase in extra cellular ground substance, number of fi broblast and acanthosis of epithelium.

(p1.1) understood; however, blood and cellular immunity response seems to be infl uenced by selective and reversible inhibition of T helper cells. There is disagreement between severity of gingival enelrgement in blood and saliva. Some studies have reported that development of gingival enlargement requires a threshold of drug concentration In blood plasma, while its severity is not associated with the dose. The dosage 500mg is considred as threshold [3].
## (s4) Pregnancy induced gingival enlergement
(p4.0) The prevalence of pregnancy gingivitis changes from 35-100%. The gingiva shows increased level of infl ammation often characterized by edema, colour and contour change and propensity to bleed on gentle stimulation ( Figure 2). The marginal gingival tends to be more prominent than facial and lingual surfaces. And infl ammatory reaction to the local irritants that occurs after 3 rd month of pregnancy is called pregnancy tumour. This lesion appears as discrete, mushroom, fl attened spherical masses, that protrude from gingival margin, more frequently interproximal space and are attached by sessile or pedanculated base [6].
## (s5) Puberty induced gingival enlargement
(p5.0) It is infl ammatory type of gingival enlargement which occurs in both male and females in pubertal age groups. it involves mainly marginal and interdental gingiva ( Figure   3). It is characterised by prominent bulbous interproximal papilla. After puberty the enlargement undergoes spontaneous reduction but does not disappear until local irritants are removed [7]. Some studies have found that pre threshold serum phenytoin was directly aenlargement, while no association was found post threshold phenytoin and gingival enlergment. Girgis et al found a direct relationship between gingival enlargement in 50% of patients, while no relationship and even an inverse relationship was found in rest 50% [2].
