# Towards Clean and Safe Water: A Review on the Emerging Role of Imprinted Polymer-Based Electrochemical Sensors

CorpusID: 235351899 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5321928c7cf9207bf2111d01c07bdb790557fc0a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5321928c7cf9207bf2111d01c07bdb790557fc0a)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Computer Science, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Human activities revolve around water, be it in industry, chemistry, agriculture or even for living. Therefore, it is quasi unavoidable that water ends up polluted [1]. Water pollution refers to all substances that human activity introduces into water, be it toxic or benign pollutants.

(p0.1) Water depollution is a major issue nowadays; however, in order to eliminate harmful substances, one needs to first characterize and quantify them in order to design appropriate pollutant removal methods, e.g., by adsorption, filtration or degradation. In this sense, the detection of species needs to be accurate and selective. Several methods meet these requirements, but they often require expensive materials and instruments; moreover, the measurement time is a significant criterion. Towards this end, electrochemistry is an excellent means of sensing pollutants because of its high sensitivity (it goes down to the femtomolar regime), selectivity and low cost [2]. Furthermore, the measurements are easy to set up and above all miniaturization is possible so that electrosensing could be directly

(p0.2) Human activities revolve around water, be it in industry, chemistry, agriculture or even for living. Therefore, it is quasi unavoidable that water ends up polluted [1]. Water pollution refers to all substances that human activity introduces into water, be it toxic or benign pollutants.

(p0.3) Water depollution is a major issue nowadays; however, in order to eliminate harmful substances, one needs to first characterize and quantify them in order to design appropriate pollutant removal methods, e.g., by adsorption, filtration or degradation. In this sense, the detection of species needs to be accurate and selective. Several methods meet these requirements, but they often require expensive materials and instruments; moreover, the measurement time is a significant criterion. Towards this end, electrochemistry is an excellent means of sensing pollutants because of its high sensitivity (it goes down to the femtomolar regime), selectivity and low cost [2]. Furthermore, the measurements are easy to set up and above all miniaturization is possible so that electrosensing could be directly
## (s4) Monomers and Polymers
(p4.0) MIPs are synthetized by (co-)polymerization of functional monomers and cross-linkers in the presence of template compounds or microorganisms (Figure 1a). Chelators could be added in the pre-polymerization mixture, in a variety of solvents [26,27]. After synthesis, templates are removed from the crosslinked polymeric matrix or coating, leaving threedimensional cavities which are complementary in terms of shape and functional groups to the targeted compounds or microorganisms. Figure 1b illustrates the concept of molecular imprinting with a picture of a slice of cake cooked with candied fruits. Clearly, the candied fruits leave prints in the cake once removed and the shape fit in well only with the ingredient ("template") used to cook the cake and that has been removed. Part of the cake slice that has no candied fruit corresponds to the non-imprinted polymer (NIP). At the molecular level, shape only does not suffice to have a good sensor; interfacial interactions matter very much, and this is the reason for using functional monomers that tightly bind the template molecules. MIPs were widely used as solid phase extractors and as sensitive recognition elements of chemical and biological sensors [28][29][30]. Imprinted organic and sol-gel polymers can be prepared using a large variety of monomers, the choice depending on the application (Table 2). Table 2. Selected, commercially available monomers frequently employed for making MIPs. Pyrrole is displayed with its corresponding 2D microstructure.

(p4.1) MIPs are synthetized by (co-)polymerization of functional monomers and cross-linkers in the presence of template compounds or microorganisms (Figure 1a). Chelators could be added in the pre-polymerization mixture, in a variety of solvents [26,27]. After synthesis, templates are removed from the crosslinked polymeric matrix or coating, leaving threedimensional cavities which are complementary in terms of shape and functional groups to the targeted compounds or microorganisms. Figure 1b illustrates the concept of molecular imprinting with a picture of a slice of cake cooked with candied fruits. Clearly, the candied fruits leave prints in the cake once removed and the shape fit in well only with the ingredient ("template") used to cook the cake and that has been removed. Part of the cake slice that has no candied fruit corresponds to the non-imprinted polymer (NIP). At the molecular level, shape only does not suffice to have a good sensor; interfacial interactions matter very much, and this is the reason for using functional monomers that tightly bind the template molecules. MIPs were widely used as solid phase extractors and as sensitive recognition elements of chemical and biological sensors [28][29][30]. Imprinted organic and sol-gel polymers can be prepared using a large variety of monomers, the choice depending on the application (Table 2). Table 2. Selected, commercially available monomers frequently employed for making MIPs. Pyrrole is displayed with its corresponding 2D microstructure.
## (s8) Vinylic Imprinted Polymers
(p8.0) Most imprinted vinylic polymer powders, nanocomposites and coatings are prepared via free radical polymerization using AIBN, Irgacure or potassium persulfate. Free radical or photoinduced radical polymerization or controlled photopolymerization (such as photoiniferter [35,36], INItiation-TransFER-TERminaison agent) is ideal as it does not require heating and could be achieved within minutes to a few hours. In the case of grafted imprinted polymers, photopolymerization is unique for its spatiotemporal aspect. The polymer can be grafted on a selected area and growth be controlled with irradiation time. Ion imprinted clay-polymer nanocomposites have recently been prepared by radical photopolymerization under visible [37] or UV light [38] using Type II photoinitiators. For grafted MIP thin films prepared by surface confined photopolymerization, the reader is referred to [39,40]. Figure 3 shows a simplified mechanism of radical polymerization whether it is of the free radical or controlled type. Initiator is activated thermally or photochemically and the initiating radical triggers polymerization of the prepolymerization complex (PCC) to yield, after a few hours or even better a few minutes (in the case of photopolymerization), 3D crosslinked polymers with entrapped template species (T). Precipitation polymerization requires crashing of the former monolith, but, in the case of the synthesis of imprinted thin polymer film, it is essential to first prepare graft initiators to the electrode in order to confine polymerization to the surface and limit precipitation of imprinted polymers or interpenetration of grafted polymers with free crosslinked polymers; this makes cleaning the grafted imprinted polymer tedious. For example, Type II radical photoinitiators are preferred over Type I phtoinitiators as they drastically limit bulk solution polymerization. Type I photoinitiators give two radicals upon thermal or photo-clevage: initiating radicals in solution and at the surface. As far as electrochemical sensors are concerned, numerous studies covered the nanostructuration of vinylic imprinted polymers by metallic or carbon nanoparticles [41,42], which can be coated on free electrode surfaces or mixed with graphite in order to prepare carbon paste electrodes. Such nanostructuration enhances the conductivity of the polymer and facilitates electron transfer.

(p8.1) Most imprinted vinylic polymer powders, nanocomposites and coatings are prepared via free radical polymerization using AIBN, Irgacure or potassium persulfate. Free radical or photoinduced radical polymerization or controlled photopolymerization (such as photoiniferter [35,36], INItiation-TransFER-TERminaison agent) is ideal as it does not require heating and could be achieved within minutes to a few hours. In the case of grafted imprinted polymers, photopolymerization is unique for its spatiotemporal aspect. The polymer can be grafted on a selected area and growth be controlled with irradiation time. Ion imprinted clay-polymer nanocomposites have recently been prepared by radical photopolymerization under visible [37] or UV light [38] using Type II photoinitiators. For grafted MIP thin films prepared by surface confined photopolymerization, the reader is referred to [39,40]. Figure 3 shows a simplified mechanism of radical polymerization whether it is of the free radical or controlled type. Initiator is activated thermally or photochemically and the initiating radical triggers polymerization of the prepolymerization complex (PCC) to yield, after a few hours or even better a few minutes (in the case of photopolymerization), 3D crosslinked polymers with entrapped template species (T). Precipitation polymerization requires crashing of the former monolith, but, in the case of the synthesis of imprinted thin polymer film, it is essential to first prepare graft initiators to the electrode in order to confine polymerization to the surface and limit precipitation of imprinted polymers or interpenetration of grafted polymers with free crosslinked polymers; this makes cleaning the grafted imprinted polymer tedious. For example, Type II radical photoinitiators are preferred over Type I phtoinitiators as they drastically limit bulk solution polymerization. Type I photoinitiators give two radicals upon thermal or photo-clevage: initiating radicals in solution and at the surface. As far as electrochemical sensors are concerned, numerous studies covered the nanostructuration of vinylic imprinted polymers by metallic or carbon nanoparticles [41,42], which can be coated on free electrode surfaces or mixed with graphite in order to prepare carbon paste electrodes. Such nanostructuration enhances the conductivity of the polymer and facilitates electron transfer.
## (s11) Electrode Material Preparation
(p11.0) For the purpose of electrochemical sensors, there are three main options for making MIP sensing layers and composites ( Figure 6): (i) polymerization conducted directly on the transducer surface, (ii) preparation of MIP or imprinted nanocomposite as powder that is coated on the electrode surface, and (iii) preparation of carbon paste electrode (CPE) from the mixture of carbon and MIP powder. "Imprinters" are interested more and more in CPEs due to their flexibility, low cost and good electrical conductivity [53]. Whilst preformed or in situ synthesized polymers can be deposited on the bare transducer, surface-initiated polymerization, in particular, requires the use of a coupling agent in order to covalently link the MIP to the transducer. In this regard, silane, thiols and aryl diazonium coupling agents were successfully employed. Indeed, they are bi-functional compounds and bear reactive groups to bind preformed MIPs, or even a polymerization initiator group to trigger surface polymerization. Silanes are mostly applied to metallic surfaces with a thin oxide film or to nanoparticles, whereas thiols are frequently used to modify gold electrodes. In the recent years, diazonium salts appeared as the most versatile coupling agents due to their ability to bind many more surfaces such as metals, oxides, sp 2 and sp 3 carbon allotropes, insulating polymers and transparent semi-conductor electrodes, to name only some of these materials. Furthermore, diazonium salts could be easily produced from aniline derivative precursors, bearing numerous functional groups for the covalent attachment of polymers. For these reasons, the surface and interface chemistry of diazonium salts is particularly suitable for making MIP-based electrochemical sensing layers with a robust electrode-MIP interface [39,54,55].
## (s12) Detection Methods
(p12.0) Electrochemical sensing techniques are among the most sensitive, simple, robust, and accurate transduction techniques. Efforts have been recently done to enable in situ multiple measurements, which has opened avenues to several chemical and biological applications, mainly the detection of harmful substances in water. Electrochemical sensors can be designed for all types of ions and molecules independently of their electroactivity.

(p12.1) Actually, if the desired target is not electroactive, the MIP-based sensor strategy will be based on the attenuation of the electrochemical signal of a probe present in the solution [64].

(p12.2) A schematic representation of the physical principles and corresponding voltammograms of the most common electrochemical techniques, used for pollutants' detection in water sources, is depicted in Figure 8. Details are presented in the following paragraphs. 

(p12.3) Electrochemical sensing techniques are among the most sensitive, simple, robust, and accurate transduction techniques. Efforts have been recently done to enable in situ multiple measurements, which has opened avenues to several chemical and biological applications, mainly the detection of harmful substances in water. Electrochemical sensors can be designed for all types of ions and molecules independently of their electroactivity.

(p12.4) Actually, if the desired target is not electroactive, the MIP-based sensor strategy will be based on the attenuation of the electrochemical signal of a probe present in the solution [64].

(p12.5) A schematic representation of the physical principles and corresponding voltammograms of the most common electrochemical techniques, used for pollutants' detection in water sources, is depicted in Figure 8. Details are presented in the following paragraphs. 
## (s13) Cyclic Voltammetry
(p13.0) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is a popular electrochemical technique usually used for quantitative analysis and for the investigation of the reduction and oxidation processes of electroactive species. During the experiment, the capacitive and faradaic currents are combined to get the total measured current. Scan rate is one of the key parameters of this technique, as it controls the "speed" of the applied potential. High scan rate values lead in fact to a decrease of the diffusion layer's size and thus to the current's increase. Since the high capacitive current interferes with the sensitive faradaic current (proportional to the analyte concentration in the linear domain), the technique's sensitivity is limited [65]. CV is thus usually used to check the state of the sensors' surfaces before and after the functionalization steps.

(p13.1) For more quantitative measurements, potential pulse methods, such as pulse differential voltammetry and square wave voltammetry, are generally used. These methods allow for reducing the contribution of the capacitive current, and thus to increase the sensitivity of the designed sensors.

(p13.2) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is a popular electrochemical technique usually used for quantitative analysis and for the investigation of the reduction and oxidation processes of electroactive species. During the experiment, the capacitive and faradaic currents are combined to get the total measured current. Scan rate is one of the key parameters of this technique, as it controls the "speed" of the applied potential. High scan rate values lead in fact to a decrease of the diffusion layer's size and thus to the current's increase. Since the high capacitive current interferes with the sensitive faradaic current (proportional to the analyte concentration in the linear domain), the technique's sensitivity is limited [65]. CV is thus usually used to check the state of the sensors' surfaces before and after the functionalization steps.

(p13.3) For more quantitative measurements, potential pulse methods, such as pulse differential voltammetry and square wave voltammetry, are generally used. These methods allow for reducing the contribution of the capacitive current, and thus to increase the sensitivity of the designed sensors.
## (s17) Stripping Voltammetry
(p17.0) Stripping (or pre-concentration) techniques have been used to detect cations, some anions and neutral species. The electrochemical procedure is carried out in two or three steps: (i) adsorption of species or their deposition occurs, during a defined time, on the electrode (pre-concentration step). The applied potential is usually controlled or fixed at the open circuit potential; (ii) the sensing electrode with preconcentrated species could be transferred to another analyte-free electrolyte or kept in the same preconcentration medium for next step; and (iii) oxidation or reduction of the accumulated species at the electrode by varying the applied potential and recording a current peak that is proportional to the concentration of these species.

(p17.1) The most commonly used stripping techniques are: (i) anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV), generally used for trace detection of metals such lead, copper, zinc, and cadmium; (ii) adsorption stripping voltammetry (AdSV), commonly used to detect trace amounts of cobalt, nickel, and some organic compounds; and (iii) cathodic stripping voltammetry (CSV) investigated for the detection of ionic species like selenium, sulfide and thiocyanate.

(p17.2) The use of pulse techniques can substantially lower LODs of the ASV technique and increases the sensitivity. The two most commonly used pulse techniques are differential pulse and square wave anodic stripping voltammetry (DPASV and SWASV, respectively). A previous work describes in more detail these different techniques for the analysis of heavy metals [68].

(p17.3) Stripping (or pre-concentration) techniques have been used to detect cations, some anions and neutral species. The electrochemical procedure is carried out in two or three steps: (i) adsorption of species or their deposition occurs, during a defined time, on the electrode (pre-concentration step). The applied potential is usually controlled or fixed at the open circuit potential; (ii) the sensing electrode with preconcentrated species could be transferred to another analyte-free electrolyte or kept in the same preconcentration medium for next step; and (iii) oxidation or reduction of the accumulated species at the electrode by varying the applied potential and recording a current peak that is proportional to the concentration of these species.

(p17.4) The most commonly used stripping techniques are: (i) anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV), generally used for trace detection of metals such lead, copper, zinc, and cadmium; (ii) adsorption stripping voltammetry (AdSV), commonly used to detect trace amounts of cobalt, nickel, and some organic compounds; and (iii) cathodic stripping voltammetry (CSV) investigated for the detection of ionic species like selenium, sulfide and thiocyanate.

(p17.5) The use of pulse techniques can substantially lower LODs of the ASV technique and increases the sensitivity. The two most commonly used pulse techniques are differential pulse and square wave anodic stripping voltammetry (DPASV and SWASV, respectively). A previous work describes in more detail these different techniques for the analysis of heavy metals [68].
## (s20) Pesticide Imprinted Vinylic Polymers (PIVPs)
(p20.0) The literature reported the design of MIP based electrochemical sensors for selective detection of cypermethrin (CPM), a synthetic pyrethroid pesticide widely used in agriculture and spot treatment for insects' control. CPM may, however, induce neurotoxicity by modulating the level of gamma-amino butyric acid [96]. Leepheng et al. [97] designed a molecularly imprinted electrochemical sensor for CPM detection in vegetable juice. In this work, the authors used methyl methacrylate (MMA), ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EDGMA), AIBN, as the functional monomer, the cross-linker and the initiator, respectively. The polymerization was carried-out at 70 • C for 2 h. This step was followed by dropping CPM-MIP onto screen-printed electrodes (SPE) at a controlled temperature of 60 • C for 90 min. The templates were removed by ethanol and deionized water. Cyclic voltammetry measurements indicate that the CPM-MIP/SPE sensor presents an LOD of 15 ppb and a sensitivity of 0.094 µA·ppm −1 .

(p20.1) Cypermethrin (CYP in this study) detection was also reported by Li et al. [98] who prepared a solution of Ag-N@ZnO/CHAC from coconut husk (CHAC), dropped it on the surface of a glassy carbon electrode and dried it under infrared lamp, prior to the MIP electro-polymerization. Two functional monomers were investigated in this study: resorcinol and dopamine. CYP extraction was performed by the immersion of the coated electrode in 0.1 M NaOH and by scanning between −1.0 V and +1.0 V for 10 cycles. CV measurements were performed to investigate the effects of double monomers use, to optimize the ratio between template and monomers, to determine the analytical performances of the sensor and for selectivity tests. The designed MIP based sensor was selective of CYP and presents an LOD on the order of 6.7 × 10 −14 M. Glyphosate (Gly), a synthetic herbicide, is probably the most widely used pesticide worldwide. In 2015, the World Health Organization's International Agency for Research on Cancer classified glyphosate as potentially carcinogenic to humans. This health concern has motivated the realization of numerous chemical sensors to track glyphosate in water samples, soil, air and body fluids. In the field of MIP-based electrochemical sensors, Zouaoui et al. [99] designed a sensitive and selective sensor, in which a chitosan (CS)-Gly-MIP was electrodeposited, by cyclic voltammetry (from −1.5 to 0.5 V at a scan rate of 80 mV/s) onto a gold microelectrode surface. Cross-linking of the polymeric matrix was performed by incubating the (GLY +CS)/Au in a solution of H 2 SO 4 for 1 h. Gly template extraction was done by incubating the microelectrodes in a protic solution acetic acid/methanol (1:1, v/v) for 30 min. The sensing properties of the designed sensor were followed-up by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry. Results indicate an LOD of 0.001 pg/mL and a linear range from 0.31 pg/mL to 50 ng/mL.
## (s21) Pesticide Imprinted Conductive Polymers (PICPs)
(p21.0) Dong et al. [109] reported an electrochemical AChE biosensor based on microporous organic polymers (MOP) for methyl parathion and paraoxon detection in lettuce samples. Herein, phloroglucinol-based MOP was prepared via simple microwave synthesis and then drop coated onto the surface of a carbon paste electrode. AChE was then added and subsequently immobilized by Nafion. The synthesis process and detection procedure are displayed in Figure 12. DPV electrochemical results were related to the oxidation of thiocholine, produced from ATCI hydrolysis in the presence of AChE. The limits of detection for methyl parathion and paraoxon were of the order of 1.5 × 10 −13 g·mL −1 and 3.4 × 10 −14 g·mL −1 , respectively. The linear ranges varied between 5.0 × 10 −13 to 1.0 × 10 −8 g·mL −1 for methyl parathion and from 1.0 × 10 −13 to 1.0 × 10 −9 g·mL −1 for paraoxon.

(p21.1) Yassa et al. [110] modified a graphite electrode with thienopyrrole based conjugated poly{1-(5-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo{1,2-b:4,5-b'}dithiophen-2-yl)furan-2yl)-5-(2-ethylhexyl)-3-(furan-2-yl)-4H thieno{3,4-c}pyrrole-4,6(5H)-dione} (PFTBDT) and carbon dots (CDs) for the detection of catechol phenolic compounds used in pesticide synthesis. In this study, PFTBDT was synthesized via Stille polycondensation reaction and then coated on a CD's modified electrode. This step was followed by the immobilization of laccase enzyme onto the modified electrode, using glutaraldehyde 1% as a cross-linker agent. Several parameters were optimized in this study, such as the amounts of carbon dots, of PFTBDT, of enzyme and the pH of the operating media. Amperometric measurements indicate that the proposed biosensor exhibits an LOD of 1.23 µM, a sensitivity of 737.4 µA·mM −1 ·cm −2 and a wide range between 1.25 to 175 µM.

(p21.2) Akdag et al. [111] designed an electrochemical AChE biosensor for paraoxon detection using polypyrrole and chitosan modified platinum (Pt) electrode. The authors electropolymerized pyrrole monomers, by cyclic voltammetry, on platinum electrode (Pt/PPy) and then coated it with a chitosan solution. The chi/Pt/PPy modified electrode was after that incubated in a buffer solution containing glutaraldehyde in order to immobilize the AChE enzyme. The sensing properties of the biosensor were monitored by DPV. LOD was of the order of 0.17 nM, and the sensor exhibited 72% of stability after 60 days.

(p21.3) Kondawar et al. [112] modified a graphite electrode surface with two layers of conducting polymers to design an AChE biosensor for Acephate quantification. In this study, pyrrole monomers were first electrochemically deposited by CV, in the −0.6-0.9 V range for 10 cycles at scan rate 50 mV/s, onto a graphite electrode. Subsequently, aniline with CNTs was electropolymerized by CV on the polypyrrole modified graphite electrode surface, prior to the immobilization of AChE. Chronoamperometry results indicated that the biosensor presents an LOD of 0.007 ppm.

(p21.4) Turan et al. [113] designed a butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) amperometric biosensor for the quantitative determination of paraoxon in milk and tap water. In this work, bis(octyloxy)-di(thieno-thiophen-2-yl)benzooxoadiazole (TTBO) was electropolymerized, by cyclic voltammetry, on a graphite electrode surface prior to the immobilization of silver nanowires (AgNWs) and then BChE. Glutaraldehyde was used to improve the electron transfer, the sensitivity and the selectivity towards paraoxon. The poly(TTBO)/AgNWs/ BChE biosensor revealed an LOD 0.212 µM and a sensitivity of 8.076 µA µM −1 cm −2 .

(p21.5) Guler et al. [114] constructed a conducting polymer on a GCE for the quantification of malathion in parsley leaf samples. The working electrode consisted of poly(terthiophene-3carbaldehyde) (PTT) electrosynthesized on GCE by cyclic voltammetry (in the range from 0.8 to 1.5 V). After that, AChE was immobilized on the PTT film surface and covalently cross-linked by glutaraldehyde. The biosensor response was dependent on the oxidation of thiocholine, which is the hydrolysis compound of acetylthiocholine iodide, catalyzed by AChE activity. CV electrochemical results indicated that the LOD was of the order of 4.08 nM and that the sensitivity and the recovery were equal to 183.2 µA/mM and 97%, respectively.

(p21.6) Bhardwaj et al. [115] designed an immunosensing platform on the basis of a thin film assembly of Cu-MOF (Cu 3 (BTC) 2 @SiO 2 ) and 2-amino terephthalic acid (NH 2 -BDC) doped polyaniline (PANI) to detect traces of atrazine. In this study, the conducting film was synthesized by mixing NH 2 −BDC and aniline monomers in an ice bath and then by spin-casting the mixture onto a four electrode sensor surfaces. This step was followed by the spin-casting of Cu 3 (BTC) 2 @SiO 2 on BDC-PANI electrode surface and by annealing at 100 • C to establish a good bonding. The modified thin film was then bioconjugated with anti-atrazine antibodies. This immunosensor was reproducible and reliable and exhibited an LOD of 0.01 nM.

(p21.7) Salih et al. [116] modified the surface of a carbon paste electrode (CPE) with pphenylenediamine (p-PD) conducting polymer and ionic liquid (IL) for carbaryl detection in spring water and fruit samples. In this work, different amounts of IL were mixed with graphite and paraffin oil to fabricate IL modified carbon paste electrode (IL/CPE). Two p-PD electropolymerization strategies on IL/CPE surfaces were investigated: (i) by cyclic voltammetry in the range −0.4 to 0.8 V for 40 cycles; and by (ii) potentiostatic mode at a fixed potential 0.7 V during 120 s. Several experimental conditions were tested and optimized: the ionic liquid ratio in paraffin oil, the number of polymerization cycles, pH and the preconcentration duration. DPV results indicated that the poly-pPDs-IL/CPE sensor presents an LOD of 0.09 mmol·L −1 and reasonable recovery values between 96 to 117.4%. Table 4 reports characteristics and sensing properties of shortlisted imprinted systems designed for the selective detection of pesticides. Outstanding LODs are reported, i.e., in the sub-nanomolar or in near picomolar regime. Chitosan-based imprinted materials seem to permit reaching extreme LOD values.   

(p21.8) Dong et al. [109] reported an electrochemical AChE biosensor based on microporous organic polymers (MOP) for methyl parathion and paraoxon detection in lettuce samples. Herein, phloroglucinol-based MOP was prepared via simple microwave synthesis and then drop coated onto the surface of a carbon paste electrode. AChE was then added and subsequently immobilized by Nafion. The synthesis process and detection procedure are displayed in Figure 12. DPV electrochemical results were related to the oxidation of thiocholine, produced from ATCI hydrolysis in the presence of AChE. The limits of detection for methyl parathion and paraoxon were of the order of 1.5 × 10 −13 g·mL −1 and 3.4 × 10 −14 g·mL −1 , respectively. The linear ranges varied between 5.0 × 10 −13 to 1.0 × 10 −8 g·mL −1 for methyl parathion and from 1.0 × 10 −13 to 1.0 × 10 −9 g·mL −1 for paraoxon.

(p21.9) Yassa et al. [110] modified a graphite electrode with thienopyrrole based conjugated poly{1-(5-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo{1,2-b:4,5-b'}dithiophen-2-yl)furan-2yl)-5-(2-ethylhexyl)-3-(furan-2-yl)-4H thieno{3,4-c}pyrrole-4,6(5H)-dione} (PFTBDT) and carbon dots (CDs) for the detection of catechol phenolic compounds used in pesticide synthesis. In this study, PFTBDT was synthesized via Stille polycondensation reaction and then coated on a CD's modified electrode. This step was followed by the immobilization of laccase enzyme onto the modified electrode, using glutaraldehyde 1% as a cross-linker agent. Several parameters were optimized in this study, such as the amounts of carbon dots, of PFTBDT, of enzyme and the pH of the operating media. Amperometric measurements indicate that the proposed biosensor exhibits an LOD of 1.23 µM, a sensitivity of 737.4 µA·mM −1 ·cm −2 and a wide range between 1.25 to 175 µM.

(p21.10) Akdag et al. [111] designed an electrochemical AChE biosensor for paraoxon detection using polypyrrole and chitosan modified platinum (Pt) electrode. The authors electropolymerized pyrrole monomers, by cyclic voltammetry, on platinum electrode (Pt/PPy) and then coated it with a chitosan solution. The chi/Pt/PPy modified electrode was after that incubated in a buffer solution containing glutaraldehyde in order to immobilize the AChE enzyme. The sensing properties of the biosensor were monitored by DPV. LOD was of the order of 0.17 nM, and the sensor exhibited 72% of stability after 60 days.

(p21.11) Kondawar et al. [112] modified a graphite electrode surface with two layers of conducting polymers to design an AChE biosensor for Acephate quantification. In this study, pyrrole monomers were first electrochemically deposited by CV, in the −0.6-0.9 V range for 10 cycles at scan rate 50 mV/s, onto a graphite electrode. Subsequently, aniline with CNTs was electropolymerized by CV on the polypyrrole modified graphite electrode surface, prior to the immobilization of AChE. Chronoamperometry results indicated that the biosensor presents an LOD of 0.007 ppm.

(p21.12) Turan et al. [113] designed a butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) amperometric biosensor for the quantitative determination of paraoxon in milk and tap water. In this work, bis(octyloxy)-di(thieno-thiophen-2-yl)benzooxoadiazole (TTBO) was electropolymerized, by cyclic voltammetry, on a graphite electrode surface prior to the immobilization of silver nanowires (AgNWs) and then BChE. Glutaraldehyde was used to improve the electron transfer, the sensitivity and the selectivity towards paraoxon. The poly(TTBO)/AgNWs/ BChE biosensor revealed an LOD 0.212 µM and a sensitivity of 8.076 µA µM −1 cm −2 .

(p21.13) Guler et al. [114] constructed a conducting polymer on a GCE for the quantification of malathion in parsley leaf samples. The working electrode consisted of poly(terthiophene-3carbaldehyde) (PTT) electrosynthesized on GCE by cyclic voltammetry (in the range from 0.8 to 1.5 V). After that, AChE was immobilized on the PTT film surface and covalently cross-linked by glutaraldehyde. The biosensor response was dependent on the oxidation of thiocholine, which is the hydrolysis compound of acetylthiocholine iodide, catalyzed by AChE activity. CV electrochemical results indicated that the LOD was of the order of 4.08 nM and that the sensitivity and the recovery were equal to 183.2 µA/mM and 97%, respectively.

(p21.14) Bhardwaj et al. [115] designed an immunosensing platform on the basis of a thin film assembly of Cu-MOF (Cu 3 (BTC) 2 @SiO 2 ) and 2-amino terephthalic acid (NH 2 -BDC) doped polyaniline (PANI) to detect traces of atrazine. In this study, the conducting film was synthesized by mixing NH 2 −BDC and aniline monomers in an ice bath and then by spin-casting the mixture onto a four electrode sensor surfaces. This step was followed by the spin-casting of Cu 3 (BTC) 2 @SiO 2 on BDC-PANI electrode surface and by annealing at 100 • C to establish a good bonding. The modified thin film was then bioconjugated with anti-atrazine antibodies. This immunosensor was reproducible and reliable and exhibited an LOD of 0.01 nM.

(p21.15) Salih et al. [116] modified the surface of a carbon paste electrode (CPE) with pphenylenediamine (p-PD) conducting polymer and ionic liquid (IL) for carbaryl detection in spring water and fruit samples. In this work, different amounts of IL were mixed with graphite and paraffin oil to fabricate IL modified carbon paste electrode (IL/CPE). Two p-PD electropolymerization strategies on IL/CPE surfaces were investigated: (i) by cyclic voltammetry in the range −0.4 to 0.8 V for 40 cycles; and by (ii) potentiostatic mode at a fixed potential 0.7 V during 120 s. Several experimental conditions were tested and optimized: the ionic liquid ratio in paraffin oil, the number of polymerization cycles, pH and the preconcentration duration. DPV results indicated that the poly-pPDs-IL/CPE sensor presents an LOD of 0.09 mmol·L −1 and reasonable recovery values between 96 to 117.4%. Table 4 reports characteristics and sensing properties of shortlisted imprinted systems designed for the selective detection of pesticides. Outstanding LODs are reported, i.e., in the sub-nanomolar or in near picomolar regime. Chitosan-based imprinted materials seem to permit reaching extreme LOD values.   
## (s25) Ion Imprinted Conductive Polymers (IICPs)
(p25.0) Electrically conductive polymers are ideal for electrochemical applications because they do not require nanostructuration with carbon or metal to impart conductivity, and could be directly prepared on electrode surfaces within seconds to few minutes. They could also be prepared by precipitation oxidative polymerization in less than 2 h at RT, particularly polypyrrole. However, despite their physicochemical properties, they are only seldom applied for making imprinted polymer-based electrochemical sensors for the selective detection of metal ions. Recently, some of us summarized the findings on polypyrrole-based electrochemical sensors including ion imprinted polypyrroles [68]. Herein, we concentrate on the recent progress in the domain of ion imprinted conductive polymers, mainly polypyrrole, polyaniline and poly(phenylene diamine).

(p25.1) Before we summarize the recent progress on ion imprinted conductive polymers (IICPs), we would like to stress again that, contrary to vinylic polymers, CPs have rigid structure and crosslinkers are quasi never employed. Despite the remarkable progress in the domain of imprinted polymers, little information is available on ion imprinted conjugated polymers for electroanalysis of heavy metal ions. Handpicked examples of recent IICPs are reported in Table 5 including an attractive study of imprinted EDTAlike PPy. In the latter, the teams of Rivas and Moutet explored the propensity of sensors based on PPy/EDTA-like films for selectively detecting Hg(II), Pb(II), Cd(II) and Cu(II) (Figure 15). The Cd(II)-imprinted conductive films were effectively selective towards Cd(II) over other competing metal ions in metal ion mixtures [126].       (Drinking or river water) [132]     Whilst pyrrole derivative bearing ligands are interesting, they might request synthesis efforts as in the case of chelatant-bearing vinylic monomers. For this reason, pyrrole can be polymerized in the presence of metal ions and ligands/chelators. Some used, in this regard, L-cystein and acrylic acid which served both as co-dopants and ligands [127]. The resulting ion imprinted polymer permitted to achieve picomolar LOD for a lead as reported by Ait-Touchente et al. [14]. This is the lowest LOD ever reported for Hg(II) detection. Figure 16 schematically illustrates the making of nanostructured Hg(II) ion imprinted polypyrrole coated on ZnO nanorods that were vertically aligned on arylated gold electrodes. 

(p25.2) Electrically conductive polymers are ideal for electrochemical applications because they do not require nanostructuration with carbon or metal to impart conductivity, and could be directly prepared on electrode surfaces within seconds to few minutes. They could also be prepared by precipitation oxidative polymerization in less than 2 h at RT, particularly polypyrrole. However, despite their physicochemical properties, they are only seldom applied for making imprinted polymer-based electrochemical sensors for the selective detection of metal ions. Recently, some of us summarized the findings on polypyrrole-based electrochemical sensors including ion imprinted polypyrroles [68]. Herein, we concentrate on the recent progress in the domain of ion imprinted conductive polymers, mainly polypyrrole, polyaniline and poly(phenylene diamine).

(p25.3) Before we summarize the recent progress on ion imprinted conductive polymers (IICPs), we would like to stress again that, contrary to vinylic polymers, CPs have rigid structure and crosslinkers are quasi never employed. Despite the remarkable progress in the domain of imprinted polymers, little information is available on ion imprinted conjugated polymers for electroanalysis of heavy metal ions. Handpicked examples of recent IICPs are reported in Table 5 including an attractive study of imprinted EDTAlike PPy. In the latter, the teams of Rivas and Moutet explored the propensity of sensors based on PPy/EDTA-like films for selectively detecting Hg(II), Pb(II), Cd(II) and Cu(II) (Figure 15). The Cd(II)-imprinted conductive films were effectively selective towards Cd(II) over other competing metal ions in metal ion mixtures [126].       (Drinking or river water) [132]     Whilst pyrrole derivative bearing ligands are interesting, they might request synthesis efforts as in the case of chelatant-bearing vinylic monomers. For this reason, pyrrole can be polymerized in the presence of metal ions and ligands/chelators. Some used, in this regard, L-cystein and acrylic acid which served both as co-dopants and ligands [127]. The resulting ion imprinted polymer permitted to achieve picomolar LOD for a lead as reported by Ait-Touchente et al. [14]. This is the lowest LOD ever reported for Hg(II) detection. Figure 16 schematically illustrates the making of nanostructured Hg(II) ion imprinted polypyrrole coated on ZnO nanorods that were vertically aligned on arylated gold electrodes. 
## (s28) Detection of Copper Ions Cu(II)
(p28.0) Copper ions were detected using copper imprinted sol-gel [128] bearing N1-(3-(trimeth oxysilyl)propyl)diethylenetriamine (TPDT), which has the property of complexing copper ions with its diethylenetriamine group. The first step of IIP synthesis was the synthesis of ligand-functionalized silane. After complexation of Cu(II) for 24 h, the gel was crosslinked at reflux and washed to leach the Cu(II). This resulted in a copper ion imprinted sol-gel material ( Figure 17) that served for making carbon paste electrode to track Cu(II) in tap water. LOD and sensitivity depended on pre-concentration time, optimally set at 1800 s. If LOD remains in the sub-micromolar regime, it is interesting to note that this IISG did not require any crosslinker such as TEOS and the synthesized TPDT silane was sufficient to make a 3D imprinted network. Interference studies have been done with Fe(II), Zn(II), Pb(II) and Ni(II). Another feature was the selectivity of the IISG to copper over Ni(II), Zn(II) and Pb(II). 

(p28.1) Copper ions were detected using copper imprinted sol-gel [128] bearing N1-(3-(trimeth oxysilyl)propyl)diethylenetriamine (TPDT), which has the property of complexing copper ions with its diethylenetriamine group. The first step of IIP synthesis was the synthesis of ligand-functionalized silane. After complexation of Cu(II) for 24 h, the gel was crosslinked at reflux and washed to leach the Cu(II). This resulted in a copper ion imprinted sol-gel material ( Figure 17) that served for making carbon paste electrode to track Cu(II) in tap water. LOD and sensitivity depended on pre-concentration time, optimally set at 1800 s. If LOD remains in the sub-micromolar regime, it is interesting to note that this IISG did not require any crosslinker such as TEOS and the synthesized TPDT silane was sufficient to make a 3D imprinted network. Interference studies have been done with Fe(II), Zn(II), Pb(II) and Ni(II). Another feature was the selectivity of the IISG to copper over Ni(II), Zn(II) and Pb(II). 
## (s29) Detection of Cadmium Ions Cd(II)
(p29.0) In a similar study, CPE was prepared with cadmium imprinted sol-gel [129]. 3-(2-(2aminoethylamino)ethylamino)propyl-tri methoxysilane (AAAPTS) was used as functional monomer, epichlorohydrin as a cross-linker and Cd(II) ions as a template; TEOS was used for the sol-gel process ( Figure 18). The reaction of epichlorhydrin with the NH groups opens the epoxy ring and yields OH groups which enhance the hydrophilic character of the imprinted gel. After washing off Cd(II) with HCl, the final IIP was obtained as fine powder and mixed with carbon. CPE was employed to track Cd(II) in aqueous solutions prepared in lab, and in environmental water samples. The IISP had an LOD of 0.15 µg Cd.L −1 , the linear range was 0.5-40 µg·L −1 and exhibited outstanding selectivity despite 30 to 100 fold more concentrated competitive metal ions. Indeed, no loss in recovery of Cd(II) was noted in the presence of other ions. An interesting IISG has been proposed by Güney and Güney [130] with rarely employed 3-isocyanatopropyl trimethoxysilane (ICTMS) that was reacted with 3-aminoquinoline in order to obtain a functional silylated monomer bearing a quinolone ligand ( Figure 19). The latter was crosslinked using tetramethylorthoxysilicate (TMOS) in the presence of UO 2 (II). A CPE was made by mixing the UO 2 (II)-imprinted sol-gel with carbon powder. The CPE exhibited an LOD of 3.07 × 10 −10 mol·L −1 ; the linear range was 2.0 × 10 −9 -3.0 × 10 −7 mol·L −1 . The sensor could be used to selectively detect uranyl in tap, pond and waste waters, with good recovery. Figure 19. Synthesis of IISG from quinolone-functionalized silane, TMOS and uranyl. Adapted with permission of Elsevier from [130].

(p29.1) In a similar study, CPE was prepared with cadmium imprinted sol-gel [129]. 3-(2-(2aminoethylamino)ethylamino)propyl-tri methoxysilane (AAAPTS) was used as functional monomer, epichlorohydrin as a cross-linker and Cd(II) ions as a template; TEOS was used for the sol-gel process ( Figure 18). The reaction of epichlorhydrin with the NH groups opens the epoxy ring and yields OH groups which enhance the hydrophilic character of the imprinted gel. After washing off Cd(II) with HCl, the final IIP was obtained as fine powder and mixed with carbon. CPE was employed to track Cd(II) in aqueous solutions prepared in lab, and in environmental water samples. The IISP had an LOD of 0.15 µg Cd.L −1 , the linear range was 0.5-40 µg·L −1 and exhibited outstanding selectivity despite 30 to 100 fold more concentrated competitive metal ions. Indeed, no loss in recovery of Cd(II) was noted in the presence of other ions. An interesting IISG has been proposed by Güney and Güney [130] with rarely employed 3-isocyanatopropyl trimethoxysilane (ICTMS) that was reacted with 3-aminoquinoline in order to obtain a functional silylated monomer bearing a quinolone ligand ( Figure 19). The latter was crosslinked using tetramethylorthoxysilicate (TMOS) in the presence of UO 2 (II). A CPE was made by mixing the UO 2 (II)-imprinted sol-gel with carbon powder. The CPE exhibited an LOD of 3.07 × 10 −10 mol·L −1 ; the linear range was 2.0 × 10 −9 -3.0 × 10 −7 mol·L −1 . The sensor could be used to selectively detect uranyl in tap, pond and waste waters, with good recovery. Figure 19. Synthesis of IISG from quinolone-functionalized silane, TMOS and uranyl. Adapted with permission of Elsevier from [130].
## (s30) Detection of Europium Eu 3+
(p30.0) Europium is a reactive rare earth. The increasing applications of this element in the domain of industrial applications, material science, electronic engineering and life science raised toxilogy concerns, hence its traceability using IIPs [131].

(p30.1) The working electrode consisted of an SPE, coated with electrosynthesized polycatechol (PC), a signal amplifying element, and an IISG (Figure 20). The signal-amplifying element PC bears hydroxyl groups and oxygen which could coordinate Eu 3+ , therefore improving the sensitivity and selectivity of Eu 3+ IISG. The ion-imprinted sol-gel solution was prepared using TEOS, phenyltrimethoxysilane (PTMOS), methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMOS) and Eu 3+ solution. Note, however, that no reason was found to justify PTMOS and MTMOS silanes besides the TEOS crosslinker. The characterization of the fabricated electrode was performed by CV and EIS. Results show clear differences before and after Eu 3+ removal: the current is weak and the resistance is strong before removal; after removal, a redox peak on CV was noted, and the resistance decreased significantly. A clear difference between the IIP with and without PC has been observed: the peak current is nearly twice as strong for the IIP with PC, hence the effective signal amplifying property of PC.

(p30.2) DPASV has been used to determine the LOD and the linear range, and they are respectively 1.0 × 10 −7 mol·L −1 and 0.3-1000 µmol·L −1 . The sensor was found to be selective to Eu 3+ over other metal ions. Indeed, peak current did not show any significant changes with the presence of competitive ions such as Ni 2+ , Co 2+ , Cu 2+ , Fe 3+ or Gd 3+ .

(p30.3) The detection of Eu(III) was achieved using a bilayer of organic polymer that facilitates electron transfer and a sol-gel imprinted polymer that facilitates selective recognition. Recently, an ion imprinted hybrid polymer system (IIHP) has just been described, and consisted of imprinted, crosslinked vinylic polymers and sol-gel. -SH from MPS and the imidazole group from the vinylic functional monomer have a synergetic effect of Cd(II) complexation [132]. Each system (organic or sol-gel) had its own functional and crosslinker monomers (see Table 5), but 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate served as a coupling reagent for organic and inorganic phases. Indeed, it is a bifunctional molecule enabling involvement in radical polymerization via the methacrylate end, and involved in sol-gel synthesis via the the trimethoxysilyl part. This sensor is certainly robust and highly selective; however, DPASV did not show any striking difference between the carbon paste electrode prepared from graphite powder only, and those prepared with IIHP and NIHP. The decreasing trend of the current intensity was CPE-IIHP (100 µA) > CPE-NIHP (80 µA) > CPE (55 µA). Table 5 summarizes the experimental conditions for the synthesis of ion imprinted polymers as thin films or nanocomposites. An organic medium is required for vinylic polymers, whilst water/alcohol usually is considered for sol-gels. Conductive polymers require aqueous media, which is interesting in this respect, making the process "greener" and energy saving since the synthesis is usually conducted at RT. There is no clear trend related to electrosensing; DPV and SWV seem to be randomly employed and return excellent LODs. From the shortlisted case studies, obviously CPEs are the most investigated electrodes and one should expect their tremendous development in the near future by "Imprinters".

(p30.4) Europium is a reactive rare earth. The increasing applications of this element in the domain of industrial applications, material science, electronic engineering and life science raised toxilogy concerns, hence its traceability using IIPs [131].

(p30.5) The working electrode consisted of an SPE, coated with electrosynthesized polycatechol (PC), a signal amplifying element, and an IISG (Figure 20). The signal-amplifying element PC bears hydroxyl groups and oxygen which could coordinate Eu 3+ , therefore improving the sensitivity and selectivity of Eu 3+ IISG. The ion-imprinted sol-gel solution was prepared using TEOS, phenyltrimethoxysilane (PTMOS), methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMOS) and Eu 3+ solution. Note, however, that no reason was found to justify PTMOS and MTMOS silanes besides the TEOS crosslinker. The characterization of the fabricated electrode was performed by CV and EIS. Results show clear differences before and after Eu 3+ removal: the current is weak and the resistance is strong before removal; after removal, a redox peak on CV was noted, and the resistance decreased significantly. A clear difference between the IIP with and without PC has been observed: the peak current is nearly twice as strong for the IIP with PC, hence the effective signal amplifying property of PC.

(p30.6) DPASV has been used to determine the LOD and the linear range, and they are respectively 1.0 × 10 −7 mol·L −1 and 0.3-1000 µmol·L −1 . The sensor was found to be selective to Eu 3+ over other metal ions. Indeed, peak current did not show any significant changes with the presence of competitive ions such as Ni 2+ , Co 2+ , Cu 2+ , Fe 3+ or Gd 3+ .

(p30.7) The detection of Eu(III) was achieved using a bilayer of organic polymer that facilitates electron transfer and a sol-gel imprinted polymer that facilitates selective recognition. Recently, an ion imprinted hybrid polymer system (IIHP) has just been described, and consisted of imprinted, crosslinked vinylic polymers and sol-gel. -SH from MPS and the imidazole group from the vinylic functional monomer have a synergetic effect of Cd(II) complexation [132]. Each system (organic or sol-gel) had its own functional and crosslinker monomers (see Table 5), but 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate served as a coupling reagent for organic and inorganic phases. Indeed, it is a bifunctional molecule enabling involvement in radical polymerization via the methacrylate end, and involved in sol-gel synthesis via the the trimethoxysilyl part. This sensor is certainly robust and highly selective; however, DPASV did not show any striking difference between the carbon paste electrode prepared from graphite powder only, and those prepared with IIHP and NIHP. The decreasing trend of the current intensity was CPE-IIHP (100 µA) > CPE-NIHP (80 µA) > CPE (55 µA). Table 5 summarizes the experimental conditions for the synthesis of ion imprinted polymers as thin films or nanocomposites. An organic medium is required for vinylic polymers, whilst water/alcohol usually is considered for sol-gels. Conductive polymers require aqueous media, which is interesting in this respect, making the process "greener" and energy saving since the synthesis is usually conducted at RT. There is no clear trend related to electrosensing; DPV and SWV seem to be randomly employed and return excellent LODs. From the shortlisted case studies, obviously CPEs are the most investigated electrodes and one should expect their tremendous development in the near future by "Imprinters".
## (s33) Whole Cell Imprinting
(p33.0) Escherichia coli (E. coli) is a rod shaped bacterium; it is normally harmless to humans and can generally be found in their intestines. However, a few varieties can cause diseases such as abdominal cramps, bloody diarrhea and vomiting. These can be found in contaminated water or food. Jafari et al. [137] proposed an electrochemical sensor in which the sensing layer is a polymer layer synthetized by sol-gel method; bacteria are added to the fresh sol solution at the end of the process. Tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) has been used as the monomer for the polymerization; it also serves as a crosslinker. EIS measurements were done with the following parameters: amplitude of 10 mV at open circuit potential with a frequency range of 100 kHz-0.1 Hz. Results showed good selectivity when the recognition of E. coli and S. aureus (a spherical bacteria) was compared: when the sensor captures the corresponding bacteria, the charge transfer resistance increases; in the case of S. aureus, the change of signal is greatly reduced. The same is true for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, another rod shaped bacterium. The performance of impedimetric sensor for E.coli is lower than other impedimetric sensor using anti-E. coli antibodies, but it has a low cost and low LOD. The authors have chosen the whole cell imprinting technique. This raises the issue of bacteria extraction from the in situ synthesized MIP film; as one can see in Figure 21, the washing of imprinted bacteria seems to seriously damage the imprinted sites. 

(p33.1) Escherichia coli (E. coli) is a rod shaped bacterium; it is normally harmless to humans and can generally be found in their intestines. However, a few varieties can cause diseases such as abdominal cramps, bloody diarrhea and vomiting. These can be found in contaminated water or food. Jafari et al. [137] proposed an electrochemical sensor in which the sensing layer is a polymer layer synthetized by sol-gel method; bacteria are added to the fresh sol solution at the end of the process. Tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) has been used as the monomer for the polymerization; it also serves as a crosslinker. EIS measurements were done with the following parameters: amplitude of 10 mV at open circuit potential with a frequency range of 100 kHz-0.1 Hz. Results showed good selectivity when the recognition of E. coli and S. aureus (a spherical bacteria) was compared: when the sensor captures the corresponding bacteria, the charge transfer resistance increases; in the case of S. aureus, the change of signal is greatly reduced. The same is true for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, another rod shaped bacterium. The performance of impedimetric sensor for E.coli is lower than other impedimetric sensor using anti-E. coli antibodies, but it has a low cost and low LOD. The authors have chosen the whole cell imprinting technique. This raises the issue of bacteria extraction from the in situ synthesized MIP film; as one can see in Figure 21, the washing of imprinted bacteria seems to seriously damage the imprinted sites. 
## (s34) Bacterial Surface Imprinting
(p34.0) As noted from the SEM picture above (Figure 21b), the imprinting of whole bacteria is not well adapted due to the size of the template; however, the imprinting of the surface or of a portion of bacteria is possible and a better option ( Figure 22). Sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB) are anaerobic microorganisms naturally present in environmental sources such as soil, sea or river. They obtain their energy by reducing sulfate to sulfite, which is a highly corrosive and toxic substance. An imprinted chitosan-based electrochemical sensor has been fabricated in this regard by Qi et al. [63]. Chitosan (CS) becomes insoluble if the pH of the solution is higher than 6.3. In order to coat this biopolymer on the electrode surface, a potential was applied on the cathode in order to reduce H + to H 2 , thus making the pH reach the threshold for deposition. Then, SRB bacteria were coated on the surface of the biopolymer film; only a part of the surface of SRB was imprinted. However, the washing of bacteria after imprinting can induce enlargement or deformation of the prints (the recognition sites). The impedimetric measurements show very good selectivity for SRB over the other S. aureus, M. luteus, V. alginolyticus and V. anguillarum bacteria as demonstrated in Figure 22.  Figure 23 shows Nyquist plots for bioimprinted ITO before and after attachment of several bacteria (Figure 23a). As the receptor sites were shaped by SRB, this bacterium is recognized most. The Nyquist plot, for bioemprinted ITO with adsorbed SRB, shows the largest semi-circle on the Z' axis. The difference between Z' values for ITO, with and without bacteria, indicates resistance to charge transfer (∆R ct ). It is the largest value for SRB because the sensor is indeed selective towards this bacterium (Figure 23b). This type of sensor is based on the size and shape of the bacteria, but the recognition site is fragile; a study on its reusability would be interesting, as one knows that biological bio-recognition elements, for example antibodies, can easily be damaged.

(p34.1) As noted from the SEM picture above (Figure 21b), the imprinting of whole bacteria is not well adapted due to the size of the template; however, the imprinting of the surface or of a portion of bacteria is possible and a better option ( Figure 22). Sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB) are anaerobic microorganisms naturally present in environmental sources such as soil, sea or river. They obtain their energy by reducing sulfate to sulfite, which is a highly corrosive and toxic substance. An imprinted chitosan-based electrochemical sensor has been fabricated in this regard by Qi et al. [63]. Chitosan (CS) becomes insoluble if the pH of the solution is higher than 6.3. In order to coat this biopolymer on the electrode surface, a potential was applied on the cathode in order to reduce H + to H 2 , thus making the pH reach the threshold for deposition. Then, SRB bacteria were coated on the surface of the biopolymer film; only a part of the surface of SRB was imprinted. However, the washing of bacteria after imprinting can induce enlargement or deformation of the prints (the recognition sites). The impedimetric measurements show very good selectivity for SRB over the other S. aureus, M. luteus, V. alginolyticus and V. anguillarum bacteria as demonstrated in Figure 22.  Figure 23 shows Nyquist plots for bioimprinted ITO before and after attachment of several bacteria (Figure 23a). As the receptor sites were shaped by SRB, this bacterium is recognized most. The Nyquist plot, for bioemprinted ITO with adsorbed SRB, shows the largest semi-circle on the Z' axis. The difference between Z' values for ITO, with and without bacteria, indicates resistance to charge transfer (∆R ct ). It is the largest value for SRB because the sensor is indeed selective towards this bacterium (Figure 23b). This type of sensor is based on the size and shape of the bacteria, but the recognition site is fragile; a study on its reusability would be interesting, as one knows that biological bio-recognition elements, for example antibodies, can easily be damaged.
## (s35) Bacterial Protein A Surface Imprinting
(p35.0) Imprinting a part of the surface of a pathogen is more efficient than imprinting a whole cell; however, the target analyte is still too massive to enable recognition by functional groups. This disadvantage can be bypassed if the target analyte is not the whole bacterium, but its corresponding molecules and proteins-for example, a specific surface protein. In this regard, Khan et al. [138] employed protein A as a template protein for making an imprinted polymer for the recognition of Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). 3-aminophenol was electropolymerized by CV on a film of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNCTs) on which a solution of protein A has been deposited. Removal of a protein A (PA) template was done using proteinase K, an enzyme that naturally degrades the former. The fabricated sensor shows good sensitivity when an EIS test with PA and bovine serum albumin (BSA) has been done; however, testing with the surface protein from other bacteria would have given more credit to this work and the efficacy of the sensor in selectively recognizing S. aureus.

(p35.1) Imprinting a part of the surface of a pathogen is more efficient than imprinting a whole cell; however, the target analyte is still too massive to enable recognition by functional groups. This disadvantage can be bypassed if the target analyte is not the whole bacterium, but its corresponding molecules and proteins-for example, a specific surface protein. In this regard, Khan et al. [138] employed protein A as a template protein for making an imprinted polymer for the recognition of Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). 3-aminophenol was electropolymerized by CV on a film of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNCTs) on which a solution of protein A has been deposited. Removal of a protein A (PA) template was done using proteinase K, an enzyme that naturally degrades the former. The fabricated sensor shows good sensitivity when an EIS test with PA and bovine serum albumin (BSA) has been done; however, testing with the surface protein from other bacteria would have given more credit to this work and the efficacy of the sensor in selectively recognizing S. aureus.
## (s36) Imprinting of Bacterial Flagella Proteins
(p36.0) Another strategy is to detect proteins from the flagella of bacteria. This approach is adopted by Khan et al. [139] for the detection of Proteus mirabilis. This bacterium can infect the respiratory tract, urinary tract and open wounds, causing fever and pain. Its flagella permits P. mirabilis to move in biological environments; more importantly, they are specific and thus a means for the identification of this bacterium. Phenol was used as a monomer and electropolymerized by CV (range from −0.2 V to 0.8 V; scan rate 50 mV/s; 15 cycles). The methods of detection are EIS and SWV; results show an excellent response for each method: for EIS, the impedance increases the more the sensing layer captures target molecules. For SWV, the pic current decreases when the concentration of flagella increases (Figure 24a). However, no such changes in the sensor response were noted with the non-imprinted polymer (Figure 24b) The selectivity is also good when the sensor was used for a mixture of flagella/BSA and flagella/PA, and the percentage of deviation in the response caused by interference is small for EIS (<8%) and SVW (<5%). The use of two methods of electrochemical detection enables crosschecking the results and adopting the most suitable strategy of protein detection. 

(p36.1) Another strategy is to detect proteins from the flagella of bacteria. This approach is adopted by Khan et al. [139] for the detection of Proteus mirabilis. This bacterium can infect the respiratory tract, urinary tract and open wounds, causing fever and pain. Its flagella permits P. mirabilis to move in biological environments; more importantly, they are specific and thus a means for the identification of this bacterium. Phenol was used as a monomer and electropolymerized by CV (range from −0.2 V to 0.8 V; scan rate 50 mV/s; 15 cycles). The methods of detection are EIS and SWV; results show an excellent response for each method: for EIS, the impedance increases the more the sensing layer captures target molecules. For SWV, the pic current decreases when the concentration of flagella increases (Figure 24a). However, no such changes in the sensor response were noted with the non-imprinted polymer (Figure 24b) The selectivity is also good when the sensor was used for a mixture of flagella/BSA and flagella/PA, and the percentage of deviation in the response caused by interference is small for EIS (<8%) and SVW (<5%). The use of two methods of electrochemical detection enables crosschecking the results and adopting the most suitable strategy of protein detection. 
## (s37) Bacterial Spore Imprinting
(p37.0) Spores are increasingly investigated for bacteria identification as they are generally released when these latter are under stress. Lahcen et al. [140] have functionalized surfaces of carbon paste electrodes with polypyrrole imprinted polymer for Bacillus cereus spore detection, used as simulant for Bacillus anthracis spores. Polypyrrole films were electropoly-Sensors 2021, 21, 4300 34 of 42 merized by cyclic votammetry (5 scans between −0.7 V and +0.7 V at 100 mV/s), prior to the addition of 10 4 CFU/mL bacterial spores and further electropolymerization for 5 cycles at 100 mV/s. Spores were then removed by sonication for 5 min in distilled water or by incubation in a surfactant.

(p37.1) Several parameters were investigated and optimized, mainly the monomers' concentration, the number of scans, the nature of the extractor, the incubation time and the sonication duration. The designed sensor exhibits a good selectivity towards Bacillus cereus spores and a dynamic range ranging from 10 2 to 10 5 CFU/mL, which makes it suitable for effective measurements of Bacillus cereus spores.

(p37.2) Spores are increasingly investigated for bacteria identification as they are generally released when these latter are under stress. Lahcen et al. [140] have functionalized surfaces of carbon paste electrodes with polypyrrole imprinted polymer for Bacillus cereus spore detection, used as simulant for Bacillus anthracis spores. Polypyrrole films were electropoly-Sensors 2021, 21, 4300 34 of 42 merized by cyclic votammetry (5 scans between −0.7 V and +0.7 V at 100 mV/s), prior to the addition of 10 4 CFU/mL bacterial spores and further electropolymerization for 5 cycles at 100 mV/s. Spores were then removed by sonication for 5 min in distilled water or by incubation in a surfactant.

(p37.3) Several parameters were investigated and optimized, mainly the monomers' concentration, the number of scans, the nature of the extractor, the incubation time and the sonication duration. The designed sensor exhibits a good selectivity towards Bacillus cereus spores and a dynamic range ranging from 10 2 to 10 5 CFU/mL, which makes it suitable for effective measurements of Bacillus cereus spores.
## (s38) Imprinting Quorum Sensing Signaling Molecules
(p38.0) For the detection of the bacterium Aeromonas hydrophila, Jiang et al. [141] chose to imprint N-acryl-homoserine-lactones (AHLs) molecules that can induce the expression of pathogenic factors. AHLs participate in the quorum sensing system (QS), a system that enables communication between bacteria, their gathering and biofilm formation. Quorum sensing plays a key role in determining virulence ( Figure 25). AHL is generally produced at a low concentration; therefore, it is difficult to detect. MIP technology can thus solve this problem owing to the combined high selectivity of MIPs and outstanding sensitivity of electrochemical devices. In this publication, magnetic molecularly imprinted polymers (MMIP) were used as the sensing element. First, Fe 3 O 4 magnetic nanoparticles were prepared using a solvothermal method; then, silica-shell was prepared using TEOS. Subsequently, 3-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxylane (APTES) was used in order to introduce amino groups. Finally, polymerization was performed at the surface of the magnetic nanoparticles with an analogue template protein (DMHF). The detection of AHLs was done as follows: first, MMIP was incubated in a solution of target proteins, after four minutes, magnetic GCE, the working electrode, is introduced in the solution, and the MMIP will attach magnetically to the electrode. When all detection sites of MMIP are occupied, the electron-transfer resistance between the heart of MMIP and the electrode is maximal. This resistance decreases when captured proteins are washed off from MMIP. DPV was the sensing technique; results show that the selectivity of the MMIP was good when tests with DMHF in the presence of structural analogues of AHLs including C4-AHL, C6-AHL, C8-AHL and N-3oxo-C6-HSL were conducted. The electrochemical sensor was found to be stable: a test was conducted with MMIP stored for about three months; no particular changes were noted. Finally, the detection range of AHLs was found to be in the 2.5 × 10 −9 mol·L −1 to 1.0 × 10 −7 mol·L −1 range 5.3.7. Summary of Bacteria Imprinted Polymers Table 6 summarizes shortlisted case studies tackled in this mini-review. It concerns the bacterium under test, the monomer employed to make the MIP, the electrode material, the polymerization technique, the electrochemical technique and the limit of detection. Despite the low number of entries, Table 6 testifies for the rich literature on bacterial sensing using MIP-based electrodes and particularly the numerous strategies for recognizing bacteria without necessarily going through the problematic whole cell imprinting technique. Solutions prepared in lab and spiked; 10 2 to 10 5 cfu/mL LOD = 10 2 cfu/mL [140] Proteus mirabilis (flagella) Phenol Carbon Electropolymerization CV, EIS, SWV Tap water LOD = 0.9 ng/mL [139] Sulfate-reducing bacteria CS ITO/graphene Electrodeposition EIS Solution prepared in lab and spiked; 1 to 10 8 cfu/mL LOD = 0.7.10 4 cfu/mL [63] AP: 3-aminophenol; CS: Chitosan; DMHF: 2,5-dimethyl-4-hydroxy-3(2H)-furanone; MAA: methacrylic acid.

(p38.1) For the detection of the bacterium Aeromonas hydrophila, Jiang et al. [141] chose to imprint N-acryl-homoserine-lactones (AHLs) molecules that can induce the expression of pathogenic factors. AHLs participate in the quorum sensing system (QS), a system that enables communication between bacteria, their gathering and biofilm formation. Quorum sensing plays a key role in determining virulence ( Figure 25). AHL is generally produced at a low concentration; therefore, it is difficult to detect. MIP technology can thus solve this problem owing to the combined high selectivity of MIPs and outstanding sensitivity of electrochemical devices. In this publication, magnetic molecularly imprinted polymers (MMIP) were used as the sensing element. First, Fe 3 O 4 magnetic nanoparticles were prepared using a solvothermal method; then, silica-shell was prepared using TEOS. Subsequently, 3-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxylane (APTES) was used in order to introduce amino groups. Finally, polymerization was performed at the surface of the magnetic nanoparticles with an analogue template protein (DMHF). The detection of AHLs was done as follows: first, MMIP was incubated in a solution of target proteins, after four minutes, magnetic GCE, the working electrode, is introduced in the solution, and the MMIP will attach magnetically to the electrode. When all detection sites of MMIP are occupied, the electron-transfer resistance between the heart of MMIP and the electrode is maximal. This resistance decreases when captured proteins are washed off from MMIP. DPV was the sensing technique; results show that the selectivity of the MMIP was good when tests with DMHF in the presence of structural analogues of AHLs including C4-AHL, C6-AHL, C8-AHL and N-3oxo-C6-HSL were conducted. The electrochemical sensor was found to be stable: a test was conducted with MMIP stored for about three months; no particular changes were noted. Finally, the detection range of AHLs was found to be in the 2.5 × 10 −9 mol·L −1 to 1.0 × 10 −7 mol·L −1 range 5.3.7. Summary of Bacteria Imprinted Polymers Table 6 summarizes shortlisted case studies tackled in this mini-review. It concerns the bacterium under test, the monomer employed to make the MIP, the electrode material, the polymerization technique, the electrochemical technique and the limit of detection. Despite the low number of entries, Table 6 testifies for the rich literature on bacterial sensing using MIP-based electrodes and particularly the numerous strategies for recognizing bacteria without necessarily going through the problematic whole cell imprinting technique. Solutions prepared in lab and spiked; 10 2 to 10 5 cfu/mL LOD = 10 2 cfu/mL [140] Proteus mirabilis (flagella) Phenol Carbon Electropolymerization CV, EIS, SWV Tap water LOD = 0.9 ng/mL [139] Sulfate-reducing bacteria CS ITO/graphene Electrodeposition EIS Solution prepared in lab and spiked; 1 to 10 8 cfu/mL LOD = 0.7.10 4 cfu/mL [63] AP: 3-aminophenol; CS: Chitosan; DMHF: 2,5-dimethyl-4-hydroxy-3(2H)-furanone; MAA: methacrylic acid.
## (s89) Introduction
(p89.0) Human activities revolve around water, be it in industry, chemistry, agriculture or even for living. Therefore, it is quasi unavoidable that water ends up polluted [1]. Water pollution refers to all substances that human activity introduces into water, be it toxic or benign pollutants.

(p89.1) Water depollution is a major issue nowadays; however, in order to eliminate harmful substances, one needs to first characterize and quantify them in order to design appropriate pollutant removal methods, e.g., by adsorption, filtration or degradation. In this sense, the detection of species needs to be accurate and selective. Several methods meet these requirements, but they often require expensive materials and instruments; moreover, the measurement time is a significant criterion. Towards this end, electrochemistry is an excellent means of sensing pollutants because of its high sensitivity (it goes down to the femtomolar regime), selectivity and low cost [2]. Furthermore, the measurements are easy to set up and above all miniaturization is possible so that electrosensing could be directly

(p89.2) Human activities revolve around water, be it in industry, chemistry, agriculture or even for living. Therefore, it is quasi unavoidable that water ends up polluted [1]. Water pollution refers to all substances that human activity introduces into water, be it toxic or benign pollutants.

(p89.3) Water depollution is a major issue nowadays; however, in order to eliminate harmful substances, one needs to first characterize and quantify them in order to design appropriate pollutant removal methods, e.g., by adsorption, filtration or degradation. In this sense, the detection of species needs to be accurate and selective. Several methods meet these requirements, but they often require expensive materials and instruments; moreover, the measurement time is a significant criterion. Towards this end, electrochemistry is an excellent means of sensing pollutants because of its high sensitivity (it goes down to the femtomolar regime), selectivity and low cost [2]. Furthermore, the measurements are easy to set up and above all miniaturization is possible so that electrosensing could be directly
## (s93) Monomers and Polymers
(p93.0) MIPs are synthetized by (co-)polymerization of functional monomers and cross-linkers in the presence of template compounds or microorganisms (Figure 1a). Chelators could be added in the pre-polymerization mixture, in a variety of solvents [26,27]. After synthesis, templates are removed from the crosslinked polymeric matrix or coating, leaving threedimensional cavities which are complementary in terms of shape and functional groups to the targeted compounds or microorganisms. Figure 1b illustrates the concept of molecular imprinting with a picture of a slice of cake cooked with candied fruits. Clearly, the candied fruits leave prints in the cake once removed and the shape fit in well only with the ingredient ("template") used to cook the cake and that has been removed. Part of the cake slice that has no candied fruit corresponds to the non-imprinted polymer (NIP). At the molecular level, shape only does not suffice to have a good sensor; interfacial interactions matter very much, and this is the reason for using functional monomers that tightly bind the template molecules. MIPs were widely used as solid phase extractors and as sensitive recognition elements of chemical and biological sensors [28][29][30]. Imprinted organic and sol-gel polymers can be prepared using a large variety of monomers, the choice depending on the application (Table 2). Table 2. Selected, commercially available monomers frequently employed for making MIPs. Pyrrole is displayed with its corresponding 2D microstructure.

(p93.1) MIPs are synthetized by (co-)polymerization of functional monomers and cross-linkers in the presence of template compounds or microorganisms (Figure 1a). Chelators could be added in the pre-polymerization mixture, in a variety of solvents [26,27]. After synthesis, templates are removed from the crosslinked polymeric matrix or coating, leaving threedimensional cavities which are complementary in terms of shape and functional groups to the targeted compounds or microorganisms. Figure 1b illustrates the concept of molecular imprinting with a picture of a slice of cake cooked with candied fruits. Clearly, the candied fruits leave prints in the cake once removed and the shape fit in well only with the ingredient ("template") used to cook the cake and that has been removed. Part of the cake slice that has no candied fruit corresponds to the non-imprinted polymer (NIP). At the molecular level, shape only does not suffice to have a good sensor; interfacial interactions matter very much, and this is the reason for using functional monomers that tightly bind the template molecules. MIPs were widely used as solid phase extractors and as sensitive recognition elements of chemical and biological sensors [28][29][30]. Imprinted organic and sol-gel polymers can be prepared using a large variety of monomers, the choice depending on the application (Table 2). Table 2. Selected, commercially available monomers frequently employed for making MIPs. Pyrrole is displayed with its corresponding 2D microstructure.
## (s97) Vinylic Imprinted Polymers
(p97.0) Most imprinted vinylic polymer powders, nanocomposites and coatings are prepared via free radical polymerization using AIBN, Irgacure or potassium persulfate. Free radical or photoinduced radical polymerization or controlled photopolymerization (such as photoiniferter [35,36], INItiation-TransFER-TERminaison agent) is ideal as it does not require heating and could be achieved within minutes to a few hours. In the case of grafted imprinted polymers, photopolymerization is unique for its spatiotemporal aspect. The polymer can be grafted on a selected area and growth be controlled with irradiation time. Ion imprinted clay-polymer nanocomposites have recently been prepared by radical photopolymerization under visible [37] or UV light [38] using Type II photoinitiators. For grafted MIP thin films prepared by surface confined photopolymerization, the reader is referred to [39,40]. Figure 3 shows a simplified mechanism of radical polymerization whether it is of the free radical or controlled type. Initiator is activated thermally or photochemically and the initiating radical triggers polymerization of the prepolymerization complex (PCC) to yield, after a few hours or even better a few minutes (in the case of photopolymerization), 3D crosslinked polymers with entrapped template species (T). Precipitation polymerization requires crashing of the former monolith, but, in the case of the synthesis of imprinted thin polymer film, it is essential to first prepare graft initiators to the electrode in order to confine polymerization to the surface and limit precipitation of imprinted polymers or interpenetration of grafted polymers with free crosslinked polymers; this makes cleaning the grafted imprinted polymer tedious. For example, Type II radical photoinitiators are preferred over Type I phtoinitiators as they drastically limit bulk solution polymerization. Type I photoinitiators give two radicals upon thermal or photo-clevage: initiating radicals in solution and at the surface. As far as electrochemical sensors are concerned, numerous studies covered the nanostructuration of vinylic imprinted polymers by metallic or carbon nanoparticles [41,42], which can be coated on free electrode surfaces or mixed with graphite in order to prepare carbon paste electrodes. Such nanostructuration enhances the conductivity of the polymer and facilitates electron transfer.

(p97.1) Most imprinted vinylic polymer powders, nanocomposites and coatings are prepared via free radical polymerization using AIBN, Irgacure or potassium persulfate. Free radical or photoinduced radical polymerization or controlled photopolymerization (such as photoiniferter [35,36], INItiation-TransFER-TERminaison agent) is ideal as it does not require heating and could be achieved within minutes to a few hours. In the case of grafted imprinted polymers, photopolymerization is unique for its spatiotemporal aspect. The polymer can be grafted on a selected area and growth be controlled with irradiation time. Ion imprinted clay-polymer nanocomposites have recently been prepared by radical photopolymerization under visible [37] or UV light [38] using Type II photoinitiators. For grafted MIP thin films prepared by surface confined photopolymerization, the reader is referred to [39,40]. Figure 3 shows a simplified mechanism of radical polymerization whether it is of the free radical or controlled type. Initiator is activated thermally or photochemically and the initiating radical triggers polymerization of the prepolymerization complex (PCC) to yield, after a few hours or even better a few minutes (in the case of photopolymerization), 3D crosslinked polymers with entrapped template species (T). Precipitation polymerization requires crashing of the former monolith, but, in the case of the synthesis of imprinted thin polymer film, it is essential to first prepare graft initiators to the electrode in order to confine polymerization to the surface and limit precipitation of imprinted polymers or interpenetration of grafted polymers with free crosslinked polymers; this makes cleaning the grafted imprinted polymer tedious. For example, Type II radical photoinitiators are preferred over Type I phtoinitiators as they drastically limit bulk solution polymerization. Type I photoinitiators give two radicals upon thermal or photo-clevage: initiating radicals in solution and at the surface. As far as electrochemical sensors are concerned, numerous studies covered the nanostructuration of vinylic imprinted polymers by metallic or carbon nanoparticles [41,42], which can be coated on free electrode surfaces or mixed with graphite in order to prepare carbon paste electrodes. Such nanostructuration enhances the conductivity of the polymer and facilitates electron transfer.
## (s100) Electrode Material Preparation
(p100.0) For the purpose of electrochemical sensors, there are three main options for making MIP sensing layers and composites ( Figure 6): (i) polymerization conducted directly on the transducer surface, (ii) preparation of MIP or imprinted nanocomposite as powder that is coated on the electrode surface, and (iii) preparation of carbon paste electrode (CPE) from the mixture of carbon and MIP powder. "Imprinters" are interested more and more in CPEs due to their flexibility, low cost and good electrical conductivity [53]. Whilst preformed or in situ synthesized polymers can be deposited on the bare transducer, surface-initiated polymerization, in particular, requires the use of a coupling agent in order to covalently link the MIP to the transducer. In this regard, silane, thiols and aryl diazonium coupling agents were successfully employed. Indeed, they are bi-functional compounds and bear reactive groups to bind preformed MIPs, or even a polymerization initiator group to trigger surface polymerization. Silanes are mostly applied to metallic surfaces with a thin oxide film or to nanoparticles, whereas thiols are frequently used to modify gold electrodes. In the recent years, diazonium salts appeared as the most versatile coupling agents due to their ability to bind many more surfaces such as metals, oxides, sp 2 and sp 3 carbon allotropes, insulating polymers and transparent semi-conductor electrodes, to name only some of these materials. Furthermore, diazonium salts could be easily produced from aniline derivative precursors, bearing numerous functional groups for the covalent attachment of polymers. For these reasons, the surface and interface chemistry of diazonium salts is particularly suitable for making MIP-based electrochemical sensing layers with a robust electrode-MIP interface [39,54,55].
## (s101) Detection Methods
(p101.0) Electrochemical sensing techniques are among the most sensitive, simple, robust, and accurate transduction techniques. Efforts have been recently done to enable in situ multiple measurements, which has opened avenues to several chemical and biological applications, mainly the detection of harmful substances in water. Electrochemical sensors can be designed for all types of ions and molecules independently of their electroactivity.

(p101.1) Actually, if the desired target is not electroactive, the MIP-based sensor strategy will be based on the attenuation of the electrochemical signal of a probe present in the solution [64].

(p101.2) A schematic representation of the physical principles and corresponding voltammograms of the most common electrochemical techniques, used for pollutants' detection in water sources, is depicted in Figure 8. Details are presented in the following paragraphs. 

(p101.3) Electrochemical sensing techniques are among the most sensitive, simple, robust, and accurate transduction techniques. Efforts have been recently done to enable in situ multiple measurements, which has opened avenues to several chemical and biological applications, mainly the detection of harmful substances in water. Electrochemical sensors can be designed for all types of ions and molecules independently of their electroactivity.

(p101.4) Actually, if the desired target is not electroactive, the MIP-based sensor strategy will be based on the attenuation of the electrochemical signal of a probe present in the solution [64].

(p101.5) A schematic representation of the physical principles and corresponding voltammograms of the most common electrochemical techniques, used for pollutants' detection in water sources, is depicted in Figure 8. Details are presented in the following paragraphs. 
## (s102) Cyclic Voltammetry
(p102.0) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is a popular electrochemical technique usually used for quantitative analysis and for the investigation of the reduction and oxidation processes of electroactive species. During the experiment, the capacitive and faradaic currents are combined to get the total measured current. Scan rate is one of the key parameters of this technique, as it controls the "speed" of the applied potential. High scan rate values lead in fact to a decrease of the diffusion layer's size and thus to the current's increase. Since the high capacitive current interferes with the sensitive faradaic current (proportional to the analyte concentration in the linear domain), the technique's sensitivity is limited [65]. CV is thus usually used to check the state of the sensors' surfaces before and after the functionalization steps.

(p102.1) For more quantitative measurements, potential pulse methods, such as pulse differential voltammetry and square wave voltammetry, are generally used. These methods allow for reducing the contribution of the capacitive current, and thus to increase the sensitivity of the designed sensors.

(p102.2) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is a popular electrochemical technique usually used for quantitative analysis and for the investigation of the reduction and oxidation processes of electroactive species. During the experiment, the capacitive and faradaic currents are combined to get the total measured current. Scan rate is one of the key parameters of this technique, as it controls the "speed" of the applied potential. High scan rate values lead in fact to a decrease of the diffusion layer's size and thus to the current's increase. Since the high capacitive current interferes with the sensitive faradaic current (proportional to the analyte concentration in the linear domain), the technique's sensitivity is limited [65]. CV is thus usually used to check the state of the sensors' surfaces before and after the functionalization steps.

(p102.3) For more quantitative measurements, potential pulse methods, such as pulse differential voltammetry and square wave voltammetry, are generally used. These methods allow for reducing the contribution of the capacitive current, and thus to increase the sensitivity of the designed sensors.
## (s106) Stripping Voltammetry
(p106.0) Stripping (or pre-concentration) techniques have been used to detect cations, some anions and neutral species. The electrochemical procedure is carried out in two or three steps: (i) adsorption of species or their deposition occurs, during a defined time, on the electrode (pre-concentration step). The applied potential is usually controlled or fixed at the open circuit potential; (ii) the sensing electrode with preconcentrated species could be transferred to another analyte-free electrolyte or kept in the same preconcentration medium for next step; and (iii) oxidation or reduction of the accumulated species at the electrode by varying the applied potential and recording a current peak that is proportional to the concentration of these species.

(p106.1) The most commonly used stripping techniques are: (i) anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV), generally used for trace detection of metals such lead, copper, zinc, and cadmium; (ii) adsorption stripping voltammetry (AdSV), commonly used to detect trace amounts of cobalt, nickel, and some organic compounds; and (iii) cathodic stripping voltammetry (CSV) investigated for the detection of ionic species like selenium, sulfide and thiocyanate.

(p106.2) The use of pulse techniques can substantially lower LODs of the ASV technique and increases the sensitivity. The two most commonly used pulse techniques are differential pulse and square wave anodic stripping voltammetry (DPASV and SWASV, respectively). A previous work describes in more detail these different techniques for the analysis of heavy metals [68].

(p106.3) Stripping (or pre-concentration) techniques have been used to detect cations, some anions and neutral species. The electrochemical procedure is carried out in two or three steps: (i) adsorption of species or their deposition occurs, during a defined time, on the electrode (pre-concentration step). The applied potential is usually controlled or fixed at the open circuit potential; (ii) the sensing electrode with preconcentrated species could be transferred to another analyte-free electrolyte or kept in the same preconcentration medium for next step; and (iii) oxidation or reduction of the accumulated species at the electrode by varying the applied potential and recording a current peak that is proportional to the concentration of these species.

(p106.4) The most commonly used stripping techniques are: (i) anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV), generally used for trace detection of metals such lead, copper, zinc, and cadmium; (ii) adsorption stripping voltammetry (AdSV), commonly used to detect trace amounts of cobalt, nickel, and some organic compounds; and (iii) cathodic stripping voltammetry (CSV) investigated for the detection of ionic species like selenium, sulfide and thiocyanate.

(p106.5) The use of pulse techniques can substantially lower LODs of the ASV technique and increases the sensitivity. The two most commonly used pulse techniques are differential pulse and square wave anodic stripping voltammetry (DPASV and SWASV, respectively). A previous work describes in more detail these different techniques for the analysis of heavy metals [68].
## (s109) Pesticide Imprinted Vinylic Polymers (PIVPs)
(p109.0) The literature reported the design of MIP based electrochemical sensors for selective detection of cypermethrin (CPM), a synthetic pyrethroid pesticide widely used in agriculture and spot treatment for insects' control. CPM may, however, induce neurotoxicity by modulating the level of gamma-amino butyric acid [96]. Leepheng et al. [97] designed a molecularly imprinted electrochemical sensor for CPM detection in vegetable juice. In this work, the authors used methyl methacrylate (MMA), ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EDGMA), AIBN, as the functional monomer, the cross-linker and the initiator, respectively. The polymerization was carried-out at 70 • C for 2 h. This step was followed by dropping CPM-MIP onto screen-printed electrodes (SPE) at a controlled temperature of 60 • C for 90 min. The templates were removed by ethanol and deionized water. Cyclic voltammetry measurements indicate that the CPM-MIP/SPE sensor presents an LOD of 15 ppb and a sensitivity of 0.094 µA·ppm −1 .

(p109.1) Cypermethrin (CYP in this study) detection was also reported by Li et al. [98] who prepared a solution of Ag-N@ZnO/CHAC from coconut husk (CHAC), dropped it on the surface of a glassy carbon electrode and dried it under infrared lamp, prior to the MIP electro-polymerization. Two functional monomers were investigated in this study: resorcinol and dopamine. CYP extraction was performed by the immersion of the coated electrode in 0.1 M NaOH and by scanning between −1.0 V and +1.0 V for 10 cycles. CV measurements were performed to investigate the effects of double monomers use, to optimize the ratio between template and monomers, to determine the analytical performances of the sensor and for selectivity tests. The designed MIP based sensor was selective of CYP and presents an LOD on the order of 6.7 × 10 −14 M. Glyphosate (Gly), a synthetic herbicide, is probably the most widely used pesticide worldwide. In 2015, the World Health Organization's International Agency for Research on Cancer classified glyphosate as potentially carcinogenic to humans. This health concern has motivated the realization of numerous chemical sensors to track glyphosate in water samples, soil, air and body fluids. In the field of MIP-based electrochemical sensors, Zouaoui et al. [99] designed a sensitive and selective sensor, in which a chitosan (CS)-Gly-MIP was electrodeposited, by cyclic voltammetry (from −1.5 to 0.5 V at a scan rate of 80 mV/s) onto a gold microelectrode surface. Cross-linking of the polymeric matrix was performed by incubating the (GLY +CS)/Au in a solution of H 2 SO 4 for 1 h. Gly template extraction was done by incubating the microelectrodes in a protic solution acetic acid/methanol (1:1, v/v) for 30 min. The sensing properties of the designed sensor were followed-up by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry. Results indicate an LOD of 0.001 pg/mL and a linear range from 0.31 pg/mL to 50 ng/mL.
## (s110) Pesticide Imprinted Conductive Polymers (PICPs)
(p110.0) Dong et al. [109] reported an electrochemical AChE biosensor based on microporous organic polymers (MOP) for methyl parathion and paraoxon detection in lettuce samples. Herein, phloroglucinol-based MOP was prepared via simple microwave synthesis and then drop coated onto the surface of a carbon paste electrode. AChE was then added and subsequently immobilized by Nafion. The synthesis process and detection procedure are displayed in Figure 12. DPV electrochemical results were related to the oxidation of thiocholine, produced from ATCI hydrolysis in the presence of AChE. The limits of detection for methyl parathion and paraoxon were of the order of 1.5 × 10 −13 g·mL −1 and 3.4 × 10 −14 g·mL −1 , respectively. The linear ranges varied between 5.0 × 10 −13 to 1.0 × 10 −8 g·mL −1 for methyl parathion and from 1.0 × 10 −13 to 1.0 × 10 −9 g·mL −1 for paraoxon.

(p110.1) Yassa et al. [110] modified a graphite electrode with thienopyrrole based conjugated poly{1-(5-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo{1,2-b:4,5-b'}dithiophen-2-yl)furan-2yl)-5-(2-ethylhexyl)-3-(furan-2-yl)-4H thieno{3,4-c}pyrrole-4,6(5H)-dione} (PFTBDT) and carbon dots (CDs) for the detection of catechol phenolic compounds used in pesticide synthesis. In this study, PFTBDT was synthesized via Stille polycondensation reaction and then coated on a CD's modified electrode. This step was followed by the immobilization of laccase enzyme onto the modified electrode, using glutaraldehyde 1% as a cross-linker agent. Several parameters were optimized in this study, such as the amounts of carbon dots, of PFTBDT, of enzyme and the pH of the operating media. Amperometric measurements indicate that the proposed biosensor exhibits an LOD of 1.23 µM, a sensitivity of 737.4 µA·mM −1 ·cm −2 and a wide range between 1.25 to 175 µM.

(p110.2) Akdag et al. [111] designed an electrochemical AChE biosensor for paraoxon detection using polypyrrole and chitosan modified platinum (Pt) electrode. The authors electropolymerized pyrrole monomers, by cyclic voltammetry, on platinum electrode (Pt/PPy) and then coated it with a chitosan solution. The chi/Pt/PPy modified electrode was after that incubated in a buffer solution containing glutaraldehyde in order to immobilize the AChE enzyme. The sensing properties of the biosensor were monitored by DPV. LOD was of the order of 0.17 nM, and the sensor exhibited 72% of stability after 60 days.

(p110.3) Kondawar et al. [112] modified a graphite electrode surface with two layers of conducting polymers to design an AChE biosensor for Acephate quantification. In this study, pyrrole monomers were first electrochemically deposited by CV, in the −0.6-0.9 V range for 10 cycles at scan rate 50 mV/s, onto a graphite electrode. Subsequently, aniline with CNTs was electropolymerized by CV on the polypyrrole modified graphite electrode surface, prior to the immobilization of AChE. Chronoamperometry results indicated that the biosensor presents an LOD of 0.007 ppm.

(p110.4) Turan et al. [113] designed a butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) amperometric biosensor for the quantitative determination of paraoxon in milk and tap water. In this work, bis(octyloxy)-di(thieno-thiophen-2-yl)benzooxoadiazole (TTBO) was electropolymerized, by cyclic voltammetry, on a graphite electrode surface prior to the immobilization of silver nanowires (AgNWs) and then BChE. Glutaraldehyde was used to improve the electron transfer, the sensitivity and the selectivity towards paraoxon. The poly(TTBO)/AgNWs/ BChE biosensor revealed an LOD 0.212 µM and a sensitivity of 8.076 µA µM −1 cm −2 .

(p110.5) Guler et al. [114] constructed a conducting polymer on a GCE for the quantification of malathion in parsley leaf samples. The working electrode consisted of poly(terthiophene-3carbaldehyde) (PTT) electrosynthesized on GCE by cyclic voltammetry (in the range from 0.8 to 1.5 V). After that, AChE was immobilized on the PTT film surface and covalently cross-linked by glutaraldehyde. The biosensor response was dependent on the oxidation of thiocholine, which is the hydrolysis compound of acetylthiocholine iodide, catalyzed by AChE activity. CV electrochemical results indicated that the LOD was of the order of 4.08 nM and that the sensitivity and the recovery were equal to 183.2 µA/mM and 97%, respectively.

(p110.6) Bhardwaj et al. [115] designed an immunosensing platform on the basis of a thin film assembly of Cu-MOF (Cu 3 (BTC) 2 @SiO 2 ) and 2-amino terephthalic acid (NH 2 -BDC) doped polyaniline (PANI) to detect traces of atrazine. In this study, the conducting film was synthesized by mixing NH 2 −BDC and aniline monomers in an ice bath and then by spin-casting the mixture onto a four electrode sensor surfaces. This step was followed by the spin-casting of Cu 3 (BTC) 2 @SiO 2 on BDC-PANI electrode surface and by annealing at 100 • C to establish a good bonding. The modified thin film was then bioconjugated with anti-atrazine antibodies. This immunosensor was reproducible and reliable and exhibited an LOD of 0.01 nM.

(p110.7) Salih et al. [116] modified the surface of a carbon paste electrode (CPE) with pphenylenediamine (p-PD) conducting polymer and ionic liquid (IL) for carbaryl detection in spring water and fruit samples. In this work, different amounts of IL were mixed with graphite and paraffin oil to fabricate IL modified carbon paste electrode (IL/CPE). Two p-PD electropolymerization strategies on IL/CPE surfaces were investigated: (i) by cyclic voltammetry in the range −0.4 to 0.8 V for 40 cycles; and by (ii) potentiostatic mode at a fixed potential 0.7 V during 120 s. Several experimental conditions were tested and optimized: the ionic liquid ratio in paraffin oil, the number of polymerization cycles, pH and the preconcentration duration. DPV results indicated that the poly-pPDs-IL/CPE sensor presents an LOD of 0.09 mmol·L −1 and reasonable recovery values between 96 to 117.4%. Table 4 reports characteristics and sensing properties of shortlisted imprinted systems designed for the selective detection of pesticides. Outstanding LODs are reported, i.e., in the sub-nanomolar or in near picomolar regime. Chitosan-based imprinted materials seem to permit reaching extreme LOD values.   

(p110.8) Dong et al. [109] reported an electrochemical AChE biosensor based on microporous organic polymers (MOP) for methyl parathion and paraoxon detection in lettuce samples. Herein, phloroglucinol-based MOP was prepared via simple microwave synthesis and then drop coated onto the surface of a carbon paste electrode. AChE was then added and subsequently immobilized by Nafion. The synthesis process and detection procedure are displayed in Figure 12. DPV electrochemical results were related to the oxidation of thiocholine, produced from ATCI hydrolysis in the presence of AChE. The limits of detection for methyl parathion and paraoxon were of the order of 1.5 × 10 −13 g·mL −1 and 3.4 × 10 −14 g·mL −1 , respectively. The linear ranges varied between 5.0 × 10 −13 to 1.0 × 10 −8 g·mL −1 for methyl parathion and from 1.0 × 10 −13 to 1.0 × 10 −9 g·mL −1 for paraoxon.

(p110.9) Yassa et al. [110] modified a graphite electrode with thienopyrrole based conjugated poly{1-(5-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo{1,2-b:4,5-b'}dithiophen-2-yl)furan-2yl)-5-(2-ethylhexyl)-3-(furan-2-yl)-4H thieno{3,4-c}pyrrole-4,6(5H)-dione} (PFTBDT) and carbon dots (CDs) for the detection of catechol phenolic compounds used in pesticide synthesis. In this study, PFTBDT was synthesized via Stille polycondensation reaction and then coated on a CD's modified electrode. This step was followed by the immobilization of laccase enzyme onto the modified electrode, using glutaraldehyde 1% as a cross-linker agent. Several parameters were optimized in this study, such as the amounts of carbon dots, of PFTBDT, of enzyme and the pH of the operating media. Amperometric measurements indicate that the proposed biosensor exhibits an LOD of 1.23 µM, a sensitivity of 737.4 µA·mM −1 ·cm −2 and a wide range between 1.25 to 175 µM.

(p110.10) Akdag et al. [111] designed an electrochemical AChE biosensor for paraoxon detection using polypyrrole and chitosan modified platinum (Pt) electrode. The authors electropolymerized pyrrole monomers, by cyclic voltammetry, on platinum electrode (Pt/PPy) and then coated it with a chitosan solution. The chi/Pt/PPy modified electrode was after that incubated in a buffer solution containing glutaraldehyde in order to immobilize the AChE enzyme. The sensing properties of the biosensor were monitored by DPV. LOD was of the order of 0.17 nM, and the sensor exhibited 72% of stability after 60 days.

(p110.11) Kondawar et al. [112] modified a graphite electrode surface with two layers of conducting polymers to design an AChE biosensor for Acephate quantification. In this study, pyrrole monomers were first electrochemically deposited by CV, in the −0.6-0.9 V range for 10 cycles at scan rate 50 mV/s, onto a graphite electrode. Subsequently, aniline with CNTs was electropolymerized by CV on the polypyrrole modified graphite electrode surface, prior to the immobilization of AChE. Chronoamperometry results indicated that the biosensor presents an LOD of 0.007 ppm.

(p110.12) Turan et al. [113] designed a butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) amperometric biosensor for the quantitative determination of paraoxon in milk and tap water. In this work, bis(octyloxy)-di(thieno-thiophen-2-yl)benzooxoadiazole (TTBO) was electropolymerized, by cyclic voltammetry, on a graphite electrode surface prior to the immobilization of silver nanowires (AgNWs) and then BChE. Glutaraldehyde was used to improve the electron transfer, the sensitivity and the selectivity towards paraoxon. The poly(TTBO)/AgNWs/ BChE biosensor revealed an LOD 0.212 µM and a sensitivity of 8.076 µA µM −1 cm −2 .

(p110.13) Guler et al. [114] constructed a conducting polymer on a GCE for the quantification of malathion in parsley leaf samples. The working electrode consisted of poly(terthiophene-3carbaldehyde) (PTT) electrosynthesized on GCE by cyclic voltammetry (in the range from 0.8 to 1.5 V). After that, AChE was immobilized on the PTT film surface and covalently cross-linked by glutaraldehyde. The biosensor response was dependent on the oxidation of thiocholine, which is the hydrolysis compound of acetylthiocholine iodide, catalyzed by AChE activity. CV electrochemical results indicated that the LOD was of the order of 4.08 nM and that the sensitivity and the recovery were equal to 183.2 µA/mM and 97%, respectively.

(p110.14) Bhardwaj et al. [115] designed an immunosensing platform on the basis of a thin film assembly of Cu-MOF (Cu 3 (BTC) 2 @SiO 2 ) and 2-amino terephthalic acid (NH 2 -BDC) doped polyaniline (PANI) to detect traces of atrazine. In this study, the conducting film was synthesized by mixing NH 2 −BDC and aniline monomers in an ice bath and then by spin-casting the mixture onto a four electrode sensor surfaces. This step was followed by the spin-casting of Cu 3 (BTC) 2 @SiO 2 on BDC-PANI electrode surface and by annealing at 100 • C to establish a good bonding. The modified thin film was then bioconjugated with anti-atrazine antibodies. This immunosensor was reproducible and reliable and exhibited an LOD of 0.01 nM.

(p110.15) Salih et al. [116] modified the surface of a carbon paste electrode (CPE) with pphenylenediamine (p-PD) conducting polymer and ionic liquid (IL) for carbaryl detection in spring water and fruit samples. In this work, different amounts of IL were mixed with graphite and paraffin oil to fabricate IL modified carbon paste electrode (IL/CPE). Two p-PD electropolymerization strategies on IL/CPE surfaces were investigated: (i) by cyclic voltammetry in the range −0.4 to 0.8 V for 40 cycles; and by (ii) potentiostatic mode at a fixed potential 0.7 V during 120 s. Several experimental conditions were tested and optimized: the ionic liquid ratio in paraffin oil, the number of polymerization cycles, pH and the preconcentration duration. DPV results indicated that the poly-pPDs-IL/CPE sensor presents an LOD of 0.09 mmol·L −1 and reasonable recovery values between 96 to 117.4%. Table 4 reports characteristics and sensing properties of shortlisted imprinted systems designed for the selective detection of pesticides. Outstanding LODs are reported, i.e., in the sub-nanomolar or in near picomolar regime. Chitosan-based imprinted materials seem to permit reaching extreme LOD values.   
## (s114) Ion Imprinted Conductive Polymers (IICPs)
(p114.0) Electrically conductive polymers are ideal for electrochemical applications because they do not require nanostructuration with carbon or metal to impart conductivity, and could be directly prepared on electrode surfaces within seconds to few minutes. They could also be prepared by precipitation oxidative polymerization in less than 2 h at RT, particularly polypyrrole. However, despite their physicochemical properties, they are only seldom applied for making imprinted polymer-based electrochemical sensors for the selective detection of metal ions. Recently, some of us summarized the findings on polypyrrole-based electrochemical sensors including ion imprinted polypyrroles [68]. Herein, we concentrate on the recent progress in the domain of ion imprinted conductive polymers, mainly polypyrrole, polyaniline and poly(phenylene diamine).

(p114.1) Before we summarize the recent progress on ion imprinted conductive polymers (IICPs), we would like to stress again that, contrary to vinylic polymers, CPs have rigid structure and crosslinkers are quasi never employed. Despite the remarkable progress in the domain of imprinted polymers, little information is available on ion imprinted conjugated polymers for electroanalysis of heavy metal ions. Handpicked examples of recent IICPs are reported in Table 5 including an attractive study of imprinted EDTAlike PPy. In the latter, the teams of Rivas and Moutet explored the propensity of sensors based on PPy/EDTA-like films for selectively detecting Hg(II), Pb(II), Cd(II) and Cu(II) (Figure 15). The Cd(II)-imprinted conductive films were effectively selective towards Cd(II) over other competing metal ions in metal ion mixtures [126].       (Drinking or river water) [132]     Whilst pyrrole derivative bearing ligands are interesting, they might request synthesis efforts as in the case of chelatant-bearing vinylic monomers. For this reason, pyrrole can be polymerized in the presence of metal ions and ligands/chelators. Some used, in this regard, L-cystein and acrylic acid which served both as co-dopants and ligands [127]. The resulting ion imprinted polymer permitted to achieve picomolar LOD for a lead as reported by Ait-Touchente et al. [14]. This is the lowest LOD ever reported for Hg(II) detection. Figure 16 schematically illustrates the making of nanostructured Hg(II) ion imprinted polypyrrole coated on ZnO nanorods that were vertically aligned on arylated gold electrodes. 

(p114.2) Electrically conductive polymers are ideal for electrochemical applications because they do not require nanostructuration with carbon or metal to impart conductivity, and could be directly prepared on electrode surfaces within seconds to few minutes. They could also be prepared by precipitation oxidative polymerization in less than 2 h at RT, particularly polypyrrole. However, despite their physicochemical properties, they are only seldom applied for making imprinted polymer-based electrochemical sensors for the selective detection of metal ions. Recently, some of us summarized the findings on polypyrrole-based electrochemical sensors including ion imprinted polypyrroles [68]. Herein, we concentrate on the recent progress in the domain of ion imprinted conductive polymers, mainly polypyrrole, polyaniline and poly(phenylene diamine).

(p114.3) Before we summarize the recent progress on ion imprinted conductive polymers (IICPs), we would like to stress again that, contrary to vinylic polymers, CPs have rigid structure and crosslinkers are quasi never employed. Despite the remarkable progress in the domain of imprinted polymers, little information is available on ion imprinted conjugated polymers for electroanalysis of heavy metal ions. Handpicked examples of recent IICPs are reported in Table 5 including an attractive study of imprinted EDTAlike PPy. In the latter, the teams of Rivas and Moutet explored the propensity of sensors based on PPy/EDTA-like films for selectively detecting Hg(II), Pb(II), Cd(II) and Cu(II) (Figure 15). The Cd(II)-imprinted conductive films were effectively selective towards Cd(II) over other competing metal ions in metal ion mixtures [126].       (Drinking or river water) [132]     Whilst pyrrole derivative bearing ligands are interesting, they might request synthesis efforts as in the case of chelatant-bearing vinylic monomers. For this reason, pyrrole can be polymerized in the presence of metal ions and ligands/chelators. Some used, in this regard, L-cystein and acrylic acid which served both as co-dopants and ligands [127]. The resulting ion imprinted polymer permitted to achieve picomolar LOD for a lead as reported by Ait-Touchente et al. [14]. This is the lowest LOD ever reported for Hg(II) detection. Figure 16 schematically illustrates the making of nanostructured Hg(II) ion imprinted polypyrrole coated on ZnO nanorods that were vertically aligned on arylated gold electrodes. 
## (s117) Detection of Copper Ions Cu(II)
(p117.0) Copper ions were detected using copper imprinted sol-gel [128] bearing N1-(3-(trimeth oxysilyl)propyl)diethylenetriamine (TPDT), which has the property of complexing copper ions with its diethylenetriamine group. The first step of IIP synthesis was the synthesis of ligand-functionalized silane. After complexation of Cu(II) for 24 h, the gel was crosslinked at reflux and washed to leach the Cu(II). This resulted in a copper ion imprinted sol-gel material ( Figure 17) that served for making carbon paste electrode to track Cu(II) in tap water. LOD and sensitivity depended on pre-concentration time, optimally set at 1800 s. If LOD remains in the sub-micromolar regime, it is interesting to note that this IISG did not require any crosslinker such as TEOS and the synthesized TPDT silane was sufficient to make a 3D imprinted network. Interference studies have been done with Fe(II), Zn(II), Pb(II) and Ni(II). Another feature was the selectivity of the IISG to copper over Ni(II), Zn(II) and Pb(II). 

(p117.1) Copper ions were detected using copper imprinted sol-gel [128] bearing N1-(3-(trimeth oxysilyl)propyl)diethylenetriamine (TPDT), which has the property of complexing copper ions with its diethylenetriamine group. The first step of IIP synthesis was the synthesis of ligand-functionalized silane. After complexation of Cu(II) for 24 h, the gel was crosslinked at reflux and washed to leach the Cu(II). This resulted in a copper ion imprinted sol-gel material ( Figure 17) that served for making carbon paste electrode to track Cu(II) in tap water. LOD and sensitivity depended on pre-concentration time, optimally set at 1800 s. If LOD remains in the sub-micromolar regime, it is interesting to note that this IISG did not require any crosslinker such as TEOS and the synthesized TPDT silane was sufficient to make a 3D imprinted network. Interference studies have been done with Fe(II), Zn(II), Pb(II) and Ni(II). Another feature was the selectivity of the IISG to copper over Ni(II), Zn(II) and Pb(II). 
## (s118) Detection of Cadmium Ions Cd(II)
(p118.0) In a similar study, CPE was prepared with cadmium imprinted sol-gel [129]. 3-(2-(2aminoethylamino)ethylamino)propyl-tri methoxysilane (AAAPTS) was used as functional monomer, epichlorohydrin as a cross-linker and Cd(II) ions as a template; TEOS was used for the sol-gel process ( Figure 18). The reaction of epichlorhydrin with the NH groups opens the epoxy ring and yields OH groups which enhance the hydrophilic character of the imprinted gel. After washing off Cd(II) with HCl, the final IIP was obtained as fine powder and mixed with carbon. CPE was employed to track Cd(II) in aqueous solutions prepared in lab, and in environmental water samples. The IISP had an LOD of 0.15 µg Cd.L −1 , the linear range was 0.5-40 µg·L −1 and exhibited outstanding selectivity despite 30 to 100 fold more concentrated competitive metal ions. Indeed, no loss in recovery of Cd(II) was noted in the presence of other ions. An interesting IISG has been proposed by Güney and Güney [130] with rarely employed 3-isocyanatopropyl trimethoxysilane (ICTMS) that was reacted with 3-aminoquinoline in order to obtain a functional silylated monomer bearing a quinolone ligand ( Figure 19). The latter was crosslinked using tetramethylorthoxysilicate (TMOS) in the presence of UO 2 (II). A CPE was made by mixing the UO 2 (II)-imprinted sol-gel with carbon powder. The CPE exhibited an LOD of 3.07 × 10 −10 mol·L −1 ; the linear range was 2.0 × 10 −9 -3.0 × 10 −7 mol·L −1 . The sensor could be used to selectively detect uranyl in tap, pond and waste waters, with good recovery. Figure 19. Synthesis of IISG from quinolone-functionalized silane, TMOS and uranyl. Adapted with permission of Elsevier from [130].

(p118.1) In a similar study, CPE was prepared with cadmium imprinted sol-gel [129]. 3-(2-(2aminoethylamino)ethylamino)propyl-tri methoxysilane (AAAPTS) was used as functional monomer, epichlorohydrin as a cross-linker and Cd(II) ions as a template; TEOS was used for the sol-gel process ( Figure 18). The reaction of epichlorhydrin with the NH groups opens the epoxy ring and yields OH groups which enhance the hydrophilic character of the imprinted gel. After washing off Cd(II) with HCl, the final IIP was obtained as fine powder and mixed with carbon. CPE was employed to track Cd(II) in aqueous solutions prepared in lab, and in environmental water samples. The IISP had an LOD of 0.15 µg Cd.L −1 , the linear range was 0.5-40 µg·L −1 and exhibited outstanding selectivity despite 30 to 100 fold more concentrated competitive metal ions. Indeed, no loss in recovery of Cd(II) was noted in the presence of other ions. An interesting IISG has been proposed by Güney and Güney [130] with rarely employed 3-isocyanatopropyl trimethoxysilane (ICTMS) that was reacted with 3-aminoquinoline in order to obtain a functional silylated monomer bearing a quinolone ligand ( Figure 19). The latter was crosslinked using tetramethylorthoxysilicate (TMOS) in the presence of UO 2 (II). A CPE was made by mixing the UO 2 (II)-imprinted sol-gel with carbon powder. The CPE exhibited an LOD of 3.07 × 10 −10 mol·L −1 ; the linear range was 2.0 × 10 −9 -3.0 × 10 −7 mol·L −1 . The sensor could be used to selectively detect uranyl in tap, pond and waste waters, with good recovery. Figure 19. Synthesis of IISG from quinolone-functionalized silane, TMOS and uranyl. Adapted with permission of Elsevier from [130].
## (s119) Detection of Europium Eu 3+
(p119.0) Europium is a reactive rare earth. The increasing applications of this element in the domain of industrial applications, material science, electronic engineering and life science raised toxilogy concerns, hence its traceability using IIPs [131].

(p119.1) The working electrode consisted of an SPE, coated with electrosynthesized polycatechol (PC), a signal amplifying element, and an IISG (Figure 20). The signal-amplifying element PC bears hydroxyl groups and oxygen which could coordinate Eu 3+ , therefore improving the sensitivity and selectivity of Eu 3+ IISG. The ion-imprinted sol-gel solution was prepared using TEOS, phenyltrimethoxysilane (PTMOS), methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMOS) and Eu 3+ solution. Note, however, that no reason was found to justify PTMOS and MTMOS silanes besides the TEOS crosslinker. The characterization of the fabricated electrode was performed by CV and EIS. Results show clear differences before and after Eu 3+ removal: the current is weak and the resistance is strong before removal; after removal, a redox peak on CV was noted, and the resistance decreased significantly. A clear difference between the IIP with and without PC has been observed: the peak current is nearly twice as strong for the IIP with PC, hence the effective signal amplifying property of PC.

(p119.2) DPASV has been used to determine the LOD and the linear range, and they are respectively 1.0 × 10 −7 mol·L −1 and 0.3-1000 µmol·L −1 . The sensor was found to be selective to Eu 3+ over other metal ions. Indeed, peak current did not show any significant changes with the presence of competitive ions such as Ni 2+ , Co 2+ , Cu 2+ , Fe 3+ or Gd 3+ .

(p119.3) The detection of Eu(III) was achieved using a bilayer of organic polymer that facilitates electron transfer and a sol-gel imprinted polymer that facilitates selective recognition. Recently, an ion imprinted hybrid polymer system (IIHP) has just been described, and consisted of imprinted, crosslinked vinylic polymers and sol-gel. -SH from MPS and the imidazole group from the vinylic functional monomer have a synergetic effect of Cd(II) complexation [132]. Each system (organic or sol-gel) had its own functional and crosslinker monomers (see Table 5), but 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate served as a coupling reagent for organic and inorganic phases. Indeed, it is a bifunctional molecule enabling involvement in radical polymerization via the methacrylate end, and involved in sol-gel synthesis via the the trimethoxysilyl part. This sensor is certainly robust and highly selective; however, DPASV did not show any striking difference between the carbon paste electrode prepared from graphite powder only, and those prepared with IIHP and NIHP. The decreasing trend of the current intensity was CPE-IIHP (100 µA) > CPE-NIHP (80 µA) > CPE (55 µA). Table 5 summarizes the experimental conditions for the synthesis of ion imprinted polymers as thin films or nanocomposites. An organic medium is required for vinylic polymers, whilst water/alcohol usually is considered for sol-gels. Conductive polymers require aqueous media, which is interesting in this respect, making the process "greener" and energy saving since the synthesis is usually conducted at RT. There is no clear trend related to electrosensing; DPV and SWV seem to be randomly employed and return excellent LODs. From the shortlisted case studies, obviously CPEs are the most investigated electrodes and one should expect their tremendous development in the near future by "Imprinters".

(p119.4) Europium is a reactive rare earth. The increasing applications of this element in the domain of industrial applications, material science, electronic engineering and life science raised toxilogy concerns, hence its traceability using IIPs [131].

(p119.5) The working electrode consisted of an SPE, coated with electrosynthesized polycatechol (PC), a signal amplifying element, and an IISG (Figure 20). The signal-amplifying element PC bears hydroxyl groups and oxygen which could coordinate Eu 3+ , therefore improving the sensitivity and selectivity of Eu 3+ IISG. The ion-imprinted sol-gel solution was prepared using TEOS, phenyltrimethoxysilane (PTMOS), methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMOS) and Eu 3+ solution. Note, however, that no reason was found to justify PTMOS and MTMOS silanes besides the TEOS crosslinker. The characterization of the fabricated electrode was performed by CV and EIS. Results show clear differences before and after Eu 3+ removal: the current is weak and the resistance is strong before removal; after removal, a redox peak on CV was noted, and the resistance decreased significantly. A clear difference between the IIP with and without PC has been observed: the peak current is nearly twice as strong for the IIP with PC, hence the effective signal amplifying property of PC.

(p119.6) DPASV has been used to determine the LOD and the linear range, and they are respectively 1.0 × 10 −7 mol·L −1 and 0.3-1000 µmol·L −1 . The sensor was found to be selective to Eu 3+ over other metal ions. Indeed, peak current did not show any significant changes with the presence of competitive ions such as Ni 2+ , Co 2+ , Cu 2+ , Fe 3+ or Gd 3+ .

(p119.7) The detection of Eu(III) was achieved using a bilayer of organic polymer that facilitates electron transfer and a sol-gel imprinted polymer that facilitates selective recognition. Recently, an ion imprinted hybrid polymer system (IIHP) has just been described, and consisted of imprinted, crosslinked vinylic polymers and sol-gel. -SH from MPS and the imidazole group from the vinylic functional monomer have a synergetic effect of Cd(II) complexation [132]. Each system (organic or sol-gel) had its own functional and crosslinker monomers (see Table 5), but 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate served as a coupling reagent for organic and inorganic phases. Indeed, it is a bifunctional molecule enabling involvement in radical polymerization via the methacrylate end, and involved in sol-gel synthesis via the the trimethoxysilyl part. This sensor is certainly robust and highly selective; however, DPASV did not show any striking difference between the carbon paste electrode prepared from graphite powder only, and those prepared with IIHP and NIHP. The decreasing trend of the current intensity was CPE-IIHP (100 µA) > CPE-NIHP (80 µA) > CPE (55 µA). Table 5 summarizes the experimental conditions for the synthesis of ion imprinted polymers as thin films or nanocomposites. An organic medium is required for vinylic polymers, whilst water/alcohol usually is considered for sol-gels. Conductive polymers require aqueous media, which is interesting in this respect, making the process "greener" and energy saving since the synthesis is usually conducted at RT. There is no clear trend related to electrosensing; DPV and SWV seem to be randomly employed and return excellent LODs. From the shortlisted case studies, obviously CPEs are the most investigated electrodes and one should expect their tremendous development in the near future by "Imprinters".
## (s122) Whole Cell Imprinting
(p122.0) Escherichia coli (E. coli) is a rod shaped bacterium; it is normally harmless to humans and can generally be found in their intestines. However, a few varieties can cause diseases such as abdominal cramps, bloody diarrhea and vomiting. These can be found in contaminated water or food. Jafari et al. [137] proposed an electrochemical sensor in which the sensing layer is a polymer layer synthetized by sol-gel method; bacteria are added to the fresh sol solution at the end of the process. Tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) has been used as the monomer for the polymerization; it also serves as a crosslinker. EIS measurements were done with the following parameters: amplitude of 10 mV at open circuit potential with a frequency range of 100 kHz-0.1 Hz. Results showed good selectivity when the recognition of E. coli and S. aureus (a spherical bacteria) was compared: when the sensor captures the corresponding bacteria, the charge transfer resistance increases; in the case of S. aureus, the change of signal is greatly reduced. The same is true for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, another rod shaped bacterium. The performance of impedimetric sensor for E.coli is lower than other impedimetric sensor using anti-E. coli antibodies, but it has a low cost and low LOD. The authors have chosen the whole cell imprinting technique. This raises the issue of bacteria extraction from the in situ synthesized MIP film; as one can see in Figure 21, the washing of imprinted bacteria seems to seriously damage the imprinted sites. 

(p122.1) Escherichia coli (E. coli) is a rod shaped bacterium; it is normally harmless to humans and can generally be found in their intestines. However, a few varieties can cause diseases such as abdominal cramps, bloody diarrhea and vomiting. These can be found in contaminated water or food. Jafari et al. [137] proposed an electrochemical sensor in which the sensing layer is a polymer layer synthetized by sol-gel method; bacteria are added to the fresh sol solution at the end of the process. Tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) has been used as the monomer for the polymerization; it also serves as a crosslinker. EIS measurements were done with the following parameters: amplitude of 10 mV at open circuit potential with a frequency range of 100 kHz-0.1 Hz. Results showed good selectivity when the recognition of E. coli and S. aureus (a spherical bacteria) was compared: when the sensor captures the corresponding bacteria, the charge transfer resistance increases; in the case of S. aureus, the change of signal is greatly reduced. The same is true for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, another rod shaped bacterium. The performance of impedimetric sensor for E.coli is lower than other impedimetric sensor using anti-E. coli antibodies, but it has a low cost and low LOD. The authors have chosen the whole cell imprinting technique. This raises the issue of bacteria extraction from the in situ synthesized MIP film; as one can see in Figure 21, the washing of imprinted bacteria seems to seriously damage the imprinted sites. 
## (s123) Bacterial Surface Imprinting
(p123.0) As noted from the SEM picture above (Figure 21b), the imprinting of whole bacteria is not well adapted due to the size of the template; however, the imprinting of the surface or of a portion of bacteria is possible and a better option ( Figure 22). Sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB) are anaerobic microorganisms naturally present in environmental sources such as soil, sea or river. They obtain their energy by reducing sulfate to sulfite, which is a highly corrosive and toxic substance. An imprinted chitosan-based electrochemical sensor has been fabricated in this regard by Qi et al. [63]. Chitosan (CS) becomes insoluble if the pH of the solution is higher than 6.3. In order to coat this biopolymer on the electrode surface, a potential was applied on the cathode in order to reduce H + to H 2 , thus making the pH reach the threshold for deposition. Then, SRB bacteria were coated on the surface of the biopolymer film; only a part of the surface of SRB was imprinted. However, the washing of bacteria after imprinting can induce enlargement or deformation of the prints (the recognition sites). The impedimetric measurements show very good selectivity for SRB over the other S. aureus, M. luteus, V. alginolyticus and V. anguillarum bacteria as demonstrated in Figure 22.  Figure 23 shows Nyquist plots for bioimprinted ITO before and after attachment of several bacteria (Figure 23a). As the receptor sites were shaped by SRB, this bacterium is recognized most. The Nyquist plot, for bioemprinted ITO with adsorbed SRB, shows the largest semi-circle on the Z' axis. The difference between Z' values for ITO, with and without bacteria, indicates resistance to charge transfer (∆R ct ). It is the largest value for SRB because the sensor is indeed selective towards this bacterium (Figure 23b). This type of sensor is based on the size and shape of the bacteria, but the recognition site is fragile; a study on its reusability would be interesting, as one knows that biological bio-recognition elements, for example antibodies, can easily be damaged.

(p123.1) As noted from the SEM picture above (Figure 21b), the imprinting of whole bacteria is not well adapted due to the size of the template; however, the imprinting of the surface or of a portion of bacteria is possible and a better option ( Figure 22). Sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB) are anaerobic microorganisms naturally present in environmental sources such as soil, sea or river. They obtain their energy by reducing sulfate to sulfite, which is a highly corrosive and toxic substance. An imprinted chitosan-based electrochemical sensor has been fabricated in this regard by Qi et al. [63]. Chitosan (CS) becomes insoluble if the pH of the solution is higher than 6.3. In order to coat this biopolymer on the electrode surface, a potential was applied on the cathode in order to reduce H + to H 2 , thus making the pH reach the threshold for deposition. Then, SRB bacteria were coated on the surface of the biopolymer film; only a part of the surface of SRB was imprinted. However, the washing of bacteria after imprinting can induce enlargement or deformation of the prints (the recognition sites). The impedimetric measurements show very good selectivity for SRB over the other S. aureus, M. luteus, V. alginolyticus and V. anguillarum bacteria as demonstrated in Figure 22.  Figure 23 shows Nyquist plots for bioimprinted ITO before and after attachment of several bacteria (Figure 23a). As the receptor sites were shaped by SRB, this bacterium is recognized most. The Nyquist plot, for bioemprinted ITO with adsorbed SRB, shows the largest semi-circle on the Z' axis. The difference between Z' values for ITO, with and without bacteria, indicates resistance to charge transfer (∆R ct ). It is the largest value for SRB because the sensor is indeed selective towards this bacterium (Figure 23b). This type of sensor is based on the size and shape of the bacteria, but the recognition site is fragile; a study on its reusability would be interesting, as one knows that biological bio-recognition elements, for example antibodies, can easily be damaged.
## (s124) Bacterial Protein A Surface Imprinting
(p124.0) Imprinting a part of the surface of a pathogen is more efficient than imprinting a whole cell; however, the target analyte is still too massive to enable recognition by functional groups. This disadvantage can be bypassed if the target analyte is not the whole bacterium, but its corresponding molecules and proteins-for example, a specific surface protein. In this regard, Khan et al. [138] employed protein A as a template protein for making an imprinted polymer for the recognition of Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). 3-aminophenol was electropolymerized by CV on a film of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNCTs) on which a solution of protein A has been deposited. Removal of a protein A (PA) template was done using proteinase K, an enzyme that naturally degrades the former. The fabricated sensor shows good sensitivity when an EIS test with PA and bovine serum albumin (BSA) has been done; however, testing with the surface protein from other bacteria would have given more credit to this work and the efficacy of the sensor in selectively recognizing S. aureus.

(p124.1) Imprinting a part of the surface of a pathogen is more efficient than imprinting a whole cell; however, the target analyte is still too massive to enable recognition by functional groups. This disadvantage can be bypassed if the target analyte is not the whole bacterium, but its corresponding molecules and proteins-for example, a specific surface protein. In this regard, Khan et al. [138] employed protein A as a template protein for making an imprinted polymer for the recognition of Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). 3-aminophenol was electropolymerized by CV on a film of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNCTs) on which a solution of protein A has been deposited. Removal of a protein A (PA) template was done using proteinase K, an enzyme that naturally degrades the former. The fabricated sensor shows good sensitivity when an EIS test with PA and bovine serum albumin (BSA) has been done; however, testing with the surface protein from other bacteria would have given more credit to this work and the efficacy of the sensor in selectively recognizing S. aureus.
## (s125) Imprinting of Bacterial Flagella Proteins
(p125.0) Another strategy is to detect proteins from the flagella of bacteria. This approach is adopted by Khan et al. [139] for the detection of Proteus mirabilis. This bacterium can infect the respiratory tract, urinary tract and open wounds, causing fever and pain. Its flagella permits P. mirabilis to move in biological environments; more importantly, they are specific and thus a means for the identification of this bacterium. Phenol was used as a monomer and electropolymerized by CV (range from −0.2 V to 0.8 V; scan rate 50 mV/s; 15 cycles). The methods of detection are EIS and SWV; results show an excellent response for each method: for EIS, the impedance increases the more the sensing layer captures target molecules. For SWV, the pic current decreases when the concentration of flagella increases (Figure 24a). However, no such changes in the sensor response were noted with the non-imprinted polymer (Figure 24b) The selectivity is also good when the sensor was used for a mixture of flagella/BSA and flagella/PA, and the percentage of deviation in the response caused by interference is small for EIS (<8%) and SVW (<5%). The use of two methods of electrochemical detection enables crosschecking the results and adopting the most suitable strategy of protein detection. 

(p125.1) Another strategy is to detect proteins from the flagella of bacteria. This approach is adopted by Khan et al. [139] for the detection of Proteus mirabilis. This bacterium can infect the respiratory tract, urinary tract and open wounds, causing fever and pain. Its flagella permits P. mirabilis to move in biological environments; more importantly, they are specific and thus a means for the identification of this bacterium. Phenol was used as a monomer and electropolymerized by CV (range from −0.2 V to 0.8 V; scan rate 50 mV/s; 15 cycles). The methods of detection are EIS and SWV; results show an excellent response for each method: for EIS, the impedance increases the more the sensing layer captures target molecules. For SWV, the pic current decreases when the concentration of flagella increases (Figure 24a). However, no such changes in the sensor response were noted with the non-imprinted polymer (Figure 24b) The selectivity is also good when the sensor was used for a mixture of flagella/BSA and flagella/PA, and the percentage of deviation in the response caused by interference is small for EIS (<8%) and SVW (<5%). The use of two methods of electrochemical detection enables crosschecking the results and adopting the most suitable strategy of protein detection. 
## (s126) Bacterial Spore Imprinting
(p126.0) Spores are increasingly investigated for bacteria identification as they are generally released when these latter are under stress. Lahcen et al. [140] have functionalized surfaces of carbon paste electrodes with polypyrrole imprinted polymer for Bacillus cereus spore detection, used as simulant for Bacillus anthracis spores. Polypyrrole films were electropoly-Sensors 2021, 21, 4300 34 of 42 merized by cyclic votammetry (5 scans between −0.7 V and +0.7 V at 100 mV/s), prior to the addition of 10 4 CFU/mL bacterial spores and further electropolymerization for 5 cycles at 100 mV/s. Spores were then removed by sonication for 5 min in distilled water or by incubation in a surfactant.

(p126.1) Several parameters were investigated and optimized, mainly the monomers' concentration, the number of scans, the nature of the extractor, the incubation time and the sonication duration. The designed sensor exhibits a good selectivity towards Bacillus cereus spores and a dynamic range ranging from 10 2 to 10 5 CFU/mL, which makes it suitable for effective measurements of Bacillus cereus spores.

(p126.2) Spores are increasingly investigated for bacteria identification as they are generally released when these latter are under stress. Lahcen et al. [140] have functionalized surfaces of carbon paste electrodes with polypyrrole imprinted polymer for Bacillus cereus spore detection, used as simulant for Bacillus anthracis spores. Polypyrrole films were electropoly-Sensors 2021, 21, 4300 34 of 42 merized by cyclic votammetry (5 scans between −0.7 V and +0.7 V at 100 mV/s), prior to the addition of 10 4 CFU/mL bacterial spores and further electropolymerization for 5 cycles at 100 mV/s. Spores were then removed by sonication for 5 min in distilled water or by incubation in a surfactant.

(p126.3) Several parameters were investigated and optimized, mainly the monomers' concentration, the number of scans, the nature of the extractor, the incubation time and the sonication duration. The designed sensor exhibits a good selectivity towards Bacillus cereus spores and a dynamic range ranging from 10 2 to 10 5 CFU/mL, which makes it suitable for effective measurements of Bacillus cereus spores.
## (s127) Imprinting Quorum Sensing Signaling Molecules
(p127.0) For the detection of the bacterium Aeromonas hydrophila, Jiang et al. [141] chose to imprint N-acryl-homoserine-lactones (AHLs) molecules that can induce the expression of pathogenic factors. AHLs participate in the quorum sensing system (QS), a system that enables communication between bacteria, their gathering and biofilm formation. Quorum sensing plays a key role in determining virulence ( Figure 25). AHL is generally produced at a low concentration; therefore, it is difficult to detect. MIP technology can thus solve this problem owing to the combined high selectivity of MIPs and outstanding sensitivity of electrochemical devices. In this publication, magnetic molecularly imprinted polymers (MMIP) were used as the sensing element. First, Fe 3 O 4 magnetic nanoparticles were prepared using a solvothermal method; then, silica-shell was prepared using TEOS. Subsequently, 3-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxylane (APTES) was used in order to introduce amino groups. Finally, polymerization was performed at the surface of the magnetic nanoparticles with an analogue template protein (DMHF). The detection of AHLs was done as follows: first, MMIP was incubated in a solution of target proteins, after four minutes, magnetic GCE, the working electrode, is introduced in the solution, and the MMIP will attach magnetically to the electrode. When all detection sites of MMIP are occupied, the electron-transfer resistance between the heart of MMIP and the electrode is maximal. This resistance decreases when captured proteins are washed off from MMIP. DPV was the sensing technique; results show that the selectivity of the MMIP was good when tests with DMHF in the presence of structural analogues of AHLs including C4-AHL, C6-AHL, C8-AHL and N-3oxo-C6-HSL were conducted. The electrochemical sensor was found to be stable: a test was conducted with MMIP stored for about three months; no particular changes were noted. Finally, the detection range of AHLs was found to be in the 2.5 × 10 −9 mol·L −1 to 1.0 × 10 −7 mol·L −1 range 5.3.7. Summary of Bacteria Imprinted Polymers Table 6 summarizes shortlisted case studies tackled in this mini-review. It concerns the bacterium under test, the monomer employed to make the MIP, the electrode material, the polymerization technique, the electrochemical technique and the limit of detection. Despite the low number of entries, Table 6 testifies for the rich literature on bacterial sensing using MIP-based electrodes and particularly the numerous strategies for recognizing bacteria without necessarily going through the problematic whole cell imprinting technique. Solutions prepared in lab and spiked; 10 2 to 10 5 cfu/mL LOD = 10 2 cfu/mL [140] Proteus mirabilis (flagella) Phenol Carbon Electropolymerization CV, EIS, SWV Tap water LOD = 0.9 ng/mL [139] Sulfate-reducing bacteria CS ITO/graphene Electrodeposition EIS Solution prepared in lab and spiked; 1 to 10 8 cfu/mL LOD = 0.7.10 4 cfu/mL [63] AP: 3-aminophenol; CS: Chitosan; DMHF: 2,5-dimethyl-4-hydroxy-3(2H)-furanone; MAA: methacrylic acid.

(p127.1) For the detection of the bacterium Aeromonas hydrophila, Jiang et al. [141] chose to imprint N-acryl-homoserine-lactones (AHLs) molecules that can induce the expression of pathogenic factors. AHLs participate in the quorum sensing system (QS), a system that enables communication between bacteria, their gathering and biofilm formation. Quorum sensing plays a key role in determining virulence ( Figure 25). AHL is generally produced at a low concentration; therefore, it is difficult to detect. MIP technology can thus solve this problem owing to the combined high selectivity of MIPs and outstanding sensitivity of electrochemical devices. In this publication, magnetic molecularly imprinted polymers (MMIP) were used as the sensing element. First, Fe 3 O 4 magnetic nanoparticles were prepared using a solvothermal method; then, silica-shell was prepared using TEOS. Subsequently, 3-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxylane (APTES) was used in order to introduce amino groups. Finally, polymerization was performed at the surface of the magnetic nanoparticles with an analogue template protein (DMHF). The detection of AHLs was done as follows: first, MMIP was incubated in a solution of target proteins, after four minutes, magnetic GCE, the working electrode, is introduced in the solution, and the MMIP will attach magnetically to the electrode. When all detection sites of MMIP are occupied, the electron-transfer resistance between the heart of MMIP and the electrode is maximal. This resistance decreases when captured proteins are washed off from MMIP. DPV was the sensing technique; results show that the selectivity of the MMIP was good when tests with DMHF in the presence of structural analogues of AHLs including C4-AHL, C6-AHL, C8-AHL and N-3oxo-C6-HSL were conducted. The electrochemical sensor was found to be stable: a test was conducted with MMIP stored for about three months; no particular changes were noted. Finally, the detection range of AHLs was found to be in the 2.5 × 10 −9 mol·L −1 to 1.0 × 10 −7 mol·L −1 range 5.3.7. Summary of Bacteria Imprinted Polymers Table 6 summarizes shortlisted case studies tackled in this mini-review. It concerns the bacterium under test, the monomer employed to make the MIP, the electrode material, the polymerization technique, the electrochemical technique and the limit of detection. Despite the low number of entries, Table 6 testifies for the rich literature on bacterial sensing using MIP-based electrodes and particularly the numerous strategies for recognizing bacteria without necessarily going through the problematic whole cell imprinting technique. Solutions prepared in lab and spiked; 10 2 to 10 5 cfu/mL LOD = 10 2 cfu/mL [140] Proteus mirabilis (flagella) Phenol Carbon Electropolymerization CV, EIS, SWV Tap water LOD = 0.9 ng/mL [139] Sulfate-reducing bacteria CS ITO/graphene Electrodeposition EIS Solution prepared in lab and spiked; 1 to 10 8 cfu/mL LOD = 0.7.10 4 cfu/mL [63] AP: 3-aminophenol; CS: Chitosan; DMHF: 2,5-dimethyl-4-hydroxy-3(2H)-furanone; MAA: methacrylic acid.
