# RENAL, PELVIC AND MESENTERIC TUMORS WITH LOW SIGNAL INTENSITY ON T2-WEIGHTED MR IMAGE: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 233467848 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83d1ee8b0dc5a44fbc5adb592465af8db608d8ed](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83d1ee8b0dc5a44fbc5adb592465af8db608d8ed)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of tumors is necessary for clinical practice. On MR imaging of the abdomen, T1 and T2-weighted sequences have always been a key aspect in characterizing tumors. The detection of tumors using T1 and T2-weighted sequences can be affected by various pathological factors. The histological structures tend to impact the T1 and T2 duration of relaxation. MR imaging possesses a unique ability in that it explores intracellular content in a way that allows it to recognize substances that can affect signal generation (1).

(p0.1) In most cases, intra-abdominal tumors have a high cellular water mass, which causes them to appear as a high signal intensity (SI) when viewed using T2-weighted imaging. In such a context, radiologists should be well-informed of the various factors that cause low SI as well as the mechanisms through which it occurs on T2-weighted images. They should possess the ability to identify the organ spectrum of tumors that are presented in various imaging findings (1).
## (s1) MR Imaging and T2 low signal intensity of renal, Pelvic and Mesenteric tumors
(p1.0) MR imaging involves the optimal evaluation of masses because of its inherent soft tissue contrast and multiplanar abilities. MR imaging aspects of indeterminate masses tend to provide well distinguished morphologic information on tumors such as its location, size, and composition (2). T2-weighted sequences incorporate an integral part of MR imaging that is performed to characterize masses. A greater percentage of intra-abdominal tumors comprise cystic components that display high SI on T2-weighted images. The findings of T2-low signal tumors are not common, which requires care when they are interpreted. These interpretations should be made based on aspects such as pathologic correlates such as smooth muscle, blood products, calcification, high tumor cellularity, and fibrous tissue (2).

(p1.1) Characterizing intra-abdominal tumors requires familiarity with their appearance as well as an analysis of their relationship with the affected or surrounding organs.A wide range of factors cause T2-low signal intra-abdominal tumors. Often, the factors rely on the nature of the tumor as well as the affected organ. Understanding the various causes of intra-abdominal tumors can help in using the correct and most effective method of diagnosis. Some abdominal tumors that are com- 
## (s8) Mesenteric and bowel tumors
(p8.0) Mesenteric tumors form part of the most common hypo-intense (low signal) tumors on T2-weighted images. Depending on where they are located, leiomyomas can in some cases project into the lumen or cause a mass effect on adjacently located bowels. Small bowel leiomyomas can appear as a homogenous focal round-shaped mass that has intense, constant enhancement. The tumor also shows uniform enhancement that is greater than that of the adjacent bowels when shown on post-gadolinium images (18). On T2-weighted images, leiomyoma is displayed as hypo-intense (low signal) round and smooth mural defect that is demarcated by sharp angles to the walls of the intestine (Figure 11).
