# Proximal Humerus Reconstruction after Tumor Resection: An Overview of Surgical Management

CorpusID: 233034445 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4d4fc612390e1afd46a1754756f5c347dec29f0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4d4fc612390e1afd46a1754756f5c347dec29f0)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s4) Autografts.
(p4.0) Autologous bone grafting involves bone segments obtained from the patient himself in donor sites that can be near or far from the recipient one. Bone tissue can be picked up from nonessential bones, whose sacrifice would not cause major repercussions on patient's quality of life. Among these, not only fibula is most frequently used and described in literature but also other donor sites can be used for the purpose, such as ribs or the neighboring scapula and clavicle [14,[27][28][29][58][59][60][61][62][63][64][65][66][67][68][69][70].

(p4.1) Harvested bones require continuous blood supply to survive in the receiving area. eir vascularization must thus be preserved, if the donor site is adjacent to the shoulder, or restored anastomosing the vascular peduncle of the graft with local vessels, if the tissue is taken from a far region.

(p4.2) In comparison to allografts, autografts do not only serve as a scaffold that receives the nearby osteoblasts (osteoconduction) but also have a greater tendency to stimulate the osteoprogenitor cells of the nearby tissues to differentiate into osteoblasts and begin new bone formation (osteoinduction).

(p4.3) Moreover, consisting in vital and metabolically active bone tissue, autologous grafts bring their own osteogenesis potential to the receiving site, giving their contribution to the local bone growth and postoperative healing.
## (s6) Anatomical Endoprostheses. Modern days' humeral endoprostheses sink their roots in the surgical and technical advances brought by Charles Sumner
(p6.0) Neer II between the 1950s and the 70s. According to Neer, shoulder hemiarthroplasty was intended to ease local pain, preserve the normal anatomy of the site, and meanwhile provide sufficient functionality to the involved upper limb [96].

(p6.1) Following this line of fought, modern humeral megaprostheses can be substantially considered as articular spacers whose purposes are to ensure the respect of shoulder's anatomical overview and give back an articular mobility that, with the help of the elbow and wrist, could allow patients to carry out basic activities, such as bring the fork to their mouth, brush their teeth, or touch their hair [1,28,36,47,[97][98][99].

(p6.2) Nowadays, many endoprosthetic systems are available on the market, and the most varied implants have been described in literature from the modular to the custommade devices, with both cemented or uncemented fixation concepts ( Figure 2) [13,36,41,94,100,101].
## (s7) Reverse Total Shoulder Prostheses.
(p7.0) Reverse total prostheses are implants in which the articular components switch; the socket is placed in the proximal humerus and the prosthetic ball is set on the glenoid (Figure 3). is design has been conceived to improve articular strength, stability, and range of motion, meanwhile keeping low the risks of dislocation and aseptic loosening.

(p7.1) For oncologic patients with proximal humerus resections, especially for those who lost their rotator cuff but maintained deltoid insertion and axillary nerve, reverse shoulder arthroplasty represents a reliable treatment that can generally lead to better functional results compared to hemiendoprosthesis. Mean MSTS scores described in literature ranged between 18 and 25.7 out of 30, with results that are on average higher than the ones obtained with endoprostheses. In comparison to these later, reverse total shoulder prostheses also provide better flexion and abduction. In fact, the functionality allowed by reverse shoulder prostheses does not limit to morphological support to the elbow and wrist but extents to active shoulder flexion and abduction generally above the 90 degrees, greatly increasing patients' possibilities in terms of daily living activities [17,44,46,104,124]. As described by De Wilde et al. in 2005, patients with proximal humerus and rotators cuff resection treated with reverse shoulder arthroplasty rely on the deltoid muscle to generate active shoulder function; therefore, surgeons must focus on optimizing the deltoid moment arm and muscular elongation to get better clinical results [17]. Boileau et al. also testified promising functional results in nononcological patients when reverse shoulder arthroplasty was used in combination with a modified latissimus dorsi and teres major tendon transfer. Cases showed an improvement of mean active elevation and external rotation range that could encourage a similar use in oncological field [125]. Another possible variation capable of increasing shoulder stability is the addition of synthetic tubes to surround the reverse prostheses, similar to what above described in the prior subchapter [23,41,46,47,126].
## (s8) Allograft-Prosthesis Composite (APC) Reconstructions
(p8.0) In orthopaedic oncology, surgical treatment of proximal humerus often leads to wide resections of both bones and soft tissues. Removal of joint capsule, rotator cuff muscles, or deltoid could be necessary in order to achieve a radical excision of neoplastic tissue. is could compromise shoulder stability after reconstruction, especially because of Advances in Orthopedics the intrinsic instability of the joint without the stabilizers complex [34]. Endoprosthesis and allograft, as described in previous chapters, are two of the most dominant reconstructive options for proximal humerus to this date. However, in the postoperative medium-term follow-up, both these techniques count several major complications that make revision surgery inevitable. Endoprostheses cannot always provide a valid reattachment for rotator cuff tendons, threating joint stability and ending in an increased risk of dislocation and subluxation.

(p8.1) Compared to endoprostheses, allografts have a number of advantages: restoration of bone stock and soft tissues attachment guarantee better stability, wider shoulder range of motion, and consequently improved functional outcomes. Nevertheless, reconstruction with allografts as well leads to major complications such as bone resorption, fracture of the graft, and nonunion at bone-graft interface frequently described in literature [127].

(p8.2) Humeral reconstruction can also be performed matching biological and prosthetic approaches that meet allograftprosthesis composite reconstructions (APC). is method was first described in 1991 by Gitelis to overcome the considerable risk of allografts alone to suffer fractures and implant failures. e association of allografts with prostheses theoretically allows matching the structural advantages from both reconstructions. Allograft's possibility to anchor surrounding soft tissues and therefore increase articular stability is combined with prostheses' durability; a more rigid construct is created and lower risk of fractures, subchondral collapses, and dislocations are achieved [128].
