# Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders: A Literature Review Male sexual health and dysfunction Enis Rauf Coskuner and Burak Ozkan: Premature Ejaculation and Endocrine Disorders

CorpusID: 233190941 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c2d159c992045300e3969a45294b2676474ebcfc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c2d159c992045300e3969a45294b2676474ebcfc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) DIABETES MELLITUS
(p3.0) As a result of the short and long-term effects caused by hyperglycemia, many medical, psychological, and SD complications can develop in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) [35]. These complications can be prevented or delayed with effective treatment and blood sugar control. SD in men is one of the lesser-known complications of DM. SD in diabetic men may present as ED, ejaculation problems, and libido disorders. All three of these types of SD can significantly affect the quality of life of diabetic patients [36]. It has been reported that the prevalence of SD is gradually increasing in diabetic patients [37]. However, the prevalence of PE has not been fully determined, due to the lack of a clear evidence-based definition of PE [7]. Studies investigating the relationship between PE and DM have been conducted separately on type 1 DM (T1DM), type 2 DM (T2DM), and preDM (Table 1).

(p3.1) In the study by El Sakka [38] including 676 male T2DM patients, the prevalence of PE was 32.4% in patients younger than 50 years old and 67.6% in patients over 50 years old. That study reported that patients who had diabetes for more than 10 years were 2.7 times more likely to have PE than men who had diabetes less than 5 years (p<0.05). In addition, the authors observed that diabetic patients with glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) >7% were 10 times more likely to have PE than patients with HbA1c <7%. As a result of their study, El-Sakka concluded that long diabetes duration, the presence of cardiovascular disease, poor glycemic control, and the presence of ED are associated with an increased risk of PE in diabetic men [38]. In another study including 300 diabetic men, Owiredu et al [36] reported a prevalence of PE of 56.6%. In addition, testosterone levels were negatively correlated with fasting blood glucose (FBS), HbA1c, short IELT, weight, and waist circumference (WC). Majzoub et al [39] reported that of 488 patients with T2DM, 115 (23.6%) had ED and 294 (60.2%) had PE. The authors of that study observed that patients with T2DM had a significantly higher prevalence of PE and ED than the control group (p<0.001). In addition, the authors found that all PE types were higher in patients with T2DM, and that mean IELT was significantly lower in patients with T2DM (3.6±2.7) than controls (4.3±2.8) (p=0.014) [39]. In a study conducted to evaluate the prevalence of PE in Italy, 569 of 2,658 men with PE had LPE, 1,855 had APE, and 234 were not identified. In that same study, it was determined that diabetes treatment led to a decrease in PE prevalence [40]. Differences in PE rates in patients with T2DM may be due to variations in the studied populations or to the way PE was defined in each study [39]. The link between PE and T2DM is still unclear. However, psychogenic factors and organic causes, especially diabetic autonomic neuropathy, play a role in the proportionality of the incidence of PE with the duration and severity of DM [41].
## (s6) THYROID DISORDERS
(p6.0) The thyroid is a hormonally active gland that is part of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis and secretes thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), which act on metabolism. Receptors that mediate the activity of thyroid hormones are found in almost all cells in the body. Indeed, hyperthyroidism, which is an excess of thyroid hormones, causes a hypermetabolic state characterized by tachycardia, tremors, anxiety, diarrhea, and sympathetic overactivity resulting in weight loss. Conversely, in hypothyroidism, there is a slowdown in physical and mental activity resulting in fatigue, decreased cardiac output, constipation, and weight gain. Although both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism affect almost all systems in the organism, the effects of these hormones on sexual function have been elucidated in less detail. The long-held false belief that the genital organs do not respond to thyroid hormone is responsible for this. However, studies have identified the presence of thyroid hormone receptors in both male and female genitalia, including the testis, corpora cavernosa, ovary, and vagina [72]. Therefore, it has been revealed that thyroid hormones can also be effective in the functioning of the genital organs, and studies on thyroid hormones and sexual activity have been accelerated. The results of some studies investigating the relationship between thyroid disorders and PE are presented in Table 3.

(p6.1) Two to four months after treatment of hypothyroidism and normalization of thyroid hormone levels, one study showed that there is a reduction in the proportion of hypothyroidic men with ED (64.3% during treatment to 21.4% after treatment, p<0.05), hypoactive sexual dysfunction (HSD) (64.3% during treatment to 35.7% after treatment, p<0.05), and DE (64% during treatment to 28.6% after treatment, p<0.05). However, this study included only 14 patients, which is an important limitation [73].

(p6.2) Numerous studies have identified a link between hyperthyroidism and ejaculatory dysfunction. In the study of Carani et al [73], PE was detected in half of the patients with hyperthyroidism. After the treat-ment of hyperthyroidism, with normalization of thyroid hormone levels for 2 to 4 months, the prevalence of PE decreased from 50% to 15%, which is similar to the levels in the general population (14%). In their study including 755 men, Corona et al [74] observed that the prevalence of PE was significantly higher in patients with TSH less than 0.2 mU/L compared to the rest of the study group (57.1% vs. 26.5%). Interestingly, Corona et al [74] found that patients with TSH less than 0.2 mU/L that also had ED had higher rates of PE. Thus, they suggested that hyperthyroidism is associated with PE independently of ED. Cihan et al [75] examined the prevalence of PE in hyperthyroidic men from a different perspective. In their single-center prospective observational study, they detected PE in 72% of 49 men with untreated hyperthyroidism, and observed a direct correlation between IELT and TSH levels (r=0.37, p=0.04). After patients were treated med- The prevalence of PE decreased from 50% to 15% after 2-4 months of treatment.

(p6.3) Waldinger et al [78] 2005 IELT ≤1 minute Hyperthyroidism -There is no relationship between LPE and hypo-or hyperthyroidism. Cihan et al [75] 2009 DMS-IV Hyperthyroidism 72% Correlation between IELT and TSH levels. Increase the IELT and decrease in the incidence of PE to 25% after treatment. Cihan et al [76] 2009 Animal study Hyperthyroidism -Hyperthyroid rat ejaculation time is shorter than control and returns to normal after treatment. Corona et al [30] 2011 PE was defined as ejaculation within 1 minute of vaginal intromission (as reported by the patient).
## (s9) PITUITARY GLAND DISORDERS
(p9.0) Testosterone production is driven by the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis. Hypothalamic gonadotropin releasing hormone stimulates the secretion of LH and FSH from the pituitary gland. LH regulates testosterone secretion by Leydig cells while FSH supports spermatogenesis. Testosterone deficiency can be asymptomatic or cause SD such as decreased libido and ED. Hypogonadism is a clinical condition that causes low serum testosterone levels due to dysfunction of the HPG axis. The relationship of testosterone levels to PE has been discussed before. Although the relationship between hypogonadism and PE has not been fully elucidated, it has been suggested that patients with PE are associated with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH) [27]. Whether or not there are symptoms of hypothalamic or pituitary disease, hypogonadism is common in sexually mature men. The results of some studies investigating the relationship between pituitary disease and PE are presented in Table 4.
## (s10) VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY
(p10.0) Vitamin D is a steroid hormone produced in the skin that is converted to vitamin D3 through exposure to sunlight [88]. Studies suggest that vitamin D deficiency is associated with endocrinological disorders, autoimmune diseases, infectious diseases, and neurocognitive disorders (other than those in the musculoskeletal system) [89]. Other studies have investigated the relationship between vitamin D and PE, and the results of those studies are presented in Table 5. Mirzahosseini et al [90] reported that the administration of 2.5 mg of vitamin D3 during the critical hormonal imprint period (neonatal period) completely prevented ejaculation in male rats due to the overlap of sex steroid receptors.
