# Integron and its role in antimicrobial resistance: A literature review on some bacterial pathogens

CorpusID: 233865798 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44bd79b396cc51ab795e11b7cabb06b26350f453](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44bd79b396cc51ab795e11b7cabb06b26350f453)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s4) Mobility
(p4.0) The mobility of integrons has been considered to be a major concern in clinical pathogens of spreading antibiotic resistance, and this mobility is related to mobile DNA elements (transposon and plasmid) (16). However, integrons do not have the ability to move, but integrons (mostly Class I) are known as mobile genetic elements that are most commonly found on transferable plasmids. Therefore, these moving plasmids carry gene cassettes that can transfer to other integrons or even to the bacterial genome. The integron system allows microorganisms to combine gene cassettes and convert them into functional proteins by expressing the genes correctly (2). Mobile genetic elements containing plasmids, transposons, secretion sequences, and genetic islands can act as extensive reservoirs of information for integrons, which are shared among bacteria. With the motion of the gene cassettes, the integrons play an important role in the distribution and spread of resistance genes. In addition to clinical aspects, there are many reports of the presence of integrons in environmental microorganisms, which indicate their high diversity in various functions. This explains exactly that integrons are old genetic elements within the genome and play an important role in evolution and adaptation (13).
## (s6) Class II integron
(p6.0) Class II integrons indicate a high prevalence in clinical isolates in Gram-negative bacteria such as Acinetobacter, Shigella, Salmonella, Pseudomonas (7). Class II integrons, similar to class I, are also associated with the Tn7 family of transposons (Tn7 and its derivatives such as Tn1825, Tn1826, and Tn4132) which carry the recombinant site attI2 and P c . The 3′-conserved segment includes The following cassettes are a part of the 3′conserved region and not mobile: sul1 gene encoding resistant to sulfonamides, qacEΔ encoding resistant to quaternary ammonium compounds, and orf5 unknown function 5 tns (tnsA, tnsB, tnsC, tnsD, and tnsD) genes that play a role in the transposon movement. Class II integrons contain gene cassettes including dfrA1 (dihydrofolate reductase), sat1 (streptothricin-acetyl transferase), and aadA1 (aminoglycoside adenyltransferase) which are resistant to trimethoprim, streptomycin, and streptomycin/spectinomycin, respectively. The ereA gene (erythromycin esterase) has also been found in the class II integron (7,16). The integrase gene in class II integrons is about 46% similar to the integrase gene in class I integrons. One of the most important differences between intI1 and intI2 is that the integrase gene in the class II integrons (intI2) is stopped early by the end codons (TAA), resulting in the 178 amino acid protein synthesis being deactivated. Therefore, class II integrons are weaker in moving gene cassettes than class I integrons. However, mutations in end codons lead to reactivity of these amino acids, which results in the activation of the integrase gene (3).
## (s7) Class III integron
(p7.0) In 1993, class III integrons were first identified in Japan by Arakawa and colleagues in S. marcescens. These types of integrons rarely present in clinical specimens, they have been found in a small number of bacteria such as Acinetobacter spp., Alcaligenes, Citrobacter freundii, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Pseudomonas putida, Salmonella spp. and S. marcescens (7). The 3′-conserved segment in these integrons is similar to that of class I integrons: it contains four genes, qacEΔ1, sul1, orf5, orf6, and their only difference is the lack of transcription genes. In these integrons, there are several gene cassettes including bla IMP-1 and aacA4 that encode metallo-lactamase enzymes and the aminoglycoside resistance gene (tobramycin), respectively. The aacA4 cassette was originally found in class I integrons but the bla IMP-1 cassette was first recognized in class III integrons, however due to the extensive recombination that occurred between class I and III integrons, this gene is also found in class I integrons and has been widely reported worldwide (22). 
## (s8) Class IV integron
(p8.0) In fact, class IV integrons are super integrons that were first detected in Vibriocholera. Mazel in 1998, for the first time, called them super integron (19). These integrons are seen in microorganisms including Vibrionaceae, Shewanella, Xanthomonas, Pseudomonas, and other proteobacteria. To date, class IV integrons have been found to carry gene cassettes imparting resistance to the antibiotic's chloramphenicol and fosfomycin (23).
## (s9) Antibiotic resistance
(p9.0) In recent years, excessive consumption of antibiotics has led to increased antibiotic resistance. Genetic mutations and acquisition of resistance genes are involved in the development of resistance. One of the most important causes of the development and spread of antibiotic resistance of genes is the acquisition of resistance genes that occur through the horizontal transduction of the gene or genetic moving elements such as plasmids and transposons (24). These integrons share a collection of genetic cassettes most of which encode antibiotic resistance. In general, about 130 resistant genetic cassettes have been identified with varying patterns of codon and attC sites (3). Resistance integrals have several common features: they usually have motion, their cassette arrangements are short, and typically only carry antibiotic resistance genes. However, these common features in them are not inherent characteristics of the ancestors of integrons but they are created by strong selective pressure during the use of antibiotics by humans.
## (s10) Integrons in various bacteria
(p10.0) Escherichia coli E. coli is known as the head of the large family of Enterobacteriaceae. Based on diversity in pathogenesis and clinical symptoms, the strains of E. coli are divided into two intestinal and extra-intestinal. E. coli is one of the most important causes of gastrointestinal and urinary tract infections in humans that has been resistant to a wide range of antibiotics over the past years (25). Acquiring mobile elements, including plasmids, transposons, and integrons among Gram-negative bacteria, it plays an important role in the development of antibiotic resistance (2). Class I integron was reported in 1973 (26). Common cassettes in this class of integron result in resistance to aminoglycosides (aadA1, aadA2, aadB, aadA5), trimethoprim (dfrA1, dfrA5, dfrA7,  dfrA12, dfrA17, dfrB2, dfrA1-gcuC, dfrA17-aadA5, dfrA1-aadA1, dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2), erythromycin (ere2) and broad-spectrum beta-lactams (ESBL) (bla OXA-101 -aac(6')-Ib) (27). Also, class II integron has been reported less frequently. This integron contains gene cassettes dfrA1-sat1-aadA1, dfrA1-sat2-aadA1 and estX-sat2-aadA1 (28). Also, recently, a new class II integron has been identified (29), which includes two gene cassettes. One of them is the dfrA14 gene. There are also reports available on the availability of Class III integrons that are commonly seen with class I and III integrons in this bacterium (30). (Table 1) in our study in 2015, we collected E. coli from clinical isolates of patients in the north of Iran, which showed 22% of E. coli isolates carried class I integron ( Table 2) (31).
## (s11) Acinetobacterbaumannii
(p11.0) A. baumannii is recognized as an important cause of nosocomial infections that has antibiotics resistant genes including efflux pumps, class B β-lactamase (Metallo-beta-lactamase (MBL)), class C chromosomal β-lactamase (Amp C), class D β-lactamase (OXA-type carbapenemase), integrons, and associated insertion sequence (IS) elements (32). Class I integron in this bacterium has several gene cassettes (aadA2, aadB, dfrA7, bla CARB-2, dfrA1-gauC, dfrA17-aadA5, dfrA1-aadA1, dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2) that caused resistance to aminoglycosides, ESBLs, and trimethoprim (27). Although class II integrons including dfrA1, aadA1, sat1, and aadB which are resistanct to trimethoprim, streptomycin, tobramycin, and kanamycin, respectively ( Table 1) (33). In other studies, in 2017, we collected A. baumannii isolates from BAL samples of patients admitted to the ICU at Ayatollah Rouhani Hospital in Babol, Iran. The distribution analysis of intI genes showed that 25.7%, 88.6%, and 28.6% of isolates carried the intI1, intI2, and intI3genes, respectively. Also, the prevalence of aadB, dfrA1, bla OXA30 , aadA1 and bla PSE1 gene cassettes were 94.3%, 77.15, 40%,5.7%, and 0%, respectively (33,34).
## (s12) Salmonella spp.
(p12.0) Salmonella spp. are intestinal pathogens that are usually transmitted by contaminated food, especially animals such as meat, poultry, eggs, and milk. Multidrugresistant (MDR) salmonella has been a major public health issue since 1990. Salmonella spp. is associated with different classes of integrons, usually containing one to three gene cassettes (35). Class I integrons play a major role in antibiotic resistance in Salmonella spp. This class has several types of gene cassettes resistant to aminoglycosides (aadA, aadA1, aadA2, aadA5, aadB), beta-lactams (bla CARB-2 ) and trimethoprim (dfrA1, dfrA7, dfrA12, dfrA17, dfrA1-gcuC, dfrA1-aadA1, dfrA17-aadA5, dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2) (27). Although the percentage of class II integrons is relatively lower in this bacterium, it appears in different serotypes of salmonella spp. with dfrA1-sat1-aadA1 and estX-sat2-aadA1 cassettes. Class III integrons are not yet found in this bacterium (Table  1)(36). In our study in 2015, the prevalence of Class I integrons in Salmonella infantis was 36% (Table 2) (37).
## (s13) Klebsiella spp.
(p13.0) Klebsiella spp. causes diseases such as pneumonia, meningitis, and blood and urinary tract infections. This bacterium is resistant to a wide range of antibiotics (aminoglycosides, cephalosporins, and ESBLs). Class I integrons in Klebsiella spp. has different gene cassettes, including aadA1a, aadA2, dfrA7, aadB, dfrA1-gcuC, dfrA1-aadA1, dfrA17-aadA5, dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2, aadA, and bla CARB-2 . However, multiple resistance to these bacteria has been determined due to dfrA12-orfF-aadA2, and dfrA1-orfC (27). Antibiotic resistance in Klebsiella spp. Is known more to ESBLs such as TEM, SHV, CTX-M. Class I integrons in Klebsiella spp. also has genes associated with MBLs like Verona integrin (VIM) and IMPtype carbapenemases (IMP). These MBLs hydrolyze β-lactams including carbapenems, which are commonly enclosed in class I integrons. The class II integron also has dfrA1, sat1 / sat2, and aadA1 cassettes, and class III integron includes bla GES-1 (Table 1) (38). Also, we studied K. pneumonia isolates in 2011 and 2015 . Our results showed that 36.6% of isolates carried the intI1 gene and the prevalence of bla VIM-1 gene cassette was 30% (Table  2) (39,40).
## (s14) Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(p14.0) P. aeruginosa is one of the most important factors in hospital infections, especially in burn patients and patients with cystic fibrosis. Due to increased MDR bacteria, treatment for this bacterium is difficult to find. Class I integron is an important factor for the development of antibiotic resistance and the emergence of MDR strains (41). This class of integrons includes some gene cassettes such a aadB and aadA2 (resistance to aminoglycosides), dfrA17-aadA5 and dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2 (resistance to trimethoprim), bla CARB-2 (resistance to carbenicillin) (27). Class II integrons in P. aeruginosa include dfrA1-sat1-aadA1 (Table 1) (16). Our studies in 2012 and 2013 on P. aeruginosa isolates showed 37-40% of isolates had the intI1 gene (Table 2) (41,42).
## (s15) Enterococcus faecalis
(p15.0) E. faecalis is an intestinal flora and has been identified as one of the major causes of hospital infections, with a tendency to increase antibiotic resistant class I integrons; E. faecalis contains gene cassettes dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2 (resistance to trimethoprim) and aadA1a (resistance to aminoglycosides) (43). Class II integrons has the dfrA1-sat1-aadA1 cassettes (Table 1) (44).
## (s16) Enterobacter spp.
(p16.0) Enterobacter spp. are Gram-negative bacteria that cause gastrointestinal diseases, at present, Enterobacter spp. with MDR patterns that contain class I integron are considered one of the major concerns of physicians and infection control practitioners. This class causes resistance to aminoglycosides (dfrA7, aadA1a, and aadA2) and trimethoprim (dfrA1-aadA1, dfrA17-aadA5, dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2, and dfr12-orfF-aadA2)( Table 1) (27).
## (s17) Staphylococcus aureus
(p17.0) S. aureus is a Gram-positive microorganism which is now considered one of the most important causes of hospital infections (45). Quantitative studies have been done on integrons in Gram-positive bacteria. Class I integrons is more common in S. aureus and causes resistance to aminoglycosides (aadA1a and aadA2), trimethoprim (dfrA17-aadA5 and dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2) and chloramphenicol (aacA4-cmlA1)( 
