# polymers Cascading Recycling of Wood Waste: A Review

CorpusID: 235298169 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff8effe17fdbb71d1676f67a2fdb4bbda8be118f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff8effe17fdbb71d1676f67a2fdb4bbda8be118f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Wood has many advantages in relation to the concepts of the bio-economy and circular economy. It is a material of natural and renewable origin, biodegradable, with remarkable mechanical and thermal characteristics. The environmental impacts during the production and end-of-life phases of the wood material are generally much lower than those of equivalent materials produced from inorganic or fossil raw materials [1]. Moreover, unlike resources of agricultural origin, wood does not compete with food. As a result, since the beginning of the 21st century and in addition to traditional uses, there has been an increase in the consumption of wood for new applications (energy production, building materials, chemicals, etc.) [2]. A study shows that by 2030, the production of wood could be insufficient to meet demand in Europe [1]. The increase in wood consumption is accompanied by an increase in the production of waste wood from end-of-life wood-based products. Recycling this large deposit could thus constitute a source of abundant and inexpensive raw material for the production of new materials.
## (s7) Hydrolysis and Thermolysis of Residual Adhesives
(p7.0) The main contaminant of recycled wood is the glue used in particleboard, plywood, fiberboard, etc. Urea-formaldehyde (UF) glue used alone or reinforced with small quantities of melamine is the most commonly used. The main advantages of UF glue are its low cost, absence of color, and high chemical reactivity during polymerization. The more expensive phenol-formaldehyde or pMDI-based adhesives are used for specific applications, particularly in wet environments. In fact, the main disadvantage of UF adhesives is their low resistance to chemical hydrolysis, which limits their use in outdoor applications. In the presence of moisture, the UF polymer chain can undergo a hydrolysis reaction described in Figure 3, leading to shorter polymer fragments and a drop in the mechanical properties of the wood-UF composite.

(p7.1) The presence of residual glue on the surface of the wood fibers or particles makes their recycling more difficult, especially for the production of new wood panels. The cross-linked glue particles do not react with a new adhesive to form a polymer network during a second cross-linking step, resulting in a significant drop in the properties of the materials formed from recycled panels. This negative impact of the residual UF on the fibers surface has been confirmed by gel time measurements [24]. It has been shown that the presence of only 6% by weight of residual UF glue results in a reduction of up to 50% in the shear strength of a plywood panel [25].  The presence of residual glue on the surface of the wood fibers or particles makes their recycling more difficult, especially for the production of new wood panels. The crosslinked glue particles do not react with a new adhesive to form a polymer network during a second cross-linking step, resulting in a significant drop in the properties of the materials formed from recycled panels. This negative impact of the residual UF on the fibers surface has been confirmed by gel time measurements [24]. It has been shown that the presence of only 6% by weight of residual UF glue results in a reduction of up to 50% in the shear strength of a plywood panel [25].

(p7.2) The hydrolysis susceptibility mentioned above can then be used to dispose of the UF adhesive in a recycling process. A removal of two-third of the UF adhesive by simple treatment in water at a temperature of <100 °C has been described [23,26]. Lubis et al. studied the hydrolysis of cured resins and showed that the pH of the medium strongly influences the hydrolysis kinetics according to the following order: acid > neutral > alkali. The optimum conditions of their study to remove UF resin from MDF were: 80 °C for 2 h in the presence of oxalic acid [27]. This hydrolysis reaction can be accelerated by treatment at higher temperatures using water vapor. For example, treatment in the presence of steam at temperatures of 150-190 °C for 10-20 min will remove 80% of the adhesive [28]. The main limitation of this approach is related to the concomitant degradation of the wood fiber (in particular, hydrolysis of hemicelluloses), which affects the morphology (particle or fiber size) and properties of the wood.

(p7.3) Low-temperature pyrolysis could also be considered for partial depollution of wood waste [29][30][31]. Pyrolysis is a degradation reaction under the effect of heat and in an inert atmosphere, i.e., without oxygen. It is often carried out under nitrogen (N2), argon, and helium being also commonly used. Figure 4 shows the degradation rate of wood, UF resin, and melamine formaldehyde (MF) resin during the pyrolysis reaction performed in thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) device. It is clearly visible that the UF resin begins to degrade at a lower temperature than wood. When the pyrolysis takes place between 250 and 300 °C (gray zone), the degradation of the resin is then promoted [32][33][34]. This method allows up to 60% of the resin to be removed while limiting the degradation of the wood for treatment times between 8 and 15 min and temperatures between 250 and 300 °C [32]. The main pyrolysis products of wood-based panels pyrolysis, for gaseous form, are NH3, HCN, and HNCO [29,30] particularly, NH3 has significantly higher yields than HCN, especially under lower pyrolysis temperatures. During the degradation process, initial UF polymer chains react with lignin The hydrolysis susceptibility mentioned above can then be used to dispose of the UF adhesive in a recycling process. A removal of two-third of the UF adhesive by simple treatment in water at a temperature of <100 • C has been described [23,26]. Lubis et al. studied the hydrolysis of cured resins and showed that the pH of the medium strongly influences the hydrolysis kinetics according to the following order: acid > neutral > alkali. The optimum conditions of their study to remove UF resin from MDF were: 80 • C for 2 h in the presence of oxalic acid [27]. This hydrolysis reaction can be accelerated by treatment at higher temperatures using water vapor. For example, treatment in the presence of steam at temperatures of 150-190 • C for 10-20 min will remove 80% of the adhesive [28]. The main limitation of this approach is related to the concomitant degradation of the wood fiber (in particular, hydrolysis of hemicelluloses), which affects the morphology (particle or fiber size) and properties of the wood.

(p7.4) Low-temperature pyrolysis could also be considered for partial depollution of wood waste [29][30][31]. Pyrolysis is a degradation reaction under the effect of heat and in an inert atmosphere, i.e., without oxygen. It is often carried out under nitrogen (N 2 ), argon, and helium being also commonly used. Figure 4 shows the degradation rate of wood, UF resin, and melamine formaldehyde (MF) resin during the pyrolysis reaction performed in thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) device. It is clearly visible that the UF resin begins to degrade at a lower temperature than wood. When the pyrolysis takes place between 250 and 300 • C (gray zone), the degradation of the resin is then promoted [32][33][34]. This method allows up to 60% of the resin to be removed while limiting the degradation of the wood for treatment times between 8 and 15 min and temperatures between 250 and 300 • C [32]. The main pyrolysis products of wood-based panels pyrolysis, for gaseous form, are NH 3 , HCN, and HNCO [29,30] particularly, NH 3 has significantly higher yields than HCN, especially under lower pyrolysis temperatures. During the degradation process, initial UF polymer chains react with lignin to produce heterocyclic-N [33,35], thus intimately bonding the residual resin to the wood and making it unavailable to be removed by hydrolysis. Due to the higher temperature levels in pyrolysis process, the wood is more degraded by this method than by hydrolysis.

(p7.5) Considering MF resin, the temperature range of degradation is over that of the wood (i.e., Figure 4), therefore, the pyrolysis process is inefficient for MF resin curing.  Considering MF resin, the temperature range of degradation is over that of the wood (i.e., Figure 4), therefore, the pyrolysis process is inefficient for MF resin curing.
## (s14) Microscopic Methods for Waste Wood Characterization
(p14.0) Developments in the fields of imaging and control of the conditions under which microorganisms are cultivated in fermenters open up the possibility of characterizing changes in the wood material and better deciphering the processes involved in recycling processes.

(p14.1) Indeed, when developing a recycling process, it is often essential to be able to observe changes in the material. In addition to conventional transmission photon microscopy, more advanced methods such as confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) or scanning electron microscopy coupled to microanalysis (EDS/WDS-SEM) allow in situ investigation of wood waste during processing. As these techniques are widely used in the literature, we will give here some examples of results obtained during laboratory-scale processes.

(p14.2) The monitoring of copper detoxification by a filamentous fungus involves the sampling of wood particles that could be analyzed by different types of imaging techniques (Figure 7). in composition between the composites. NIR analysis can thus separate different wood products thanks to the differences in their compositions.

(p14.3) This analysis can go further. The work carried out by [65] has shown the potential of NIR to differentiate wood-plastic composites (WPC). However, this promising technique for the identification of certain plastics is limited for the detection of black plastics in recycled wood. In order to eliminate this gray area, authors of [67] studied the interest of mid-infrared for the detection of black plastics. In mid-infrared, black plastics have characteristic and identifiable spectra.
## (s17) Conclusions and Recommendations
(p17.0) The current waste wood recycling processes need to be improved in order to (1) prioritize material recovery over energy recovery by cascading and (2) to limit as much as possible the non-recyclable batches, which may contain at least partly highly contaminated class C wood and/or MDF. From this study and on a European scale, the following conclusions and recommendations can be drawn:
