# IP Annals of Prosthodontics and Restorative Dentistry A literature review on immediate implant placement

CorpusID: 236279631 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f9581567c32718d988964fc9c3b7cb5f1dddd86](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f9581567c32718d988964fc9c3b7cb5f1dddd86)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Risk factors
(p6.0) There is a high risk of failure of implant when placed immediately at the extraction site of the patients having severe periodontitis. 14 Mucosal recession is found to be a very common and serious problem associated with immediate implant placement. 15,16 Literature revealed that 2-0 to 30 percent of buccal mucosal recession for more than I mm was reported. So a thin bio type could be a precipitating factor in the development of muco gingival defect after implant placement. Literature revealed that the immediate implantation is successful in limited or otherwise ideal extraction cases in terms of aesthetics or in otherwise compromised cases the aesthetic results of immediate implant placement is unpredictable. 17,18 rough surface of the implant found to be having more primary stability when compared to the smooth machined surface implant. Literature revealed that patient not taking antibiotic course including amoxicillin after implant placement are at 3 times more likely to develop chances of failures after implant placement .
## (s7) Conclusion
(p7.0) By increasing the aesthetic demand and limited time period, immediate implant placement could be a better option for the patient as well as to the clinician. Literature revealed high success rate of 95 percent to 98 percent with immediate implant placement, but when the inclusion criteria for the patient is followed well. 19 parametres that are climical and case selection criteria would be taken seriously in to account to achieve the possibility of achieving good results.
