# energies The Hydration and Volume Expansion Mechanisms of Modified Expansive Cements for Sustainable In-Situ Rock Fragmentation: A Review

CorpusID: 239241152 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45238c6b780f4dd5e5edc933d735f42c7be0910a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45238c6b780f4dd5e5edc933d735f42c7be0910a)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s1) Volume Expansion and Rock Fracturing through Expansive Materials
(p1.0) The expected volume expansion by an expansive cement, leading to rock fragmentation, is mainly due to the hydration of CaO [21,22]. The formation of Ca(OH) 2 results in an increase in temperature to approximately 150 • C, due to the exothermic nature of the hydration reaction [9]. Yet, the volume expansion is not only caused by the exothermic heat expelled, but would also depend on the crystallization of Ca(OH) 2 and ettringite (Ca 6 Al 2 (SO 4 ) 3 (OH) 12 ·26H 2 O).
## (s2) Components of SREMA
(p2.0) Considering the composition of SREMA, it has four basic components, which are the elementary SCDA mixture, welan gum as the viscosity enhancing agent, sodium naphthalene sulfonate formaldehyde (SNSF) as the high range water reducer (HRWR) and calcium chloride as the accelerator [13]. Yet, SREMA can be further developed depending on the SCDA used, to cater the ground and environmental conditions that need to be met.
## (s5) Hydration of Alite
(p5.0) Considering the hydration of alite, it would provide a substantially high amount of heat than that of CaO and would facilitate the production of Ca(OH) 2 through the formation of an intermediate product known as the calcium silicate hydrate (CSH). Initially, CSH would have a poor crystalline structure with sheets of calcium and oxygen with chains of tetrahedral silica, separated by water layers, forming atomic structure similar to tobermorite or jennite but with a higher Ca:Si ratio [42]. Yet, with further hydration, CSH would grow in the form of micro-needles around the tricalcium silicate surface until complete coverage is reached [43].
## (s6) Molecular Scale Hydration Mechanism of Alite
(p6.0) To study the formation of the volume expansive phase via the hydration products, molecular-scale hydration was considered based on the conducted by Pustovgar et al., who suggested a proton transfer that occurs in the interface of the solid surface and water [44]. Here the tricalcium silicate surface has been broken down as follows, disregarding any impurities and surface deformations. This mechanism has been divided into 4 main steps,
## (s9) Time-Dependent Hydration Mechanisms of Alite
(p9.0) Although the previously discussed molecular scale mechanism supports the overall reaction suggested by Taylor, it has been proposed considering a completely pure form with uniform surfaces dissolving stoichiometrically. However, when considering the lattice structures, as shown in Figure 1, it can be clearly seen that the surfaces do not always obey the stoichiometric ratios. Furthermore, the electrical nature of the ions, even of similar chemical nature, may be different, resulting in uneven adsorption, nucleation and finally product formation. Therefore, the variations observed from Taylor's equation of the tricalcium silicate hydration discussed in the previous section, can be attributed to these assumptions. Considering the thermodynamics of the reaction between alite and water, a high heat of hydration is observed within the first few seconds. The reaction would then reduce during about 30 min and remain at a constant low rate of less than 1 mW/g. This steady state would last for about 1-2 h and would be consequently led to slow expansion. By the end of this period, the rate of hydrolysis would again increase at about 2 h into the hydration, reaching a secondary maximum at around 9 h, before gradually decreasing again [47]. Thus, five distinct stages can be seen in the hydration of alite, as shown in Figure 2.  The rapid dissolution of the alite in water is a highly exothermic reaction, releasing a heat of about 138 kJ/mol immediately after wetting [47]. This would result in the initially observed high rate of Stage 0.

(p9.1) As the Ca 2+ concentration increases with time, further dissolution would be inhibited by the Le' Chaterlier's principle, leading to the next stage of the hydration. However, by the end of Stage 0, the expected Si and Ca concentrations would be much lower when compared to the theoretical K sp ≈ 3 and the deceleration of the rate would occur in undersaturated conditions [48]. In addition, the molar ratio of Ca:Si observed during the steady state is much larger than the expected 3:1 ratio [49]. Thus, the rapid decrease in rate (Stage 1) in undersaturated conditions and the steady state (stage 2), which can be assumed to be an equilibrated period showing larger Ca:Si ratios, is an enigma. There are several hypotheses on this regard, but we shall review two of the most plausible mechanisms.
## (s10) Protective Barrier Hypothesis
(p10.0) The protective barrier hypothesis states that there is a rapid formation of a thin metastable layer of the less soluble CSH, of a lower stoichiometric ratio when compared with alite [50], which acts as a barrier for water to diffuse and hydrate the alite, and to control the diffusion of particles from the unhydrated surfaces as well [51]. However, a considerable rate of hydration can be seen during this period (Stage 1), indicating that the reaction continues beneath the formed protective barrier suggested by this hypothesis, until an equilibrium is reached. To explain this, Gartner et al. [52] suggested the formation of two layers, one by the hydration of alite and the other by the precipitation from the surrounding solution. It has also been suggested that these layers would eventually turn into a stable form. The end of the steady state where an acceleration in rate is observed is predicted to occur as the stable barrier breaks due to the arising osmotic pressure. The origin of this pressure is explained by the difference between the ion concentration of the solution, which is in contact with the cement grains, and that of outside the barrier [53]. However, this theory has not gained much evidence to be proven correct.

(p10.1) Furthermore, the thermodynamically stable passivating layer formed on the unhydrated cement has never been observed by any experimental analysis, including atomic force microscopy conducted on flat calcium silicate surfaces under water and ionic solutions [54,55] and high-resolution electron microscopy on dried samples [56]. The difference in crystallographic orientation and the lack of an epitaxial relationship between the layer is considered as the barrier. Thus, the unhydrated alite surface, similar to a corroding metal surface and its protective oxide layer, suggests grey areas of this hypothesis.

(p10.2) Therefore, it can be said that the protective barrier hypothesis would only be able to explain the first two stages of the experimental observations, and a graphical representation of this hypothesis can be plotted as indicated in Figure 3.  
## (s11) Slow Dissolution Hypothesis
(p11.0) Another hypothesis that has been developed is the controlled dissolution hypothesis. Here the dissolution mechanism would depend on the degree of saturation. At very high levels of undersaturation of Ca 2+ (aq) , prior to equilibration, which is at about (10-20) mmol/L [49], the dissolution rate would be very high, which enables an etch pit activation on the surface, and thus defects the surface. As the undersaturation decreases and reaches equilibrium, the etch pit openings occur in a negligibly small scale. After this point, the rate of dissolution would depend on the previously activated etch pit density, thus ensuring slow release of the ions from the activated etch pits. This will lead to a decelerating dissolution rate and then a steady state [57]. An additional reason for the decreasing rate, which leads to a constant low stage, is the poisoning of the etch pits by the free silicate ions in the solution [58].

(p11.1) However, this deceleration can be expected to be more of a dragged tail. This is due to the availability of active CSH nucleation sites, unlike in the case of the protective barrier hypothesis where the active surface is said to be entirely covered by an impermeable membrane.

(p11.2) It is possible to consider the impure nature of alite to explain the experimentally observed sharp deceleration. Alite, being the impure form of tricalcium silicate, contains small amounts of Al 2 O 3 , MgO, Fe 2 O 3 , P 2 O 5 , Na 2 O, and K 2 O. As Al 2 O 3 is insoluble in water it would therefore not have any effect on the hydration reaction. However, MgO can easily react with water, to form a gel-like barrier of Mg(OH) 2 around the unreacted alite [59].

(p11.3) The formation of this barrier would cause a delay in the expansion [60] to result in the sudden drop in the heat evolution in Stage 1, as observed experimentally. The slight solubility of Mg(OH) can be used to believe that the barrier layer is faintly permeable to water and this penetrable nature would allow the CSH formation to take place with the activation of etch pits, but at a slow steady level (Stage 2). Eventually, the needleshaped CSH would tear the Mg(OH) 2 barrier, exposing the unreacted alite, resulting in an acceleration in hydration.

(p11.4) Moreover, the growth of the intermediate product CSH would cause a reduction in the Si concentration, thus increasing the molar ratio of Ca:Si. This explains the experimentally observed characteristic of the steady state mentioned earlier. The decrease in Si concentration would also open up the etch pits that were previously poisoned and facilitate the precipitation of Ca(OH) 2 , thus increasing the degree of unsaturation of Ca 2+ with respect to CSH. This would again activate the dissolution of tricalcium silicate and offer a greater driving force for the CSH formation [61], explaining the accelerating Stage 3. In addition, as discussed in the earlier section, ettringite would contribute to the volume expansion of SREMA and provide greater nucleation sites for the CSH growth, thus ensuring a more rapid hydration.

(p11.5) The steady state of Stage 2 is hypothesized to be the time between the slow dissolution process and the increasing growth rate of CSH. Considering the silicate concentration drop in the beginning of the hydration, this proves that the CSH begins to form during the first few minutes of hydration, controlling the hydration kinetics [62,63]. During Stage 2, CSH would start to form and once they reach a certain critical size, would provide a more active surface area for further heterogeneous nucleation, and the start of the acceleration period could be observed. Therefore, it can be concluded that the Stages 2 and 3 are controlled by the nucleation and growth of hydrates, which are coupled with the dissolution of tricalcium silicate, where the main peak of heat release is caused by the precipitation of CSH and Ca(OH) 2 .

(p11.6) In order to explain the deceleration seen in Stage 4, Bazzoni [43] proposed that when forming new needles, CSH would not form on top of the originally formed needles but would form in the interfaces between the needles and the anhydrous grains. Therefore, a lowering in the diffusion of ions through the hydrate leading to a lowered growth rate was hypothesized. This hypothesis seems to coincide with the Dijon model, as it states that CSH grows both parallel and perpendicular to the surface until full coverage is reached and then only grows perpendicularly afterward [64].
## (s13) In the Absence of Sulfates
(p13.0) In the absence of sulfates, the hydration of tricalcium aluminate can be divided into two stages: (1) dissolution of tricalcium aluminate and (2) formation of metastable hydration products within the first few minutes of the reaction. These hydration products first form a gel-like structure on top of the tricalcium aluminate surface. 

(p13.1) The SEM images of the hydration products, indicating the morphological changes are shown in Figure 4 below. During the hydration of tricalcium aluminate, the formed gel layer would act as a barrier disrupting the hydration of the main volume expansive components. Since it is a fast reaction compared to others of the cement mixture, it also uses up all the water to give more calcium aluminate hydration products, leading to the flash set. The formation of the gel layer will be completed in minutes; hence the flowability of the SREMA is highly affected by the hydration of tricalcium aluminate. In addition, having aluminum ions in the solution can increase the steady state and disrupt the hydration of alite. This is either due to the adsorption of aluminum ions onto alite, diminishing its solubility [67], or the formation of Calcium Aluminum Silicate hydrates (CASH) that would not enable the seeding of CSH for further growth [68].

(p13.2) The retardation of alite solubility in the presence of aluminates have been further studied by Pustovgar et al. [44] using various dosages of NaAlO 2 . They have concluded that aluminates tend to adsorb on to the active sites of alite promoting the formation of hydrated calcium aluminate (AFm phase) in the form of [Ca 2 (Al,Fe)(OH) 6 ]·X·xH 2 O, where X is an exchangeable singly or doubly charged anion [69], enhancing the aluminum incorporation in CSH and increasing the amount of CASH. These observations agree with the slow dissolution hypothesis as it acknowledges the effect of etch pit activation on the changes observed in the reaction rate.
## (s14) In the Presence of Sulfates
(p14.0) Even with the adverse effects of tricalcium aluminate, it is quite useful, when used in the presence of sulfates, for the volume expansion expected in SCDA as it forms ettringite crystals within the gel structure. In the presence of sulfates, the hydrolysis process can be divided into two main peaks and a deceleration period as presented in Figure 5. Similar to the hydration of alite, the initial high release of heat can be observed expelling approximately 160 mW/g of heat, irrespective of the amount of sulfates added [70]. Next, the dissolution and rapid precipitation of ettringite complete within a few minutes, leading to the deceleration. The formation of ettringite, occurring at a sulfate concentration of 12.5 mmol/L with respect to portlandite, takes about five minutes to be first observed. 

(p14.1) It is believed that the deceleration occurs due to the impermeable nature of ettringite crystals which form on the tricalcium aluminate surface, retarding further hydration, until the sulfate concentration depletes [71].

(p14.2) In the presence of CaSO 4 , depending on the degree of supersaturation and amount used, ettringite would show different morphologies from short hexagonal prisms to long needles [72]. These ettringite crystals can tear up the formed gel which would cause flash set. This would allow further hydration of the SCDA while maintaining the fluidity until the mixture has been transferred to the desired location.

(p14.3) In terms of how ettringite assists the volume expansion, Meredith et al. [65] have found that the length of the crystals formed depend on the water to solid ratio and longer crystals can be expected with the increase in the ratio. Accordingly, under 10% water to solid ratio with 25% gypsum by weight of tricalcium aluminate, large crystals of ettringite have been observed in the intergranular spaces within the first hour of the reaction. This observation can therefore be correlated with the increase in the volume expansion observed by increasing the water to solid ratio [9]. However, the larger size of the crystals can also be attributed to the saturation level that is ideal for the crystal growth and the space availability.

(p14.4) After the initial high heat of hydration, rapid deceleration can only be observed in the presence of sulfates. Two hypotheses have been proposed to explain the deceleration: (1) protective membrane hypothesis and (2) sulfate adsorption hypothesis.

(p14.5) The protective membrane hypothesis considers the formation of an ettringite or AFm phase protective barrier [73]. However, considering the needle-like structure of ettringite crystals, they might not have the capability to produce a complete coverage and the AFm precipitate can be seen even in the absence of externally added sulfates [74] unlike the deceleration of Stage 2. The more possible explanation would be the adsorption of sulfates into the active sites of the tricalcium aluminate, with the dissolution of more gypsum to compensate the reduction in the sulfate concentration with the formation of ettringite. The adsorption of sulfates is assumed to be quite preferential, forming electrostatic interactions with the Ca 2+ ions, showing higher nucleophilicity. Due to the distance between the two most nucleophilic Ca 2+ ions being about 3.5 Å, which allows only one sulfate ion to house, the sulfate ions may be trapped in the active sites, which would explain the retarded hydration [75] by inhibiting the dissolution of tricalcium aluminate and nucleation around the active sites.

(p14.6) However, even after the deceleration, some amount of ettringite is formed in a slow rate (Stage 3), and it can be confirmed by the slow decrease in conductivity of the sample, from 11 mS/cm to slightly less than 10 mS/cm [70,76]. By the end of the Stage 3, the sulfate concentration would completely diminish and the ettringite would dominate the hydrated phase.
## (s16) Effect of Sulfate Concentration
(p16.0) In a system with sufficient amounts of sulfates, with over 2.4% by mass of SREMA [77], the reaction was observed to accelerate greatly during the nucleation and the crystal growth processes. This would lead the main alite peak about 7-8 h into the hydration. Soon after, a sharp peak, corresponding to the formation of monosulfate from tricalcium aluminate at the point of sulfate depletion, will be seen. Figure 6 depicts the overall rate of hydration of a properly sulfated system. Under low sulfate percentages with less than 1.3% by mass [47], the hydration of alite would be delayed while the monosulfate peak is seen much earlier. Thus, a clear relationship between alite hydration and sulfates can be observed and it is said to be due to the modifications to the growth of CSH by the adsorption of sulfate ions. That being said, EDS analysis indicates no such unique modification. However, the hydration of alite would retard in the presence of aluminates by the formation of the byproduct CASH. In the absence of active etch pits, aluminates tend to attack polar groups such as water, to form more a stable state Al(OH) 3 with a gel-like consistency. This has a solubility product K sp in the range of ∼10 −34 , explaining its stability.

(p16.1) However, the reaction can be considered as a minor reaction in the presence of activated voids, giving a stable form of aluminates. The formation of CASH can be hypothesized as follows:

(p16.2) As the exact composition of CASH is yet to be found, the mechanism cannot be validated by comparing the formulated composition and the actual value. However, this mechanism does align with the theory of how CASH formation minimizes the dissolution of alite, as more Ca 2+ ions on the surface would be used up for the formation of CASH rather than the formation of Ca(OH) 2 and CSH, interrupting the volumetric phase.

(p16.3) Nonetheless, experimental evidence suggests that the alite peak would tend to be seen much earlier with the increase in sulfate percentage, when compared with that in the absence of sulfates [78]. However, an optimum condition is reached at 5% sulfate where the peak is observed about 7 h into the hydration, producing a maximum of about 4.5 mW/g of heat. After this point, increasing the sulfate concentration simply delayed the generation of the peak. These observations were explained considering that it is not the alite-sulfate system that accelerates the hydration, but sulfates using up the aluminates in the solution producing ettringite, that slow down the alite hydration. The deceleration of the reaction after a certain sulfate concentration may be due to the sulfates attacking the active sites of alite, disrupting its solubility and thus the reaction rate.
## (s17) Effect of Alite to Tricalcium Aluminate Ratio
(p17.0) Studies have been carried out to understand the influence of the ratio of alite to tricalcium aluminate for the overall rate of hydration [78]. It has been found that the peaks corresponding to the alite hydration are barely influenced by small changes to the ratio. However, it has been observed that larger ratios would lead to an earlier monosulfate peak. While a 90:10 ratio of alite to tricalcium aluminate showed the monosulfate peak at around 43 h into the hydration, the sample with the ratio of 94:6 showed the same peak about 23 h earlier. As the ratio increases, the amount of corresponding tricalcium aluminate would be reduced and thereby the amount of sulfates incorporated into the system would also be reduced. The large amounts of alite would give an efficient CSH production, which then would adsorb a larger portion of the sulfates. This would ultimately lead to a sulfate deficiency and initiate the monosulfate formation [78].
## (s18) Effect of Temperature
(p18.0) As for any chemical reaction, the reaction rate would increase with the temperature of the system. This can be attributed to the increased kinetic energy of the molecules, which then undergoes increased random chaotic motion with a larger number of successful collisions, forming the products with an increased rate. Additionally, as more molecules possess an energy equal to or greater than the activation energy of the reaction, much faster product formation can be seen.

(p18.1) The hydration kinetics of the combined mixture has been studied using isothermal calorimetry at 15 • C, 20 • C, 26 • C and 30 • C [78], and as expected the reaction occurs faster with increased temperature and the observed peak intensities are also higher. However, it has also been observed that a system containing adequate amounts of sulfate would act as an over-sulfated system at low temperatures and as an under-sulfated system at elevated temperatures [78]. This indicates that cements which are properly sulfated at room temperature may behave in an under-sulfated manner at higher temperatures.

(p18.2) To explain this observation, the activation energies for the hydration of alite and tricalcium aluminate with varying amounts of sulfates have been considered. Both activation energies tend to increase with the amount of sulfates added, and also may be related to the inhibition of the hydration mechanism by adsorbing into the CSH of alite and the active sites of tricalcium aluminate. However, at reduced levels of sulfate, the activation energy corresponding to the hydration of tricalcium aluminate is lower compared to alite. At elevated temperatures, the monosulfate formation would be much faster than alite hydration, acting as a highly under-sulfated system. Therefore, it can be concluded that under low sulfate concentrations, the hydration of tricalcium aluminate is more sensitive to the temperature.
## (s20) Effect of Welan Gum
(p20.0) Considering SREMA shows its activity in the presence of water, welan gum should not disrupt the main reactions of concern, resulting in the volume expansion. Although welan gum has been studied extensively due to its commercial importance in many areas, the exact mechanism of it in water is poorly studied. Gellan gum, having the same tetrasaccharide backbone as welan gum [80], would act as a gelling agent forming a gel-like consistency with water and would disintegrate in the presence of excess of water. However, welan gum, having either L-rhamnose or L-mannose as a side group in glucose (*), is a non-gelling agent [33] which leads to a viscous aqueous solution rather than undergoing complete hydration. Therefore, it is safe to say that welan gum would not intervene with the hydration reactions of the main components, causing changes in the optimum amount of water incorporated.

(p20.1) As discussed earlier, welan gum has a repeat unit of D-glucose, D-glucuronic acid and L-rhamnose. Therefore, it is quite clear that a single repeat unit of welan gum has several equatorial -OH groups for the formation of hydrogen bonds. In the presence of water, the molecules can be held strongly by these equatorial -OH groups, increasing the viscosity [32].
## (s23) Effect of Calcium Chloride
(p23.0) Calcium chloride is used in the SREMA as an accelerating agent to overcome the delay in the expansion that occurs in the presence of welan gum. Cheung et al. [92] noted that an accelerator should assist: (1) Ca(OH) 2 nucleation, having control over the saturation levels and influence the etch pit activation; (2) CSH nucleation, giving more growth sites and CSH growth after nucleation, giving permeable reaction products promoting faster reaction after the induction period.
## (s27) Diphosphonate-type
(p27.0) The phosphonate groups would interact with water similar to SNSF. However, a slight increase in Ca 2+ concentration in the system can be observed, in the presence of diphosphonate-derivatives. This is due to the complex formation between the diphosphonates and Ca 2+ ions leading to further dissolution of the Ca-based compounds in cement [105].
## (s28) Accelerator
(p28.0) Other cations of a similar size and charge, that are is a similar charge density, would also show an accelerated reaction mechanism [107]. Thus, the effectiveness of cations as a chemical accelerator is as follows [108,109]: Ca 2+ > Sr 2+ > Ba 2+ > Li + > K + > Na + ≈ Cs + > Rb + The counter ion which would maintain the electroneutrality of the sample, should not bind to either CSH or alite during the hydration process, by replacing the silicates. As silicates are covalently bonded, highly electronegative anions such as bromides and chlorides would not take their position while anions that are less electronegative such as fluorides would replace silicates, inhibiting the acceleration [110]. Therefore, the effectiveness of anions as a chemical accelerator is as follows:
