# Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in 5G and beyond: A Survey and Perspectives

CorpusID: 237777276 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d0da0462ac25a4046f6f3e37ed372c4026100bb2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d0da0462ac25a4046f6f3e37ed372c4026100bb2)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s2) What is AI?
(p2.0) AI is the scientific field that deals with programming machines to mimic human behavior in solving tasks that humans are good at (natural language, speech, image recognition, etc.). AI involves the intersection of many fields of computer science and applied mathematics. The position of artificial intelligence is rather to consider that we, as human beings, have an intuitive understanding of what intelligence is and therefore we can judge whether a machine is intelligent or not. This operational definition of AI was promoted by Alan Turing in 1950, who introduced his famous "Turing test". The Turing test is an operational test; according to which a machine is considered intelligent if it can converse in such a way that (human) interrogators cannot distinguish it from a human being [2].

(p2.1) Initial efforts at AI involved modeling the biological neurons in the brain. In 1943 McCulloch and Pitts [3] modeled for the first time the artificial neural as a binary variable that is switched to either on or off. Later in 1949, Donald Hebb developed an algorithm for learning neural networks. In 1951, Marvin Minsky and Dean Edmonds built the Stochastic Neural Analog Reinforcement Calculator (SNARC), the first neural network computer. Following this accomplishment, a small group of scientists interested in the study of intelligence met in a 2-month workshop at Dartmouth University in 1956. According to common belief, the term AI was first introduced and defined by John McCarthy at this workshop, as:" AI involves machines that can perform tasks that are characteristic of human intelligence".

(p2.2) Over the last few decades, AI has gained increasing interest among researchers and industry. This is due to the wide variety of applications in which AI has been used, such for example, natural language processing (e.g. broadcast news transcription, speech-to-speech translation), healthcare (e.g. assisting in surgeries, computer aided diagnosis), smart cars and drones (e.g. self-driving cars, obstacle detection) and also mobile networks (e.g. performance optimization, traffic prediction).
## (s8) Advantages of using AI in mobile networks
(p8.0) The history of mobile communication is evolving from one generation to a next one over the last three decades. Nowadays, before to jump to a next generation, i.e. 5G, the mobile network operator need to understand deeply the current situations and future scenarios. The MNO needs to learn more about the real behavior of the subscribers, their profiles, the traffic patterns, wished and possibly adequate services for each profile and how all these will evolve in the future. In the communications market, whether it is network operators, equipment manufacturers or solution providers, etc., the market players hope to take advantage of AI to assist in areas that become very challenging, such as in designing, operating, maintaining and managing communication networks and services. Mainly AI will offer the MNO the ability of learning more about their network and the need of customers, ability of understanding and reasoning to make the ideal decision/actions for different scenarios and environment conditions and finally the ability to collaborate between high heterogeneous widely expanded and densified network infrastructures.

(p8.1) Operators need intelligent decisions to manage complex resources and dynamic traffic. However, so far no one single model has the ability to model accurately the network traffic characteristics. Fortunately, AI has entered into the cognitive age, and deep learning can be used. Through deep learning, the machine system can use the existing training data to process large amounts of data through data mining. AI can also learn the characteristics of data traffic, management, controls and other characteristics automatically and master expert experience of operating, managing and maintaining networks. By these efforts, the accuracy of analysis can be enhanced, and the intelligent management and services of communication networks can be realized. Detailed description can be found in [9].

(p8.2) Due to the high dynamics of the network system, the state information of a resource may have changed when it is transmitted to the network management system. Therefore, the network management can only know the local state information without the knowledge about the system internal state. ML has the strength to deal with this kind of fuzzy logic and uncertainty reasoning. In order to make the classification or prediction of the state easier, deep learning constructs a multi-hidden layer model and uses the hierarchical network structure to transform the feature representation of the sample into a new feature space layer by layer, as detailed in the first sections of the chapter. The major advantage is the fact that AI does not need to describe the mathematical model of the system accurately, and therefore has the ability to deal with uncertainty or even 'unknowability.

(p8.3) Due to the expansion and high densification of the network infrastructure, both in scale and size, the structure complexity of communication networks, and especially for the next generation, are increasing quickly. Concepts such as distribution and hierarchy are often talked about in the network management. Management tasks and controls are distributed to the entire network, in order to avoid centralization of the management functions that requires more data overhead and reliability issues. As a result, network operators have to deal with issues such as tasks' distribution, communication and collaboration between management nodes. The introduction of the multi-agent collaboration of distributed AI into the network management will support the ability to collaborate between network managers distributed in every layer. However, such collaboration requires a high level of interoperability between the heterogeneous networks building the entire communications infrastructure. Furthermore, this network interoperability is just of the many other factors that must be fulfilled by the environment, in order to take benefits of the above-cited advantages of AI. The other factors allowing taking full potential from AI are depicted in Figure 4.

(p8.4) One of the major enablers of a profitable AI integration is the availability of high performing and efficient computing resources. Indeed, 5G systems seek to provide high throughput and ultra-low latency communication services, to improve users QoE. Implementing deep learning to build intelligence into 5G systems, to meet these objectives is expensive. This is because powerful hardware and software is required to support training and inference in complex settings. Several tools are emerging, which make deep learning in mobile networks tangible as discussed in [10]. Authors discussed a hierarchy of advanced computing tools as deep learning integration enablers; namely: (i) advanced parallel computing, (ii) distributed ML systems, (iii) dedicated deep learning libraries, (iv) fast optimization algorithms, and (v) fog computing.
## (s9) Big data as prerequisite for integrating AI in mobile networks
(p9.0) The integration of intelligent algorithms and learning approaches requires the availability of big data sets, which represent the starting point. However, because the AI and ML can be integrated at different levels of the next generation mobile work, or at least in 5G, different big data sources can be explored and must be selected carefully to be able to extract as much as possible of knowledge/learning. Different ways are proposed in the literature to classify the needed types of big data sets, which should build the basis for the AI and ML, such the ones proposed in [10][11][12]. For example, a classification of different big data sources is illustrated in Figure 5, which contains three pools of big data sets: general wireless data, social network-aware data, social data and cloud data [11].

(p9.1) Wireless data: This class represents the big data generated by wireless users, and which contains useful information about the activity patterns in time, frequency and space (locations). For example, this can help to infer from the data traffic/ demand variation over time, the interference power at different frequencies, and the congestion level distribution at different locations, etc. The exploitation of these spectral patterns will allow an efficient management of the wireless resources, at radio resource management/allocation (RRM/RRA) functionalities, for improving the systems spectral efficiency and for enhancing the delivered quality of service experienced by the end-user. One of the possible intelligent applications can be the load balancing relying on proactive RRA. In such context, the network operator can adjust the transmit power, frequency or direction, through the beamforming mechanism adopted for 5G or simply through sectorized antennas, of the different base station transmitters relaying on the mobile users distributions. In addition, the operator can dispatch mobile base stations in advance when anticipating a regional surge of data traffic, which could be caused for example by sport events, music concerts, etc. In [10], authors subdivided the mobile big data into classes: Network level-data, which is similar to "wireless data", and App-level data. It is worth to notice that network level-data are further subdivided into sub-classes, namely:
## (s12) Machine learning/deep learning in 5G
(p12.0) With the increasing advances and advantages of ML in the wireless communications, each research community has tried to evaluate the impact of ML on 5G in its discipline. As result, we have several publication for ML impact on physical layer, security aspects, radio resource managements, etc. This makes it very difficult to give short overview on the utilization and the impact of AI/ML in 5G. Therefore, we can summarize the works applying ML to 5G according to two principles: a "general ML categorization", where we consider all possible ML approaches from the literature, and a "Deep Learning-based Categorization", which focuses only the deep learning, because several leading publications consider deep learning as the most promising approach of ML for the high complexity of 5G.

(p12.1) A general ML categorization in case of 5G follows the general structure of ML as seen in the first sections, which uses three classes of ML: supervised learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning. Table 2 shows an example of such classification giving the used learning approaches from each class and a concrete example of application in 5G, [17]. In the next section, some 5G use cases will be described and solution for AI/ML integration in mobile network operators will be proposed.

(p12.2) Some research works focus only on the deep learning, because it is considered as most powerful learning approach of AI/ML. This gives a very large spectrum of applications in 5G and its different aspects, as detailed in the most recent surveys from examples [10,18]. Figure 8 shows just a small part of possible applications in Latency reduction by clustering fog nodes to automatically decide which low power node (LPN) is upgraded to a high power node (HPN) in heterogeneous cellular networks.
## (s19) AI building efficient collaboration NFV/SDN and network management
(p19.0) Already with 4G, the mobile network operators were facing an increasing network densification as response to the increasing demand for capacity and coverage, while with 4.5G operators were facing an exponential increasing number of end-devices, essentially in case of M2M and NB-IoT LTE. Therefore, research works have been dealing with the integration of AI in different levels of mobile architecture; independently of the access technology, either 4G or 5G. For example, authors in [9] proposed a functional architecture of the integration of AI to exploit and serve SDN, NFV and network control/monitoring. The authors proposed a framework of an intelligent communication network, called future intelligent network (FINE). The framework architecture is constituted of three planes: intelligence plane, agent plane and business lane.

(p19.1) In this section, we focus on the integration of the AI in SDN/NFV and network management, which is achieved through the intelligence plane that acts as the brain of the entire framework, Figure 11. Therefore, FINE is an intelligent network with an AI core. The intelligence plane can be composed of the basic layer, the core layer, the platform layer, the application/terminal layer and the solution layer. The basic tasks of each layers are summarized in Table 4. Intelligence plane for the integration of AI in SDN, NFV and network control in the platform "FINE" [9].
