# metals A Review of the Boiling Curve with Reference to Steel Quenching

CorpusID: 237927816 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4ead16395ae757d2261c778d1ac8ec77890d7cb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4ead16395ae757d2261c778d1ac8ec77890d7cb)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s3) Boiling Curve Determination
(p3.0) Boiling curves are obtained from thermal analysis. This is an experimental technique which uses embedded sub-superficial thermocouples within the workpiece, as it is shown in Figure 1. A typical distance from wall surface to thermocouple tip is 1 to 3 mm. The temperature-time data recorded during quenching are used to solve the so-called Inverse Heat Conduction Problem (IHCP) [10]. This method solves iteratively the heat conduction differential equation to find the proper boundary condition consisting in the heat flux evolution function q(t) that minimizes the sum of absolute differences between the measured, T m , and computed, T c , temperatures,
## (s4) Boiling Curve Determination
(p4.0) Boiling curves are obtained from thermal analysis. This is an experimental technique which uses embedded sub-superficial thermocouples within the workpiece, as it is shown in Figure 1. A typical distance from wall surface to thermocouple tip is 1 to 3 mm. The temperature-time data recorded during quenching are used to solve the so-called Inverse Heat Conduction Problem (IHCP) [10]. This method solves iteratively the heat conduction differential equation to find the proper boundary condition consisting in the heat flux evolution function q(t) that minimizes the sum of absolute differences between the measured, Tm, and computed, Tc, temperatures, ∑ | − | =1 , where N is the number of data points collected during the quenching test. The computed temperatures correspond to the thermocouple tip position at the recorded times during cooling. The final solution of the heat conduction equation also provides the temperature evolution at any location within the solid, in particular it provides the temperature at the wall surface, Tw. Therefore, the solution of the IHCP leads to the q vs. Tw plot. Sometimes, the wall temperature is replaced by the wall superheat defined by the difference Tw − Tsat, where Tsat is the saturation temperature of the liquid, i.e., its boiling temperature. The boiling curve would be the same, except for the shift of the temperature scale. Figure 1 shows a graphic summary of the boiling curve determination from thermal analysis using the solution of the IHCP.  Figure 2a shows typical boiling curves when quenching metallic workpieces from several initial temperatures, T1, T2, …, and T6. As it was mentioned previously, reference [9] presents an example using several initial temperatures between 400 to 1000 °C and  Figure 2a shows typical boiling curves when quenching metallic workpieces from several initial temperatures, T 1 , T 2 , . . . , and T 6 . As it was mentioned previously, reference [9] presents an example using several initial temperatures between 400 to 1000 • C and quenching stainless-steel plates using a water spray. At any initial temperature, the heat flux is low but increases as the surface temperature decreases until reaching a maximum value, so called critical heat flux (CHF). Thereafter, heat flux keeps decreasing during cooling.
## (s6) Effect of Initial Temperature of the Solid Workpiece
(p6.0) At this point, it is convenient to say that Babu et al. [11] proposed a normalized boiling curve to represent all curves for different soaking temperatures into a single curve. In spite of its usefulness, this method has not gained further visibility in the research community. Figure 2b shows schematically the boiling phenomena occurring on the surface of a workpiece during its quenching by immersion. They are described as follows: At higher initial temperatures, a continuous vapor film forms on the solid surface, which acts as a thermal resistance for heat flow. The presence of this vapor blanket explains the quasi-plateaus observed in the curves corresponding to initial temperatures, T w ≥ T 3 . Heat flux is kept at a relatively low value; however, when the temperature drops, the vapor film collapses under the liquid pressure, and heat flux increases as a result of a direct contact between the solid surface and the liquid. However, for the curves with T w < T 3 the plateau does not appear, suggesting the absence of an initial stable vapor film. Leidenfrost temperature, T L , is defined as the minimum wall temperature where the stable vapor film regime prevails. Below this temperature, nucleate boiling regime appears, in which swarms of bubbles continuously form and detach from the wall surface. This process is maintained until wall temperature is too low to promote boiling. This is the onset of nucleate boiling temperature, T ONB , and is where single phase convection regime appears. The above explanation does not clarify why heat flux is very low at the starting high temperature. This initial low heat flux has mainly attributed to the measurement delay from the thermocouple (time constant). This is a characteristic delay that depends on the wire diameter, the thinner the wire the shorter the delay. Rabin and Rittel [12] showed that the time response of a solid-embedded thermocouple is far from being similar to the corresponding response of a fluid-immersed thermocouple. The authors found that the solid-embedded thermocouple has a significantly faster time response at the initiation of the process, but it requires a much longer time to reach a steady state temperature. They also claim that the thermal diffusivity of the thermocouple should be at least one order of magnitude higher than that of the measured domain in order to obtain meaningful results in transient measurements. This is difficult to obtain for quenching metals, since both, thermocouple and workpiece have mutually similar thermal diffusivity values. quenching stainless-steel plates using a water spray. At any initial temperature, the heat flux is low but increases as the surface temperature decreases until reaching a maximum value, so called critical heat flux (CHF). Thereafter, heat flux keeps decreasing during cooling. At this point, it is convenient to say that Babu et al. [11] proposed a normalized boiling curve to represent all curves for different soaking temperatures into a single curve. In spite of its usefulness, this method has not gained further visibility in the research community. Figure  2b shows schematically the boiling phenomena occurring on the surface of a workpiece during its quenching by immersion. They are described as follows: At higher initial temperatures, a continuous vapor film forms on the solid surface, which acts as a thermal resistance for heat flow. The presence of this vapor blanket explains the quasi-plateaus observed in the curves corresponding to initial temperatures, Tw ≥ T3. Heat flux is kept at a relatively low value; however, when the temperature drops, the vapor film collapses under the liquid pressure, and heat flux increases as a result of a direct contact between the solid surface and the liquid. However, for the curves with Tw < T3 the plateau does not appear, suggesting the absence of an initial stable vapor film. Leidenfrost temperature, TL, is defined as the minimum wall temperature where the stable vapor film regime prevails. Below this temperature, nucleate boiling regime appears, in which swarms of bubbles continuously form and detach from the wall surface. This process is maintained until wall temperature is too low to promote boiling. This is the onset of nucleate boiling temperature, TONB, and is where single phase convection regime appears. The above explanation does not clarify why heat flux is very low at the starting high temperature. This initial low heat flux has mainly attributed to the measurement delay from the thermocouple (time constant). This is a characteristic delay that depends on the wire diameter, the thinner the wire the shorter the delay. Rabin and Rittel [12] showed that the time response of a solid-embedded thermocouple is far from being similar to the corresponding response of a fluid-immersed thermocouple. The authors found that the solid-embedded thermocouple has a significantly faster time response at the initiation of the process, but it requires a much longer time to reach a steady state temperature. They also claim that the thermal diffusivity of the thermocouple should be at least one order of magnitude higher than that of the measured domain in order to obtain meaningful results in transient measurements. This is difficult to obtain for quenching metals, since both, thermocouple and workpiece have mutually similar thermal diffusivity values.  
## (s9) Effect of Wall Surface Roughness and Wettability
(p9.0) Essentially, wall surface roughness is represented by the average length of mili or micro scale bumps and batches forming a net of gaps over the wall surface. When a workpiece is submerged into a liquid, air remains trapped in these gaps. During the nucleate boiling regime, vapor bubbles will grow from these "air seeds". In contrast, a smooth surface is basically a gap-free surface which requires a higher superheating, as compared to a rough surface, to promote bubble nucleation and grow. Surface roughness can be controlled by machining specific patterns on the wall surface, or it can be a consequence of solid deposits formed on the surface, for example salt deposition when using hard water for quenching, or when quenching a workpiece covered with an oxide layer, which formed during its previous heating in the furnace. The wall surface roughness has an effect on single phase convection since improves the specific surface area, increasing the heat flux; although in most heat-treating cases, this effect is marginal. In contrast, surface roughness plays a major role during nucleate boiling regime and its effect on the boiling curve is explained including the surface wettability as follows.

(p9.1) Wettability is a property that measures the ability to extend the liquid-solid interface surface. A higher wettability means a larger liquid-solid interface area which leads to a higher heat flux, when remaining all other variables as constants. Wettability can be measured using the contact angle, θ, which is determined from the Young equation and is represented by the following expression.

(p9.2) where γ LS , γ LG , γ GS are the surface tensions at the liquid-solid, liquid-gas and gas-solid interfaces, respectively. In the range 0 ≤ θ ≤ 180 • , cosθ increases when θ decreases. Therefore, a decrease in surface tension leads to a decrease in the contact angle, improving wall wettability. This means that decreasing surface tension, for example using tensoactives, improves wettability and therefore increases the heat flux during quenching in the singlephase convection regime. This is not the case at high wall temperature, above T L . Under stable vapor blanket regime, liquid properties are no longer heat flux controlling but the vapor properties are. Therefore, under this regime, wettability has no effect. In the intermediate regime, nucleation boiling, wettability has a specific effect on the rate of bubble nucleation and growth. Vapor bubbles are formed in the gaps that are already occupied by air. When wettability increases, liquid penetrates deeper into every gap leaving a smaller "air seed" for vapor bubble nucleation. This would make more difficult for a bubble embryo to grow. The wettability effect is to increase heat flux as a result of improving direct contact between liquid and the solid wall. Wettability has been also modified by applying and electric voltage [17]. The authors report laboratory results showing that interfacial electrowetting (EW) fields can disrupt the stable vapor film. They attributed this phenomenon to electrostatic attraction of the liquid molecules to the wall surface. As a result of improving direct contact between liquid-wall, heat flux is increased. Experiments include the use of stagnant water bath to quench metallic spheres from 400 • C.
## (s11) Link between Heat Transfer Coefficient, H, and Quenching Severity, H
(p11.0) Quenching severity is a quantity that has been widely used in heat treatment engineering to design quenching systems, and it represents the ability of a quenching medium to extract heat from a hot workpiece. It is expressed as the Grossman H-value, which commonly varies for a steel workpiece between 7.9 (oil, no agitation) to 196 m −1 (brine, strong agitation) [23]. This quantity is related to the heat transfer coefficient, h, by the following expression.
## (s12) Hardenability Determination, the End-Quench Jominy Test
(p12.0) The end-quench Jominy test uses a standard cylindrical probe 100 mm long × 25.4 mm diameter which is heated up to an austenization temperature and then is set over an open vertical tube from where water flows upward at a controlled constant rate. The liquid impacts the basal face of the cylinder, as it is shown in Figure 1, and heat is removed from the probe in the downward direction by convection boiling and radiation. The lateral surface of the cylinder is not isolated therefore heat flows by natural convection and radiation. However, it can be shown, that the lateral heat flux is much smaller than the basal heat flux, and therefore heat flows essentially in one dimension (1D). The resulting steel structure changes from the basal surface all along the cylinder. Martensite forms at the basal surface and its local proportion decreases further away from this point. Hardness depends on the obtained phases; therefore, hardenability is determined from a hardness profile measured along the cylindrical probe. Since the probe and test setup dimensions and the water flowrate are standard, the hardness curve depends only on the steel grade.

(p12.1) This laboratory test has been the focus of numerous works aiming to understand the relationship between heat transfer, kinetics of phase transformation and mechanical properties after quenching. A particularly useful analysis has been presented by Smoljan et al. [25], who developed a model to simulate the hardness of quenched and tempered steel workpieces. In these studies, heat transfer is characterized using at least one thermocouple, as it is shown in Figure 1. The cooling curve data are analyzed using the solution of the IHCP to determine the heat flux at the wall and, more important, the temperature field evolution in the workpiece. This computed temperature is used to calculate the cooling rate map within the solid probe and then the kinetics of phase transformation and the corresponding mechanical properties. Thermal analysis and mathematical modeling have proved to be useful methods to improve our understanding on the relationship, heat transfer, microstructure evolution and properties. However, when dealing with design, optimization and quality issues during production heat treatment, our knowledge of such a relationship may not allow us to predict quenching phenomena with enough accuracy, unless a detailed data base were available. Section 4.3 presents a summary of these data.
