# Feature Topic on Rigorous and Impactful Literature Reviews Citation Context Analysis as a Method for Conducting Rigorous and Impactful Literature Reviews

CorpusID: 230556279 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/24cff4b0649eebb0358906f9de9b77c59399dffc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/24cff4b0649eebb0358906f9de9b77c59399dffc)

Fields: Education, Business, Sociology

## (s5) Question 4: How Many of the Citations to the Works Refer to Empirical Evidence Regarding Their Knowledge Claims?
(p5.0) A distinguishing feature of science as an institution is that its body of knowledge is built upon empirical tests. Although some scholars have challenged this view, claiming that empirical work cannot really determine whether assertions are true or not (e.g., Astley, 1985), it is clear that the majority of work in organization studies is empirical. However, except when it is aggregated in meta-analyses, very little scholarship has examined how subsequent work draws on the empirical findings in prior work (Anderson, 2006;Anderson & Lemken, 2019).
## (s11) Step 1: Determine the Domain and Research Questions to Address
(p11.0) As with most types of literature reviews, the first step is to decide on the domain of the review (Siddaway et al., 2019). The purpose of this step is to define the source work or works considered and referenced in citing works. In the case of a citation context analysis, the domain will typically take the form of a seminal work that the scholar wants to examine in terms of its influence on subsequent scholarship. The domain could also be multiple works by a single author (usually a luminary in the field), or work on a particular concept. One needs to justify the importance of the work(s) or author(s) to be investigated through the examination of citations.

(p11.1) The researcher must then select the specific research questions to address in the review. These questions will generally be a subset of those listed in Table 1. The questions selected before the analysis form the evidentiary framework for the main arguments of the literature review. It is important to frame the primary insights to be gleaned from the analysis and thereby help to specify its scope. Naturally, as with other types of reviews, the researcher may want to begin by examining a larger set of questions and then emphasize a subset of questions in the final paper, depending on which results are most interesting and provide the most insight regarding the realized impact of the work. The goal of this step is achieved when the researcher has settled on a cohesive set of questions to be addressed with a clear rationale for each question.
