# A Review of Gear Fault Diagnosis of Planetary Gearboxes Using Acoustic Emissions

CorpusID: 233960099 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf992a88adf13f228248e79042ffb9abeda3124f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf992a88adf13f228248e79042ffb9abeda3124f)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Materials Science

## (s4) Sources of AE in Gear Transmissions
(p4.0) In the case of gear transmissions experimental observations have shown that under non-faulty conditions the waveforms of AE signals contain multiple bursts over a continuous AE. Tan and Mba [24,26,27] investigated the sources of AE on parallel-shaft gearboxes that produce such waveforms. They measured the AE with a sensor located directly on the pinion and the signals were transmitted using a slip ring. Three possible sources of AE were analyzed: tooth resonance, secondary pressure peak in the lubricant and asperity contacts between the meshing surfaces. After having discarded the first two hypotheses, they reached to the conclusion that the main source of AE in gear transmissions was asperity contacts during sliding and rolling of the meshing teeth. They also suggested that the rolling was responsible for the generation of AE bursts, while the sliding was responsible for the generation of continuous AE. This affirmation was initially based on the observation that the bursts were approximately separated at the gear mesh period. In additional tests without lubrication, they compared the AE waveforms generated by gears in a good condition and gears with loss of involute profile due to surface damage. The results showed that the bursts were more visible for gears in a good condition than for those with surface damage, which helps to validate their hypothesis.
## (s5) Influence of Operating Conditions
(p5.0) Since the values from signal features used for gearbox diagnostics can be altered by the change of operating conditions such as rotational speed, load or temperature, the effects of these conditions must be taken into account for fault diagnosis. Some investigations on this topic are presented below.

(p5.1) In the experiments from Tan and Mba [27] they mentioned the significant influence of the rotational speed on the AE levels during isothermal conditions. As the speed was increased, so did the AE RMS value. Although according to the elastohydrodynamic theory an increase in the speed will cause a thicker lubricant film (and thus less asperity contacts), they attributed the observed behavior to the higher strain rate of asperity contacts. The increase of the AE RMS value was significantly higher when the speed was increased in the lowspeed range than when it was increased in the high-speed range. They argued that at higher speeds the thicker lubricant film effect will be predominant over the higher strain rate of asperity contacts. They even suggested that at some point the AE levels would be in fact reduced. Regarding the influence of load, their results showed that the AE activity is practically unaffected by it.

(p5.2) In other experiments from Tan and Mba [24] AE measurements on a gearbox with a faulty tooth were carried out. After the analysis of the AE waveforms, they concluded that the AE bursts with the largest amplitudes were not always generated as the faulty tooth meshed. They attributed this limitation to the influence of the lubricant temperature on the AE activity. The temperature changes the lubricant viscosity and thus the lubricant film thickness. Based on the research from Dornfeld and Handy [4], they suggested that the changes in the AE RMS values due to the changes in the lubricant film thickness was a consequence of the asperity contacts as a main source of AE activity in gears. They noticed large variations in the AE RMS values for up to several hours until the lubricant temperature reached the equilibrium. The reason for this was attributed to two contrary effects. On one hand, as the temperature increases the lubricant film thickness decreases allowing more asperity contacts. On the other hand, the meshing surfaces decrease their roughness when they come in contact due to abrasion. Also they showed that when the lubricant temperature was constant, the applied load had negligible effect on the AE RMS value.
## (s7) Comparison with Vibration
(p7.0) The attention to the AE analysis over other traditional techniques for the monitoring of gearboxes is because its ability to detect more incipient damage. A few researchers have carried out comparative experiments regarding the potential of AE and vibration analysis for gear fault diagnosis. Since most of them have been conducted in fixed-shaft gearboxes rather than in PG, this section describes some studies for both types of gearboxes.

(p7.1) Loutas et al. [21] evaluated several statistical features based on vibration and AE signals to detect crack propagation in an artificially damaged fixed-shaft gearbox under stationary operating conditions. Some features were calculated in the time-domain signal, while others were calculated in the frequency domain. They found out that AE-based features can better follow the damage propagation, especially at early stages. Regionally linear behavior of some AE-based features was observed and gradient changes were associated with changes in the crack propagation rate. The important influence of the lubricant temperature on both vibration and AE-based features was also pointed out.
