# Vortex Shedding Suppression: A Review on Modified Bluff Bodies

CorpusID: 237686394 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7f75b2600d37162d77ca8092cbb5e36aea15a1e0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7f75b2600d37162d77ca8092cbb5e36aea15a1e0)

Fields: Geology, Engineering, Physics

## (s1) Perforated Bluff Bodies
(p1.0) Perforating bluff bodies for flow control and vortex shedding suppression in the wake region attracted several researchers. The concept behind the method is to demonstrate the effect of porosity β (defined as the ratio of open area to the total area), the injection/suction parameter in the case of the active method and the configuration of the perforated surfaces on the vortex shedding phenomenon in the wake region. Therefore, to achieve such a goal researchers have deployed both passive and active flow control methodology.

(p1.1) Çuhadaroglu and Akansu [14], Çuhadaroglu and Turan [15], Çuhadaroglu [16], Turhal and Çuhadaroglu [17] and Sohankar and Khodadadi [18] employed an active control method with the injection/suction of fluid through the surfaces of the square cylinder to reduce the damaging effect of the vortex shedding phenomenon. Çuhadaroglu and Akansu [14] conducted an experimental study to investigate the injection effects on the pressure coefficient and drag coefficient of a perforated square cylinder at high Reynolds number between Re = 10,000 and 24,000. Different configurations of injection through the front, top and rear surfaces of the cylinder have been employed. The results revealed that injection through the rear face decreased the drag force. However, injection of fluid through the front face demonstrated opposite results and caused an increase in drag force. Moreover, injection through the other faces have demonstrated negligible effects. Turhal and Çuhadaroglu [17] experimentally studied the variation of the pressure coefficient, drag coefficient and Strouhal number of a perforated square cylinder (horizontal and diagonal) with fluid injected through various surfaces at a high Reynolds number. The result revealed that in the case of a diagonal square cylinder, surface injection through the top-rear, rear and all surfaces reduced the drag coefficient. However, only injection through all surfaces of a horizontal square cylinder can result in a reduction of drag coefficient. Numerical study on the control of fluid flow by injection through the surfaces of a square cylinder, which have been reported by Sohankar and Khodadadi [18], is one of the latest studies in this context. The simulation demonstrated that in the case of fluid injection through the front surface, Strouhal number decreased by increasing the injection parameter, while aerodynamic force fluctuations were increased.

(p1.2) On the other hand, injection of fluid through the rear face caused a reduction in Strouhal number and drag coefficient. Figure 1 compares the time-averaged streamline contours with injection and without control through the surfaces of a square cylinder. Injection parameter, Γ = V w /U in , defined as the ratio of the fluid velocity through the porous wall (V w ) to inlet streamwise velocity (U in ). The injection parameter is positive for blowing (Γ > 0) and negative for the case of suction (Γ < 0). The significant changes of the flow wake structure by employing injection are completely apparent as the vortices disappear for higher injection parameters due to the suppression of vortex shedding. Çuhadaroğlu and Turan [15] and Çuhadaroğlu [16] numerically studied the effects of uniform injection and suction through a porous square cylinder on the wake flow and its aerodynamic characteristics. It was observed that despite the lower velocity magnitude of injection and suction velocity relative to the main flow, drag and lift coefficients and vortex shedding frequency had been affected significantly. The numerical simulation demonstrated that increasing the suction velocity decreases the drag coefficient for all of the suction configurations (except suction through the rear surface) while the lift coefficient substantially decreases with increasing velocity of suction through the top surface. Moreover, it was demonstrated that injection and suction altered the vortex shedding frequency. While increasing the injection velocity (through most of the surfaces) increases the Strouhal number, increasing the suction velocity exhibits an opposite effect of decreasing the Strouhal number. Therefore, it was observed that the suction application through the top and bottom surfaces of the square cylinder are the most effective configuration to alter the vortex shedding phenomenon.
## (s2) Permeable and Porous Mesh
(p2.0) Employing permeable mesh is classified as the passive wake control method to suppress the vortex shedding in the wake region. Several researchers investigated the effect of porosity on the wake region for various flow conditions. Gözmen, Akilli [26], Ozkan and Oruc [27] experimentally investigated suppression of vortex shedding in the wake of a circular cylinder by employing a permeable outer cylinder.

(p2.1) Gözmen and Akilli [26] employed various values of porosity to demonstrate its effect on flow control in the wake of the circular cylinder with the outer permeable cylinder. It was observed that vortex shedding has been suppressed significantly downstream the cylinder as porosity increases. In order to control the vortex shedding in the wake, the report suggested the optimum value of porosity as a value of 0.7. While the previous study of Gözmen and Akilli [26] conducted the experiments for a single value of the ratio of the outer cylinder diameter to the inner cylinder diameter (D/d), Ozkan and Oruc [27] investigated the effects of the variation of both the outer cylinder diameter and porosity. It was reported that both parameters have considerable effects on the wake flow behind the circular cylinder. A significant reduction of turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses was observed as a result of employing the outer cylinder. The results demonstrated that a value of 0.4 ≤ D/d ≤ 0.6 and 1.6 ≤ D/d ≤ 2.0 would achieve a better flow control in the near wake with a remarkable reduction in the turbulent kinetic energy peak value. Cicolin and Freire [28] investigated a circular cylinder with three different types of permeable meshes on the suppression of vortex-induced vibrations by means of PIV. It was observed that the vortex shedding in the wake region has been disrupted and formation length has been increased. Durhasan and Pinar [29] studied the gap between a circular cylinder and a shroud to investigate the effect of shroud porosity and diameter. Therefore, the experiment was conducted for various porosity and diameter ratios at a Reynolds number of Re = 5000. Durhasan and Pinar [29] divided the field of view into four flow regions as demonstrated in Figure 2. These regions are upstream region I (UR I), upstream region II (UR II), downstream region I (DR I) and downstream region II (DR II). Therefore, it was possible to have a closer look at the effects of shroud on these four flow regions.

(p2.2) Eng 2021, 2, FOR PEER REVIEW 6 (UR II), downstream region I (DR I) and downstream region II (DR II). Therefore, it was possible to have a closer look at the effects of shroud on these four flow regions.  Figure 3 demonstrates the time-averaged streamline topology for various porosities at different diameter ratios. In comparison to the bare cylinder, the recirculation zone of the cylinder and location of the foci and saddle points are significantly affected for the case of the perforated cylinders. It was observed at porosity values of β ≤ 0.5, the vortex formation of the cylinder occurs only in the gap between the cylinder and the shroud. For β ≥ 0.6 it was observed that in DR I and DR II the formation of the wake flow structures is affected dominantly by the diameter rather than the porosity. It was also revealed that the flow structure in the outer region of the shroud exhibited a similar pattern to the wake region of a single perforated cylinder. In addition, it was reported that employing the shroud will lead to a significant drag reduction between 21% and 87% depending on the values of the porosity and the diameter ratio.  [29] Copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier. Figure 3 demonstrates the time-averaged streamline topology for various porosities at different diameter ratios. In comparison to the bare cylinder, the recirculation zone of the cylinder and location of the foci and saddle points are significantly affected for the case of the perforated cylinders. It was observed at porosity values of β ≤ 0.5, the vortex formation of the cylinder occurs only in the gap between the cylinder and the shroud. For β ≥ 0.6 it was observed that in DR I and DR II the formation of the wake flow structures is affected dominantly by the diameter rather than the porosity. It was also revealed that the flow structure in the outer region of the shroud exhibited a similar pattern to the wake region of a single perforated cylinder. In addition, it was reported that employing the shroud will lead to a significant drag reduction between 21% and 87% depending on the values of the porosity and the diameter ratio.

(p2.3) On the other hand, some researchers investigated the wake flow control numerically. Mimeau and Cottet [30] investigated flow control around a semicircular cylinder by employing porous coatings numerically. The simulation is performed by using direct numerical simulations and employing the vortex penalization method. The numerical results demonstrated that the relevant control performances can be achieved by introducing porous layers only at the top and bottom of the solid body permits. Moreover, a significant drag reduction was observed by introducing a thin layer with intermediate permeability in both edges of the back wall. Liu and Wei [31] studied numerically the circular cylinder with a porous materials coating to investigate the effects of surface permeability on the flow control. The three-dimensional simulation demonstrated the underlying physical mechanisms of flow control. It was observed that vorticity in the spanwise direction has been affected more than other directions. In addition, vortex shedding suppression is achieved partly due to a favorable pressure gradient around the porous surface.

(p2.4) The literature suggested that porosity and the permeable cylinder diameter have a substantial effect on the flow characteristics and results in significant reduction in turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses. In addition, such methodology also is very effective for drag reduction of the cylinder. However, the drag coefficient of the cylinder together with the shroud is higher than the bare cylinder. Table 2 presents the experimental and numerical research on flow control and suppression of vortex shedding by employing a permeable wall on bluff bodies. On the other hand, some researchers investigated the wake flow control numerically. Mimeau and Cottet [30] investigated flow control around a semicircular cylinder by employing porous coatings numerically. The simulation is performed by using direct numerical simulations and employing the vortex penalization method. The numerical results demonstrated that the relevant control performances can be achieved by introducing porous layers only at the top and bottom of the solid body permits. Moreover, a significant drag reduction was observed by introducing a thin layer with intermediate permeability in both edges of the back wall. Liu and Wei [31] studied numerically the circular cylinder with a porous materials coating to investigate the effects of surface permeability on the flow control. The three-dimensional simulation demonstrated the underlying physical mechanisms of flow control. It was observed that vorticity in the spanwise direction has been affected more than other directions. In addition, vortex shedding suppression is achieved partly due to a favorable pressure gradient around the porous surface.

(p2.5) The literature suggested that porosity and the permeable cylinder diameter have a substantial effect on the flow characteristics and results in significant reduction in turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses. In addition, such methodology also is very effective for drag reduction of the cylinder. However, the drag coefficient of the cylinder   

(p2.6) Employing permeable mesh is classified as the passive wake control method to suppress the vortex shedding in the wake region. Several researchers investigated the effect of porosity on the wake region for various flow conditions. Gözmen, Akilli [26], Ozkan and Oruc [27] experimentally investigated suppression of vortex shedding in the wake of a circular cylinder by employing a permeable outer cylinder.

(p2.7) Gözmen and Akilli [26] employed various values of porosity to demonstrate its effect on flow control in the wake of the circular cylinder with the outer permeable cylinder. It was observed that vortex shedding has been suppressed significantly downstream the cylinder as porosity increases. In order to control the vortex shedding in the wake, the report suggested the optimum value of porosity as a value of 0.7. While the previous study of Gözmen and Akilli [26] conducted the experiments for a single value of the ratio of the outer cylinder diameter to the inner cylinder diameter (D/d), Ozkan and Oruc [27] investigated the effects of the variation of both the outer cylinder diameter and porosity. It was reported that both parameters have considerable effects on the wake flow behind the circular cylinder. A significant reduction of turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses was observed as a result of employing the outer cylinder. The results demonstrated that a value of 0.4 ≤ D/d ≤ 0.6 and 1.6 ≤ D/d ≤ 2.0 would achieve a better flow control in the near wake with a remarkable reduction in the turbulent kinetic energy peak value. Cicolin and Freire [28] investigated a circular cylinder with three different types of permeable meshes on the suppression of vortex-induced vibrations by means of PIV. It was observed that the vortex shedding in the wake region has been disrupted and formation length has been increased. Durhasan and Pinar [29] studied the gap between a circular cylinder and a shroud to investigate the effect of shroud porosity and diameter. Therefore, the experiment was conducted for various porosity and diameter ratios at a Reynolds number of Re = 5000. Durhasan and Pinar [29] divided the field of view into four flow regions as demonstrated in Figure 2. These regions are upstream region I (UR I), upstream region II (UR II), downstream region I (DR I) and downstream region II (DR II). Therefore, it was possible to have a closer look at the effects of shroud on these four flow regions.

(p2.8) Eng 2021, 2, FOR PEER REVIEW 6 (UR II), downstream region I (DR I) and downstream region II (DR II). Therefore, it was possible to have a closer look at the effects of shroud on these four flow regions.  Figure 3 demonstrates the time-averaged streamline topology for various porosities at different diameter ratios. In comparison to the bare cylinder, the recirculation zone of the cylinder and location of the foci and saddle points are significantly affected for the case of the perforated cylinders. It was observed at porosity values of β ≤ 0.5, the vortex formation of the cylinder occurs only in the gap between the cylinder and the shroud. For β ≥ 0.6 it was observed that in DR I and DR II the formation of the wake flow structures is affected dominantly by the diameter rather than the porosity. It was also revealed that the flow structure in the outer region of the shroud exhibited a similar pattern to the wake region of a single perforated cylinder. In addition, it was reported that employing the shroud will lead to a significant drag reduction between 21% and 87% depending on the values of the porosity and the diameter ratio.  [29] Copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier. Figure 3 demonstrates the time-averaged streamline topology for various porosities at different diameter ratios. In comparison to the bare cylinder, the recirculation zone of the cylinder and location of the foci and saddle points are significantly affected for the case of the perforated cylinders. It was observed at porosity values of β ≤ 0.5, the vortex formation of the cylinder occurs only in the gap between the cylinder and the shroud. For β ≥ 0.6 it was observed that in DR I and DR II the formation of the wake flow structures is affected dominantly by the diameter rather than the porosity. It was also revealed that the flow structure in the outer region of the shroud exhibited a similar pattern to the wake region of a single perforated cylinder. In addition, it was reported that employing the shroud will lead to a significant drag reduction between 21% and 87% depending on the values of the porosity and the diameter ratio.

(p2.9) On the other hand, some researchers investigated the wake flow control numerically. Mimeau and Cottet [30] investigated flow control around a semicircular cylinder by employing porous coatings numerically. The simulation is performed by using direct numerical simulations and employing the vortex penalization method. The numerical results demonstrated that the relevant control performances can be achieved by introducing porous layers only at the top and bottom of the solid body permits. Moreover, a significant drag reduction was observed by introducing a thin layer with intermediate permeability in both edges of the back wall. Liu and Wei [31] studied numerically the circular cylinder with a porous materials coating to investigate the effects of surface permeability on the flow control. The three-dimensional simulation demonstrated the underlying physical mechanisms of flow control. It was observed that vorticity in the spanwise direction has been affected more than other directions. In addition, vortex shedding suppression is achieved partly due to a favorable pressure gradient around the porous surface.

(p2.10) The literature suggested that porosity and the permeable cylinder diameter have a substantial effect on the flow characteristics and results in significant reduction in turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses. In addition, such methodology also is very effective for drag reduction of the cylinder. However, the drag coefficient of the cylinder together with the shroud is higher than the bare cylinder. Table 2 presents the experimental and numerical research on flow control and suppression of vortex shedding by employing a permeable wall on bluff bodies. On the other hand, some researchers investigated the wake flow control numerically. Mimeau and Cottet [30] investigated flow control around a semicircular cylinder by employing porous coatings numerically. The simulation is performed by using direct numerical simulations and employing the vortex penalization method. The numerical results demonstrated that the relevant control performances can be achieved by introducing porous layers only at the top and bottom of the solid body permits. Moreover, a significant drag reduction was observed by introducing a thin layer with intermediate permeability in both edges of the back wall. Liu and Wei [31] studied numerically the circular cylinder with a porous materials coating to investigate the effects of surface permeability on the flow control. The three-dimensional simulation demonstrated the underlying physical mechanisms of flow control. It was observed that vorticity in the spanwise direction has been affected more than other directions. In addition, vortex shedding suppression is achieved partly due to a favorable pressure gradient around the porous surface.

(p2.11) The literature suggested that porosity and the permeable cylinder diameter have a substantial effect on the flow characteristics and results in significant reduction in turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses. In addition, such methodology also is very effective for drag reduction of the cylinder. However, the drag coefficient of the cylinder   
## (s3) Corner Modification
(p3.0) Several researchers studied the features of the wake flow for square cylinders with modified corners and suggested a possible aerodynamic forces reduction as a result. In one of the early attempts to understand the effects of coroner modification on the flow structure, Kwok and Wilhelm [32] investigated experimentally the effect of edge configuration on the Eng 2021, 2 332 wind induced response of tall buildings with the rectangular cross section. The experiment demonstrated that slotted corners and chamfered corners reduce both the along-wind and cross-wind responses significantly. Further investigation on the wake energy spectra and wind force spectra characteristics demonstrated that the excitation processes were altered for a chamfered corner. Tamura and Miyagi [33] and Tamura and Miyagi [34] elaborated the effect of corner modification of the square cylinder on the wake flow structures and aerodynamics forces. Tamura and Miyagi [33] observed that a slight corner modification alters the flow structure and result in considerable variation of the aerodynamic characteristics up to approximately 60% of the original value. The report suggested corner modification as a promising passive technique for aerodynamic forces reduction.
## (s4) Researchers Flow Control Reynolds Number TI Technique Measurements
(p4.0) Kwok and Wilhelm [32] CC --CTA U Tamura and Miyagi [33] RC, CC 10 4 -10 6 0.5% PS, Num C D , C L , C P , St Tamura and Miyagi [34] RC, CC 3.0 × 10 4 6.5%, 14% CTA, FB C D , C L , St Dalton and Zheng [37] RC 250, 1000 -Num C D , C L , C P , St Hu and Zhou [35] RC  

(p4.1) Kwok and Wilhelm [32] CC --CTA U Tamura and Miyagi [33] RC, CC 10 4 -10 6 0.5% PS, Num C D , C L , C P , St Tamura and Miyagi [34] RC, CC 3.0 × 10 4 6.5%, 14% CTA, FB C D , C L , St Dalton and Zheng [37] RC 250, 1000 -Num C D , C L , C P , St Hu and Zhou [35] RC  
## (s5) Wavy Cylinder
(p5.0) Employing a wavy surface for bluff bodies is also suggested in the literature for flow control. The concept is to employ a wavy surface, sinusoidal waviness, for instance to investigate its effect on the wake flow and vortex shedding phenomenon.

(p5.1) In this context, two sets of extensive numerical investigation [48][49][50][51] and combined experimental-numerical studies [52][53][54] have been conducted. Investigations on the wake flow structure of a wavy circular cylinder demonstrated that the wavy cylinder encountered a lower mean drag coefficient than the corresponding drag coefficient for a circular cylinder. Such an observation was due to the formation of a longer wake vortex generated by the wavy cylinder. On the other hand, a significant reduction of the lift coefficient fluctuation of the wavy cylinder was observed. The employed wavy surface led to the formation of 3-D free shear layers, which are more stable than purely 2-D free shear layers. Such free shear layers only roll up into mature vortices at the further downstream position and significantly alters the near wake structures and the pressure distributions around the wavy cylinder. The wake flow structure of a circular cylinder and a wavy circular cylinder illustrated in Figure 6 by means of large eddy simulation (LES) and laser-induced fluorescence (LIF). From the figure alteration of the vortex structure behind a way cylinder is apparent.

(p5.2) On the other hand, investigation on the flow structure in the wake region of the modified square cylinder demonstrated that the three-dimensional free shear layers from the leading edge are widened and lengthened. Therefore, vortices formed further downstream in the wake of modified square cylinder in comparison to the straight square cylinder. Thus, a reduction in the mean drag was observed while the lift fluctuation was suppressed significantly. Organized transverse vortices have been observed along the spanwise direction, which make such a flow control achievable. The free shear layers stabilized by these vortices and therefore forced the roll up process into the vortex at a further downstream position. In comparison with a straight square cylinder a significant force reduction is observed for a wavy square cylinder. The simulation demonstrated more stable threedimensional free shear layers behind the wavy square cylinder. It was observed that at Re = 100 the free shear layers exhibit a steady flow feature with symmetrical flow patterns behind the modified cylinder with a wavy surface. In agreement with previous studies a reduction in the mean drag coefficient and fluctuating lift coefficient was reported. However, as the aspect ratio and Reynolds number increases such features disappear. The simulation suggested that such a modified cylinder with a wavy surface is not effective in flow separation control.

(p5.3) cylinder. Such an observation was due to the formation of a longer wake vortex generated by the wavy cylinder. On the other hand, a significant reduction of the lift coefficient fluctuation of the wavy cylinder was observed. The employed wavy surface led to the formation of 3-D free shear layers, which are more stable than purely 2-D free shear layers. Such free shear layers only roll up into mature vortices at the further downstream position and significantly alters the near wake structures and the pressure distributions around the wavy cylinder. The wake flow structure of a circular cylinder and a wavy circular cylinder illustrated in Figure 6 by means of large eddy simulation (LES) and laser-induced fluorescence (LIF). From the figure alteration of the vortex structure behind a way cylinder is apparent. On the other hand, investigation on the flow structure in the wake region of the modified square cylinder demonstrated that the three-dimensional free shear layers from the leading edge are widened and lengthened. Therefore, vortices formed further downstream in the wake of modified square cylinder in comparison to the straight square cylinder. Thus, a reduction in the mean drag was observed while the lift fluctuation was suppressed significantly. Organized transverse vortices have been observed along the spanwise direction, which make such a flow control achievable. The free shear layers stabilized by these vortices and therefore forced the roll up process into the vortex at a further downstream position. In comparison with a straight square cylinder a significant force reduction is observed for a wavy square cylinder. The simulation demonstrated more stable three-dimensional free shear layers behind the wavy square cylinder. It was observed that at Re = 100 the free shear layers exhibit a steady flow feature with symmetrical flow patterns behind the modified cylinder with a wavy surface. In agreement with previous studies a reduction in the mean drag coefficient and fluctuating lift coefficient was re- Recently, Assi and Bearman [55] investigated the vortex-induced vibration of a wavy elliptic cylinder. The experimental study demonstrated that a wavy cylinder exhibits vortexinduced vibrations with similar behavior to a plain cylinder with equivalent diameter. The modification elongated the wake region with significant dimensional features, increased the base pressure and consequently affects the drag coefficient. It was also reported that the elliptical wavy cylinder exhibits more evident 3D features than those of a wavy cylinder with the circular cross section.

(p5.4) Other studies combined other parameters with the wavy cylinder to investigate the flow structure in the wake region. Investigation on the inclined cylinder with a wavy surface [49] demonstrated similar three dimensional characteristics of the wake. It was reported that a significant drag reduction and suppression of lift fluctuation can be achieved by a wavy cylinder at a low angle of inclination while at a large angle of inclination these effects disappear.

(p5.5) New and Shi [56] conducted an experimental study to investigate effects of the aspect ratio of the finite-length on the flow structure of wavy cylinders. The results demonstrated that for high aspect ratio wavy cylinders with a large wavelength, the vortex shedding phenomenon can be altered by modifying the aspect ratio. Such an observation is due to the persistent formation of recirculating regions close to the end-walls under certain wavy cylinder configurations, which affect the distributions of spanwise flows and vortex formation lengths. Wavy cylinder with smaller wavelength demonstrated less sensitivity to variations in the physical configurations.

(p5.6) To sum up, the numerical and experimental studies demonstrated the effectiveness of modified cylinders with a wavy surface on flow control and vortex shedding suppression in the wake of the cylinders. Apparently, the vortex formation region is elongated and the effectiveness of wavy cylinders can be observed in terms of minimization of flow induced vibration and force reduction. Such a force reduction for drag can be substantial with up to Eng 2021, 2 337 a 34% reduction at a higher Reynolds number. Table 4 summarized the conducted research on modified cylinders with a wavy surface. Table 4. Selected studies on flow control and suppression of vortex shedding wavy cylinders.

(p5.7) Employing a wavy surface for bluff bodies is also suggested in the literature for flow control. The concept is to employ a wavy surface, sinusoidal waviness, for instance to investigate its effect on the wake flow and vortex shedding phenomenon.

(p5.8) In this context, two sets of extensive numerical investigation [48][49][50][51] and combined experimental-numerical studies [52][53][54] have been conducted. Investigations on the wake flow structure of a wavy circular cylinder demonstrated that the wavy cylinder encountered a lower mean drag coefficient than the corresponding drag coefficient for a circular cylinder. Such an observation was due to the formation of a longer wake vortex generated by the wavy cylinder. On the other hand, a significant reduction of the lift coefficient fluctuation of the wavy cylinder was observed. The employed wavy surface led to the formation of 3-D free shear layers, which are more stable than purely 2-D free shear layers. Such free shear layers only roll up into mature vortices at the further downstream position and significantly alters the near wake structures and the pressure distributions around the wavy cylinder. The wake flow structure of a circular cylinder and a wavy circular cylinder illustrated in Figure 6 by means of large eddy simulation (LES) and laser-induced fluorescence (LIF). From the figure alteration of the vortex structure behind a way cylinder is apparent.

(p5.9) On the other hand, investigation on the flow structure in the wake region of the modified square cylinder demonstrated that the three-dimensional free shear layers from the leading edge are widened and lengthened. Therefore, vortices formed further downstream in the wake of modified square cylinder in comparison to the straight square cylinder. Thus, a reduction in the mean drag was observed while the lift fluctuation was suppressed significantly. Organized transverse vortices have been observed along the spanwise direction, which make such a flow control achievable. The free shear layers stabilized by these vortices and therefore forced the roll up process into the vortex at a further downstream position. In comparison with a straight square cylinder a significant force reduction is observed for a wavy square cylinder. The simulation demonstrated more stable threedimensional free shear layers behind the wavy square cylinder. It was observed that at Re = 100 the free shear layers exhibit a steady flow feature with symmetrical flow patterns behind the modified cylinder with a wavy surface. In agreement with previous studies a reduction in the mean drag coefficient and fluctuating lift coefficient was reported. However, as the aspect ratio and Reynolds number increases such features disappear. The simulation suggested that such a modified cylinder with a wavy surface is not effective in flow separation control.

(p5.10) cylinder. Such an observation was due to the formation of a longer wake vortex generated by the wavy cylinder. On the other hand, a significant reduction of the lift coefficient fluctuation of the wavy cylinder was observed. The employed wavy surface led to the formation of 3-D free shear layers, which are more stable than purely 2-D free shear layers. Such free shear layers only roll up into mature vortices at the further downstream position and significantly alters the near wake structures and the pressure distributions around the wavy cylinder. The wake flow structure of a circular cylinder and a wavy circular cylinder illustrated in Figure 6 by means of large eddy simulation (LES) and laser-induced fluorescence (LIF). From the figure alteration of the vortex structure behind a way cylinder is apparent. On the other hand, investigation on the flow structure in the wake region of the modified square cylinder demonstrated that the three-dimensional free shear layers from the leading edge are widened and lengthened. Therefore, vortices formed further downstream in the wake of modified square cylinder in comparison to the straight square cylinder. Thus, a reduction in the mean drag was observed while the lift fluctuation was suppressed significantly. Organized transverse vortices have been observed along the spanwise direction, which make such a flow control achievable. The free shear layers stabilized by these vortices and therefore forced the roll up process into the vortex at a further downstream position. In comparison with a straight square cylinder a significant force reduction is observed for a wavy square cylinder. The simulation demonstrated more stable three-dimensional free shear layers behind the wavy square cylinder. It was observed that at Re = 100 the free shear layers exhibit a steady flow feature with symmetrical flow patterns behind the modified cylinder with a wavy surface. In agreement with previous studies a reduction in the mean drag coefficient and fluctuating lift coefficient was re- Recently, Assi and Bearman [55] investigated the vortex-induced vibration of a wavy elliptic cylinder. The experimental study demonstrated that a wavy cylinder exhibits vortexinduced vibrations with similar behavior to a plain cylinder with equivalent diameter. The modification elongated the wake region with significant dimensional features, increased the base pressure and consequently affects the drag coefficient. It was also reported that the elliptical wavy cylinder exhibits more evident 3D features than those of a wavy cylinder with the circular cross section.

(p5.11) Other studies combined other parameters with the wavy cylinder to investigate the flow structure in the wake region. Investigation on the inclined cylinder with a wavy surface [49] demonstrated similar three dimensional characteristics of the wake. It was reported that a significant drag reduction and suppression of lift fluctuation can be achieved by a wavy cylinder at a low angle of inclination while at a large angle of inclination these effects disappear.

(p5.12) New and Shi [56] conducted an experimental study to investigate effects of the aspect ratio of the finite-length on the flow structure of wavy cylinders. The results demonstrated that for high aspect ratio wavy cylinders with a large wavelength, the vortex shedding phenomenon can be altered by modifying the aspect ratio. Such an observation is due to the persistent formation of recirculating regions close to the end-walls under certain wavy cylinder configurations, which affect the distributions of spanwise flows and vortex formation lengths. Wavy cylinder with smaller wavelength demonstrated less sensitivity to variations in the physical configurations.

(p5.13) To sum up, the numerical and experimental studies demonstrated the effectiveness of modified cylinders with a wavy surface on flow control and vortex shedding suppression in the wake of the cylinders. Apparently, the vortex formation region is elongated and the effectiveness of wavy cylinders can be observed in terms of minimization of flow induced vibration and force reduction. Such a force reduction for drag can be substantial with up to Eng 2021, 2 337 a 34% reduction at a higher Reynolds number. Table 4 summarized the conducted research on modified cylinders with a wavy surface. Table 4. Selected studies on flow control and suppression of vortex shedding wavy cylinders.
## (s6) Researchers Technique Reynolds Number TI Bluff Body
(p6.0) Darekar and Sherwin [57] Num 10-500 -SC Lee and Nguyen [58] Exp 5.0 × 10 3 -2.0 × 10 4 0.08% CC Lam and Lin [48] Num 3000 -CC Lin and Lin [53] Exp, Num 3000 -CC Lam and Lin [49] Num 3900 -CC Lam and Lin [50] Num 100 -CC Lam and Wang [59] Exp 200-9000 0.2% CC Lam and Wang [60] Exp 1.53 × 10 4 -5.05 × 10 4 0.2% CC Lam and Lin [51] Num 100-5000 -SC New and Shi [56] Exp 2700 2% CC Zou and Hu [54] Exp, Num 600, 5900 -SC Shen and Miao [52] Exp, Num 100-22,000 -SC Tammisola [61] Num 50-100 -CC Assi and Bearman [55] Exp 1500-15,000 3% EC CC = circular cylinder; SC = square cylinder; EC = elliptic cylinder; Exp = experimental; Num = numerical.

(p6.1) In conclusion, this paper reviewed different promising methods of vortex shedding suppression through geometry modification on the bluff body. The discussed methods namely permeable and porous mesh, corner modification and wavy cylinder demonstrate promising results in suppressing vortex shedding. The literature suggests the significant effectiveness of vortex shedding suppression in terms of the alteration of turbulent kinetic energy, Reynolds stresses and drag coefficient. These methodologies have potential application in the civil engineering and wind energy sector and their implementation for a more effective vortex shedding suppression is essential for engineers. 

(p6.2) Darekar and Sherwin [57] Num 10-500 -SC Lee and Nguyen [58] Exp 5.0 × 10 3 -2.0 × 10 4 0.08% CC Lam and Lin [48] Num 3000 -CC Lin and Lin [53] Exp, Num 3000 -CC Lam and Lin [49] Num 3900 -CC Lam and Lin [50] Num 100 -CC Lam and Wang [59] Exp 200-9000 0.2% CC Lam and Wang [60] Exp 1.53 × 10 4 -5.05 × 10 4 0.2% CC Lam and Lin [51] Num 100-5000 -SC New and Shi [56] Exp 2700 2% CC Zou and Hu [54] Exp, Num 600, 5900 -SC Shen and Miao [52] Exp, Num 100-22,000 -SC Tammisola [61] Num 50-100 -CC Assi and Bearman [55] Exp 1500-15,000 3% EC CC = circular cylinder; SC = square cylinder; EC = elliptic cylinder; Exp = experimental; Num = numerical.

(p6.3) In conclusion, this paper reviewed different promising methods of vortex shedding suppression through geometry modification on the bluff body. The discussed methods namely permeable and porous mesh, corner modification and wavy cylinder demonstrate promising results in suppressing vortex shedding. The literature suggests the significant effectiveness of vortex shedding suppression in terms of the alteration of turbulent kinetic energy, Reynolds stresses and drag coefficient. These methodologies have potential application in the civil engineering and wind energy sector and their implementation for a more effective vortex shedding suppression is essential for engineers. 
## (s24) Perforated Bluff Bodies
(p24.0) Perforating bluff bodies for flow control and vortex shedding suppression in the wake region attracted several researchers. The concept behind the method is to demonstrate the effect of porosity β (defined as the ratio of open area to the total area), the injection/suction parameter in the case of the active method and the configuration of the perforated surfaces on the vortex shedding phenomenon in the wake region. Therefore, to achieve such a goal researchers have deployed both passive and active flow control methodology.

(p24.1) Çuhadaroglu and Akansu [14], Çuhadaroglu and Turan [15], Çuhadaroglu [16], Turhal and Çuhadaroglu [17] and Sohankar and Khodadadi [18] employed an active control method with the injection/suction of fluid through the surfaces of the square cylinder to reduce the damaging effect of the vortex shedding phenomenon. Çuhadaroglu and Akansu [14] conducted an experimental study to investigate the injection effects on the pressure coefficient and drag coefficient of a perforated square cylinder at high Reynolds number between Re = 10,000 and 24,000. Different configurations of injection through the front, top and rear surfaces of the cylinder have been employed. The results revealed that injection through the rear face decreased the drag force. However, injection of fluid through the front face demonstrated opposite results and caused an increase in drag force. Moreover, injection through the other faces have demonstrated negligible effects. Turhal and Çuhadaroglu [17] experimentally studied the variation of the pressure coefficient, drag coefficient and Strouhal number of a perforated square cylinder (horizontal and diagonal) with fluid injected through various surfaces at a high Reynolds number. The result revealed that in the case of a diagonal square cylinder, surface injection through the top-rear, rear and all surfaces reduced the drag coefficient. However, only injection through all surfaces of a horizontal square cylinder can result in a reduction of drag coefficient. Numerical study on the control of fluid flow by injection through the surfaces of a square cylinder, which have been reported by Sohankar and Khodadadi [18], is one of the latest studies in this context. The simulation demonstrated that in the case of fluid injection through the front surface, Strouhal number decreased by increasing the injection parameter, while aerodynamic force fluctuations were increased.

(p24.2) On the other hand, injection of fluid through the rear face caused a reduction in Strouhal number and drag coefficient. Figure 1 compares the time-averaged streamline contours with injection and without control through the surfaces of a square cylinder. Injection parameter, Γ = V w /U in , defined as the ratio of the fluid velocity through the porous wall (V w ) to inlet streamwise velocity (U in ). The injection parameter is positive for blowing (Γ > 0) and negative for the case of suction (Γ < 0). The significant changes of the flow wake structure by employing injection are completely apparent as the vortices disappear for higher injection parameters due to the suppression of vortex shedding. Çuhadaroğlu and Turan [15] and Çuhadaroğlu [16] numerically studied the effects of uniform injection and suction through a porous square cylinder on the wake flow and its aerodynamic characteristics. It was observed that despite the lower velocity magnitude of injection and suction velocity relative to the main flow, drag and lift coefficients and vortex shedding frequency had been affected significantly. The numerical simulation demonstrated that increasing the suction velocity decreases the drag coefficient for all of the suction configurations (except suction through the rear surface) while the lift coefficient substantially decreases with increasing velocity of suction through the top surface. Moreover, it was demonstrated that injection and suction altered the vortex shedding frequency. While increasing the injection velocity (through most of the surfaces) increases the Strouhal number, increasing the suction velocity exhibits an opposite effect of decreasing the Strouhal number. Therefore, it was observed that the suction application through the top and bottom surfaces of the square cylinder are the most effective configuration to alter the vortex shedding phenomenon.
## (s25) Permeable and Porous Mesh
(p25.0) Employing permeable mesh is classified as the passive wake control method to suppress the vortex shedding in the wake region. Several researchers investigated the effect of porosity on the wake region for various flow conditions. Gözmen, Akilli [26], Ozkan and Oruc [27] experimentally investigated suppression of vortex shedding in the wake of a circular cylinder by employing a permeable outer cylinder.

(p25.1) Gözmen and Akilli [26] employed various values of porosity to demonstrate its effect on flow control in the wake of the circular cylinder with the outer permeable cylinder. It was observed that vortex shedding has been suppressed significantly downstream the cylinder as porosity increases. In order to control the vortex shedding in the wake, the report suggested the optimum value of porosity as a value of 0.7. While the previous study of Gözmen and Akilli [26] conducted the experiments for a single value of the ratio of the outer cylinder diameter to the inner cylinder diameter (D/d), Ozkan and Oruc [27] investigated the effects of the variation of both the outer cylinder diameter and porosity. It was reported that both parameters have considerable effects on the wake flow behind the circular cylinder. A significant reduction of turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses was observed as a result of employing the outer cylinder. The results demonstrated that a value of 0.4 ≤ D/d ≤ 0.6 and 1.6 ≤ D/d ≤ 2.0 would achieve a better flow control in the near wake with a remarkable reduction in the turbulent kinetic energy peak value. Cicolin and Freire [28] investigated a circular cylinder with three different types of permeable meshes on the suppression of vortex-induced vibrations by means of PIV. It was observed that the vortex shedding in the wake region has been disrupted and formation length has been increased. Durhasan and Pinar [29] studied the gap between a circular cylinder and a shroud to investigate the effect of shroud porosity and diameter. Therefore, the experiment was conducted for various porosity and diameter ratios at a Reynolds number of Re = 5000. Durhasan and Pinar [29] divided the field of view into four flow regions as demonstrated in Figure 2. These regions are upstream region I (UR I), upstream region II (UR II), downstream region I (DR I) and downstream region II (DR II). Therefore, it was possible to have a closer look at the effects of shroud on these four flow regions.

(p25.2) Eng 2021, 2, FOR PEER REVIEW 6 (UR II), downstream region I (DR I) and downstream region II (DR II). Therefore, it was possible to have a closer look at the effects of shroud on these four flow regions.  Figure 3 demonstrates the time-averaged streamline topology for various porosities at different diameter ratios. In comparison to the bare cylinder, the recirculation zone of the cylinder and location of the foci and saddle points are significantly affected for the case of the perforated cylinders. It was observed at porosity values of β ≤ 0.5, the vortex formation of the cylinder occurs only in the gap between the cylinder and the shroud. For β ≥ 0.6 it was observed that in DR I and DR II the formation of the wake flow structures is affected dominantly by the diameter rather than the porosity. It was also revealed that the flow structure in the outer region of the shroud exhibited a similar pattern to the wake region of a single perforated cylinder. In addition, it was reported that employing the shroud will lead to a significant drag reduction between 21% and 87% depending on the values of the porosity and the diameter ratio.  [29] Copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier. Figure 3 demonstrates the time-averaged streamline topology for various porosities at different diameter ratios. In comparison to the bare cylinder, the recirculation zone of the cylinder and location of the foci and saddle points are significantly affected for the case of the perforated cylinders. It was observed at porosity values of β ≤ 0.5, the vortex formation of the cylinder occurs only in the gap between the cylinder and the shroud. For β ≥ 0.6 it was observed that in DR I and DR II the formation of the wake flow structures is affected dominantly by the diameter rather than the porosity. It was also revealed that the flow structure in the outer region of the shroud exhibited a similar pattern to the wake region of a single perforated cylinder. In addition, it was reported that employing the shroud will lead to a significant drag reduction between 21% and 87% depending on the values of the porosity and the diameter ratio.

(p25.3) On the other hand, some researchers investigated the wake flow control numerically. Mimeau and Cottet [30] investigated flow control around a semicircular cylinder by employing porous coatings numerically. The simulation is performed by using direct numerical simulations and employing the vortex penalization method. The numerical results demonstrated that the relevant control performances can be achieved by introducing porous layers only at the top and bottom of the solid body permits. Moreover, a significant drag reduction was observed by introducing a thin layer with intermediate permeability in both edges of the back wall. Liu and Wei [31] studied numerically the circular cylinder with a porous materials coating to investigate the effects of surface permeability on the flow control. The three-dimensional simulation demonstrated the underlying physical mechanisms of flow control. It was observed that vorticity in the spanwise direction has been affected more than other directions. In addition, vortex shedding suppression is achieved partly due to a favorable pressure gradient around the porous surface.

(p25.4) The literature suggested that porosity and the permeable cylinder diameter have a substantial effect on the flow characteristics and results in significant reduction in turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses. In addition, such methodology also is very effective for drag reduction of the cylinder. However, the drag coefficient of the cylinder together with the shroud is higher than the bare cylinder. Table 2 presents the experimental and numerical research on flow control and suppression of vortex shedding by employing a permeable wall on bluff bodies. On the other hand, some researchers investigated the wake flow control numerically. Mimeau and Cottet [30] investigated flow control around a semicircular cylinder by employing porous coatings numerically. The simulation is performed by using direct numerical simulations and employing the vortex penalization method. The numerical results demonstrated that the relevant control performances can be achieved by introducing porous layers only at the top and bottom of the solid body permits. Moreover, a significant drag reduction was observed by introducing a thin layer with intermediate permeability in both edges of the back wall. Liu and Wei [31] studied numerically the circular cylinder with a porous materials coating to investigate the effects of surface permeability on the flow control. The three-dimensional simulation demonstrated the underlying physical mechanisms of flow control. It was observed that vorticity in the spanwise direction has been affected more than other directions. In addition, vortex shedding suppression is achieved partly due to a favorable pressure gradient around the porous surface.

(p25.5) The literature suggested that porosity and the permeable cylinder diameter have a substantial effect on the flow characteristics and results in significant reduction in turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses. In addition, such methodology also is very effective for drag reduction of the cylinder. However, the drag coefficient of the cylinder   

(p25.6) Employing permeable mesh is classified as the passive wake control method to suppress the vortex shedding in the wake region. Several researchers investigated the effect of porosity on the wake region for various flow conditions. Gözmen, Akilli [26], Ozkan and Oruc [27] experimentally investigated suppression of vortex shedding in the wake of a circular cylinder by employing a permeable outer cylinder.

(p25.7) Gözmen and Akilli [26] employed various values of porosity to demonstrate its effect on flow control in the wake of the circular cylinder with the outer permeable cylinder. It was observed that vortex shedding has been suppressed significantly downstream the cylinder as porosity increases. In order to control the vortex shedding in the wake, the report suggested the optimum value of porosity as a value of 0.7. While the previous study of Gözmen and Akilli [26] conducted the experiments for a single value of the ratio of the outer cylinder diameter to the inner cylinder diameter (D/d), Ozkan and Oruc [27] investigated the effects of the variation of both the outer cylinder diameter and porosity. It was reported that both parameters have considerable effects on the wake flow behind the circular cylinder. A significant reduction of turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses was observed as a result of employing the outer cylinder. The results demonstrated that a value of 0.4 ≤ D/d ≤ 0.6 and 1.6 ≤ D/d ≤ 2.0 would achieve a better flow control in the near wake with a remarkable reduction in the turbulent kinetic energy peak value. Cicolin and Freire [28] investigated a circular cylinder with three different types of permeable meshes on the suppression of vortex-induced vibrations by means of PIV. It was observed that the vortex shedding in the wake region has been disrupted and formation length has been increased. Durhasan and Pinar [29] studied the gap between a circular cylinder and a shroud to investigate the effect of shroud porosity and diameter. Therefore, the experiment was conducted for various porosity and diameter ratios at a Reynolds number of Re = 5000. Durhasan and Pinar [29] divided the field of view into four flow regions as demonstrated in Figure 2. These regions are upstream region I (UR I), upstream region II (UR II), downstream region I (DR I) and downstream region II (DR II). Therefore, it was possible to have a closer look at the effects of shroud on these four flow regions.

(p25.8) Eng 2021, 2, FOR PEER REVIEW 6 (UR II), downstream region I (DR I) and downstream region II (DR II). Therefore, it was possible to have a closer look at the effects of shroud on these four flow regions.  Figure 3 demonstrates the time-averaged streamline topology for various porosities at different diameter ratios. In comparison to the bare cylinder, the recirculation zone of the cylinder and location of the foci and saddle points are significantly affected for the case of the perforated cylinders. It was observed at porosity values of β ≤ 0.5, the vortex formation of the cylinder occurs only in the gap between the cylinder and the shroud. For β ≥ 0.6 it was observed that in DR I and DR II the formation of the wake flow structures is affected dominantly by the diameter rather than the porosity. It was also revealed that the flow structure in the outer region of the shroud exhibited a similar pattern to the wake region of a single perforated cylinder. In addition, it was reported that employing the shroud will lead to a significant drag reduction between 21% and 87% depending on the values of the porosity and the diameter ratio.  [29] Copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier. Figure 3 demonstrates the time-averaged streamline topology for various porosities at different diameter ratios. In comparison to the bare cylinder, the recirculation zone of the cylinder and location of the foci and saddle points are significantly affected for the case of the perforated cylinders. It was observed at porosity values of β ≤ 0.5, the vortex formation of the cylinder occurs only in the gap between the cylinder and the shroud. For β ≥ 0.6 it was observed that in DR I and DR II the formation of the wake flow structures is affected dominantly by the diameter rather than the porosity. It was also revealed that the flow structure in the outer region of the shroud exhibited a similar pattern to the wake region of a single perforated cylinder. In addition, it was reported that employing the shroud will lead to a significant drag reduction between 21% and 87% depending on the values of the porosity and the diameter ratio.

(p25.9) On the other hand, some researchers investigated the wake flow control numerically. Mimeau and Cottet [30] investigated flow control around a semicircular cylinder by employing porous coatings numerically. The simulation is performed by using direct numerical simulations and employing the vortex penalization method. The numerical results demonstrated that the relevant control performances can be achieved by introducing porous layers only at the top and bottom of the solid body permits. Moreover, a significant drag reduction was observed by introducing a thin layer with intermediate permeability in both edges of the back wall. Liu and Wei [31] studied numerically the circular cylinder with a porous materials coating to investigate the effects of surface permeability on the flow control. The three-dimensional simulation demonstrated the underlying physical mechanisms of flow control. It was observed that vorticity in the spanwise direction has been affected more than other directions. In addition, vortex shedding suppression is achieved partly due to a favorable pressure gradient around the porous surface.

(p25.10) The literature suggested that porosity and the permeable cylinder diameter have a substantial effect on the flow characteristics and results in significant reduction in turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses. In addition, such methodology also is very effective for drag reduction of the cylinder. However, the drag coefficient of the cylinder together with the shroud is higher than the bare cylinder. Table 2 presents the experimental and numerical research on flow control and suppression of vortex shedding by employing a permeable wall on bluff bodies. On the other hand, some researchers investigated the wake flow control numerically. Mimeau and Cottet [30] investigated flow control around a semicircular cylinder by employing porous coatings numerically. The simulation is performed by using direct numerical simulations and employing the vortex penalization method. The numerical results demonstrated that the relevant control performances can be achieved by introducing porous layers only at the top and bottom of the solid body permits. Moreover, a significant drag reduction was observed by introducing a thin layer with intermediate permeability in both edges of the back wall. Liu and Wei [31] studied numerically the circular cylinder with a porous materials coating to investigate the effects of surface permeability on the flow control. The three-dimensional simulation demonstrated the underlying physical mechanisms of flow control. It was observed that vorticity in the spanwise direction has been affected more than other directions. In addition, vortex shedding suppression is achieved partly due to a favorable pressure gradient around the porous surface.

(p25.11) The literature suggested that porosity and the permeable cylinder diameter have a substantial effect on the flow characteristics and results in significant reduction in turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses. In addition, such methodology also is very effective for drag reduction of the cylinder. However, the drag coefficient of the cylinder   
## (s26) Corner Modification
(p26.0) Several researchers studied the features of the wake flow for square cylinders with modified corners and suggested a possible aerodynamic forces reduction as a result. In one of the early attempts to understand the effects of coroner modification on the flow structure, Kwok and Wilhelm [32] investigated experimentally the effect of edge configuration on the Eng 2021, 2 332 wind induced response of tall buildings with the rectangular cross section. The experiment demonstrated that slotted corners and chamfered corners reduce both the along-wind and cross-wind responses significantly. Further investigation on the wake energy spectra and wind force spectra characteristics demonstrated that the excitation processes were altered for a chamfered corner. Tamura and Miyagi [33] and Tamura and Miyagi [34] elaborated the effect of corner modification of the square cylinder on the wake flow structures and aerodynamics forces. Tamura and Miyagi [33] observed that a slight corner modification alters the flow structure and result in considerable variation of the aerodynamic characteristics up to approximately 60% of the original value. The report suggested corner modification as a promising passive technique for aerodynamic forces reduction.
## (s27) Researchers Flow Control Reynolds Number TI Technique Measurements
(p27.0) Kwok and Wilhelm [32] CC --CTA U Tamura and Miyagi [33] RC, CC 10 4 -10 6 0.5% PS, Num C D , C L , C P , St Tamura and Miyagi [34] RC, CC 3.0 × 10 4 6.5%, 14% CTA, FB C D , C L , St Dalton and Zheng [37] RC 250, 1000 -Num C D , C L , C P , St Hu and Zhou [35] RC  

(p27.1) Kwok and Wilhelm [32] CC --CTA U Tamura and Miyagi [33] RC, CC 10 4 -10 6 0.5% PS, Num C D , C L , C P , St Tamura and Miyagi [34] RC, CC 3.0 × 10 4 6.5%, 14% CTA, FB C D , C L , St Dalton and Zheng [37] RC 250, 1000 -Num C D , C L , C P , St Hu and Zhou [35] RC  
## (s28) Wavy Cylinder
(p28.0) Employing a wavy surface for bluff bodies is also suggested in the literature for flow control. The concept is to employ a wavy surface, sinusoidal waviness, for instance to investigate its effect on the wake flow and vortex shedding phenomenon.

(p28.1) In this context, two sets of extensive numerical investigation [48][49][50][51] and combined experimental-numerical studies [52][53][54] have been conducted. Investigations on the wake flow structure of a wavy circular cylinder demonstrated that the wavy cylinder encountered a lower mean drag coefficient than the corresponding drag coefficient for a circular cylinder. Such an observation was due to the formation of a longer wake vortex generated by the wavy cylinder. On the other hand, a significant reduction of the lift coefficient fluctuation of the wavy cylinder was observed. The employed wavy surface led to the formation of 3-D free shear layers, which are more stable than purely 2-D free shear layers. Such free shear layers only roll up into mature vortices at the further downstream position and significantly alters the near wake structures and the pressure distributions around the wavy cylinder. The wake flow structure of a circular cylinder and a wavy circular cylinder illustrated in Figure 6 by means of large eddy simulation (LES) and laser-induced fluorescence (LIF). From the figure alteration of the vortex structure behind a way cylinder is apparent.

(p28.2) On the other hand, investigation on the flow structure in the wake region of the modified square cylinder demonstrated that the three-dimensional free shear layers from the leading edge are widened and lengthened. Therefore, vortices formed further downstream in the wake of modified square cylinder in comparison to the straight square cylinder. Thus, a reduction in the mean drag was observed while the lift fluctuation was suppressed significantly. Organized transverse vortices have been observed along the spanwise direction, which make such a flow control achievable. The free shear layers stabilized by these vortices and therefore forced the roll up process into the vortex at a further downstream position. In comparison with a straight square cylinder a significant force reduction is observed for a wavy square cylinder. The simulation demonstrated more stable threedimensional free shear layers behind the wavy square cylinder. It was observed that at Re = 100 the free shear layers exhibit a steady flow feature with symmetrical flow patterns behind the modified cylinder with a wavy surface. In agreement with previous studies a reduction in the mean drag coefficient and fluctuating lift coefficient was reported. However, as the aspect ratio and Reynolds number increases such features disappear. The simulation suggested that such a modified cylinder with a wavy surface is not effective in flow separation control.

(p28.3) cylinder. Such an observation was due to the formation of a longer wake vortex generated by the wavy cylinder. On the other hand, a significant reduction of the lift coefficient fluctuation of the wavy cylinder was observed. The employed wavy surface led to the formation of 3-D free shear layers, which are more stable than purely 2-D free shear layers. Such free shear layers only roll up into mature vortices at the further downstream position and significantly alters the near wake structures and the pressure distributions around the wavy cylinder. The wake flow structure of a circular cylinder and a wavy circular cylinder illustrated in Figure 6 by means of large eddy simulation (LES) and laser-induced fluorescence (LIF). From the figure alteration of the vortex structure behind a way cylinder is apparent. On the other hand, investigation on the flow structure in the wake region of the modified square cylinder demonstrated that the three-dimensional free shear layers from the leading edge are widened and lengthened. Therefore, vortices formed further downstream in the wake of modified square cylinder in comparison to the straight square cylinder. Thus, a reduction in the mean drag was observed while the lift fluctuation was suppressed significantly. Organized transverse vortices have been observed along the spanwise direction, which make such a flow control achievable. The free shear layers stabilized by these vortices and therefore forced the roll up process into the vortex at a further downstream position. In comparison with a straight square cylinder a significant force reduction is observed for a wavy square cylinder. The simulation demonstrated more stable three-dimensional free shear layers behind the wavy square cylinder. It was observed that at Re = 100 the free shear layers exhibit a steady flow feature with symmetrical flow patterns behind the modified cylinder with a wavy surface. In agreement with previous studies a reduction in the mean drag coefficient and fluctuating lift coefficient was re- Recently, Assi and Bearman [55] investigated the vortex-induced vibration of a wavy elliptic cylinder. The experimental study demonstrated that a wavy cylinder exhibits vortexinduced vibrations with similar behavior to a plain cylinder with equivalent diameter. The modification elongated the wake region with significant dimensional features, increased the base pressure and consequently affects the drag coefficient. It was also reported that the elliptical wavy cylinder exhibits more evident 3D features than those of a wavy cylinder with the circular cross section.

(p28.4) Other studies combined other parameters with the wavy cylinder to investigate the flow structure in the wake region. Investigation on the inclined cylinder with a wavy surface [49] demonstrated similar three dimensional characteristics of the wake. It was reported that a significant drag reduction and suppression of lift fluctuation can be achieved by a wavy cylinder at a low angle of inclination while at a large angle of inclination these effects disappear.

(p28.5) New and Shi [56] conducted an experimental study to investigate effects of the aspect ratio of the finite-length on the flow structure of wavy cylinders. The results demonstrated that for high aspect ratio wavy cylinders with a large wavelength, the vortex shedding phenomenon can be altered by modifying the aspect ratio. Such an observation is due to the persistent formation of recirculating regions close to the end-walls under certain wavy cylinder configurations, which affect the distributions of spanwise flows and vortex formation lengths. Wavy cylinder with smaller wavelength demonstrated less sensitivity to variations in the physical configurations.

(p28.6) To sum up, the numerical and experimental studies demonstrated the effectiveness of modified cylinders with a wavy surface on flow control and vortex shedding suppression in the wake of the cylinders. Apparently, the vortex formation region is elongated and the effectiveness of wavy cylinders can be observed in terms of minimization of flow induced vibration and force reduction. Such a force reduction for drag can be substantial with up to Eng 2021, 2 337 a 34% reduction at a higher Reynolds number. Table 4 summarized the conducted research on modified cylinders with a wavy surface. Table 4. Selected studies on flow control and suppression of vortex shedding wavy cylinders.

(p28.7) Employing a wavy surface for bluff bodies is also suggested in the literature for flow control. The concept is to employ a wavy surface, sinusoidal waviness, for instance to investigate its effect on the wake flow and vortex shedding phenomenon.

(p28.8) In this context, two sets of extensive numerical investigation [48][49][50][51] and combined experimental-numerical studies [52][53][54] have been conducted. Investigations on the wake flow structure of a wavy circular cylinder demonstrated that the wavy cylinder encountered a lower mean drag coefficient than the corresponding drag coefficient for a circular cylinder. Such an observation was due to the formation of a longer wake vortex generated by the wavy cylinder. On the other hand, a significant reduction of the lift coefficient fluctuation of the wavy cylinder was observed. The employed wavy surface led to the formation of 3-D free shear layers, which are more stable than purely 2-D free shear layers. Such free shear layers only roll up into mature vortices at the further downstream position and significantly alters the near wake structures and the pressure distributions around the wavy cylinder. The wake flow structure of a circular cylinder and a wavy circular cylinder illustrated in Figure 6 by means of large eddy simulation (LES) and laser-induced fluorescence (LIF). From the figure alteration of the vortex structure behind a way cylinder is apparent.

(p28.9) On the other hand, investigation on the flow structure in the wake region of the modified square cylinder demonstrated that the three-dimensional free shear layers from the leading edge are widened and lengthened. Therefore, vortices formed further downstream in the wake of modified square cylinder in comparison to the straight square cylinder. Thus, a reduction in the mean drag was observed while the lift fluctuation was suppressed significantly. Organized transverse vortices have been observed along the spanwise direction, which make such a flow control achievable. The free shear layers stabilized by these vortices and therefore forced the roll up process into the vortex at a further downstream position. In comparison with a straight square cylinder a significant force reduction is observed for a wavy square cylinder. The simulation demonstrated more stable threedimensional free shear layers behind the wavy square cylinder. It was observed that at Re = 100 the free shear layers exhibit a steady flow feature with symmetrical flow patterns behind the modified cylinder with a wavy surface. In agreement with previous studies a reduction in the mean drag coefficient and fluctuating lift coefficient was reported. However, as the aspect ratio and Reynolds number increases such features disappear. The simulation suggested that such a modified cylinder with a wavy surface is not effective in flow separation control.

(p28.10) cylinder. Such an observation was due to the formation of a longer wake vortex generated by the wavy cylinder. On the other hand, a significant reduction of the lift coefficient fluctuation of the wavy cylinder was observed. The employed wavy surface led to the formation of 3-D free shear layers, which are more stable than purely 2-D free shear layers. Such free shear layers only roll up into mature vortices at the further downstream position and significantly alters the near wake structures and the pressure distributions around the wavy cylinder. The wake flow structure of a circular cylinder and a wavy circular cylinder illustrated in Figure 6 by means of large eddy simulation (LES) and laser-induced fluorescence (LIF). From the figure alteration of the vortex structure behind a way cylinder is apparent. On the other hand, investigation on the flow structure in the wake region of the modified square cylinder demonstrated that the three-dimensional free shear layers from the leading edge are widened and lengthened. Therefore, vortices formed further downstream in the wake of modified square cylinder in comparison to the straight square cylinder. Thus, a reduction in the mean drag was observed while the lift fluctuation was suppressed significantly. Organized transverse vortices have been observed along the spanwise direction, which make such a flow control achievable. The free shear layers stabilized by these vortices and therefore forced the roll up process into the vortex at a further downstream position. In comparison with a straight square cylinder a significant force reduction is observed for a wavy square cylinder. The simulation demonstrated more stable three-dimensional free shear layers behind the wavy square cylinder. It was observed that at Re = 100 the free shear layers exhibit a steady flow feature with symmetrical flow patterns behind the modified cylinder with a wavy surface. In agreement with previous studies a reduction in the mean drag coefficient and fluctuating lift coefficient was re- Recently, Assi and Bearman [55] investigated the vortex-induced vibration of a wavy elliptic cylinder. The experimental study demonstrated that a wavy cylinder exhibits vortexinduced vibrations with similar behavior to a plain cylinder with equivalent diameter. The modification elongated the wake region with significant dimensional features, increased the base pressure and consequently affects the drag coefficient. It was also reported that the elliptical wavy cylinder exhibits more evident 3D features than those of a wavy cylinder with the circular cross section.

(p28.11) Other studies combined other parameters with the wavy cylinder to investigate the flow structure in the wake region. Investigation on the inclined cylinder with a wavy surface [49] demonstrated similar three dimensional characteristics of the wake. It was reported that a significant drag reduction and suppression of lift fluctuation can be achieved by a wavy cylinder at a low angle of inclination while at a large angle of inclination these effects disappear.

(p28.12) New and Shi [56] conducted an experimental study to investigate effects of the aspect ratio of the finite-length on the flow structure of wavy cylinders. The results demonstrated that for high aspect ratio wavy cylinders with a large wavelength, the vortex shedding phenomenon can be altered by modifying the aspect ratio. Such an observation is due to the persistent formation of recirculating regions close to the end-walls under certain wavy cylinder configurations, which affect the distributions of spanwise flows and vortex formation lengths. Wavy cylinder with smaller wavelength demonstrated less sensitivity to variations in the physical configurations.

(p28.13) To sum up, the numerical and experimental studies demonstrated the effectiveness of modified cylinders with a wavy surface on flow control and vortex shedding suppression in the wake of the cylinders. Apparently, the vortex formation region is elongated and the effectiveness of wavy cylinders can be observed in terms of minimization of flow induced vibration and force reduction. Such a force reduction for drag can be substantial with up to Eng 2021, 2 337 a 34% reduction at a higher Reynolds number. Table 4 summarized the conducted research on modified cylinders with a wavy surface. Table 4. Selected studies on flow control and suppression of vortex shedding wavy cylinders.
## (s29) Researchers Technique Reynolds Number TI Bluff Body
(p29.0) Darekar and Sherwin [57] Num 10-500 -SC Lee and Nguyen [58] Exp 5.0 × 10 3 -2.0 × 10 4 0.08% CC Lam and Lin [48] Num 3000 -CC Lin and Lin [53] Exp, Num 3000 -CC Lam and Lin [49] Num 3900 -CC Lam and Lin [50] Num 100 -CC Lam and Wang [59] Exp 200-9000 0.2% CC Lam and Wang [60] Exp 1.53 × 10 4 -5.05 × 10 4 0.2% CC Lam and Lin [51] Num 100-5000 -SC New and Shi [56] Exp 2700 2% CC Zou and Hu [54] Exp, Num 600, 5900 -SC Shen and Miao [52] Exp, Num 100-22,000 -SC Tammisola [61] Num 50-100 -CC Assi and Bearman [55] Exp 1500-15,000 3% EC CC = circular cylinder; SC = square cylinder; EC = elliptic cylinder; Exp = experimental; Num = numerical.

(p29.1) In conclusion, this paper reviewed different promising methods of vortex shedding suppression through geometry modification on the bluff body. The discussed methods namely permeable and porous mesh, corner modification and wavy cylinder demonstrate promising results in suppressing vortex shedding. The literature suggests the significant effectiveness of vortex shedding suppression in terms of the alteration of turbulent kinetic energy, Reynolds stresses and drag coefficient. These methodologies have potential application in the civil engineering and wind energy sector and their implementation for a more effective vortex shedding suppression is essential for engineers. 

(p29.2) Darekar and Sherwin [57] Num 10-500 -SC Lee and Nguyen [58] Exp 5.0 × 10 3 -2.0 × 10 4 0.08% CC Lam and Lin [48] Num 3000 -CC Lin and Lin [53] Exp, Num 3000 -CC Lam and Lin [49] Num 3900 -CC Lam and Lin [50] Num 100 -CC Lam and Wang [59] Exp 200-9000 0.2% CC Lam and Wang [60] Exp 1.53 × 10 4 -5.05 × 10 4 0.2% CC Lam and Lin [51] Num 100-5000 -SC New and Shi [56] Exp 2700 2% CC Zou and Hu [54] Exp, Num 600, 5900 -SC Shen and Miao [52] Exp, Num 100-22,000 -SC Tammisola [61] Num 50-100 -CC Assi and Bearman [55] Exp 1500-15,000 3% EC CC = circular cylinder; SC = square cylinder; EC = elliptic cylinder; Exp = experimental; Num = numerical.

(p29.3) In conclusion, this paper reviewed different promising methods of vortex shedding suppression through geometry modification on the bluff body. The discussed methods namely permeable and porous mesh, corner modification and wavy cylinder demonstrate promising results in suppressing vortex shedding. The literature suggests the significant effectiveness of vortex shedding suppression in terms of the alteration of turbulent kinetic energy, Reynolds stresses and drag coefficient. These methodologies have potential application in the civil engineering and wind energy sector and their implementation for a more effective vortex shedding suppression is essential for engineers. 
