# Emphysematous cystitis: A case report and literature review of 113 cases Case Report

CorpusID: 236146909 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95e6227cb9d58057e70d3426c5d9d844a94a1dd8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95e6227cb9d58057e70d3426c5d9d844a94a1dd8)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Emphysematous cystitis (EC) is a rare life-threatening infection of bladder wall by gas forming microorganisms, characterized by misleading nonspecific clinical features. Bailey in 1961 defined EC as "cystitis emphysematosa" and linked it with pneumaturia. [1,2] Clinical presentation of EC is variable ranging from incidental detection on imaging to septic shock. [3] The detection of EC is increasing because of frequent use and advancement in cross-sectional imaging leading to better understanding of this rare diseases. The aim of the present study is to revisit this urological emergency with review of existing literature. All articles published in English literature in PubMed® from 1999 to 2019 identified using keywords "Emphysematous" and "cystitis." Total 267 publications were found and after exclusion of animal studies, paper in languages other than English, review articles and case series, 113 case reports were eligible for analysis and described here in discussion.
## (s1) CASE REPORT
(p1.0) A 62-year-old male known case of type II diabetes mellitus for the past 6 months on oral hypoglycemic agents presented to emergency with left flank pain, inter mittent fever with chills, suprapubic pain, generalized weakness for 7 days and burning micturition associated with foul smelling cloudy urine for 3 days. His vitals at presentation were temperature of 101 o F, pulse 102/min, BP108/78 mm of Hg, and respiratory rate of 22/min. Abdomen was soft with mild tenderness in suprapubic region and renal angle. In laboratory parameters, his blood sugar was 370 mg/dl, HbA1C 11.5%, total leukocyte count 17070/mm 3 (neutrophils 90%), hemoglobin 7.9 mg/dl, blood urea 80 mg/dl, serum creatinine 1.03 gm/dl, and serum bilirubin was 1.35 mg/dl. Provisional diagnosis of urosepsis was made and urine was sent for routine microscopy and culture. The patient was started on piperacillin-tazobactam and intravenous crystalloid. For strict sugar control regular insulin on sliding scale with blood sugar charting was started. Ultrasonography showed left pyelonephritis and floating echoes in bladder. Foley catheterization was done in emergency and 400 ml of turbid urine was drained instantly. Computed tomography (CT) revealed left hydronephrosis, tiny calculi, multiple air foci in left renal pelvis and parenchyma suggestive of grade II emphysematous pyelonephritis according to classification by Huang et al. [4] [ Figure 1]. There was classical finding of "beaded necklace" pattern of gas in the wall of urinary bladder which confirmed the diagnosis of EC [ Figure 1]. After primary resuscitation, the patient underwent cystoscopy and left double J stenting which showed multiple air filled submucosal vesicles in the bladder, further strengthening the diagnosis of EC [ Figure 2]. Urine culture grew Escherichia coli (>10 5 colonies/ml) which was sensitive to previous antibiotics. The same injectable antibiotic continued until leukocyte count comes to normal. The patient became afebrile after 48 h and was discharged on 7 th day advising culture directed oral antibiotic (levofloxacin 750 mg once a day for next 2 weeks).
## (s2) DISCUSSION
(p2.0) In 113 identified cases of EC in literature, mean age of presentation was 67.94  years. Most cases were seen in female (65.49%) and age older than 60 years (75.22%). Apart from age and sex, the most common predisposing factor was diabetes mellitus (60.18%) and comorbidities (>2 comorbid conditions in 49.55%). Other risk factors were neurogenic bladder (9.73%), malignancy on chemotherapy (8.85%), immunosuppressed state (transplant recipient), and postsurgery [ Table 1].

(p2.1) Most patients presented with features of sepsis (32.74%) and uncomplicated urinary tract infection (16.81%). Sepsis is defined as systemic inflammatory response syndrome with documented infection. [5] Other modes of presentation were pain abdomen (25.66%), hematuria (6.19%), and fever (3.54%). Nine (7.96%) patients were diagnosed incidentally on imaging for other reason.
