# A Survey on Robotic Technologies for Forest Firefighting: Applying Drone Swarms to Improve Firefighters' Efficiency and Safety A Survey on Robotic Technologies for

CorpusID: 234315746 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f464f43cfe450d8c720d2093e55b85e587b8569f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f464f43cfe450d8c720d2093e55b85e587b8569f)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s7) Surveillance
(p7.0) Fire surveillance is the most covered activity in the literature about robotics for firefighting. Most of the proposals involve the use of different kinds of aerial robots (fixed-wing and multi-rotor drones) equipped with various types of cameras (RGB, infrared, multispectral...) to watch over the forests from above. Fire surveillance tasks may have up to four objectives: search of potential fires, detection to alert firefighters, diagnosis to get relevant data about the fire, and prognosis to predict fire propagation [20]. The early detection of fire is as important as the complete analysis of it, given that firefighting teams need information such as the ignition and danger potential to organize their operations [21].

(p7.1) Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) with on-board vision systems have considerable potential in the detection and monitoring of forest fires, since they offer high maneuverability, flexible perspective and resolution, and limited risks to people [22]. For this purpose, surveillance systems should integrate six elements: a fleet of UAVs with payloads, sensor fusion and image processing methods, guidance, navigation and control (GNC) algorithms, coordination and cooperation strategies, path planning algorithms, and ground control stations (GCS) [23]. The selected UAVs shall meet a set of requirements, such as long flight time, accurate localization with the data obtained by the Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) and Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS), stable and robust flight, and good image quality [24].
## (s8) Extinguishing
(p8.0) In general terms, fire extinguishing is the last task of firefighting after having detected and checked the fire. Currently, this task is mostly performed with ground and aerial means that require human intervention. Sometimes, the presence of humans results in risky situations for their lives due to the virulence of fires. Although this is a good reason to try to use robots in these tasks, these autonomous systems are only used experimentally. The literature considers two main approaches: one for aerial extinguishing and another for supporting ground operations.

(p8.1) The main idea of the firefighting drones is to attack the fire when it is in its first stages, trying to avoid the spread of it. An extinguishing quadcopter equipped with a bucket to capture and release water is presented in [40]. Although this design is similar to those used in current firefighting helicopters, the limitation in the payload capacity of the quadcopter reduces its performance.

(p8.2) An aerial hose-type robot that can fly directly into the fire source by a water jet is presented in [41]. This robot receives a continuous intake of water for fighting the fires and controlling its stability. In this way, it solves the limited payload issues of conventional drones, but it requires a water source close to the fire scenario. Another alternative is the use of gases instead of water. A quadcopter that carries a balloon filled with helium is proposed by [42]. This inert gas is used because it can reduce the amount of oxygen of the flames, as well as it is light enough to be transported by a quadcopter. The scalability of this system to forest fires must be validated, including the mechanism to release the balloons on the exact points.
## (s14) Drone Swarm
(p14.0) The mission described in the previous section can be addressed by several types of aerial robot systems. The first approach is using a heterogeneous drone fleet, so different types of drones can adapt to different types of tasks, increasing the efficiency of the whole mission. For instance, fixed-wing drones can do the tasks that require covering large areas as surveillance and mapping, whereas rotary-wing drones can do the tasks that require stationary flights as monitoring and support. However, our proposal involves the use of a homogeneous drone swarm to solve this mission. This system relies on the cooperation between drones to accomplish the tasks and not on the adaptation of them to specific tasks. In this case, the same type of drones can perform surveillance and monitoring, but in a different number.

(p14.1) Both systems have advantages and disadvantages in the defined scenario. As already mentioned, heterogeneous fleets can optimize the missions by allocating their different resources to different tasks. Additionally, these systems are easier to control because the drones have more capabilities and need less coordination. On the other hand, drone swarms are more scalable and have more flexibility to adapt to the changes in the scenario. Besides, these systems have better fault tolerance because they can recover from losing one or more members.

(p14.2) We contemplate the definition of robot swarm drawn from [53]: a robot swarm is a group of simple robots, which individually can only perform rudimentary actions, but collectively form an intelligent system and can perform complex tasks. Therefore, we consider a quadcopter fleet as a robot swarm when the fleet consists of a dozen robots, single robots cannot cover the target scenarios, and individual robots are not able to perform the considered tasks. Firefighting missions involve large and complex terrains, where single quadcopters can only collect local information and perform simple actions.
## (s17) Infrastructure
(p17.0) A minimal infrastructure is required for the operation of the system. This infrastructure consists of multiple elements that sustain the autonomy of the swarm, enable the communications among the agents, and allow the human-swarm interaction.

(p17.1) As mentioned above, autonomy is a major challenge for applying drone swarms to firefighting missions. Some of the tasks imply continuous flights over target areas, such as fire surveillance and monitoring, whereas some others require a rapid deployment there, such as fire investigation and firefighter support. Therefore, the drones must be able to charge their batteries in the scenario to increase their availability during the missions. For this purpose, charging stations can be distributed throughout the scenario, even using the ground vehicles involved in the mission.

(p17.2) Adaptive and immersive interfaces can improve the situational awareness and reduce the workload of operators in the considered mission. These results have been validated in similar missions, such as the control of multiple robots to perform complex missions [59] and the analysis of the information collected by a drone swarm from a smart city [57].

(p17.3) These interfaces adapt their displays to the mission state and operator preferences, in order to reduce the amount of information and the workload of operator. For this purpose, they can integrate mission and operator models. The first ones allow following the state of the mission and selecting the relevant information according to it, whereas the second ones allow adapting the interface to the operator preferences. The adaptation can be performed through artificial intelligence models like neural networks.

(p17.4) These interfaces apply immersive technologies like virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), and mixed reality (MR) to introduce the operator in the scenario, improving their perception of the environment where the robots are working. VR reproduces virtual environments and allows interacting with their elements; AR enhances real environments with virtual elements with which the operator can interact, and MR combines real and virtual elements and allows interacting with them [60].

(p17.5) In this work, we consider VR interfaces for the mission commander and AR interfaces for team leaders and members. The mission commander works away from the scenario, so they can focus on the information from the mission. A VR interface can reproduce the scenario, incorporating the real-time information of the swarm and its environment, allowing the operator to move around the scene searching for the best point of view. Meanwhile, team leaders and members work in the scenario, so they must pay most of their attention to the mission. In this case, an AR interface can provide them with relevant information about the mission while keeping their attention in their environment.
