# Natural Fiber Waste from Palm Oil Tree: An Overview of Potential Usage for Indonesia's Affordable House Building Materials

CorpusID: 236540641 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ae7e2da49fc31b19d8bfdf1913d235811732550b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ae7e2da49fc31b19d8bfdf1913d235811732550b)

Fields: Business, Environmental Science

## (s1) Methodology
(p1.0) This paper is not a research article but instead uses a review article method. The review article intends to evaluate, identify research gaps or synthesize previous research-based sources. This approach can also be used to investigate the effect of or relationship between two specific variables (Snyder, 2019). In this case, the variables would be the possible relations of two different topics: Indonesia's affordable housing programs and palm oil industry waste. The discussion begins by examining affordable housing programs in Indonesia regarding history, definitions, and implementation. Secondly, discuss the oil palm fiber waste from the stages of the plantation, production, and its volume as a potential source for building material. The last step discusses previous studies that have addressed the conversion of palm fiber waste as a building material and the possibility of implementing it for affordable houses in Indonesia. In the end, this paper closes with conclusions.
## (s7) Palm Oil Fiber Waste Previous Research And Its Description Sources
(p7.0) OPF Particle Board made from OPF using steam-exploded binder less process. The board's density and thickness swelling test results met the requirement of JIS A 5908. (Laemsak & Okuma, 2000) Cold-pressed Particle Board made from OPF mixed with cement PC (Portland Cement) as the adhesive and CO2 gas as the curing treatment method. The mechanical and dimensional properties of the board followed by C02 curing treatment improved significantly. (Hermawan et al., 2001) OPT Experimental particleboard was manufactured using fine particles of OPT using a binderless process. The panel's internal bond strength meets the JIS standard, while the MOR did not. This research suggests that adding an increase in temperature during pressing may improve the properties of the boards. (Hashim et al., 2011) Experimental binderless particleboards produced from several processing parameters that include pressing temperatures, hot pressing times and pressing pressures. The panel's thickness swelling nearly met European Standard (ES) requirement for use in humid conditions. Some of the specimens showed promising mechanical properties and met the requirement of the European Standard. (Boon et al., 2013) OPT and EFB Hybrid plywood made from EFB and OPT with phenol and urea-formaldehyde resins. This type of plywood can be used in both interiors and exterior and can be a substitute for conventional plywood.

(p7.1) (Abdul Khalil et al., 2010) EFB HDF made of EFB with formaldehyde resin. Based on the research, the high-density fiberboard's mechanical properties show an increase with increasing EFB proportion. The results show that the tensile and hardness strength was higher than other existing composites material. (Sahari et al., 2014) MDF made from pre-treated EFB with phenol-formaldehyde resin.
