# A Review of GPR Application on Transport Infrastructures: Troubleshooting and Best Practices

CorpusID: 232314085 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a1ad556619f0f3b6965b548d2b3cb07d186b230e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a1ad556619f0f3b6965b548d2b3cb07d186b230e)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s2) GPR with Dipole Antennas
(p2.0) Dipole antennas were primarily developed for use in geological survey, normally ground-coupled (Figure 1c). They have frequencies ranging between 10 MHz and 6 GHz. For transport infrastructure applications, the best results are obtained with antennas from 400 MHz to 2.5 GHz central frequency. In general, the higher the frequency, the lower the penetration depth and the higher the resolution is. For example, 1.5 GHz dipole antennas will give a penetration depth of 0.50 m, while the 400 MHz will give a penetration of 2.00 m [19].
## (s23) Stone Masonry Arch Bridges
(p23.0) A large number of the existing masonry arch bridges still in use within the transportation network are ancient structures remaining from Roman and Mediaeval periods. In addition to their age, and environmental conditions, the stability of these bridges (both road and railway bridges) is questionable because of the actual loading, significantly higher than the estimate for their original design [127]. Consequently, they require periodic inspections of the changes in the structural condition, aiming to develop effective preventive and maintenance tasks.

(p23.1) The use of NDT technology becomes essential for the health assessment of these former structures in order to preserve their historical character and structural integrity. In this context, the GPR method has been demonstrated as effective for the diagnosis of masonry arch bridges, in which the detection of the following characteristics was possible:
## (s25) Overview on GPR in Tunneling
(p25.0) Tunnels are essential civil engineering structures that constitute an important part of roadways, passages, sewer systems, utility networks and railways. There are various categories of tunnel construction, including bored, drill and blast, horizontal directional drilling, and pipe jacking/microtunnels. Moreover, the bored tunnel can be divided into two subcategories, controlled bored tunnels and tunnel boring machine (TBM) tunneling. Shield tunneling is the typical method used for railways, which is considered a more stable method than mining.

(p25.1) Tunnel distresses might not be visible, and it is therefore necessary to conduct regular inspections during its service life in order to ensure safety and long-term viability. Various processes and subsequent failures may cause damage to tunnel structural integrity; those that occur during construction (ground settlement) and after opening to service (aging, physical and chemical agents, etc.). Undoubtedly, the frequency of periodic inspection should be increased when the tunnel has become aged. If potential and hidden deficiencies of the tunnel are detected in advance, and treated in time, many accidents may be avoided, whereas excessive repair and maintenance costs can be saved. Firstly, the geological and hydro-geologic conditions in which tunneling occur are essential factors in the structural integrity. Secondly, more and more problems appear in the lining with aging, such as water leakage, cracks, spalling and voids behind the lining, which greatly affect the safety of the tunnel and the users. The thickness distribution of the grouting layer behind lining segments is a crucial factor to control the quality of the tunnel and it directly affects the overall bearing capacity and structural adhesion of the tunnel. Overall, based on the International Tunneling and Underground Space Association (ITA/AITES) [184], the stresses and settlements that appear at the surface of the lining are indicators of an inadequate TBM method on shield tunnels: (i) over-excavation, (ii) the ploughing/heading effect and steering, (iii) lining deformation and insufficient grouting and (iv) swelling/consolidation of the surrounding ground.
## (s33) Quality Control of New Structures: Asphalt Air Void Content and Segregation
(p33.0) Quality control is important in the construction of new pavements and in the restoration of already existing roads and airfields [78,240,241]. The analysis requires the improvement of signal-to-noise ratio of the GPR scans. Bianchini Ciampoli et al. [240] present and discuss a processing flow to improve the GPR images during the quality control of structures. In these applications, a previous calibration is required to obtain accurate results [217].
## (s35) Recent Developments and Applications
(p35.0) The most recent developments in the pavement assessment are focused on four main purposes: (i) controlled experiments, (ii) deep learning and automatic detection of damage and layers, (iii) antenna positioning, and (iv) design of new devices.

(p35.1) Some of those more controlled experiments are realized in testing sites on roads, comparing GPR results to other complementary tests and cores. Other tests are developed in a laboratory, using specimens prepared to simulate damage and structures. Many tests are prepared to analyze the effect of different conditions on the GPR images and to monitor damages. The experimental tests address the evaluation of different problems. In this way, for example, Rasol et al. [56] present the effects of size and filling of cracks on the GPR images, and Baltrušaitis et al. [250] use the GPR results in order to estimate the quality of materials by determining the bulk density of bituminous mixture, and [251] determines the bitumen content in different mixtures. In all cases, the measured parameter is the dielectric permittivity, and mathematical models are compared to cores and experimental results.
