# Chi-square Reference Meanings: a Historical-epistemological Overview Significados de Referência da Estatica Qui-quadrado: um Olhar Histórico-epistemológico

CorpusID: 237381575 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2c23b2069c04cb7b31c9ea3e2305eabc61645ffd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2c23b2069c04cb7b31c9ea3e2305eabc61645ffd)

Fields: History, Mathematics

## (s5) Test of homogeneity
(p5.0) From this problem, Pearson posed the following question: What is the chance that there is a significant difference in the houses with cases of tuberculosis and the ones with cancer cases?

(p5.1) He started from the premise that the population, from which the two samples are drawn, can be given by the class μ 1 , μ 2 , μ 3 , μ 4 … μ p , μ q … μ g , being M the total population and where the samples would be given by the frequencies in the same classes. He also supposed that the two samples were independent, and thus, there would be no correlation between any deviation in any frequency of the first and second row. Pearson (1911) indicated that the statistic has the form:
## (s21) Partial meaning 12 (PM12): Test of homogeneity with Yates' continuity correction factor
(p21.0) To show how the test of homogeneity works with the correction for continuity factor to the 2 statistic, we resume the problem presented by Pearson (1911) about the hair color of two samples. The first sample corresponds to persons with scarlet fever and the second sample to persons with measles.

(p21.1) Among the linguistic elements in this configuration, we have natural language, in the same sense as in PM6, and tabular representation to show the frequencies of hair color of two samples (just as in PM11). Likewise, symbolic representation is also used as in PM11. Concerning the concepts/definition and the properties/proposition, they are resumed from different partial meanings, for example, in concepts/definitions the correction for continuity factor is resumed from PM4; variable from PM6; observed and expected frequency, frequency and marginal distribution, from PM7; and sample, probability, and homogeneity from PM9. Concerning properties/proposition, the degrees of freedom and expected frequency are resumed from PM11. Moreover, the 2 statistic is understood as in PM8.

(p21.2) The procedures identified are: (1) calculating the expected frequencies and the value of the 2 statistic; (2) establishing the degrees of freedom; and (3) looking for the value of the probability in 2 distribution tables. While the arguments revolved around the probability of occurrence that both samples correspond to the same population. For example, for 2 = 26 and = 4, the 2 distribution table shows = 0.000,086039; hence, the probabilities are around 11,628 to 1 against the emergence of two samples of hair color that diverge, if they were random samples from the same population.
## (s23) Incidence of partial meanings identified for the statistical education research
(p23.0) In the present section, we describe the connections among partial meanings identified in this article, for the 2 statistic, and the developments of the statistical education research concerning IIR and FIR, the use of statistical software, and the textbooks.

(p23.1) In this sense, diverse authors (e.g., Woodard et al. 2020;Fellers and Kuiper 2020;DePaolo et al. 2016;Seier 2014;Gibbs and Goossens 2013;Leigh and Dowling 2010), have reported activities or problems proposals with the finality to make more accessible the study of the 2 tests, goodness-of-fit, independence, and homogeneity, which correspond to the problem areas presented in the previous section. However, commonly, in these investigations, the last partial meanings of each problem area (i.e., PM3, PM7 y PM11) were used. That is to say; problems are proposed to promote the FIR by students, due to the approach used has a high degree of formalization (although these authors do not explicitly refer to FIR). We consider that the first partial meanings of each problem area identified here, as in the case of PM1, could be used intuitively to promote the logic of the goodness-of-fit-test with the 2 statistics, that is to say, promote the IIR for the case of this test.

(p23.2) For example, Leihg and Dowling (2010) present data that they collected about the water taste from different brands and how these data could be used to perform inferential analyzes with the 2 goodness-of-fit and independence test. For the case of the goodness-of-fit-test, primary mathematical objects corresponding to PM3 can be identified, such as the followings procedures:

(p23.3) establish the degrees of freedom (also associated with the proposition/property), calculate the 2 statistic and the p-value. Moreover, linguistic elements such as the use of natural language and the usual tabular representation in this type of test are identified.

(p23.4) In the same sense, Gibbs and Goossens (2013) propose to analyze a dataset about the efficacy of HPV vaccines with the 2 homogeneity test. An analysis of the activity statement and solution, in terms of the meanings proposed here, allow revealing the primary mathematical objects that correspond to PM11. Another example is that of DePaolo et al. (2016), who propose an activity about a sample of 200 transactions, which is solved with the 2 independence test, where primary mathematical objects used (and described) corresponding to PM7.

(p23.5) In these last two works, software was used for statistical data analysis; in the case of the first study, the authors point out that they do not use the 'continuity correction factor,' although some data have a frequency of less than five. This is very usual when we are working with software because some (e.g., Minitab) do not include the option to use the continuity correction, which constitutes a concept/definition and property/proposition corresponding to PM4, PM8, and PM12.

(p23.6) When we are working with frequencies less than five, the 2 tests require this correction, but the statistical software often gives a warning as an additional note to the results. Therefore, another use that can be made of the identified meanings in this article refers to promote what is found in the background understanding in the processes or procedures carried out by some statistical software, in this case for 2 tests, this would help a critical review of the statistical results produced by the software, with the aim of interpreting them correctly.

(p23.7) Furthermore, university textbooks (e.g., Devore 2008), present activities for the 2 tests, goodness-of-fit, independence, and homogeneity; however, the tests are introduced in an 'abrupt' way, completely formalized and without an introduction or progression in the understanding of the test. For example, the first activity on the goodness-of-fit-test in Devore (2008), is about the phenotypes from a dihybrid cross of tomatoes and requiring probing if they are distributed according to Mendel's laws. An analysis considering the epistemological characteristics of the identified partial meanings would allow us to observe that the practices developed to perform the goodness-of-fittest correspond to PM3. While the first activity with the presentation of the homogeneity test deals with the homogeneity in production lines concerning five categories that make defective products.

(p23.8) In a brief analysis, it was possible to identify concepts/definitions such as frequency distribution and marginal distribution, properties/propositions like the expected frequency and degrees of freedom, procedures like calculating the statistic, for which it is necessary to calculate the expected frequency. The previous primary mathematical objects are used in the sense of PM11. Finally, the analysis of the activity for the independence test revealed that primary mathematical objects used for the development of this test correspond to PM7.

(p23.9) The analyzes presented could be carried out in greater depth, just as we did with the situations identified in the historical evolution. However, for space reasons and not being the scope of this work, they are presented succinctly. The objective of evidencing them is to evince the uses that can be given to partial meanings and to primary mathematical objects associated with them, as well as, to analyze, and to propose activities for promoting the meanings progressively (from informal to formal) of the 2 statistic in teachers and students.

(p23.10) In this sense, this work purports to be the first step towards a proposal of progressive levels of inferential reasoning (that allow a continuous transition from IIR to FIR) for the 2 statistic, in other words, a progression from intuition towards formalization. Indeed, a proposal like this would lead to revisiting discussions of statistical education research that lead to associating the IIR with, almost exclusively, descriptive statistics concepts (see, for example, Zieffler et al. 2008;Makar and Rubin 2009). Thus, a line of research that is generated from our study is related to 'a new perspective' of the IIR, perhaps understanding this type of reasoning as processes that involve different epistemological characteristics of partial meanings (as well as, intuitive, as pre-formal). In other words, it may be necessary to rethink what we understand by IIR and FIR, in terms of mathematical and statistical objects and processes associated with the meanings of the notions that we are working in our research area.
