# R E V I E W An Overview of the Efficacy and Safety of Ozanimod for the Treatment of Relapsing Multiple Sclerosis

CorpusID: 234767136 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c502b5b7087db13b9bb69caf26e26dfbf0d52f27](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c502b5b7087db13b9bb69caf26e26dfbf0d52f27)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common inflammatory immune-mediated demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS), affecting approximately 2.3 million people worldwide. 1 It is one of the most common causes of disability in young adults. 2 Although MS remains a chronic condition, early diagnosis and treatment are the keys to achieving satisfactory control of the disease. Currently, many disease-modifying drugs (DMDs) with different immunomodulatory mechanisms have become available and can radically change the natural progression of MS. Most of them have a significant effect on inflammation and are approved to treat relapsing-remitting forms of MS (RRMS); however, the longterm neuroprotective effects remain unproven. migration, rearrangement of cytoskeleton, adhesion, and inflammation. 3 By interacting with S1PR, the S1P analogue evokes several effects in different tissues and organs. S1PR is a G protein-coupled receptor with five subtypes (S1PR1-5) that are expressed in multiple organs and systems. 4 The primary therapeutic action of S1PR modulators is due to the inhibition of S1PR subtype 1 located on lymphocytes, neural cells, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, atrial myocytes, and atrioventricular (AV) nodes.- 5 Its inhibition blocks lymphocyte egress from lymph nodes and the thymus, resulting in a reduction of circulating lymphocytes and thus inflammatory cell infiltration in the CNS. Fingolimod (also called FTY720 and Gilenya TM ), a novel immunosuppressant, induces the sequestration of circulating mature lymphocytes by accelerating lymphocyte homing in rats. An increase in the frequency of CD62L-positive T cells in Peyer's patches by fingolimod-induced lymphocyte homing was observed by Yanagawa. 6 S1PR modulators can readily cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB), thereby allowing the establishment of a direct interaction with CNS receptors; this interaction may be partly responsible for the therapeutic benefit demonstrated by this class of drugs. 7 The modulation of S1PR in the neurons, microglia, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes has been hypothesized to promote myelin regeneration and to prevent the occurrence of synaptic defects, ultimately preventing neuronal damage. 8 These effects are thought to be attributable not only to the interaction with the subtype 1 receptor, but also with the subtype 5 receptor that is mainly expressed on oligodendrocytes in white matter tracts and on brain endothelial cells. 9,10 Interactions with S1PR5 may mediate oligodendrocyte survival that is essential for neuronal remyelination. 9 It is also thought that S1PR5 expressed on CNS endothelial cells plays an important role in BBB formation and permeability maintenance. 11
## (s1) Fingolimod
(p1.0) The first oral drug developed and approved for the treatment of relapsing-remitting MS in 2010 was fingolimod, a small lipophilic agent that is phosphorylated by sphingosine kinase to become an S1P analogue. It binds to S1PR and induces its internalization; after fingolimod phosphate dissociation, the receptor returns to the surface. 12 Fingolimod is a non-selective modulator of all S1PR subtypes, except for subtype 2. Clinical trials showed a 60% decrease in the annualized relapse rate (ARR) in fingolimod 1.25 mg/d-treated patients versus placebo and a reduction in new T2 lesions and gadolinium-enhancing (GdE) lesions on MRI scans over 24 months of treatment. 8 The good efficacy, tolerability, and convenient route of administration have been key to the success of fingolimod. Nevertheless, its non-selectivity leads to interactions with S1PR 3-4-5, which are likely responsible for several of fingolimod's adverse events, including QT interval prolongation, hypertension, macular oedema, pulmonary toxicity, and possibly hepatotoxicity. 13 Moreover, the effects of fingolimod are reversible but are affected by its prolonged half-life of 7 d.
## (s2) Siponimod
(p2.0) Siponimod (also known as BAF312 and Mayzent TM ) is a highly selective functional antagonist of S1PR1 and S1PR5, with very low activity exerted on the S1P2, S1P3, and S1P4 receptors. Selectivity for S1P1 versus S1P2, S1P3, and S1P4 receptors is reportedly greater than 1000-fold. 14 With a relatively short half-life of 30 hours, the once-daily oral dosing regimen is permitted; recovery of the absolute lymphocytes count (ALC) to baseline levels is observed in most subjects within 10 days after treatment discontinuation. 7 A phase II clinical trial in RRMS (BOLD) 15 and a subsequent extension study 16 were completed and showed a reduction in new T2 lesions and GdE lesions at three months for siponimod versus placebo.
## (s6) Clinical Trials Phase I Trials
(p6.0) The safety of ozanimod was first tested in two Phase I, randomized, double-blind trials. The data showed a dosedependent reduction in heart rate after the first ozanimod administration; therefore, a dose-escalation protocol was used in all subsequent clinical trials. 25 These studies also determined that ozanimod did not prolong the QTc interval at therapeutic and supratherapeutic doses and did not raise any new safety concerns. 32 Furthermore, the effect of ozanimod on circulating leukocyte subsets was evaluated using flow cytometry and epigenetic cell counting in an open label pharmacodynamic study in which MS patients were randomized to oral ozanimod (0.5 or 1 mg/d) for 12 weeks. Dose-dependent decreases in circulating B-and T-cell counts and differential impacts on naive and memory CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and CD19+ B cells were observed. 34 
## (s9) RADIANCE
(p9.0) A 24-month, multicentre, double-blind, phase III trial that enrolled 1320 active RRMS patients. 36 Participants were randomly divided into three groups: daily ozanimod 0.5 mg/d, daily ozanimod 1 mg/d, and weekly intramuscular interferon beta-1a 30 µg/week. The treatment period was 24 months. To reduce the possible heart rate decrease effect, an initial 7-d dose escalation was used for ozanimod. The trial demonstrated a lower ARR over 24 months among patients treated with ozanimod (adjusted ARRs were 0.17 with ozanimod 1 mg/d, 0.22 with ozanimod 0.5 mg/d, and 0.28 with interferon beta-1a), with a rate ratio versus interferon beta-1a of 0.79 (0.65 to 0.96; p=0.0167) for ozanimod 0.5 mg/d and 0.62 (95% CI 0.51-0.77; p<0.0001) for ozanimod 1 mg/d.

(p9.1) The ozanimod-treated groups also showed a fewer new or enlarging T2 lesions over 24 months (1.84 for 1 mg/d, 2.09 for 0.5 mg/d, and 3.18 for interferon beta-1a) and a fewer GdE lesions over 24 months (0.18 for 1 mg/d, 0.20 for 0.5 mg/d, and 0.37 for interferon beta-1a). Ozanimod showed reduced brain volume loss over 24 months than interferon beta-1a, while the proportion of patients with disability progression at three and six months was not significantly different among the treatment groups. TEAEs were reported by almost 75% of subjects who received ozanimod and 83% of subjects who received interferon beta-1a.

(p9.2) Most of the events were mild or moderate. The TEAEs that occurred in more than 5% of patients treated with ozanimod were nasopharyngitis, pharyngitis, urinary tract infections, and increased ALT and γ-glutamyl transferase levels. During dose escalation, no clinically meaningful cardiac findings were reported (only asymptomatic and spontaneously resolved bradycardia with <45 bpm in four patients). No serious opportunistic infections were observed.
## (s10) SUNBEAM
(p10.0) A 12-month, multicentre, double-blind, phase III trial that enrolled 1346 active RRMS patients between December 2014 and November 2015 37 . As in the RADIANCE trial, subjects were randomly assigned to ozanimod (0.5 mg/d), ozanimod (1 mg/d), or interferon beta-1a (30 µg/week). These results are similar to those of RADIANCE. Ozanimod was more effective than interferon beta-1a in lowering the ARR and lowering the number of new T2 lesions and GdE lesions over 12 months. Interestingly, both the RADIANCE and SUNBEAM trial results indicated smaller losses of whole brain volume, cortical grey matter volume, and thalamic volume in patients treated with ozanimod than in those treated with interferon beta-1a. These results have not previously been reported in a phase III study of an MS DMD and suggest a possible role of ozanimod in protecting against structural changes associated with disease progression over time.
## (s12) A Comparison Between Ozanimod and Other S1PR Modulators
(p12.0) A recent study 41 to compare the safety and efficacy outcomes between fingolimod and ozanimod was performed because of the absence of a head-to-head randomized trial. For this purpose, a matching-adjusted indirect comparison was used, using data from pivotal clinical trials of the two drugs. The study showed that the first ozanimod administration was associated with a significantly lower risk of TEAEs than fingolimod administration. In addition, a lower risk of heart rate reduction, atrioventricular blocks, and conduction abnormalities were observed among patients treated with ozanimod. A lower risk of any TEAEs for ozanimod versus fingolimod was also observed after one and two years of treatment. It was also seen that patients treated with ozanimod had a lower risk of TEAEs leading to discontinuation. No statistically significant differences in ARRs and confirmed disability progression were found after three and six months of treatment. Overall, this comparative analysis suggests a favourable safety profile and similar efficacy for ozanimod versus fingolimod. Notably, the gold standard used for comparing two different drugs includes the performance of head-to-head trials. The comparative study reported herein may include biases arising due to the different populations, study design, and pharmacologic eras considered for the execution of the trials.
## (s13) Ozanimod for the Treatment of Other Immune-Mediated Diseases
(p13.0) Thus far, ozanimod has been approved only for the treatment of relapsing MS; however, other immune-mediated inflammatory diseases may benefit from its use. This is suggested not only by evidence based on similar DovePress pathophysiology underlying these conditions but also by analyses based on the use of computational predictive models of docking; 52 however, hypothetical interactions should be confirmed by conducting experimental studies.

(p13.1) A study on the utility of ozanimod in murine models of systemic lupus erythematosus has reported encouraging results. 53 More advanced research data are available on inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) since two Phase II trials, TOUCHSTONE and STEPSTONE (for ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, respectively), have been completed.
