# Clinical Medicine A Review on Various Topics on the Thermal Grill Illusion

CorpusID: 237324970 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a16c367d446ad9ce0117b302d8c0f3a4f46ef6a6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a16c367d446ad9ce0117b302d8c0f3a4f46ef6a6)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The thermal grill illusion (TGI), first introduced in 1896, is the perception of burning heat and pain that arises from the simultaneous cutaneous application of a grill with interlaced warm (38-42 • C) and cool (18)(19)(20)(21)(22) • C) bars [1][2][3]. Although cold and warm cutaneous stimulations are felt as coolness and warmth in isolation, respectively, their spatial combination (when placing a hand on the interlaced grill) often creates a thermonociceptive prickling sensation (burning heat and pain) [1][2][3].
## (s4) The Area in which the Perception of the TGI Originates
(p4.0) Ferrè et al. evaluated whether the perception of the TGI originates at the spinal or supraspinal levels. The inhibition of nociceptive input by concomitant non-nociceptive somatosensory input is known to have a strong spinal component [13]. For this reason, they proposed that if the afferent input underlying the TGI originates at the spinal level, then the TGI is inhibited by a concomitant non-nociceptive somatosensory input (tactile stimulation). By contrast, if the TGI is provoked by the supraspinal process, a concomitant tactile stimulation would not affect the TGI. To remove the effect of touch on the TGI, instead of the conventional TGI based on mechanical contact between the skin and hot and cold bars, the authors applied a novel radiant thermal stimulation. In their study, TGI was not influenced by the presence of tactile stimulation. They concluded that TGI-induced pain would result from supraspinal interactions. However, because Ferrè et al. did not demonstrate that tactile stimulation applied in their study could inhibit nociceptive input, the conclusion might not be robust.
## (s6) The Response to the TGI in Patients with Chronic Pain
(p6.0) Two studies evaluated whether chronic pain affected the response to the TGI, with conflicting results. Sumracki et al. evaluated the difference in the response to the TGI between patients with chronic pain (n = 18) and pain-free participants (n = 16) [16]. They compared the responses to the TGI in patients with chronic pain with those in pain-free participants. Although there was a minimal difference, the intensity of TGI-related pain and degree of discomfort were significantly lower in patients with chronic pain than in pain-free participants. Sumracki et al. suggested that patients with chronic pain have an altered central integration of ascending pain signals. This proposal is correlated with long-term functional and structural changes in the central nervous system. In contrast to the results of this study, the case report by Heavner et al. showed the opposite response [17]. They reported that a patient with chronic pain due to complex regional pain syndrome experienced an intolerable burning sensation on the thermal grill; however, this result might be unreliable because this study involved only one patient with chronic pain. More studies are needed to clarify whether chronic pain increases the intensity of the pain response to the thermal grill or decreases it. Furthermore, the response to the TGI following pain duration would be an interesting topic for future studies.
## (s7) Modulation of TGI-Induced Pain
(p7.0) In previous studies on TGI-related topics, the shape and quantity of the alternating warm and cold bars varied extensively and were not important factors for evoking the TGI [18]. However, the spinal segmental difference between warm and cold temperatures and the spatial pattern of thermal stimulation are crucial factors in the generation of the TGI [14,19].

(p7.1) Harper et al. evaluated the effect of conditioned pain modulation on TGI [20]. Before placing 18 healthy participants' right volar forearm on a thermal grill, comprising innocuous alternating warm (42 • C) and cool (18 • C) bars, the left hand was placed in noxious cold water (6 • C). When the left hand was placed in a neutral water bath (33 • C), cold noxious stimulation with cold water significantly reduced pain and discomfort by 47.0% and 56.6%, respectively. Descending inhibitory pathways appear to be activated during conditioned pain modulation (cold noxious cutaneous stimulation), which suppresses the ascending innocuous thermal information. Additionally, in the studies by Harper et al., most reported sensations by a thermal grill were hot, burning, stinging, sharp, and aching.

(p7.2) Schaldemose et al. recruited 80 healthy participants and topically applied capsaicin and ethanol (control) on the volar forearms in a randomized order [21]. Capsaicin induced hyperalgesia, allodynia, and decreased cold and cold pain sensations. They placed the volar forearms on a thermal grill (10/40 • C). On the control side, the thermal grill induced more pain and burning sensations, although after capsaicin application, the thermal grill induced less pain and burning sensations. Capsaicin reduces the activity of the C-nociceptor; consequently, the sensation of temperature transferred via C fibers decreases. The reduced C-fiber activity by topical capsaicin decreased the transfer of thermal information to the spine and brain. Consequently, the thermal-nociceptive interaction, which is necessary to evoke the TGI, is decreased. Additionally, Kern et al. demonstrated that analgesics modulate TGI [5]. They revealed that the intravenous administration of morphine (0.1 mg/kg) induced the reduction of TGI-induced pain, which was correlated with the reduction of cold pain.

(p7.3) Harper et al. [22] reported that coolness involves both the production and protection of TGI-induced pain. Adaptation to the grill's cool bars significantly reduced TGI-induced pain, which indicates that coolness underlies the development of TGI-induced pain. On the other hand, the feeling of coolness during the illusion was significantly associated with less TGI-induced pain.
## (s8) The Response to the TGI in Patients with Psychological Disorders
(p8.0) Bekrater-Bodmann et al. reported alterations in the TGI due to borderline personality disorder (BPD) [25]. They recruited 29 patients with current BPD, 19 patients with BPD in remission, and 22 healthy participants. They found that the intensities of TGI-induced pain and unpleasantness were lower in patients with current BPD than in those with BPD in remission and healthy participants. However, the general ability to perceive TGI in patients with current BPD was not affected. The intensity of the TGI was negatively correlated with dissociation and traumatization in patients with current BPD. In addition, Boettger et al. compared the TGI response between 18 patients with acute paranoid schizophrenia and 18 matched controls [26]. Compared with controls, temperature differentials for the perception of the TGI and cold and heat pain thresholds were increased in patients with schizophrenia. In another study, Boettger et al. recruited 18 patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) and 18 matched controls and evaluated the pain threshold and intensity of TGI-induced pain [27]. In patients with MDD, cold and heat pain thresholds were significantly increased compared to those in controls. In addition, patients with MDD experienced less TGI pain despite increased stimulus intensity. In contrast to these results, in another study by Boettger et al. and Pinerua-Shuhaibar et al., transiently mildly depressed people or people in a sad mood state showed an increase in TGI-induced pain [28,29].
## (s10) Genetic Factors Contributing to the Intensity of TGI-Induced Pain
(p10.0) Several studies have shown that various genes play important roles in determining pain sensitivity and susceptibility to the development of chronic pain [35][36][37][38]. It has been reported that specific genetic polymorphisms involving serotonin and dopamine receptors and serotonin transporters are more frequently observed in patients with fibromyalgia [35,36].

(p10.1) To date, only one study has reported a genetic effect on TGI-induced pain. Lindstedt et al. evaluated the relationship between the level of expression of the 5-HT transporter (5-HTT) and perception of the TGI. Forty-four healthy participants (21 participants: low 5-HTT-expressing group; 23 participants: high 5-HTT-expressing group) were recruited [39]. Females with low 5-HTT expression perceived TGI as significantly less unpleasant than females with high 5-HTT expression.
