# viruses Tree Shrew as an Emerging Small Animal Model for Human Viral Infection: A Recent Overview

CorpusID: 237340059 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb837d0c8c309965abec8eb6826a61b7718acf8e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb837d0c8c309965abec8eb6826a61b7718acf8e)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s9) Zika Virus (ZIKV)
(p9.0) Emerging and reemerging pathogens constitute a major public health threat globally [66]. ZIKV is a mosquito-borne flavivirus in the Flaviviridae family containing a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA genome of approximately 10.7 kb in size. ZIKV contains two major geographically different lineages, the Asian and African lineages [67]. Recently, ZIKV has spread worldwide and the WHO declared ZIKV fever as a public health emergency [68]. ZIKV has been associated with fetal microcephaly and serious neurological complications in adults [69]. A proper understanding of ZIKV pathogenesis and host-virus interaction is crucial for antiviral and vaccine development, for which a suitable small animal model is highly essential. There has been much progress in understanding of the ZIKV pathogenesis and host response using several animal models, including mice and non-human primates [70]; however, each model has its limitations. Therefore, an alternative animal model is required. Zhang et al. showed that tree shrews subcutaneously inoculated with ZIKV strain GZ01 (10 6 PFU/animal) produced transient viremia, cutaneous inflammation and notable dermatological manifestations of skin rashes, as commonly observed in human patients [32]. However, there was no induction of fever or other neurological and behavioral abnormalities. Notably, ZIKV infection in adult tree shrews induced an antibody response that prevented reinfection with a homologous virus [32], suggesting the tree shrew model could be used for vaccine candidate screening. During neonatal infection of 1-day-old tree shrews through the intracerebral route with 10 5 PFU of ZIKV, despite the detection of high levels of ZIKV RNA in the brain at 3 and 6 dpi and substantial pathological changes of neuron destruction, no signs of microcephaly in the ZIKV-infected tree shrews was observed [32]. In another study, in vitro tissue tropism of ZIKV infection in the tree shrew has been demonstrated, and the obtained findings indicated the susceptibility of the tree shrew primary cells from the kidney, lung, liver, skin and aorta to ZIKV infection [71]. Moreover, the antiviral innate immune response was induced, as observed by the induction of different cytokines, including IL-6, IL-8, TNF-α, IFN-β, CXCL9, and MX1 [71]. Although further studies are required, the above findings highlight the potential of the tree shrew for ZIKV infection and pathogenesis studies.
## (s13) Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 (HIV-1)
(p13.0) A recent study characterized the ability of tree shrew cells to support HIV-1 in vitro. This study showed that the exogenous expression of human CD4 and CCR5 362 molecules in tree shrew cells support HIV-1 entry and replication and showed that the tree shrew CXCR4 serves as a functional co-receptor [78]. The tree shrew cytidine deaminases of the APOBEC3 family have been reported as the host restriction factor for HIV-1 in tree shrew cells, which exerted a strong inhibitory effect on HIV-1 replication [78]. Therefore, the findings of the study discovered APOBEC3 proteins as a barrier to HIV-1 infection; this information is critical for developing gene-edited tree shrew HIV-1-infected models. Previously, induction of hypermutations in the HIV-1 genome by APOBEC3 proteins was reported [79].
## (s14) Conclusions
(p14.0) The development of animal models is essential for studying the pathogenesis of viral infections, as well as for evaluating the efficacy of drugs and vaccines. The use of the tree shrew model for viral infection is increasing due to its susceptibility to several important human viral pathogens. No animal models can be a perfect alternate to the human infection model. However, animal models mimicking human diseases are crucial for properly understanding the host response and pathogenesis, and at the same time, experiments should be conducted in such a way that the results obtained using animal models can be translated to humans. As the ethical and financial concerns limit the use of chimpanzees in hepatitis virus research, the tree shrew model could be developed. However, high genetic variation within this species may hinder a wide use of this animal in biomedical research. So far, no inbred line of tree shrews has been reported, which is required to be developed to reduce the individual variations found in wild tree shrews. Moreover, there is the challenge of the overall low viral titer in tree shrews and the scarcity of the research tools that should be overcome. However, the development of inbred tree shrews is underway [4], and a recent report of transgenic tree shrews has been released [80], which should further enhance the widespread use of tree shrews in biomedical research, including viral infections. 
