# A Review of Therapeutic Antibodies in Breast Cancer

CorpusID: 236451912 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ec6f8dadcb270d0f13c88d260115bab847d37626](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ec6f8dadcb270d0f13c88d260115bab847d37626)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Nivolumab
(p4.0) Nivolumab (Opdivo®), as an anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody with great affinity, was shown to help treat unresectable malignant melanoma in Japan (73). Nivolumab is a fully human IgG4 monoclonal antibody against PD-1, which is intravenously administered. It was found to contain linear pharmacokinetics related to partial tumor response in almost one-fourth of Japanese patients who were previously treated for advanced melanoma (74). TONIC trial was used as an ongoing phase II trial for five groups of patients with metastatic triple-negative breast cancer (mTNBC) who received sedative chemotherapy, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, cisplatin, and no treatment. Following completing the induction treatment, nivolumab 3 mg/kg was considered for all patients, and obtained result was an objective response rate of (ORR) 22%, complete remissions of (CRs) 4%, and nine partial remissions (PRs) of 18%. A favorable response rate was observed after receiving nivolumab following the other treatments such as chemotherapy or irradiation, compared to single blocking PD-1/PD-L1 studies in TNBC (75). In a project, patients suffering from advanced melanoma were entered from 2008 to 2012 and treated by intravenous nivolumab in an outpatient clinic every two weeks for a whole period of 96 weeks. Patients were monitored for overall survival, long-term safety, and response duration after stopping the treatment. After the nivolumab treatment in patients suffering from advanced treatment-refractory melanoma, the researcher favorably compared overall survival rate with studies on patients with similar symptoms. The obtained responses were persistent, and long-term safety was acceptable after drug discontinuation (76). Toxicity: The adverse effect of nivolumab associated with immune system profile and its association with clinical activity in Non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) was investigated via a multi-institutional retrospective study using landmark and multivariable analyses. The multivariable analysis results suggested that side effects positively associated with survival outcome, progression-free survival (PFS), and overall survival rate (OS). Developing adverse events was related to the survival outcome of nivolumab treatment in patients suffering from advanced or recurrent NSCLC (77).
## (s9) Toxicity:
(p9.0) Hepatitis, water-electrolyte imbalance, and rash (without any grade 4 or 5 side effects) were the most common related adverse events of durvalumab in TNBC or metastatic endocrine receptor (ER) positive patients (95).
## (s11) CONCLUSION
(p11.0) The design and development of different antibodies have undergone significant progress. The modern antibodies are considered one of the most promising tools to treat breast cancer in the future. Today, HER2 is one of the most important therapeutic targets in breast cancer, and administration of herceptin is one of the routine parts of treatment patterns which have improved patient outcomes. The clinical application of HER2 directed antibodies is extended even beyond breast cancer. It is being investigated in other solid tumors, including gastric, colorectal, biliary tract, bladder, and non-small-cell lung cancers (100). However, projects such as detecting new targets, standardization of older antibodies, and developing and testing novel ones in clinical experiments can be programmed and performed.
