# Panax japonicus and chikusetsusaponins: A review of diverse biological activities and pharmacology mechanism

CorpusID: 230569744 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8ada41802f375cc0bad85c062146c9fb3f5fa06e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8ada41802f375cc0bad85c062146c9fb3f5fa06e)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Panax japonicus (T. Nees) C. A. Meyer (Fig. 1), which in the Tujia dialect is known as ''Baisan Qi" and ''Zhujieshen", is a classic ''qi" drug of Tujia ethnomedicine and it has unique effects on disease caused by ''qi" stagnation and blood stasis. Modern research suggests that P. japonicus plays an important role on several diseases, such as rheumatic arthritis, cancer, and cardiovascular agents. In 2000, it was included in Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of China. It is said that P. japonicus rhizomes possess conserving vitality activities of Panax ginseng C. A. Mey and replenishing blood activities of Panax notoginseng (Burkill) F. H. Chen ex C. H. simultaneously . It was traditionally used as P. ginseng for enhancing immunity, in addition, it can be applicated in rheumatic arthritis as P. notoginseng (Yang et al., 2014). Thus, P. japonicus rhizomes were also named as ''the king of herbs" in traditional Tujia and Hmong medicines.

(p0.1) Triterpenoid saponins are important active components and usually named ginsenoside in Panax species (Yi, 2019). Many pharmacological effects of ginsenoside are reported to play critical roles in preventing and treating many human diseases, including cancers, neuronal, cardiovascular, inflammatory, immunity adjustment, and metabolic diseases (Lee & Kim, 2014;Lee, Park, & Cho, 2019;Mohanan, Subramaniyam, Mathiyalagan, & Yang, 2018). Dammarane-type triterpenoid saponins are abundant in ginseng and notoginseng. Therefore, most of researches were focused on dammarane-type triterpenoid saponins other than oleanane-type and lots of review concerned about ginsenosides are actually dammarane-type triterpenoid saponins (Zhu, Zou, Fushimi, Cai, & Komatsu, 2004). P. japonicus also possessed considerable amount of saponins including dammarane-type and oleanane-type, especially oleanane-type saponins (Zhu, Zou, Fushimi, Cai, & Komatsu, 2004). The total saponin content in the roots of P. japonicus can reach 15%, which is 2-to 7-fold higher than that of P. ginseng. Due to the unique traditional utilization of P. japonicus, in recent years, main researches were conducted on main saponins from it. Hence, in this review, pharmacology effects of molecular signaling and clinical application of chikusetsusaponins from P. japonicus were discussed and summarized.
## (s2) Antitumor activity
(p2.0) Oleanane triterpenoids exhibit cytotoxic activity against various types of cancer cells (Liby, Sporn, & Esbenshade, 2012;Liu et al., 2013). Chikusetsusaponins belongs to oleanane triterpenoids and many studies reported its anticancer activities (Table 1).
## (s4) Liver cancer
(p4.0) Chikusetsusaponin IVa are reported against SK-Hep-1 cells with IC 50 value of 18.9 mg/mL and it was comparable to that of cisplatin (IC 50 = 12.7 mg/mL) (Yoo, Kwon, & Park, 2006). Deglucose chikusetsusaponin IVa (DCIVa) inhibited cell growth of HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cell line and viability in a dose-and time-dependent manner using an MTT assay. DCIVa lead to chromatin condensation and margination at the nuclear periphery, and apoptotic body for-mation. Moreover, Hoechst 33,258 staining showed nuclear condensation and fragmentation. Furthermore, DCIVa increased cell apoptosis and G2/M cell cycle arrest, in addition enhanced the expression of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax, and deceased the expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 (Song et al., 2015).
## (s5) Ovarian cancer
(p5.0) Compound oleanolic acid 3-O-b-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 ? 2)-b-Dglucuronopyranosyl-6 0 -O-n-butyl ester are reported moderate antitumor activities against the A2780 cells and OVCAR-3 cells with IC 50 values of 21.1 and 35.2 mg/mL, respectively, but the mechanism research was not conducted (Zhao et al., 2010).

(p5.1) Chikusetsusaponin IVa methyl ester (CSME) exhibited antiproliferative with the IC 50 values at less than 10 lmol/L in both The number of proliferating cell nuclear antigen-positive hepatocytes in the GST-P-positive area was significantly decreased in the fresh ginseng group but not in the Panax japonicus CA Meyer or P. quinquefolius L groups

(p5.2) No report  6 ovarian cancer A2780 and HEY cell lines. In addition, CSME induced G1 cell cycle arrest accompanied with an S phase the cell mitochondrial membrane potential decrease and increased the annexin V positive cells and nuclear chromatin condensation, as well as enhanced the expression of cleaved PARP, Bax and cleaved Caspase-3 while decreasing that of Bcl-2. Moreover, mechanism research proved CSME suppressed the proliferation, migration and invasion of ovarian cancer A2780 and HEY cell lines though downregulating the expression of cyclin D1, CDK2, CDK6, Cdc42, Rac, RohA, MMP2 and MMP9, and decreased the enzymatic activities of MMP2 and MMP9 .
## (s6) Prostate cancer
(p6.0) Chikusetsusaponin IVa (CHIVa) resulted in intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, and induced apoptosis regulated by mitochondria in vitro studies in both caspase-dependent andindependent manner, which released cyto-c, enhancing caspases expression and promoting apoptosis-inducing factors (AIF) as well as endonuclease G (Endo G) nuclear transfer, respectively. Moreover, prostate tumor was inhibited by CHIVa treatment through apoptosis induction in vivo study (Zhu, Tian, & Liu, 2017). CHI inhibits prostate cancer cell proliferation and induces cell death without cytotoxicity in prostate normal cells, which means P. japonicus is a safe agent against prostate cancer.
## (s7) Other cancers
(p7.0) The activation of IL6/STAT3 signaling is associated with the pathogenesis of many cancers, which means agents that suppress IL6/STAT3 signaling have cancer-therapeutic potential. CS-IVa-Be can inhibit IL6-IL6Ra-GP130 interaction and showed higher affinity to IL6Ra than to LIFR and Leptin R. CS-IVa-Be as a IL-6R antagonist not only directly induced cancer cell apoptosis but also enhanced MDA-MB-231 cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis via upregulating DR5 . Chikusetsusaponin IVa methyl ester, chikusetsusaponin IVa butyl ester and panajaponol A are reported cytotoxicity against MCF-7, A549, A354-S2, HeLa, KB cell lines and DU145 cell lines, but mechanisms are unclear (Chan et al., 2011;Wang, Lu, Lv, Xu, & Jia, 2012).
## (s8) Anti-inflammatory activity
(p8.0) Inflammation is a well-orchestrated biological reaction that consists of multiple reactions. After the germ-line encoded receptors, such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and leucine-rich-repeatcontaining receptors (NLRs), recognized external stimuli receptors detect pathogen-or damage-associated molecular patterns. Receptors are activated to stimulate a series of signaling cascades. Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-jB) and activator protein-1 (AP-1) are very important pathway of inflammation. These transcriptional factors induce the expression of proinflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-a, IL-1b, IL-6, iNOS, and COX-2. Consequently, cytokines can lead highly reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitrogen species in effector cells (Kim, Yi, Kim, & Cho, 2017;Tasneem, Liu, Li, Choudhary, & Wang, 2018). Both inhibiting cytokines and ROS or improving the expression of eNOS and SOD can alleviate inflammation.

(p8.1) Chikusetsusaponins from P. japonicus can inhibit inflammation in different cells with different inducer through inhibiting cytokines and ROS generation. By using colonic aging rats model, Dun et al. investigated the modulating intestinal tight junction of total saponins of P. japonicus (SPJ). The study proved that SPJ increased the expression of the tight junction proteins claudin-1 and occludin. Treatment with SPJ decreased the levels of interleukin-1b and tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), reduced the phosphorylation of three MAPK isoforms, and inhibited the expression of NF-jB. Consequently, SPJ modulates the damage of intestinal epithelial tight junction and inhibits inflammation in colonic aging rats model (Dun et al., 2018). Chikusetsusaponin IVa (CSIVa) could significantly inhibit HFDinduced lipid homeostasis, and inhibited inflammation in adipose tissue through inhibiting both NLRP3 inflammasome activation and NF-jB signaling (Yuan et al., 2017). Meanwhile, Chikusetsusaponin IVa (CSIVa) suppresses the production of iNOS, COX-2, IL-1b, IL-6, and TNF-a in LPS-stimulated THP-1 cells through inhibiting NF-jB activation and ERK, JNK, and p38 signal pathway phosphorylation (Wang, Qi, Li, Wu, & Wang, 2015). In addition, Chikusetsusaponin IVa methyl ester might inhibit iNOS, COX-2, TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-1b expression through downregulation of NF-jB and AP-1 in macrophages (Lee et al., 2016). Moreover, Chikusetsusaponin IV showed significant anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and anticoagulant effects through significantly inhibit levels of TXA2, ET, MDA, and COX-2 and improve the activities of eNOS and SOD in vitro (Cao et al., 2017). Moreover, Hsiu-Hui Chan (Chan et al., 2011) reported some chikusetsusaponins (including chikusetsusaponin IVa) exhibited strong inhibition of superoxide anion generation and elastase release by human neutrophils induced by formyl-L-methionyl-L-leucyl-lphenylalanine/cytochala sin B (fMLP/CB), with IC 50 values ranging from 0.78 to 43.6 lmol/ L ( Table 2).
## (s9) Cardiovascular protective activity
(p9.0) Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality and includes various diseases such as cardiac ischemia, vascular disease, heart failure, atherosclerosis and hypertension (Lim, Ko, & Kim, 2013).

(p9.1) Cardiac dysfunction caused by ischemia and reperfusion has been ameliorated through the glucocorticoid receptor-and estrogen receptor-activated pathways and the eNOS-dependent mechanism Kim, 2018). Also, saponins of P. japonicus (SPJ) exhibited beneficially cardioprotective effects on myocardial ischemia injury (MI) rats, mainly scavenging oxidative stresstriggered overgeneration and accumulation of ROS, alleviating myocardial ischemia injury and cardiac cell death. Moreover, the mechanism was concerned with markedly upregulated mRNA expressions of the SOD1, SOD2 and SOD3, and downregulated Bax and Caspase-3 mRNA and Bcl-2 mRNA expression and ratios of Bcl-2 to Bax (He et al., 2012). In addition, SPJ can inhibit NF-jB, ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK activation, but enhance the expression of SIRT1, alleviate MI injury and cardiac cell death. SPJ might significantly improve cardiac function through decreasing the serum MCP-1, TNF-a levels and Bax protein expression and increasing Bcl-2 protein expression. In addition, SPJ suppressed the protein expressions of NF-jBp65 subunit, extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and p38 MAPK and increased the expression of SIRT1 in a dose-dependent manner, but did not show effect on c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase . Moreover, Duan et al. reported Chikusetsu saponin IVa (CHIVa) can markedly reverse treatment of H9c2 cells induced by high glucose (HG) for 24 h, resulted in cell viability losing and ROS, LDH and Ca 2+ levels improvement. A further study exhibits protective effect of CHS against hyperglycemia-induced myocardial injury (MI) through SIRT1/ERK1/2 and Homer1a pathway in vivo and in vitro .

(p9.2) Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) proliferation is the most important risk of atherosclerosis and hypertension (Kim et al., 2019). Liu et al. found chikusetsusaponin IVa methyl ester (3 lmol/L) exhibited a dose-dependent inhibitive effect on angiotensin II (Ang II)-induced VSMC proliferation . Chikusetsusaponin IVa can prevent hyperglycemia-induced myocardial injuries.

(p9.3) Many researchers have shown that inflammation of blood vessels can result in atherosclerosis and coronary artery dysfunction. Inflammation is widely acknowledged to increase morbidity and mortality in myocardial infarction (MI), and the ideal therapeutic methods should be aimed at the inflammation reaction triggers (Libby, 2005). Ginsenoside plays an important role in the treatment of chronic heart failure. With the Chinese medicine compound Yiqi  (Chan et al., 2011) Fumai Injection containing ginseng, it can be remarkable to improve the cardiac function of mice with chronic heart failure and the activity of inflammatory mediators, such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-6, and interleukin-1b. In this formula, ginsenoside Ro (chikusetsusaponin V) is proved as an antiinflammatory component and a new nuclear transcription factor NF-KB inhibition agent (Xing et al., 2013). Activation of autophagy can effectively inhibit angiotensin IIinduced inflammation and cardiac fibrosis (Qi, Li, Li, Li, & Du, 2014). Chikusetsusaponin IV a effectively attenuated myocardial fibrosis induced by isoprenaline in vivo, reduced the heart index, inhibited inflammatory infiltration, decreased collagen deposition and myocardial cell size. In addition, Chikusetsusaponin Ⅳa treatment activate the expression of autophagy-related markers through the activation of AMPK, which in turn inhibited the phosphorylation of mTOR and ULK1(Ser757), rather than directly phosphorylate ULK1(Ser555) by AMPK   (Table 3).
## (s11) Effect on metabolic system
(p11.0) Oleanolic acid glycosides from several medicinal foodstuffs were found to show potent inhibitory activity on the increase of serum glucose levels in oral glucose-loaded rats (Xi et al., 2010). Six chikusetsusaponins (notoginsenoside R1, ginsenoside Rb1, chikusetsusaponin V, chikusetsusaponin IV, chikusetsusaponin IVa and ginsenoside Rd) were screened to be potential aglucosidase inhibitors by a new assay based on ultrafiltration, liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (Li, Tang, Liu, & Zhang, 2015). Ethanolic extract, n-BuOH (PJB) and H 2 O (PJW) extract, compound oleanolic acid 28-O-b-D-glucopyranoside are reported to be potential inhibition of R-glucosidase activity compared with acarbose (Chan et al., 2011;Chan, Sun, Reddy, & Wu, 2010).

(p11.1) Chikusetsusaponin IVa (CSIVa) of oral administration increased the level of serum insulin and decreased the rise in blood glucose level with a dose-dependently manner in type 2 diabetic mellitus (T2DM) rats. In vitro, CSIVa potently activated bTC3 cells releasing insulin at both basal and stimulatory glucose concentrations and the effect was changed by the removal of extracellular Ca 2+ . The signaling of CSIVa-induced insulin secretion from bTC3 cells resulted from GPR40 mediated calcium and PKC pathways . Moreover, Chikusetsusaponin IVa (CSIVa) effectively decreases blood glucose, triglyceride, free fatty acid (FFA) and low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol levels in T2DM rats. In both normal and insulin-resistant C2C12 myocytes, CSIVa increases glucose uptake or fatty acid oxidation through activating AMPK and enhancing membrane translocation of GLUT4 or CPT-1 activity respectively. In addition, the effects of CSIVa on glucose uptake and fatty acid oxidation significantly diminishes by the knockdown of AMPK. Thus, CSIVa is a novel AMPK activator that is capable of by passing defective insulin signaling and might be developed into a new potential for therapeutic agent used in T2DM patients or other metabolic disorders .

(p11.2) Chikusetsusaponins not only relieve disorder of glucose metabolism, but also ameliorate abnormal fat metabolism. Obesity is closely associated with life-style-related diseases. Total chikusetsusaponins, chikusetsusaponin III, 28-deglucosyl-chikusetsusaponin IV and 28-deglucosyl-chikusetsusaponin V prevent obesity induced in mice by a high-fat diet for 9 weeks. It increased the fecal content and triacylglycerol level and inhibited the elevation of the plasma triacylglycerol level 2 h after oral lipid emulsion treatment. The anti-obesity effects of chikusetsusaponins may be partly mediated through delaying the intestinal absorption of dietary fat by inhibiting pancreatic lipase activity (Han, Zheng, Yoshikawa, Okuda, & Kimura, 2005).

(p11.3) Chikusetsusaponin IVa pretreatment attenuate cerebral ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury in diabetic mice. It increased APN level and enhanced neuronal AdipoR1, adenosine monophosphateactivated protein kinase (AMPK), and glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK-3b) expression in a concentration-dependent manner. Consequently, chikusetsusaponin IVa reduced infarct size, improved neurological outcomes, and inhibited cell injury after I/ R (Duan et al., 2016) (Table 5).
## (s12) Effect on hematological system
(p12.0) It is reported P. japonicus var. major and P. japonicus var. bipinnatifidus could be used as a substitute for P. notoginseng as hemostatic herbs . P. notoginseng is used for treating bleed in bone injury. Meanwhile, the traditional use of P. japonicus is similar with P. notoginseng in folk.

(p12.1) Chikusetsusaponin III, IV and V showed a strong promotion of uroenzyme fibrin plate (Matsuda et al., 1989). Min Li reported some chikusetsusaponins exhibited moderate antiplatelet aggregation activities induced by adenosine diphosphate with IC 50 values of less than 25 mmol/L, respectively . Chikusetsusaponin IVa prolongs the recalcification time, prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, and thrombin time of normal human plasma in a dose-dependent manner, inhibits the amidolytic activity of thrombin and factor Xa upon synthetic substrates S2238 and S2222. In addition, it preferentially inhibits thrombin in a competitive manner (Ki = 219.6 L mol/L). Furthermore, it inhibited thrombus formation in a stasis model of venous thrombosis and prolonged the ex vivo activated partial thromboplastin time (Dahmer et al., 2012).

(p12.2) Hong Zhang reported polysaccharides (PJPS) and lowmolecular-weight compounds (PJSM) accelerate the recovery of the white blood cell (WBC), red blood cell (RBC), and haemoglobin (HGB) levels in the blood deficiency model mice. Haematopoietic activity may result from stimulating the secretion of interleukin-3 (IL-3), interleukin-6 (IL-6), erythropoietin (EPO), GM colony stimulating factor (CSF), and M-CSF and from the resistance of spleen cells to apoptosis   (Table 6).
## (s13) Hepatocyte protective activity
(p13.0) Ginsenoside Ro (chikusetsusaponin V) inhibited the increase of connective tissue in the liver of CCl 4 -induced chronic hepatitic rats (Matsuda, Samukawa, & Kubo, 1991). Moreover, Li  investigated the possible mechanism(s) of saponins from P. japonicus (SPJ) on alcohol-induced hepatic damage in mice. In vitro, SPJ showed significant hydroxyl radical scavenging capacity. In vivo, SPJ (50 mg/kg) could rectify the pathological changes of aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, malondialdehyde, meanwhile, the levels of glutathione peroxidase (GPX) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) caused by alcohol metabolism are reduced to normal levels but not that of hepatic GSH and CAT. RT-PCR results proved that total saponins of P. japonicus (SPJ) protect the structure and function of hepatic mitochondria and karyon by directly scavenging reactive oxygen species/free radicals and up-regulating the expression of antioxidant enzymes (SOD, GPX and CAT), especially to GPX 3 , SOD 1 and SOD 3 .

(p13.1) Fatty liver fibrosis, a severe form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), is a key step which can be reversed by effective medical intervention. Saponins of P. japonicus (SPJ) could significantly improve liver function and decrease the lipid level in the serum. SPJ significantly improved the liver steatosis, collagen fibers and inflammatory cell infiltration. In addition, SPJ distinctly attenuate the collagen I (Coll), alpha smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMP), CHOP and GRP78 mRNA expression levels; Moreover, the phosphorylated JNK (p-JNK), Coll and 78 kD glucose-regulated protein (GRP78) expression levels were significantly alleviated, which might be caused by the inhibition of the ERS response and the CHOP and JNK-mediated apoptosis and inflammation pathway .

(p13.2) Chikusetsusaponin V, the most abundant saponin in P. japonicus, has reported to inhibit inflammation. Also, Dai reported it attenuated elevation of alanine transaminase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels and improved liver histopathological changes in LPS-induced mice. Chikusetsusaponin V decreased serum TNF-a and IL-1b levels and inhibited mRNA expressions of in iNOS, TNF-a and IL-1b. Furthermore, chikusetsusaponin V inhibited NF-jB activation via downregulating phosphorylated NF-jB, IjB-a, ERK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase and p38 levels, which ultimately decreased nucleus NF-jB protein level. These data suggested that chikusetsusaponin V could be a promising drug for preventing LPS challenged liver injury through NF-jB and MAPK signaling pathways (Dai et al., 2016) (Table 7). In both normal and insulinresistant C2C12 myocytes: (") AMPK, (") glucose uptake or fatty acid oxidation, (") membrane trans-location of GLUT4 or CPT-1 activity  6
## (s15) Commercial formulation in clinical trial
(p15.0) There are some commercial formulations in clinical trial. More and more clinical trial are being conducted recently, and metabolomics are used not only in plant but also the formulation (Xie et al., 2008;Yu, Mwesige, Yi, & Yoo, 2019).

(p15.1) ShenMai Injection (SMI), is an intravenous injection used as an add-on therapy for coronary artery disease and cancer; saponins are its bioactive constituents. Ginsenosides Rb, Rb, Rc, Rd, Ro, Ra, Re, and Rg likely contribute the major part of OATP1B3-mediated ShenMai-drug interaction potential. Ginsenoside Ro (chikusetsusaponin V) inhibited OATP1B3 more potently than the other ginsenosides detected in ShenMai plasma (Olaleye et al., 2019). Another research showed 14 saponins of 21 compounds were quantified in SMI by HPLC-MS. The highest content of ginsenosides Ro and chikusetsusaponin IVa are137 lg/mL, 4.96 lg/mL in ten batches, respectively, indicating these compounds may play an important role in pharmacodynamics of SMI (Li, Cheng, Dong, Li, & Yang, 2016).

(p15.2) The fermented Chinese formula Shuan-Tong-Ling (STL) is composed of Puerariae Lobatae Radix (Gegen in Chinese), Salvia miltiorrhiza (Danshen in Chinese), Curcumae Radix (Jianghuang in Chinese), Hawthorn (Shanzha in Chinese), Salvia chinensis (Shijianchuan in Chinese), Sinapis alba (Baijiezi in Chinese), Astragali Radix (Huangqi in Chinese), Panax japonicus (Zhujieshen in Chinese), Atractylodes macrocephala (Baizhu in Chinese), Paeoniae Radix Alba (Baishao in Chinese), Bupleurum chinense (Chaihu in Chinese), Chrysanthemum indicum (Juhua in Chinese), Cyperi Rhizoma (Xiangfu in Chinese) and Gastrodiae Rhizoma (Tianma in Chinese). The aqueous extract was fermented with Lactobacillus, Bacillus aceticus and Saccharomycetes. ShuanTong-Ling is a formula used to treat brain diseases including ischemic stroke, migraine, and vascular dementia. Shuan-Tong-Ling attenuated H 2 O 2 -induced oxidative stress in rat microvascular endothelial cells. Meanwhile, Shuan-Tong-Ling also decreased tumor necrosis factor-a and interleukin-1b levels in the hippocampus on the ischemic side. In addition, Shuan-Tong-Ling upregulated the expression of SIRT1 and Bcl-2 and downregulated the expression of acetylatedprotein 53 and Bax. The reduced ROS level was accompanied by increasing SOD and GSH activities. Further assays showed upregulation of SIRT1 and PGC-1aand downregulation of p21 after STL treatment. The results revealed that STL could protect BMECs against oxidative stress injury at least partially through the SIRT1 pathway (Mei et al., 2017;Tan et al., 2016).
