# Development of Natural Gas Chemical Kinetic Mechanisms and Application in Engines: A Review

CorpusID: 237625829 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5a1b37674945b86974a5a316722bec477cc8a6a4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5a1b37674945b86974a5a316722bec477cc8a6a4)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Chemistry, Medicine

## (s2) ETHANE/PROPANE MECHANISM
(p2.0) In order to achieve highly efficient and safe use of natural gas, the kinetic model needs to be used in various mixtures of natural gas to verify its changing combustion characteristics. Natural gas mixtures containing methane, ethane, and propane were the most suitable for analyzing the combustion chemistry of natural gas.

(p2.1) It is well-known that methane reactivity is significantly enhanced by higher alkanes, which thereby decrease the IDTs and increase the burning velocities. There are also studies that have found that when the proportion of ethane increased in natural gas the mole fraction of NO decreased. Thus, it is meaningful to study the optimization process of the combustion submechanism of ethane and propane.

(p2.2) 3.1. Optimizing the Ethane Mechanism. Ethane is widely found to be the intermediate in the oxidation of many hydrocarbons, e.g., methane, ethylene, propane, propylene, and higher hydrocarbon,s 32 and also is the second largest natural gas component after methane. Furthermore, for the recombination of methyl radicals to produce ethane, with further consumption producing ethylene and acetylene, 2 the flux diagram was shown in Figure 2.

(p2.3) The formation of ethane and its subsequent reactions is characterized by great complexity, so any ignition analysis of methane-oxygen-rich mixtures must involve the analysis of ethane combustion. Cooke and Williams 33 studied the ignition and combustion of ethane and slightly rich methane mixtures at high temperatures where little fuel degradation occurred and only moderate concentrations of C 2 H 4 and C 2 H 2 were produced during ignition. Dagaut et al. 32 developed a detailed reaction mechanism of ethane oxidation to reproduce the ethane ignition delay times at high temperature and obtained good agreement with the experiment data.

(p2.4) By updating the mechanism to describe ethane oxidation, Rota et al. 34 primarily relied on measurements of species concentrations to simulate and compare experimental data. The parameter sensitivity analysis and a comparison with other mechanisms indicated that the direct oxidation of the C 2 H 3 radical should be included in the mechanism. The updated mechanism was able to reproduce reasonably well the main species concentrations.

(p2.5) Younessi-Sinaki et al. 35 updated the mechanism for ethane oxidation by removing the reactions containing species with an oxygen atom and adjusting the rate constants, based on the determinations for the literature, for the reaction C 2 H 5 + H, and the rate coefficient of this reaction was increased to about 22.5 times its initial value.

(p2.6) Prince and Williams 27 developed a mechanism to describe low-temperature ignition of ethane using rate constants from the literature and adjusted the rates of reaction C 2 H 5 + O 2 based on ignition time measurements in rapid-compression machines under a wide range of conditions for initial temperatures above about 1000 K.

(p2.7) For the reaction of C 2 H 5 + O 2 as the center in the oxidation of ethane, some scholars use different methods to study the importance of this reaction step. More relevant information is shown in Table 4.

(p2.8) Furthermore, Hidaka and co-workers 38 also evaluated the rate constants of the reactions C 2 H 5 + H → C 2 H 4 + H 2 and C 2 H 5 + O 2 → C 2 H 4 + H 2 O whose values are significantly different from accepted values, respectively. Moreover, Konnov et al. 39 studied the oxidation of ethane at low temperature, and the results indicated that the rate of reaction C 2 H 5 + O 2 is crucial to the accuracy of the model. The rate constant of C 2 H 5 decomposition has close sensitivity coefficients in lean, stoichiometric, and rich mixtures.

(p2.9) Recently, Hashemi et al. 40 proposed a mechanism for ethane oxidation based on high-pressure oxidation of hydrogen, syngas, and C 1 −C 2 species. They adjusted the rate constants for the reactions C 2 H 5 + O 2 and C 2 H 4 + HO 2 and modified Arrhenius fits of calculated rate constants for CH 3 CH 2 OO → CH 2 CH 2 OOH. Figure 3 showed a simplified pathway diagram for conversion of C 2 H 5 of Hashemi's work. 40 3.2. Optimizing the Propane Mechanism. Unlike hydrocarbon fuels with simpler structures such as methane or ethane, the thermochemical and combustion properties of propane are similar in many ways to more complex practical fuels. In the early years, Westbrook and Pitz 41 published a comprehensive mechanism to describe the oxidation and pyrolysis of propane and propene and emphasized that the existence of small amounts of propane in natural gas can have a significant influence on its ignition property. Many other detailed chemical kinetic mechanisms describing propane kinetics have been developed over the years including those for propane combustion chemistry from Qin et al., 42 a low-and high-temperature mechanism of propane oxidation from Titova et al., 43 a comprehensive mechanism involving C 1 −C 5 alkane oxidation from Healy and co-workers, 44 and a suitable kinetic mechanism for modeling natural gas combustion from Gokulakrishnan et al. 45 Some literature studies have proved that some key reactions in the propane mechanism play an incredible role under different pressures and temperatures and also can affect the ignition delay time. Recently, Hashemi et al. 49 adjusted the rate constant, based on recent determinations for the literature, for the reaction C 3 H 8 + O 2 and their own flow reactor measurements of species profiles versus temperature. The specific relationship between propane oxidation reactions and basic state parameters (i.e., temperature and pressure) is shown in Table 5. Figure 4 shows model-simulated laminar speed flames for propane, propanal, n-propanol, and acetone oxidation in air at 1 atm and 393 K using a mechanism by Gong et al. 50 To achieve good agreement with experimental results, the C 1 −C 4 submodel was updated to the AramcoMech 1.3 mechanism   and the n-propanol submechanism as well as the propanol submechanism.

(p2.10) More recently, Bramltte and Depcik 51 summarized a large number of available propane−air kinetic mechanisms and selected the detailed San Diego mechanism to model the combustion process of a ramjet engine design. The San Diego mechanism was in agreement with the experimental ignition delay across a wide range of equivalence and temperatures. Due to the excessively long computational times, they developed a reduced mechanism by removing all the reactions not affe cting the ignition delay at the 1 ms level and compared it with the original mechanism and experimental ignition delay. The results are shown in Figure 5.
