# metals Capacitor Electrical Discharge Consolidation of Metallic Powders-A Review

CorpusID: 234878872 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bc9bf005fccb7e39820492d5d23a948d2ee31632](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bc9bf005fccb7e39820492d5d23a948d2ee31632)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Metallic materials can be manufactured by a wide variety of methods. Casting [1] is a first option, heating to the liquid state and pouring the liquid into moulds, or just cooling in a continuous way, to obtain rough bulk pieces. Parts with relatively precise dimensions can also be obtained working with small amounts of material poured on precise moulds [2]. Bulk solid parts can be further processed and forced to adopt some more precise shapes by methods like forging, lamination or extrusion [3][4][5]. Details in these resulting parts can be further worked by machining [6], generally resulting in a certain amount of excess material. Despite these much extended industrial methods, in case of special needs like controlled microstructures, avoiding waste material, complex shapes, etc., powder metallurgy (PM) is an interesting option [7].
## (s4) Influence of Powder Particles Oxide Layers in EDC
(p4.0) As previously discussed, the oxide layer surrounding particles is of primordial importance in EDC processes, being detrimental in both very thick and very thin layers. If the oxide does not surround the particles, insufficient local heat is generated, resulting weak inter-particle bonding and mechanical strength. In the case of thick layers, breakdown could not be completed, making the neck formation difficult and resulting in separate molten fibres or channels. Figure 5a shows the effect of oxide thickness increase in hydrogen annealed steel powders for different times, including conditions both below and beyond the limit thickness [62]. Once the oxide is thicker than the limit value, consolidation is not completed. Areas outside these channels contain particles not welded to each other, which reduces mechanical strength. Thus, once a critical oxide thickness is surpassed, compaction is not possible even increasing the discharge voltage, which only increases the thickness of the molten channels [62]. On the other hand, for constant voltage, higher capacitance also leads to thicker channels, but it does not result in a greater number of fibres [29], i.e., the breakdown of the oxide layers is not clearly affected by the voltage or capacitance. number of fibres [29], i.e., the breakdown of the oxide layers is not clearly affected by the voltage or capacitance.

(p4.1) For oxide thicknesses below the critical limit, increasing the discharge voltage beyond the breakdown produces more numerous fibres as shown in Figure 5b [29]. The breakdown voltage in slightly oxidized particles depends on the oxide thickness, for instance, artificially increasing the oxide thickness of particles with an average size of 110 μm from 0.5 to 3 μm in steel powder, increases the breakdown voltage from 2 to 5 kV [62]. EDC seems to be more influenced by discharge voltage than by capacitance. It could be said that for a particular energy level, high voltage and low capacitance could help to create a uniform distribution of current density, leading to the appearance of a higher number of channels and avoiding undesirable phenomena [29].  For oxide thicknesses below the critical limit, increasing the discharge voltage beyond the breakdown produces more numerous fibres as shown in Figure 5b [29]. The breakdown voltage in slightly oxidized particles depends on the oxide thickness, for instance, artificially increasing the oxide thickness of particles with an average size of 110 µm from 0.5 to 3 µm in steel powder, increases the breakdown voltage from 2 to 5 kV [62]. EDC seems to be more influenced by discharge voltage than by capacitance. It could be said that for a particular energy level, high voltage and low capacitance could help to create a uniform distribution of current density, leading to the appearance of a higher number of channels and avoiding undesirable phenomena [29].
## (s8) Studied Materials
(p8.0) Pure iron is a very well-known material in traditional sintering and therefore a candidate to make any initial study on new sintering techniques. Thus, development studies on EDC in the UK were carried out with iron [36,98], being iron also studied in Japan after being mechanically ground [68], Italy [43], Russia [27,28,99] and Iran [29]. The effect of electric discharges on Fe particle suspensions were studies in Ukraine [100].
## (s11) Iron-Base
(p11.0) The initial tests of the EDC technique in the UK were carried out with Fe powders, with the idea of producing iron metallic bars that should be further processed in swaging dies to increase density [36]. No external pressure but that necessary to have a good contact in the electric circuit was applied; nevertheless, the pinch effect caused by the discharge produced a density increase of up to 20%, reaching a relative density of 59% in a time of approximately 50 µs. It was checked that extreme conditions, i.e., current densities higher than 125 kA/cm 2 , caused the explosion of the powder column. This value has, however, been later clearly surpassed with Fe powders by other researchers, reaching for instance 234 kA/cm 2 [28]. Depending on the applied pressure and energy set in the capacitor bank, the process can make part of the powder to reach critical viscosity values, being thrown out from the die apparently in liquid state and even causing the destruction of the die [43]. It has been shown [27] that there is a power law dependence between the applied pressure and the electrical conductivity of the Fe powder column, which undoubtedly affects this behaviour.

(p11.1) Initial studies [36] also included the effect of the electrical resistance of the powders, not taking into account the influence of the applied pressure but directly caused by the oxides covering the powder particles (indeed, experiments were carried out with different powder particle sizes to check the effect of the oxides, present in higher amount in small particles). It was found that the current flowing through smaller powders was lower. It was also checked that increasing the length of the column increases resistance, and therefore the current passing through the powders decreases, and the attained density decreases. Increasing the section of the powder column did not necessarily affect the density, because despite the fact that resistance decreased, the current density was smaller.
## (s13) Titanium-Base
(p13.0) Pure Ti powder has been processed by EDC after being pressed at 710 MPa (relative density of about 80%) with an energy of 2.04 kJ/g (400 V and 0.025 F), reaching a 90% relative density, which was not affected by using different powder particle sizes. The same final relative density was attained by pre-pressing at 425 MPa and discharging at 10 kV with 200 μF (5 kJ/g) [26]. Ti can however be consolidated with lower specific energy; as explained in [43], only 3.6 kJ/g were needed when pressure was applied at the time that the electric current passed through the compact.

(p13.1) For medical implants, pure Ti has also been consolidated. The use of 2.14 kJ/g under vacuum produced a solid core of deformed and welded particles and a porous layer of particles connected by necks, with a discharge time of about 122 μs. The process led to a compact where the original oxide layer breaks down, and a new very thin oxide layer is formed [55]. Different densities can be reached depending on the processing conditions, from fully porous parts to those with solid cores and porous periphery. The core size depends on the heat generated in the discharge, and the neck-joining particles can attain sizes in the order of 90 μm for particles of 200-250 μm, or 40 μm for particles of 50-100 μm (see Figures 1 and 2). The obtained microstructure consisted of alpha prime, a non-equilibrium supersaturated structure produced by martensitic transformation from beta phase. Starting with a relative density of 39.7%, the process reached 72.8% after pressing the powders with a load of 10 kg (7.8 MPa) and sintering with 300 μF and 2.86 kJ/g [41]. The compressive strength can reach values as high as 280 MPa, greater than that of conventionally sintered Ti compacts, where the microstructure is clearly affected by grain growth and phase changes [37].

(p13.2) Ti porous parts have also been manufactured with spherical powders with sizes in the ranges of 160-200 μm and 315-400 μm (see Figure 12). The diameter of the particle necks was about 10-20% of the particle size, resulting in a porosity not less than 36-37%. Several parameters were analysed in this study. EDC with an energy of 1.8 J/mm 3 showed that applied pressures in the range of 10-20 MPa provoke the destruction of the oxide 
## (s14) Titanium-Base
(p14.0) Pure Ti powder has been processed by EDC after being pressed at 710 MPa (relative density of about 80%) with an energy of 2.04 kJ/g (400 V and 0.025 F), reaching a 90% relative density, which was not affected by using different powder particle sizes. The same final relative density was attained by pre-pressing at 425 MPa and discharging at 10 kV with 200 µF (5 kJ/g) [26]. Ti can however be consolidated with lower specific energy; as explained in [43], only 3.6 kJ/g were needed when pressure was applied at the time that the electric current passed through the compact.

(p14.1) For medical implants, pure Ti has also been consolidated. The use of 2.14 kJ/g under vacuum produced a solid core of deformed and welded particles and a porous layer of particles connected by necks, with a discharge time of about 122 µs. The process led to a compact where the original oxide layer breaks down, and a new very thin oxide layer is formed [55]. Different densities can be reached depending on the processing conditions, from fully porous parts to those with solid cores and porous periphery. The core size depends on the heat generated in the discharge, and the neck-joining particles can attain sizes in the order of 90 µm for particles of 200-250 µm, or 40 µm for particles of 50-100 µm (see Figures 1 and 2). The obtained microstructure consisted of alpha prime, a non-equilibrium supersaturated structure produced by martensitic transformation from beta phase. Starting with a relative density of 39.7%, the process reached 72.8% after pressing the powders with a load of 10 kg (7.8 MPa) and sintering with 300 µF and 2.86 kJ/g [41]. The compressive strength can reach values as high as 280 MPa, greater than that of conventionally sintered Ti compacts, where the microstructure is clearly affected by grain growth and phase changes [37].

(p14.2) Ti porous parts have also been manufactured with spherical powders with sizes in the ranges of 160-200 µm and 315-400 µm (see Figure 12). The diameter of the particle necks was about 10-20% of the particle size, resulting in a porosity not less than 36-37%. Several parameters were analysed in this study. EDC with an energy of 1.8 J/mm 3 showed that applied pressures in the range of 10-20 MPa provoke the destruction of the oxide films, making the resistivity to drop. The final porosity of the samples, the bending strength and the axial shrinkage behaves in a similar way, with minimum porosity and maximum strength and shrinkage in this pressure range. Higher pressures led to an increase of interparticle contacts, reducing resistivity and energy released for sintering. Regarding radial shrinkage, under low pressures of about 10 MPa, the pinch effect is dominating, producing a radial contraction of 5-9%, and higher for smaller particles. For pressures of 10-20 MPa, the contraction is reduced to 1-1.5% [42]. Despite the short discharge time, TiO2 surfaces transform to other titanium oxides during EDC, even during environmental discharges in a vacuum [55] or Ar atmosphere [37,41]. In addition, N2 atmosphere was used to intentionally change the powder's surface composition, with the TiO2 surface of the as-received powders changing to TiN in the very short time that EDC lasts [109]. A similar effect is obtained when discharges are carried out in the air, revealing the formation of TiO2, and after a light etching, the presence of TiN and TiON [48].
## (s17) Cooper-Base
(p17.0) Cu powders with different thicknesses of the oxide layer surrounding powder particles have been used to study the effect of EDC. Powder batches with different average sizes of 106, 60 and 43 µm were oxidized in air at temperatures of 150, 200 and 250 • C, and subjected to electrical discharges from 79.8 µF with energies of up to 5.75 kJ/g [62]. Oxide thickness reached up to 2.1 µm in the bigger Cu particles. Breakdown voltages for a 100 mm in length and 7.4 mm in diameter column were measured, resulting in values between 1 and 6 kV for the smaller batch, and some narrower values for bigger particles. Nevertheless, the interparticle breakdown voltage, computed by dividing the measured breakdown voltage by the number of particles necessary to reach the column height, was almost independent of the particle size, just depending on the oxide thickness.

(p17.1) The effect of consolidation on the microstructure was studied on ball-milled nanocrystalline Cu powders [120,121]. Milled powders had a plate like shape with a diameter of 30-40 µm and thickness of 5-15 µm [120], and estimated grain size of 38 nm [120], or a crystallite size of 28 nm measured by XRD, with a dislocation density of 1.8 × 10 16 m −2 [121]. The study was intended to check the results observed in Fe-based alloys, where ultrafast processes such as EDC maintain the original structure even at the level of grain misorientation and dislocation interaction. Consolidation was carried out on 2 g of powder with 3.1 kJ/g under a pressure of 350 [120] or 300 MPa, with specimens subsequently deformed under compression of up to 650 MPa [121]. After sintering, 93% of theoretical density was measured. Vickers microhardness values around 182 ± 12 HV were measured, with limited change in the nanostructure: crystallite size well below 100 nm when starting from 38 nm [120], and a measured crystallite size of 38 nm when starting from 28 nm [121]. The dislocation density is halved, resulting close to 10 × 10 16 m −2 [120], or slightly diminished, with absence of networks of strongly interacting dislocations [121].

(p17.2) A similar study was carried out on the Cu alloy Cu-37.5Zn. Cold worked bulk parts consisting of a single fcc α-Cu(Zn) coarse grained phase, with a lattice parameter of 0.3702 nm, were treated by EDC with 1200 µF at 1.8 kV, i.e., an energy of 1.9 kJ in a piece of 30.6 mm 3 . After discharging, coarse grains with an fcc structure were still observed, with most of the dislocation arrays becoming parallel, and fewer dislocation nodes. Moreover, nanostructured areas of about 11 nm accounting for about 5-10% of the material, with phases α -Cu(Zn) and β'-(CuZn), were observed. A temperature increase of up to 670 • C was estimated in areas with high density of defects, transforming the original non-equilibrium supersaturated solid solution [76].

(p17.3) Regarding studies with other Cu alloys, Cu-15Sn alloy obtained by mixing Cu-25Sn alloy and pure Cu, was poured in a die with a cross section of 3 × 4 mm 2 until filling a high of 100 mm. After ESF processing, densities higher than 98% were attained, with coarser grains at the periphery and a centre with a much finer microstructure. Samples were subsequently cold rolled with a maximum thickness reduction of 61.33%. According to the Cu-Sn phase diagram, α-Cu and Sn rich ε-phase are present, together with grains of admixed Cu. Thus, the EDC process did not affect the chemical composition nor the microstructure of the constituents, resulting in a fine microstructure with higher mechanical properties than the obtained with conventional processing techniques. Bars could be cold rolled without breaking, although a significant strain hardening was detected [86].

(p17.4) Additionally, a powder blend of pure ball-milled Cu and 5 wt.% synthetic diamond coated with Ni film, with sizes of 3 and 350 µm, were processed with 4.12 kJ under a pressure of 125 MPa with a total duration of 150 ms. The goal was to avoid graphitization of diamond crystals with this short process and maintain the ultrafine structure of Cu, at the time that compressive residual stresses were generated in the compact. A complete FEM model was developed in this work to avoid the trial and error process [52].

(p17.5) The evolution of amorphous powders has also been studied in Cu based materials. Gas atomized amorphous powders of composition Cu-22Zr-18Ti-6Ni were consolidated with 0.22-1.55 kJ/g in vacuum. Compacts of 3 and 4 mm in diameter were EDC-ed without external applied pressure. The amorphous character was maintained up to 0.44 kJ/g in compacts of 3 mm in diameter, reaching a relative density of about 55% and forming necks between particles, with pores homogeneously distributed in the sample. Increasing energy to 0.66 kJ/g made the powders crystalize and relative density reached 80%, whereas 1.11 kJ/g made a dense sample with few pores appear (see Figure 15). Regarding samples with 4 mm, the amorphous character is maintained up to 1.1 kJ/g, whereas increasing to 1.55 kJ/g makes a crystalline pore-gradient structure appear [122]. Details on the microstructural evolution inside powder particles of similarly manufactured compacts can be found in [123]. Being in the energy limit for crystallization, crystalline phases are mainly observed in the outer layer of big particles, with the inner zone maintaining the amorphous structure. Small particles are completely crystallized. For higher energies, particles completely crystallize, with coarse grains in the inner areas and fine crystalline phases in the surface. This reveals a complete melt and a quicker quench at surfaces. compacts of 3 mm in diameter, reaching a relative density of about 55% and forming necks between particles, with pores homogeneously distributed in the sample. Increasing energy to 0.66 kJ/g made the powders crystalize and relative density reached 80%, whereas 1.11 kJ/g made a dense sample with few pores appear (see Figure 15). Regarding samples with 4 mm, the amorphous character is maintained up to 1.1 kJ/g, whereas increasing to 1.55 kJ/g makes a crystalline pore-gradient structure appear [122]. Details on the microstructural evolution inside powder particles of similarly manufactured compacts can be found in [123]. Being in the energy limit for crystallization, crystalline phases are mainly observed in the outer layer of big particles, with the inner zone maintaining the amorphous structure. Small particles are completely crystallized. For higher energies, particles completely crystallize, with coarse grains in the inner areas and fine crystalline phases in the surface. This reveals a complete melt and a quicker quench at surfaces. Sintering with applied pressures in the range 250-1000 MPa and a maximum energy of 40 kJ (3400 μF and up to 5 kV) were conducted on 10-30 μm Cu powder, Cu mechanically mixed with 40 vol.% TiB2 30-100 nm in size, and Cu containing Ti and B powder in the same proportion. Sintering succeeded with Cu powder for an integrated value of the square of the current density higher than 1.4·10 15 A 2 ·s/m 4 , a value lower than that corresponding to the copper transition to the liquid state, of 1.05·10 17 A 2 ·s/m 4 . The height of the sample decreased by 25-30%, and the transverse size remained unchanged, obtaining high-density materials. Sintering succeeded for Cu-TiB2 from 0.9·10 15 A 2 ·s/m 4 , and from 0.34·10 14 A 2 ·s/m 4 for the Cu-Ti-B powder. This latter lower value can be explained by the additional heat due to an exothermal reaction of TiB2 synthesis as confirmed by XRD with a crystallite size smaller than 20 nm. Despite the porous structure of the Cu-TiB2 materials, their electric erosion resistance was four times higher than that of solid copper [64]. Sintering with applied pressures in the range 250-1000 MPa and a maximum energy of 40 kJ (3400 µF and up to 5 kV) were conducted on 10-30 µm Cu powder, Cu mechanically mixed with 40 vol.% TiB 2 30-100 nm in size, and Cu containing Ti and B powder in the same proportion. Sintering succeeded with Cu powder for an integrated value of the square of the current density higher than 1.4 × 10 15 A 2 ·s/m 4 , a value lower than that corresponding to the copper transition to the liquid state, of 1.05 × 10 17 A 2 ·s/m 4 . The height of the sample decreased by 25-30%, and the transverse size remained unchanged, obtaining high-density materials. Sintering succeeded for Cu-TiB 2 from 0.9 × 10 15 A 2 ·s/m 4 , and from 0.34 × 10 14 A 2 ·s/m 4 for the Cu-Ti-B powder. This latter lower value can be explained by the additional heat due to an exothermal reaction of TiB 2 synthesis as confirmed by XRD with a crystallite size smaller than 20 nm. Despite the porous structure of the Cu-TiB2 materials, their electric erosion resistance was four times higher than that of solid copper [64].
## (s18) Hard Metals
(p18.0) Consolidation of hard metals by EDC has been tested by several researchers. WC-20Co powders with WC grain size <5 µm were successfully processed by applying an external pressure of 200 MPa and a current density of up to 95 kA/cm 2 [90]. Relative density of up to 99% was attained at the time that maintaining the WC size and a hardness of 78 ± 2 HRA was measured (see Figure 16). Higher current densities caused the disintegration of the material, creating big pores and reducing hardness to 46 ± 6 HRA. 
## (s19) Hard Metals
(p19.0) Consolidation of hard metals by EDC has been tested by several researchers. WC-20Co powders with WC grain size <5 μm were successfully processed by applying an external pressure of 200 MPa and a current density of up to 95 kA/cm 2 [90]. Relative density of up to 99% was attained at the time that maintaining the WC size and a hardness of 78 ± 2 HRA was measured (see Figure 16). Higher current densities caused the disintegration of the material, creating big pores and reducing hardness to 46 ± 6 HRA. Reprinted from ref. [90] For certain applications, attaining a nanostructured WC is considered a key factor to obtain high hardness and fracture toughness. Nanocrystalline WC-10Co powders have been processed by EDC, showing that powders can be consolidated into ultrafine-grained WC-Co cemented carbides with outstanding mechanical properties [124]. Processing 2.5 g of WC-Co powders with particle size of about 200 nm and average grain size of 50 nm, under 300 MPa of external pressure and 360 μF at 3 kJ/g, reached 95% of theoretical density at the time that avoided the grain growth of WC.

(p19.1) Outstanding properties can also be obtained in graded hard metals, regarding both cobalt content and WC grain size. Graded materials are difficult to process by traditional liquid phase sintering, although good results can be obtained with quick enough processes to restrict Co migration and WC growth. Nanocrystalline and coarse-grained WC-10Co powders, 50 nm and 3 μm, respectively, were consolidated in a two-layer compact by EDC with 360 μF and current densities in the range 150 to 240 kA/cm 2 [125]. Different WC grain sizes produce liquid channels of different size during conventional sintering, being smaller for finer grains, with preferential Co migrating to these areas due to the capillary force. During EDC experiments, an increase in Co content to about 14 wt.% was observed only in 15 μm of the fine-grained layer. On the other hand, grain growth is constrained with EDC since the densification mainly comes from particle rearrangement (see Figure 17). Regarding mechanical properties, the ultrafine grained layer showed higher hardness of about 18 GPa, whereas the coarse layer exhibited higher fracture toughness of about 14 MPa·m 1/2 , producing graded cemented carbides with excellent properties combination. The interfacial diffusion between sublayers in EDC has also been studied in WC-11Co/Fe/WC-11Co compacts [50]. The distance of Fe penetration reached 400 μm for a current density of 220 kA/cm 2 attained with 6.48 kJ/g. This value agrees with estimations for the particle rearrangement densification mechanism, therefore being restricted the grain growth by solution-reprecipitation. Reprinted from ref. [90] For certain applications, attaining a nanostructured WC is considered a key factor to obtain high hardness and fracture toughness. Nanocrystalline WC-10Co powders have been processed by EDC, showing that powders can be consolidated into ultrafine-grained WC-Co cemented carbides with outstanding mechanical properties [124]. Processing 2.5 g of WC-Co powders with particle size of about 200 nm and average grain size of 50 nm, under 300 MPa of external pressure and 360 µF at 3 kJ/g, reached 95% of theoretical density at the time that avoided the grain growth of WC.

(p19.2) Outstanding properties can also be obtained in graded hard metals, regarding both cobalt content and WC grain size. Graded materials are difficult to process by traditional liquid phase sintering, although good results can be obtained with quick enough processes to restrict Co migration and WC growth. Nanocrystalline and coarse-grained WC-10Co powders, 50 nm and 3 µm, respectively, were consolidated in a two-layer compact by EDC with 360 µF and current densities in the range 150 to 240 kA/cm 2 [125]. Different WC grain sizes produce liquid channels of different size during conventional sintering, being smaller for finer grains, with preferential Co migrating to these areas due to the capillary force. During EDC experiments, an increase in Co content to about 14 wt.% was observed only in 15 µm of the fine-grained layer. On the other hand, grain growth is constrained with EDC since the densification mainly comes from particle rearrangement (see Figure 17). Regarding mechanical properties, the ultrafine grained layer showed higher hardness of about 18 GPa, whereas the coarse layer exhibited higher fracture toughness of about 14 MPa·m 1/2 , producing graded cemented carbides with excellent properties combination. The interfacial diffusion between sublayers in EDC has also been studied in WC-11Co/Fe/WC-11Co compacts [50]. The distance of Fe penetration reached 400 µm for a current density of 220 kA/cm 2 attained with 6.48 kJ/g. This value agrees with estimations for the particle rearrangement densification mechanism, therefore being restricted the grain growth by solution-reprecipitation. Additionally, graded Fe/W composites for future applications in fusion reactors have been processed by low voltage EDC [88]. Fine powders of Fe and W were mechanically mixed in different volume fractions until particles big enough to be used safely were attained. Powders containing different volume fractions of W, from 0 to 75%, were loaded into the die in different sublayers and consolidation was carried out with up to 388 MPa and 80 kJ (applied to a powder volume of 850 mm 3 ). No differences were found with respect to compacts of homogeneous compositions, with little porosity, fine distribution of Fe and W volumes, and bond zones between sublayers not showing more defects than other locations of the microstructure. The compact's thermal conductivity is higher than or equal to the conductivity of Eurofer-a promising property to remove heat. The Young's modulus is somewhat lower than expected according to a linear interpolation model, as the yield and bending strengths are than predicted. Finally, the powdered structure was electrically sintered to a polished 1 mm thick vanadium disk (see Figure 18). Joining cemented carbide to bulk materials is usually carried out by the brazing and electron beam welding processes, but EDC has also been proved with bulk steel [90]. By using EDC with 200 MPa and a current density of 100 kA/cm 2 joints resulted homogeneous, with high strength and low residual thermal stress, therefore resulting in an alternative joining process with high precision and low heat input.

(p19.3) Samples of W-6.93Ni-3.12Fe were prepared by EDC from mechanically mixed near spherical powders with an average size of 6.03 μm. Voltage varied from 4.5 to 5.8 kV and pressure from 100 to 250 MPa. Mechanical tests (Brazilian test) of the consolidated cylindrical samples showed that higher external pressures resulted in lower strengths, with samples consolidated at 250 MPa resulting in a brittle fracture. The maximum strength (500 MPa) of samples sintered at 200 MPa was reached by consolidating with 5.4 kV, decreasing for higher voltages. Even higher strength of 700 MPa was reached with 150 MPa at 5.5 kV [84].

(p19.4) The pore formation mechanism during EDC has been studied in W powders [123]. The surfaces of broken W compacts fabricated with spherical and smooth-surface powders revealed the presence of needle like shapes and rough powder surfaces. This means that melting, evaporation and quenching processes took place during EDC because of the joule heat produced by the current flow (see Figure 19). Moreover, the pinch pressure affected the interparticle necks, with unstable necks at 1.5 kJ/g and more stable necks for higher energies [123]. Additionally, graded Fe/W composites for future applications in fusion reactors have been processed by low voltage EDC [88]. Fine powders of Fe and W were mechanically mixed in different volume fractions until particles big enough to be used safely were attained. Powders containing different volume fractions of W, from 0 to 75%, were loaded into the die in different sublayers and consolidation was carried out with up to 388 MPa and 80 kJ (applied to a powder volume of 850 mm 3 ). No differences were found with respect to compacts of homogeneous compositions, with little porosity, fine distribution of Fe and W volumes, and bond zones between sublayers not showing more defects than other locations of the microstructure. The compact's thermal conductivity is higher than or equal to the conductivity of Eurofer-a promising property to remove heat. The Young's modulus is somewhat lower than expected according to a linear interpolation model, as the yield and bending strengths are than predicted. Finally, the powdered structure was electrically sintered to a polished 1 mm thick vanadium disk (see Figure 18). Joining cemented carbide to bulk materials is usually carried out by the brazing and electron beam welding processes, but EDC has also been proved with bulk steel [90]. By using EDC with 200 MPa and a current density of 100 kA/cm 2 joints resulted homogeneous, with high strength and low residual thermal stress, therefore resulting in an alternative joining process with high precision and low heat input.

(p19.5) Samples of W-6.93Ni-3.12Fe were prepared by EDC from mechanically mixed near spherical powders with an average size of 6.03 µm. Voltage varied from 4.5 to 5.8 kV and pressure from 100 to 250 MPa. Mechanical tests (Brazilian test) of the consolidated cylindrical samples showed that higher external pressures resulted in lower strengths, with samples consolidated at 250 MPa resulting in a brittle fracture. The maximum strength (500 MPa) of samples sintered at 200 MPa was reached by consolidating with 5.4 kV, decreasing for higher voltages. Even higher strength of 700 MPa was reached with 150 MPa at 5.5 kV [84].
## (s20) Other Compositions
(p20.0) Several other compositions have been consolidated by EDC. Regarding Co alloys, amorphous Co-4Fe-1Ni-14Si-15B alloy powders were initially pressed up to a relative density of 75%, and then processed with input energy bellow 0.53 kJ/g to maintain the amorphous structure. The relative density increased about 12% reaching a homogeneous amorphous structure [69].

(p20.1) High corrosion-resistant Zr-1Nb alloy powders with both flake and spherical shape were processed by EDC to form bulk samples and coatings. Different current densities were needed to reach the maximum density, depending on the applied pressure. For flake particles, about 180 kA/cm 2 was the best condition for pressures of 165 and 190 MPa, whereas was 280 kA/cm 2 for 307 MPa. For current densities above 340 kA/cm 2 , the final density decreases sharply. The microstructures for both flake and spherical particles were maintained after consolidation. Regarding coatings, a high-strength damage-free interface is obtained for coatings on both ceramic and metallic substrates [127].

(p20.2) Low melting temperature materials have also been consolidated with low energy conditions. In total, 1.5-2 g of Sn or Zn powders with different particle sizes were pressed at 70-710 MPa and discharged with 400 V and 0.025 F (0.90 kJ/g for Sn and 1.38 kJ/g for Zn). Density increased to high values by applying high pressure. Sn density increased from 7.2 to 7.3 g/cm 3 after discharging. In general, no individual particles could be seen in the microstructures after consolidation. New discharges on the same compact did not improve densification [26].

(p20.3) Low energy discharges have also been applied to sinter Ag-Ni nanocomposite paste for thermoelectric element interconnections. The paste was prepared from 75 nm Ag and Ni particles and additives, and bridged two silver electrodes on Al 2 O 3 substrate. After drying and compressing the paste at 2.4 MPa, a current from a capacitor 0.01 F charged to 10 V sinters the sample. The result is a resistance decrease by nearly 1-2 orders of magnitude [78].
## (s21) Conclusions
(p21.0) According to the different studies reviewed in this manuscript, the electrical consolidation of powders by discharging the energy stored in a capacitor can be applied to a wide variety of metallic materials, from pure elemental powders to complex alloys. In general, the very short duration of the process allows for maintaining the microstructure of the original powders, even when working with nanostructured materials or amorphous structures.

(p21.1) The process is governed by several factors affecting the easiness of electricity to flow through the powder mass. A key factor regarding this flow is the electrical resistance of the powders, affected by the oxide layers surrounding the particles. Oxide layers can be eliminated by the appropriate combination of pressure (external or due to the electromagnetic forces of the process) and energy of the process, with a different effect of capacitance and voltage. Nevertheless, the presence of this oxide layer is mandatory for the process, and has to be eliminated during the process itself, not previously to the discharge. Thus, the necessary heat to join the powder particles is generated by Joule effect. Nanocrystalline MA Nb-Al 23 powders were consolidated with external pressures of up to 450 MPa [129] or 500 MPa [71]. The annealed powders at relative densities of up to 85% were discharged with input energies of 0.5, 0.75 and 1.0 kJ/g [129], or 1 and 2 kJ/g [71], from a 500 µF capacitor bank. The maximum achieved relative density was 99% for highest input energies. The microstructure for low energies remained without significant changes, with just a very small grain growth. Higher energies produced the transformation from Nb, Al, Nb 2 Al and Nb 3 Al to only the compound phases, and the increase in the latter one. Grain size grew from 5-8 to a maximum of 26-36 nm, with extremely high hardness values of 14.7-17.6 GPa.
## (s22) Conclusions
(p22.0) According to the different studies reviewed in this manuscript, the electrical consolidation of powders by discharging the energy stored in a capacitor can be applied to a wide variety of metallic materials, from pure elemental powders to complex alloys. In general, the very short duration of the process allows for maintaining the microstructure of the original powders, even when working with nanostructured materials or amorphous structures.

(p22.1) The process is governed by several factors affecting the easiness of electricity to flow through the powder mass. A key factor regarding this flow is the electrical resistance of the powders, affected by the oxide layers surrounding the particles. Oxide layers can be eliminated by the appropriate combination of pressure (external or due to the electromagnetic forces of the process) and energy of the process, with a different effect of capacitance and voltage. Nevertheless, the presence of this oxide layer is mandatory for the process, and has to be eliminated during the process itself, not previously to the discharge. Thus, the necessary heat to join the powder particles is generated by Joule effect.

(p22.2) When using the proper parameters, a homogeneous microstructure can be attained, with densities near the theoretical ones, and just a small layer in contact with the electrodes and die being not properly consolidated. Nevertheless, graded materials regarding porosity can also be obtained, mainly when the pinch effect controls the pressure during the process. The processing conditions and the attained results very much depend on the studied materials, because the powder characteristics can be quite different, therefore being necessary different operating parameters.

(p22.3) On the other hand, electrical discharging is an uncontrolled process, with the current intensity not being regulated and varying during the process. This makes the temperature uncontrollable inside the specimen to be consolidated. Only the proper selection of the processing conditions (which must be found by trial and error) will drive to acceptable results. A detailed simulation of the process, in the line of the work in [51,52] (also statistical analysis of big amounts of results can help, as shown in [102]) is still lacking. Advances in this direction could help understanding of and finding the best processing conditions for a particular material, and the reason for the very different conditions which are adequate for different materials. Any progress in this line would help to order the large amount of experimental results obtained up to now. The basic problem is the difficulty in simulating a process in which mechanical, electrical and thermal problems are intimately coupled, with the added problem of the very short time that the process lasts.

(p22.4) The stored energy used in experiments is quite different for different materials, with a mean value of about 3 kJ/g. This energy is attained with capacitors of a few hundred µF and charging voltages of a few kV. The external applied pressure ranges from zero to hundreds of MPa. There are not however, as already commented, clear value ranges for particular compositions, making it necessary to look for the appropriate combination of the process parameters to find the optimal experimental conditions. The differences in reported values of the process parameters among different researchers does not help in defining the aforementioned optimal conditions for the different materials.

(p22.5) The process has usually been applied to cylindrical small pieces, with a maximum diameter of about 20 mm. In this scale, the process generates promising results in most experiences studied, with improved properties mainly associated with the final microstructure obtained in the consolidated pieces. For metallic materials, one of the main challenges of EDC is its application to bigger and complex shaped compacts. This challenge will require studies by trial and error. Only a better understanding of the physical phenomena taking place during the process, and a correct modelling without simplifications, considering a uniform porosity in the compact for each particular moment of the process, will help in a higher applicability of the technique.

(p22.6) The limited applicability to conductive materials should also be addressed by extending the use to semiconductors heated to increase their conductivity. This is the idea underlying at microwave or flash sintering processes. Nevertheless, increasing temperature could easily affect the final microstructures, and therefore each particular case should be analysed.
