# UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL PAULISTA "JÚLIO DE MESQUITA FILHO" SYSTEMATIC REVIEW Erbium laser in the debonding of ceramics: a literature review Laser de érbio na remoção de cerâmicas: uma revisão de literatura

CorpusID: 248727922 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38ccbb6790a08b0bd7a31f74adb5e7e9d6b33cff](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38ccbb6790a08b0bd7a31f74adb5e7e9d6b33cff)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) In 1964 the first laser and medical equipment were developed in the areas of ophthalmology, dermatology and general surgery. In dentistry, applications of lasers in dental tissues were first described in the 1990s, and approval for clinical use in 1997 [1]. We have some types of lasers in dentistry, among those that can be used in hard tissues, we highlight the Erbium lasers that have the ability to cut enamel, dentin, cement and bone, in addition to soft tissues, and remove some pathologies, including caries lesions. Among the advantages reported by professionals and patients when using erbium lasers for the management of hard tissues, are the reduction of uncomfortable noises, decreased intra and postoperative sensitivity, as well as a certain selectivity in the removal of tissues, as each tissue has a specific amount of water. The use of lasers in dentistry can be used in virtually all specialties [2].
## (s3) CRITICAL REVIEW
(p3.0) The first work on the subject reported in the literature was published in 2007 by Broome [9] in the proceedings of the Pract Proced Aesthet Dent Congress. In this work, the Er,Cr:YSGG laser was used to peel off the feldspar ceramic as per the protocol mentioned in Table I. Broome [9] describes the mechanism by which the facets were peeled off as a "denaturation" of the resin cement. He suggested that the laser energy passes through the laminate to interact with the ceramic-resin interface, where it selectively excites the water molecules in the resin. The author also noticed that feldspar ceramic veneers take between 5 and 30 seconds to remove, while pressed ceramics usually take between 20 seconds and 2 minutes, looking at darkened areas where there should be "denatured" resin, which he said was polished.

(p3.1) After clinical observation, the author also pointed out that the dental structure below the facet was not affected by the laser irradiation, requiring only minor corrections in the preparation for making new laminates [9]. As it is a pioneering work in the area, we consider the author's conclusions subjective since some methodological details have not been thoroughly described. In addition to that, the analysis carried out in a non-blind manner by a unique examinator may have promoted a bias conclusion of the study.
