# Internet of Bio-Nano Things: A Review of Applications, Enabling Technologies and Key Challenges

CorpusID: 245329770 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f61fdbb5c543431aa5f147b7e4ba5edbeb30bdcd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f61fdbb5c543431aa5f147b7e4ba5edbeb30bdcd)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s1) II. FRAMEWORK A. Natural IoBNT
(p1.0) In the last several billion years, most basic single cell organisms evolved into complex systems of multi-cellular organisms composed of living nanoscale building blocks, i.e., cells, to perform the most intricate tasks in an optimized fashion. This highly coordinated structure of multicellular organisms are indeed a result of self-organized networks of cells communicating at various scales. Hence, these networks can be considered as natural IoBNTs and many lessons can be drawn in terms of effective techniques of communications and networking at nanoscale by observing the behavior of these natural IoBNTS. Here, we will describe some of the most natural IoBNTS, namely, human body nanonetworks, bacterial nanonetworks, and plant networks.

(p1.1) 1) Human-body nanonetworks: Biological systems in the human body are connected to each other and communicate primarily through molecular interactions and action potentials. These communication pathways enable the coordination of various types of cells, which are basic building blocks of life, and organization into tissues, organs, and systems with different structures and functions. The dense network of interconnected cells use signaling at various scales such as juxtracrine (signaling among cells in contact with each other), paracrine (signaling among cells in the vicinity of each other, but not in contact), or endocrine (signaling among cells distant from each other). The performance and reliability of this intrabody networks ensures the health of the human body by preserving the equilibrium state, i.e., homeostasis, achieved by tight control of nervous system reacting to molecular and electrical inputs coming from all parts of the body and environmental cues coming through five senses. Any failure in communication in these networks will deteriorate the health and lead to diseases [4]. For example, i) problems in electrical signaling of heart cells cause arrhythmia, i.e., irregular heartbeat, which can end in heart failure, stroke or sudden death; ii) communication problems between the brain and the body arising from the damage to protective sheath (myelin) that cover nerve fibers by immune system attacks which is the Multiple Sclerosis (MS) disease potentially causing paralysis; iii) irresponsiveness of cells to insulin which is a molecule carrying information regulating metabolism in endocrine pathways leads to diabetes; iv) irregular signaling in the microbiome-gut-brain axis, where microbes in gut and brain cells exchange information through endocrine and nervous pathways, is shown to affect mood, neurodevelopment, and obesity.

(p1.2) The most advanced and complex human-body network is the nervous system [5], composed of a very large scale network of neurons interconnected through neuro-spike [17] and synapse [18] communication channels. The nervous nanonetwork distributed throughout the body transfers information about external stimuli to the brain, which is a dense network of highly complex neuron cells. The brain processes all this information and sends back commands to the body accordingly to control the vital functions, behavior and physical activities. Other networks spanning the whole body yet carrying information on a slower scale than the electrochemical pulses of nervous nanonetworks, are cardiovascular system and the endocrine system both composed of vessels carrying information in molecular form in blood and lymph, respectively [4].

(p1.3) 2) Bacterial nanonetworks: Besides the IoBNT in multicellular organisms such as human body, single cell organisms such as bacteria show coordination and group behavior enabled by intercellular signaling. The first communication mechanism among bacteria discovered is quorum sensing (QS), the ability to detect and respond to cell population density represented by the concentration of the signaling molecules called autoinducers [19]. QS controls biofilm formation, virulence factor expression, production of secondary metabolites and stress adaptation mechanisms. Using this mechanism, unicellular bacteria coordinate their behavior and act as if they are a unified multicellular organism. Recently, besides the molecular means of QS, electrical means of communication among bacteria has been shown [20]. The bacterial membrane potentials creating potassium waves through bacterial biofilms synchronize the behavior of bacteria in biofilms. In case of nutrient depletion in the center of the biofilm, this signaling mechanism warns the outer circle of bacteria in the biofilm to slow down growth allowing more nutrients to penetrate to the center.

(p1.4) Using the above mentioned communication mechanisms, bacteria form spatio-temporally organized community structures optimizing the growth and fitness of the whole colony which resembles a decentralized decision-making system of millions of interconnected nodes. Studies also show that bacterial colonies engage in social behavior such as competition, collaboration, and cheating during the production of public goods [21]. Despite the limited resources of a single bacterium, tight coordination in the bacterial populations containing sheer number of bacteria can be established. Hence, bacterial nanonetworks provide lots of clues to IoBNT researchers that are looking to form networks of large numbers of BNT devices with limited power and communication resources [22], [23], [24], [25].

(p1.5) 3) Plant networks: Among the natural IoBNTs, plant networks are the most counter-intuitive since plants seem to be immobile and solitary. However, the growth and development of plants are highly dependent on the communication both within a plant itself, among different plants, and between plants and microorganisms in soil. Although there is no physical nervous system in plants, electrical communication have been observed between the roots and the body of plants [26], and capillary networks carry molecular information to the various parts of the plant along with water and nutrients. Furthermore, nearby plants use pheromone communication to coordinate their behavior to avoid overgrowth and shadowing each other and to warn each other against attacks from animals and bugs [27], [28]. Considering the many species of plants in a forest, various weed and grass on top of the soil, ivies and the trees on which they live symbiotically, plant networks enable a high level coordination to share the resources and optimize growth of each plant. Another element helping this coordination is the presence of rhizobiome, i.e., the root associated microbiome, which are shaped by the plant signaling primary and secondary root metabolites [29]. In turn, the rhizobiome consisting of multiple species of bacteria helps the roots to reach necessary nutrients from the soil and protects the plant against pathogens. This rhizobiome-plant interaction significantly affects the health and growth of the plant.
## (s2) B. Bio-Nano Things
(p2.0) In IoBNT framework, Bio-Nano Things are defined as basic structural and functional units operating at nanoscale within the biological environment [1]. BNTs are expected to have typical functionalities of the embedded computing devices in IoT, such as sensing, processing, actuation, and communication.

(p2.1) To build BNTs, one approach is miniaturizing electrical devices with nanotechnology and encapsulating these devices for biocompatibility. However, at such a small size, miniaturized electrical BNTs suffer from lack of space for batteries to provide sufficient power and antenna generating usable frequencies. Another approach to build BNTs is utilizing biological units as substrates such as cells which can be considered standalone devices that can harvest its energy from the environment.

(p2.2) Another important class of BNTs is molecular and nanomachines, which are tiny artificial devices with feature sizes between 1 and 100 nm, that can perform a useful task at nanoscale [30], [31]. Recent years have observed the design and implementation of molecular and nanomachines with increasing complexity and sophistication, expanding the range of their applications, which now include molecular factories, self-propelling cargo carriers, nanosensors, and molecular computation [32]. At a coarse-grained level, molecular and nanomachines can be categorized into three main groups: molecular machines, self-assembled nanomachines, and hybrid inorganic nanomachines.
## (s3) C. IoBNT Applications
(p3.0) The IoBNT will enable a plethora of applications in many fields where the connection of biological entities and nanodevices to the Internet leads to unprecedented ways of interfacing with biology due to IoBNT's inherent biocompatibility, reduced invasiveness, and low power consumption. In the rest of this section, we discuss the potential of IoBNT in biomedical applications, smart agriculture, and environmental applications.

(p3.1) 1) Biomedical Applications: The most promising applications of IoBNT are envisioned to be in the biomedical field where IoBNT would play a crucial role in healthcare. IoBNT comprising nanonetworks of biosensors and actuators operating near, on, or in the body, will enable real-time remote monitoring and control of patients' health.

(p3.2) A nanosensor network deployed in cardiovascular system monitoring vital signs such as heart rate, blood pressure, EEG signals, and blood oxygen and carbon dioxide levels may reveal abruptly occurring diseases such as heart attack and automatically alert healthcare providers. Meanwhile, continuous long-term monitoring of these vital signs may be used for management of chronic diseases as well as data collection to predict future attacks.

(p3.3) Recently, researchers also considered applying IoBNT concept for detection and mitigation of infectious diseases [15] where bio-hybrid BNTs constantly monitors for biomarkers released by infectious microorganisms. Other biomarkers that would be interesting to monitor by IoBNT would be glucose. A sudden changes in glucose levels can be deadly for diabetic patients, IoBNT can alert the patient against low/high glucose levels and can help adjust precise and timely administration of insulin automatically. Similarly, IoBNTs can be used for hormonal therapy management in cancer treatments or hormone replacement therapies in sex change [48].

(p3.4) Besides monitoring applications, IoBNT can also lead the realization of next generation smart drug delivery applications. To spare the non-target organs and tissues from the side effects of drugs, BNTs can deliver medicine to targeted regions in human body. BNTs encapsulating drug molecules can either actively search for or be directed externally to target cells and release the drugs only on target location.

(p3.5) 2) Smart Agriculture: Humans are not the only organisms that can benefit from remote health monitoring with IoBNT. The health of animals such as cattle and poultry can be also interrogated by IoBNT to ensure the health of the animals and the quality of their products such as meat, milk, and eggs. Another benefit of IoBNT to agriculture would be through monitoring of plants by measuring their health through BNTs deployed on the plants or in the soil. This can be also supported by BNTs monitoring and controlling smart irrigation systems, actively fertilizing the soil, and deterring bugs and wildlife damaging crops.

(p3.6) 3) Environmental Applications: Another promising area for IoBNT applications is environmental monitoring. By deploying IoBNT networks in water supply and distribution systems, it might be possible to detect pollutants in the water and use nano-filters to remove harmful substances and toxic agents contained in it. A similar system can be deployed to combat air pollution in crowded cities. Another environmental application can be listed as handling the growing problem of waste management where IoBNTs can be used to sort and process waste. Nanosensors can sense and tag different materials and nanoactuators can biodegrade the tagged materials or alert service providers to remove potentially toxic waste that might pollute water or soil.
## (s4) III. CHALLENGES A. Communication Methods for IoBNT
(p4.0) Conventional forms of electromagnetic (EM) communications are deemed not suitable for connecting BNTs, mainly due to the antenna size limitations, biocompatibility concerns, and the severe attenuation of EM signals in physiological media relevant for IoBNT applications [1]. Because of these challenges, researchers have started a quest for alternative communication methods to extend our connectivity to nanoscales. We can classify the proposed nanocommunication methods into two main types: (i) Molecular communications (MC), (ii) THz-band EM. Other techniques based on magnetic coupling, Förster Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET), heat transfer and acoustic energy transfer have also been proposed for nanonetworks. In the rest of this section, these techniques will be briefly overviewed, with a particular focus on MC, which is considered as the most promising nanocommunication method to enable IoBNT.

(p4.1) 1) Molecular Communications: Molecular communications is a bio-inspired communication technique, that uses molecules to transfer information. More specifically, a physically distinguishable feature of molecules, such as their type and concentration, is used to encode information, and random molecular motion in a fluidic channel is exploited as a means of signal propagation for information transfer. MC is radically different from conventional communication paradigms, e.g., EM communications, in various aspects such as the size and type of network entities, information transmission mechanisms, noise sources and fundamental performance limits including transmission delay, achievable data rates, coverage and power consumption.

(p4.2) Example MC scenarios between pairs of nanomachines are depicted in Fig. 2 the concentration of molecules, and then transmitted to the receiver via molecular propagation in a fluidic channel. The information can also be encoded into the type, release time, or the electronic state of the molecules [8]. Different kinds of propagation methods for molecular messages are investigated in the literature, such as passive diffusion, active transport with molecular motors [49], convection, and transport through gap junctions [50]. Among these, passive diffusion is the most promising, as it does not require energy consumption, and thus perfectly suits the energy limitations of the envisioned nanomachines. MC channel has many peculiar characteristics. For example, the discrete nature of information carriers, i.e., molecules, results in molecular counting noise, which is of similar nature with the shot noise occurring in photonic devices [51]. The stochastic nature of the ligand-receptor binding process occurring at the receiver gives rise to colored noise, also leading to a strong correlation between molecular propagation process and reception [52]. The slow nature of diffusion leads to a substantial amount of channel memory, which in turn, causes severe intersymbol interference (ISI), and limits the achievable data transmission rates [53]. The same reason also causes a significant delay in the transmission [54].

(p4.3) Deviations from the conventional means of communications necessitate radically different ideas for the design of transmitter and receiver architectures, and communication techniques for MC, and new approaches to channel modeling. a) Transmitter and Receiver Architectures for MC: There are mainly two design approaches considered for artificial nanomachines that can perform MC and form MC nanonetworks within the IoBNT framework. The first approach is to build the components of nanomachines using newly discovered nanomaterials, such as two-dimensional graphene, and one-dimensional silicon nanowire (SiNW) and carbon nanotube (CNT), which all manifest extraordinary characteristics at the interface of biology and electronics [55]. The other approach relies on synthetic biology, and envisions the use of engineered, i.e., genetically modified, bacteria as artificial nanomachines with communication functionalities wired into their intracellular signaling networks [24].

(p4.4) The physical nature of the BNTs determines the potential transmitter and receiver architectures. The MC transmitter of a BNT should perform the modulation of MC signals, and the release of molecules into the channel upon a stimulation by an external source, or as a result of an internal biochemical or electrical process. The receiver of a BNT is responsible for detecting the incoming molecular messages, transducing them into a processable signal, and extracting the encoded information through signal processing. The decoded information can then be used by the BNT to perform a prescribed operation, e.g., modulation of gene expression or translocation. Therefore, the performance of the transmitter and receiver is critical for the proper operation of a BNT within an IoBNT application.

(p4.5) Nanomaterial-based design approaches for MC transmitter mainly draw on the existing drug delivery technologies, such as stimuli-responsive hydrogels, molecule release rate of which is controlled by an electrical or chemical stimuli. Synthetic biology-based approaches, on the other hand, rely on making use of the already existing molecule release mechanisms of living cells, and tailoring these functionalities through genetic modifications to realize the desired MC modulation schemes. There are also theoretical MC transmitter designs that exploit stimuli-responsive ion channels to trigger the release of molecules in an externally controllable fashion [56].

(p4.6) Nanomaterial-based receiver designs are widely inspired by nanobiosensors, which share a common objective with MC receivers, that is to transduce biomolecular signals into a signal form suitable for processing. Although there are many nanobiosensor designs differing in their transducing mechanisms and the resulting signal form at the output, fieldeffect-transistor (FET)-based nanobiosensors have attracted the most attention for MC receiver design due to their scalability, simple design similar to conventional FETs, internal signal amplification by electrical field-effect, label-free operation, and the electrical output signals that allow fast processing of received signals. More importantly, FET-based nanobiosensors provide a wide range of design options. For example, they can accommodate different types of nanomaterials, e.g., graphene, SiNW, CNT, as the transducer channel, the conductivity of which is modulated by the molecular concentration in its proximity through the alteration of the surface potential and electrical field-effect. FET-based nanobiosensors have also a biorecognition layer, which replaces the gate electrode in conventional FETs, and consists of receptor molecules selectively binding target molecules via affinity-based ligandreceptor interactions. Depending on the transducer channel material, the biorecongition layer can host a wide range of receptor molecules, ranging from proteins to DNAs.

(p4.7) Among other options, graphene FET (GFET) biosensors provide unique advantages for the practical design of MC receiver. The main advantage of graphene is its high sensitivity to the charged analytes, e.g., proteins and DNAs, due to its extremely high carrier mobility and one-atom thickness, exposing all its atoms to the environment. The advent of new types of receptors, e.g., aptamers, has broadened the target range of nanoscale FET biosensors from ions to proteins, peptides, and even whole cells. Aptamers are short functional oligonucleotides (typically 20-60 nucleotides). Their base sequences for specific targets are identified from an oligonucleotide library with an in vitro process called systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX). Their application in biosensors has gained momentum due to their wide target range, chemical stability, and ease of production. Combined with the exceptional properties of graphene and aptamers, the ability of nanoscale FET biosensors to provide selective, labelfree and continuous detection makes GFET aptamer-based biosensors, i.e., GFET aptasensors, very promising candidates for the design of MC receiver.

(p4.8) Biological MC receiver designs are based on the enhancement of biosensing and biochemical signal processing functionalities of livings cells with synthetic biology tools for the receiver operation. This approach consists in the design of new synthetic receptors that can provide more sensitivity and selectivity in physiological environments, for example, through kinetic proof reading mechanisms [57], and the implementation of new chemical reaction networks within the cell that can realize the required computations for decoding the received MC signals. Synthetic biology is already mature enough to allow performing complex digital computations, e.g., with networks of genetic NAND and NOR gates, as well as analog computations, such as logarithmically linear addition, ratiometric and power-law computations, in synthetic cells [58]. Synthetic gene networks integrating computation and memory is also proven feasible [59]. More importantly, the technology enables implementing BNTs capable of observing individual receptors, as naturally done by living cells. Hence, it stands as a suitable domain for practically implementing more information-efficient MC detectors based on the binding state history of individual receptors. b) MC Channel Modeling: To design effective and efficient MC systems addressing the needs of the envisioned IoBNT applications, it is important to have a theoretical framework which can be used to optimize the physical components of the system with ICT performance metrics. Because of this, there has been tremendous interest in modeling the MC channels to find the ultimate performance limits in terms of information theoretical capacity and data rate. In majority of studies, MC channel is usually assumed to be unbounded where information-carrying molecules propagate through free diffusion with the underlying phenomenon of Brownian motion [60], [61]. In a few studies, diffusion is accompanied by a flow which directs the propagating molecules to a distant receiver [62], [63], [64], whereas some studies also consider the existence of reactive molecules within the channel which can chemically degrade the information carrier molecules and reduce the intersymbol interference. A few studies consider bounded MC channels, for example microfluidic channels where molecules propagate through convection-diffusion. In majority of these studies, it is assumed that the molecules are transmitted from a hypothetical point source, which is capable of releasing a known number of molecules to the channel in the form of an impulse signal at a given time instant. On the other hand, the receiver is typically assumed to be a transparent instrument, which is capable of counting every single molecule in a hypothetically defined space [63], or an ideal absorbing instrument capable of counting each molecule that is absorbed [65]. Common to these studies is the ignorance of the impact of the physical architectures of the transmitter and receiver on the communication channel. As such, researchers have been able to adopt the EM-inspired simplifications in modeling, such as linear and time-invariant (LTI) channel characteristics with additive white Gaussian noise, neglecting the effects of interactions and correlations resulting from transmitter and receiver architectures and channel geometry. This leads to a serious discrepancy between theory and practice, as revealed by the initial MC experiments performed with 'macroscale' sensors and dispensers utilized as MC transmitter and receiver, respectively, showing that the nonlinearity and time-variance caused by the operation of transmitter and receiver invalidate the models built upon these assumptions [66], [67].

(p4.9) On the other hand, some research groups have studied MC receivers that rely on ligand-receptor binding reactions, the common molecular sensing method in natural MC [68], [69]. Deterministic models, assuming free diffusion and point transmitter, have been developed for a virtual MC receiver with ligand receptors. Although the consideration of ligand receptors has advanced the accuracy of the models one step further, the employed assumptions about the transmitter and channel strictly limit the applicability of these models. Additionally, stochastic receiver models are developed for FET nanobiosensor-based MC receivers [69]. In [62], a model for MC with 2D biosensor-based receivers in microfluidic channels is provided. However, these initial models also rely on unrealistic assumptions, e.g., equilibrium conditions in ligand-receptor binding reaction, and ignore the implications of the receiver geometry.

(p4.10) Therefore, there is still a need for a bottom-up physical modeling approach originating from first principles, capturing all interactions in practical transmitter, channel and receiver architectures, causing nonlinear and time-varying behavior and unconventional noise and interference that may have decisive impacts on the development of MC techniques for IoBNT. c) Experimental MC System Testbeds and Practical Demonstrations: Testbeds are crucial for validating theoretical models, and practically evaluating the performance of new communication techniques. However, research for building experimental MC systems has just recently gained momentum. Few studies in MC literature have focused on 'macroscale' implementation of MC systems with off-the-shelf components. For example, in [66], [70], the isopropyl alcohol (IPA) is used as airborne information carriers, and commercially available metal oxide semiconductor alcohol sensors are used as the MC receiver. The transmission of molecules is realized by electrically-controlled spray nozzles. In [71], the information is encoded in pH level of the transmitted fluid instead of molecular concentration or type. The acidic and basic fluids are injected into off-the-shelf flexible tubes via peristaltic pumps, and a macroscale pH meter is used as the MC receiver. In another testbed [67], magnetic nanoparticles (MNs) are employed as information carriers, which are injected into off-the-shelf mm-scale flexible tubes by flow pumps, and propagate through convection and diffusion. In this study, for the detection of messages encoded into MN concentration, the authors designed bulky detector coils placed around the tubes coupled with capacitors to form a resonator circuit, which informs about the concentration through a change in inductance and shift in resonance frequency. In this implementation, the designed receiver acts only as an observer, and does not physically interact with the information carrier molecules. The focus of the aforementioned studies is on macroscale MC using commercially available channels, and off-the-shelf sensors or bulky detectors as receivers that are not physically relevant for the application domain of MC and IoBNT.

(p4.11) Recently, the first micro/nanoscale demonstration of an MC system is reported in [72]. In this study, the authors provide the results of MC experiments using a custom-made microfluidic testbed with a graphene FET DNA biosensorbased MC receiver integrated into a microfluidic channel. A commercially available microfluidic flow control system is used to pump single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) molecules of different molecular concentrations into the microfluidic channel. Graphene transducer channel of the receiver functionalized with complementary ssDNAs transduces the realtime concentration of the propagating DNA molecules into electrical signals, which are then used for detection. The authors of the study report nM-level sensitivity and singlebase-pair-mismatch selectivity for the receiver. However, they also note the very low communication rates on the order of 1 bit/minute, mainly resulting from the slow associationdissociation kinetics of DNA hybridization.

(p4.12) Biological MC testbeds have also been reported by many research groups. For example, in [73] and [74], authors implement a microfluidic MC testbed with genetically engineered Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteria acting as receiver nanomachines. The bacteria in these studies have been engineered to respond to certain biomolecules, e.g., N-(3-Oxyhexanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (C6-HSL) and N-Acyl homoserine lactone (AHL), by expressing green fluorescent proteins (GFP), which can later be detected via fluorescent microscopy upon excitation with light of certain wavelengths. Both studies report extremely low communication rates on the order of 1 bit/hour due to the lengthy process of gene expression required for each bit transmission. In [75], the authors prefer a different approach by exploiting the light-responsive proton pump gloeorhodopsin (GR) located in the bacterial membrane to obtain an optically controlled MC transmitter that can export protons into the fluidic channel upon the application of external light stimuli. Accordingly, protons are used as information carriers, which propagate through structural diffusion in water, and are detected by a pH sensor acting as the receiver. Using this testbed, the authors report communication rates on the order of 1 bit/minute. Although biological designs have been demonstrated individually for both MC transmitter and receiver, there is yet to be any practical implementation of an entirely biological testbed for end-to-end MC. d) Development of MC Techniques: The unconventional characteristics of MC, such as discrete nature of information carriers and slow nature of propagation mechanisms, which bear no similarity to conventional EM communications, lead to various challenges, such as high channel memory causing severe ISI, non-Gaussian noise sources, time-variance, and very low communication rates, as revealed by several theoretical investigations [62], [13]. The initial experimental studies performed on both macro-and micro-scales also demonstrated the high level of nonlinearity mainly resulting from the characteristics of sensors utilized as receivers [66], [70], [72]. One can expect that practical MC system implementations for IoBNT applications may face many more challenges, such as molecular interference due to existence of different types of molecules in the channel, environmental fluctuations, such as those in flow velocity and temperature, ionic screening in physiologically relevant environments preventing the receiver from detecting the electrical charges of information molecules, and new noise sources such as electronic 1/f noise in nanomaterial-based MC receivers. Therefore, MC requires new communication methods that account for these peculiarities, and overcome their detrimental effects on the communication performance. Considering physical limitations of the envisioned BNTs, these techniques should be also lowcomplexity and low-energy, i.e., low-molecule-use.
## (s5) B. Bio-Cyber and Nano-Macro Interfaces
(p5.0) Most of the envisioned IoBNT applications require a bidirectional nano-macro interface that can seamlessly connect the intrabody nanonetworks to the external macroscale networks, and vice versa [114], [115]. Considering that the MC is the most promising method for intrabody IoBNT, the interface should be capable of performing the conversion between biochemical signals and other signal forms that can be easily processed and communicated over conventional networks, such as electromagnetic, electrical, and optical. Several techniques are considered for enabling such a nano-macro interface.

(p5.1) 1) Electrical Interfaces: These are the devices that can transduce molecular signals into electrical signals, and vice versa. Electrical biosensors can readily serve the function of converting MC signals into electrical signals (see Section III-A1 for the use of electrical biosensors as MC receivers). The literature on biosensors is vast, and the first practical demonstration of graphene bioFET-based MC receiver shows promising results in terms of sensitivity, selectivity, and reliability in electrical detection of MC signals [72]. However, challenges posed by physiological conditions should be overcome before employing biosensors as electrical interfaces, as detailed in [55], [13]. Conversion from electrical signals into molecular signals is more challenging due to the problem of maintaining continuous molecule generation or supply. Existing electrical stimuli-responsive drug delivery systems rely on limited-capacity reservoirs or polymer chains, e.g., hydrogel, that can store certain types of molecules and release them upon stimulation with a modulated rate. However, these systems are typical irreversible, i.e., they cannot replenish their molecular stock unless they are replaced or reloaded externally [13].

(p5.2) In [116], a redox-based technique is proposed and practically demonstrated for interfacing biological and electronic communication modalities, which can be used to connect a conventional wireless network with engineered bacterial BNTs communicating via molecular signals. The authors introduced the concept of electronically-controlled biological local area network (BioLAN), which includes a biohybrid electrode that transduces information-encoded electronic input signals into biologically-recognized signals in the form of hydrogen peroxide through an oxygen reduction reaction. These signals are recognized by bacterial cells that are attached to the biohybrid electrode, and then biologically propagated across a microbial population with quorum sensing molecules. The overall electronic-biology link is bidirectional such that a microbial subpopulation in the BioLAN generates specific molecules that can be detected by the electrode via an electrochemical oxidation reaction.

(p5.3) Wearable and epidermal tattoo biosensors and transdermal drug-delivery systems, which have attracted a signif-icant research interest for various healthcare applications, can also be targeted for an macro-nano interface that can connect intrabody IoBNT to the external communication networks, with the integration of communication antennas, such as radio-frequency-identification (RFID)-tag-antennas [117], [118], [119], [120]. The challenges lie in the further miniaturization of these devices as well as their continuous operation, since biosensors exposed to physiological fluids suffer contamination, and drug delivery systems require periodic replenishment of their reservoir.

(p5.4) 2) Optical Interfaces: Light represents an alternative modality to interface the intrabody IoBNT with external networks. In the case that MC is utilized in IoBNT, such an optical interface can be realized with the help of light-sensitive proteins and bioluminescent/fluorescent proteins.
## (s7) D. Biocompatibility and Co-existence
(p7.0) Biological processes are complex, and intertwined, often through intricate relationships that are yet to be uncovered. Perturbation of homeostasis maintained by these relationships may result in serious disorders. Even more complicated is the fact that the composition of physiological environment and the interactome may have a large variance among different members of the same species. For example, gut microbiome is known to be composed of different types of bacteria in different people [169]. Therefore, the evaluation of in vivo IoBNT applications in terms of biocompatibility is very challenging, however, must be considered seriously.

(p7.1) Biocompatibility constraints for IoBNT can be viewed from two angles [170]. First, an IoBNT application, along with all the communication methods and devices therein, should not disrupt the homeostasis of the organism it is implemented in. Such disruption might occur when the introduced application has toxic, injurious, or adverse effects on the living cells and biochemical processes. Second, an implanted IoBNT application should be able to operate without its performance being degraded by the co-existing biochemical processes. Performance degradation usually follows when an IoBNT application alters the metabolic activities, because such alternation invokes the immune response that might in turn lead to the rejection of the deployed application. Rejection can occur in the form of expulsion of the IoBNT application from the organism, encapsulation of the BNTs with biological cells and tissues, or inflammation or death of the surrounding tissues. In the case of MC, performance degradation may also happen as a result of cross-talk caused by the natural biochemical signaling.

(p7.2) Biocompatibility concerns both materials used in the physical architecture of BNTs, and the networking, energy harvesting, power transfer, and interfacing processes of the IoBNT. In terms of materials, synthetic biology-based BNTs can be considered highly biocompatible, as they adopt living cells and cellular components as the substrate [24]. Likewise, fluorescent protein-and DNA-based BNTs are also of biological origins, and thus, can be expected to offer similar levels of biocompatibility [108]. However, depending on their exact biological origin and their overall amount in the body, they may still trigger the immune response. For example, a virus-based synthetic BNT can be labeled as foreign agent and attacked by the immune system, unless it is designed to possess a kind of stealth proteins that help escape the immune control [171]. For artificial BNTs based on nanomaterials, biocompatibility is more challenging. There is still no consensus on a universal test of biocompatibility for nanomaterials, leading to conflicting results in the literature about almost all materials. Complexity of the biological systems and reproducibility problem for in vivo and in vitro tests are the main causes of the ongoing ambiguity. Nonetheless, many polymers (e.g., PMMA, Parylene), gold, titanium, and some ceramics are widely known to be biocompatible [172], [173], [174]. Carbon-based materials, e.g., CNT and graphene, have been reported as both biocompatible and toxic in different works, preventing a generalization over these nanomaterials. This is attributed to large variations in their physicochemical properties, e.g., size, shape, surface characteristics, adopted in different works [175], [176]. However, it has been repeatedly reported that their biocompatibility can be modulated with chemical manipulation [175]. For example, surface functionalization with dextran is shown to reduce the toxicity of graphene oxide (GO), hinting at strategies to make carbon-based nanomaterials suitable for safe in vivo applications [177], [176]. Similarly, nanoparticles are shown to be detoxified upon the functionalization of their surfaces with smart/benign ligands [178].
