# Citation: Cecil, K.M. Pediatric Exposures to Neurotoxicants: A Review of Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy Findings

CorpusID: 247309838 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6c1e756074a605251ddf8a455bd65b6fb3cbd40d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6c1e756074a605251ddf8a455bd65b6fb3cbd40d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Neuroimaging studies of pediatric populations exposed to environmental chemicals is an emerging area of research with the objective of uniquely informing the field of public health about brain structure, organization, and function while helping to unravel the contribution of environmental chemicals to the increased prevalence of neurodevelopmental disorders. Environmental epidemiologists traditionally employ cognitive and neurobehavioral assessments to assess the health effects environmental chemicals exert on pediatric brain development. Chemicals with adverse effects are classified as neurotoxicants as they are toxic substances introduced into the environment by human activity that harm the central nervous system. Established neurotoxicants include the heavy metals, air pollutants, some classes of pesticides, and tobacco smoke. As thousands of chemicals are introduced annually, there are limitations on exposure assessments and biomonitoring methods. Suspected neurotoxicants include flame retardants, perfluoroalkyl substances, phthalates, phenols, and polyphenols [1].

(p0.1) Pediatric populations are exposed to known and suspected toxicants from their mothers during gestation and with breast feeding, neonatally from products used for care in the medical setting, postnatally from the contaminated environment (air, soil, and water) that also taints the food ingested along with the products used in food storage and preparation (e.g., cans, pans, and other containers), and with transference from parental occupational exposures brought into the home. The ever-increasing use of consumer products in our homes, such as electronics, furniture, carpeting, cosmetics, etc., also expose children to neurotoxicants. This manuscript highlights only a few of the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)based studies of pediatric populations exploring associations with known or suspected neurotoxicant exposures. While some of these studies evaluate populations with high levels of a single neurotoxicant, for the majority, these exposures do not arise from an "accidental discharge" but instead occur from continual exposure to wide-spread, low-level mixtures found in ordinary living. Several studies employ typically developing, longitudinal pregnancy and birth cohorts with individually monitored low-level, ubiquitous exposures of environmental chemicals. Exposures may be present for a short-term at a key stage in pediatric development or persist as chronic exposures throughout childhood. Bioaccumulation may also contribute to the exposure effects. Traditional study designs quantitatively assess individual exposures employing biomarkers determined from whole blood, serum, urine, hair, and toenails to use in comparison models for statistical analyses. Moreover, analyses from large cohorts having neuroimaging originally designed for other purposes, such as the Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development Study (ABCD Study) are also included in this review. For these types of studies, individual participant biomarkers are often absent. However, using the individual participant home address, research teams can model estimates of lead exposure risk from community public records that detail housing age. Furthermore, spatial temporal models can take air quality monitoring data and home addresses to produce individual estimates of air pollutants for select periods of time. Exposure models have strengths and limitations, just as the neuroimaging acquisitions and analyses have their benefits and pitfalls. While the overarching objective of environmental epidemiology studies is to understand how environmental chemicals impact the brain by assessing cognition (e.g., full scale intelligence quotient (FSIQ)), reading skills, motor skills) and behaviors including mental health outcomes (attention disorders, anxiety, depression, etc.), those incorporating neuroimaging are also indirectly benefiting other research disciplines and clinical care. The variability found in clinical and research data collected within neuroimaging studies of diseases or in normal development may arise in part from the unrecognized adverse effects of maternal and childhood exposures to neurotoxicants. While a neurotoxicant exposure may alter structural volume by a relatively insignificant amount, such as 2% in an individual, when this is applied across a population, it can have a large impact [2,3].
## (s2) Lead Exposure and Intelligence
(p2.0) Cognitive and behavioral assessments of individuals exposed to lead have demonstrated adverse changes in brain function. Several cohort studies from around the world individually demonstrated the adverse effect of environmental lead exposure on FSIQ, as it is sensitive for assessing cognitive function and can be reliably measured during childhood. When combining data into a pooled analysis from existing cohort studies for over 1300 children followed from birth until 10 years of age, Lanphear and co-authors found using a covariate-adjusted log-linear model, a 6.7 FSIQ point decrement associated with an increase in concurrent blood lead concentrations from 2.4 to 30 µg/dL, with the steepest slope for FSIQ loss found for the first 10 µg/dL [18]. Effects this large warranted changes in brain structure, organization, and function, however, lead itself cannot be directly or indirectly detected by MRI methods.
## (s3) Initial Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Evaluations of Children with Elevated Blood Lead Concentrations
(p3.0) Two small studies were among the first pediatric environmental epidemiology studies investigating the effects of childhood lead exposure. Trope et al. examined the frontal cortex of lead-exposed children using high-resolution magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) for evidence of metabolic differences. The initial case-control report pointed to a reduction of N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA) to creatine (Cr) ratio within the middle frontal cortex of a 10-year-old boy with elevated blood lead concentrations (e.g., 51 µg/dL at 38 months) Diagnostics 2022, 12, 641 4 of 21 compared to his healthy 9-year-old cousin living in the same household [4]. A subsequent small cohort study with 16 children having at least one blood lead concentration exceeding 23 µg/dL before the age of 5 years replicated the case-control study finding [5].
## (s6) Neuroimaging of the Dunedin New Zealand Study Evaluating the Effects of Childhood Lead Exposure
(p6.0) Starting in 1972, the Dunedin Study setup a population representative birth cohort in New Zealand. Anatomical and diffusion MRI was acquired for participants at age 45 years who previously had blood lead concentrations assessed at 11 years of age (n = 564 members representing 57% of the original cohort, 54% male) [14]. The mean blood lead concentration at 11 years was 10.99 (SD 4.63) µg/dL. After adjusting for covariates, each 5-µg/dL higher childhood blood lead concentration was significantly associated with 1.19-cm (cm) 2 smaller cortical surface area, 0.10-cm 3 smaller hippocampal volume, lower global fractional anisotropy, and a BrainAGE index 0.77 years older than expected at age 45 years. However, the study authors found no statistically significant associations between blood lead concentration and log-transformed white matter hyperintensity volume or mean cortical thickness [14].
## (s8) Fetal Brain Functional MRI and Lead Exposure
(p8.0) Thomason et al. examined human fetal brain functional MRI data in a cohort (n = 26) to determine neural network connectivity differences between lead-exposed and lead-naive fetuses between 23-and 40-weeks gestation [17]. Prenatal lead exposure was extracted from newborn bloodspots. Those below the detection limit of 1.0 µg/dL were classified as lead-naïve (n = 13), while those above as lead-exposed ((n = 13) mean lead 2.43 µg/dL, range 1-11 µg/dL). Groups were matched for gestational age at birth, gestational age at fetal scan, birth weight, and factors pertaining to fMRI data quality and motion. Neural connectivity patterns differed as fetuses that were classified as lead-naïve demonstrated stronger age-related increases in cross-hemispheric connectivity, such as in the bilateral insular cortices, while the lead-exposed fetuses showed stronger age-related increases in posterior cingulate cortex to lateral prefrontal cortex connectivity, as in the superior frontal gyrus. The findings suggested that the frontoparietal control network and the default mode network enhanced connectivity within the lead-exposed group could contribute to later developmental psychopathology and executive dysfunction.
## (s9) Manganese Characteristics and MRI
(p9.0) Due to its paramagnetic properties, the presence of Mn in the human brain can be quantified with T1-weighted anatomical MRI [24]. Mn shortens the water proton T1 relaxation rate in brain tissue, producing hyperintense signal within sub-structures where Mn is stored.  [27]. Quantitative T1 and T2 mapping sequences were obtained from 10 children with long-term exposure to higher water Mn (median 145 µg/L) and 13 children as age-matched controls with lower water Mn concentrations (median 0.9 µg/L). Three metrics were compared between groups: (1) The signal intensity within the globus pallidus relative to subcortical frontal white matter (known as the standard pallidal index (PI)); (2) the signal intensity within the globus pallidus relative to pericranial muscles; and (3) calculated T1 relaxation time. Children exposed to higher water Mn concentrations had lower PI referenced to pericranial muscles and higher T1 relaxation time compared to those in the lower Mn water concentration group. The standard PI failed to show any differences between the higher and lower water Mn groups [27].
## (s10) Italian Adolescents, Manganese, and Resting State Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(p10.0) De Water et al. investigated the associations between prenatal, early postnatal, and childhood dentine Mn concentrations and intrinsic functional connectivity (iFC) for adolescents enrolled in a longitudinal cohort from northern Italy [29]. The study team estimated prenatal, early postnatal, and childhood Mn concentrations in deciduous teeth using laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry. Dentine Mn concentrations (Mn:Calcium ratio) were highest during the prenatal period and significantly diminished throughout childhood. Resting state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) from 14 adolescents (12-18 years; 6 girls) was post-processed with seed-based correlation analyses featuring six subcortical seeds (pallidum, putamen, left, and right caudate) and one cortical seed (bilateral middle frontal gyrus) from Harvard-Oxford atlases. With linear and quadratic correlations between log-transformed Mn concentrations and seed-based iFC (Bonferronicorrected), controlling for either socio-economic status, sex or age, the study reported postnatal Mn concentrations were associated with increased iFC between the middle frontal gyrus and medial prefrontal cortex, however, decreased iFC between the right putamen and pre-and postcentral gyrus. Summarizing the preliminary work, the study found early postnatal Mn concentrations are associated with increased iFC within cognitive control brain areas, but decreased iFC between motor areas in adolescents [29].
## (s12) Pre-and Postnatal Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons and Morphological MRI in Urban Children
(p12.0) Peterson and colleagues evaluated 40 urban children from New York City with anatomical MRI between ages 7 and 9 years [30]. Pre-and postnatal PAH exposures were compared with morphological measures that indexed local volumes on the surface of the brain and the white matter surface upon removal of cortical gray matter. The study did not find an association between individual PAH exposure during the third trimester of pregnancy and any measure of cortical thickness. However, they reported an association between higher PAH exposure during the third trimester of pregnancy and a lower white matter surface, almost exclusively to the left hemisphere of the brain. The study authors observed prenatal exposure to PAH air pollutants contributed to slower processing speed, attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder symptoms, and externalizing problems in urban children and disrupted the development of left hemisphere white matter, whereas postnatal PAH exposure contributed to additional disturbances in the development of white matter in dorsal prefrontal regions [30].
## (s13) Barcelona Schools Study of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
(p13.0) Mortamais et al. estimated outdoor and indoor PAH exposures in Spanish schools for comparison with basal ganglia and whole brain volumes in children (n = 242, 49% female, from 35 schools) [31]. An increase of approximately 70 pg/m 3 in the concentration of indoor or outdoor benzo[a]pyrene in the school environment was significantly associated with a reduction corresponding to almost 2% of the mean caudate nucleus volume in the study population of children aged 8 to 12 years adjusted for intracranial volume, age, sex, maternal education and socioeconomic vulnerability index at home [31]. Benzo[a]pyrene levels were below the legislative annual target level established by the European Union.
## (s14) Morphological MRI of Children and Adolescents from The Netherlands Exposed to Air Pollution
(p14.0) Guxens et al. evaluated if air pollution exposures during fetal life altered brain morphology and if the alterations mediate the exposures relationships with cognitive function in school-age children [32]. Air pollution modeled by the team using land-use regression models included nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ), coarse particles (difference between particles with aerodynamic diameters < 10 µm and <2.5 µm), fine particles (particles with aerodynamic diameters < 2.5 µm), and absorbance of fine particles (proxy for elemental carbon). Children (n = 783, ages 6-10 years) from a population-based birth cohort in Rotterdam, The Netherlands, born between 2002 and 2006, and exposed to higher PM concentrations during fetal life demonstrated thinner cortex in several brain regions of both hemispheres, with more associations found in the right hemisphere. The team determined the cerebral cortex of the precuneus region in the right hemisphere was 0.045 mm (mm) thinner for each 5-µg/m 3 increase in PM 2.5 . The reduced cerebral cortex in the precuneus and rostral middle frontal regions partially mediated the association between exposure to PM and impaired inhibitory control. However, exposures were not associated with global brain volumes [32]. Their models were adjusted for parental educational levels, monthly household income, parental countries of birth, parental ages, maternal prenatal smoking, maternal prenatal alcohol use, parental body mass indices and heights, maternal parity, family status, maternal psychological distress, maternal FSIQ, and child gender, age, and genetic ancestry. Lubczynska et al. also using participants from the Rotterdam cohort, however, imaged as pre-adolescents (n = 3133, 9-12 years old) with additional types and greater exposure details of air pollutants modeled during pregnancy and childhood, also found no associations with exposures and global brain volumes [33]. However, the study found when using single pollutant analyses, multiple associations between higher pregnancy and childhood pollutant concentrations with smaller corpus callosum, smaller hippocampus, larger amygdala (pregnancy only), and larger cerebellum (pregnancy only). Higher gestational exposure to air pollutants was associated with smaller cortical thickness in the right postcentral gyrus, right rostral middle frontal gyrus, and the left lingual gyrus, while higher childhood exposure was associated with predominantly larger cortical surface area within the right pre-and post-central gyri, the left precuneus and calcarine cortex [33]. Models were adjusted for parental educational levels, household income, parental countries of birth, parental ages, maternal prenatal smoking, maternal alcohol consumption during pregnancy, maternal parity, marital status, and parental psychiatric symptoms, parental heights and body mass indices, maternal intelligence quotient, child's genetic ancestry, child's gender and child's age at the scanning session. Subcortical grey matter, corpus callosum, cerebellum, and subcortical brain volumes were additionally adjusted for intracranial volume.
## (s15) Morphological MRI and Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of Cincinnati Children Exposed to Traffic Related Air Pollution
(p15.0) Beckwith et al. examined whether childhood TRAP exposure is associated with regional differences in brain volume and cortical thickness among children enrolled in a longitudinal cohort study based in Cincinnati, Ohio USA [34]. Anatomical T1-weighted MRI from a nested subset of 12-year-old participants (n = 135) characterized with either higher or lower levels of TRAP exposure during their first year of life was analyzed with voxel-based morphometry to examine group differences in regional brain volume, and with separate analyses, changes in cortical thickness. Smaller regional gray matter volumes were found in the left pre-and post-central gyri, the cerebellum, and inferior parietal lobe of participants in the higher TRAP exposure group relative to participants with lower exposure. Reduced cortical thickness was observed in participants with higher exposure relative to those with lower exposure, primarily in sensorimotor regions of the brain including the pre-and post-central gyri and the paracentral lobule, but also within the frontal and limbic regions [34]. These findings are shown in Figure 6. Age at MRI examination, birth weight, participant FSIQ, census tract deprivation status at birth, and race were selected for inclusion in the final model. Total intracranial volume was also included as a covariate for volumetric analyses. Figure 6. Imaging findings acquired from a 3 Tesla scanner at age 12 years from the Cincinnati Childhood Allergy and Air Pollution Study (CCAAPS) comparing high and low groups based upon estimated element carbon attributable to traffic (ECAT) exposure in the first year of life. Left, regions illustrated in red and yellow on brain renderings oriented with different views demonstrate regional reduced cortical thickness. Right, regional gray matter volume loss illustrated across the brain in a sagittal view (top) and axial view showing cerebellar region (bottom) associated with the high ECAT group compared to the low ECAT group. Clusters were corrected for multiple comparisons using threshold free cluster enhancement with a familywise error rate of p < 0.05. Color bar representslog (p) value from 1.4 to 2.6.
## (s17) The ABCD Study, Morphological MRI and PM 2.5 Exposure
(p17.0) Cserbik and colleagues examined the cross-sectional associations between concurrent PM 2.5 exposures, hemisphere-and regional-specific differences in brain morphometry and measures of cognition in 10,343 children (ages 9-10 years) who participated in the ABCD Study across the United States [36]. All models were adjusted for age, sex, ethnicity, neighborhood quality, parental higher education, total family income, parental employment status, imaging device manufacturer, handedness and intracranial volume for volumetric measures, including random intercepts for ABCD site and familial relationship. Models were scaled for PM 2.5 using a fixed increment of 5 µg/m 3 . Annual residential PM 2.5 exposure was associated with hemispheric-specific differences in gray matter across cortical regions of the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes as well as subcortical and cere-bellum brain regions. There were hemispheric-specific associations between PM 2.5 exposures and cortical surface area in 9/31 regions, cortical thickness in 22/27 regions; and volumes of the thalamus, pallidum, and nucleus accumbens. The analyses revealed regional specific associations between PM 2.5 exposure and cortical thickness of the frontal lobe, temporal lobe, and basal ganglia as well as differences in the directionality of associations by hemisphere, some smaller, others larger. An increase of 5-µg/m 3 was associated with differences in cortical thickness on the magnitude ranging from 0.01 to 0.04 mm, suggesting that continual exposure to PM 2.5 during childhood and adolescence could substantially impact an individual's brain growth trajectories with potentially lifelong consequences. However, the team found neither significant associations between PM 2.5 and task performance on individual measures of cognition nor evidence that sex moderated the observed associations [36]. Figure 6. Imaging findings acquired from a 3 Tesla scanner at age 12 years from the Cincinnati Childhood Allergy and Air Pollution Study (CCAAPS) comparing high and low groups based upon estimated element carbon attributable to traffic (ECAT) exposure in the first year of life. Left, regions illustrated in red and yellow on brain renderings oriented with different views demonstrate regional reduced cortical thickness. Right, regional gray matter volume loss illustrated across the brain in a sagittal view (top) and axial view showing cerebellar region (bottom) associated with the high ECAT group compared to the low ECAT group. Clusters were corrected for multiple comparisons using threshold free cluster enhancement with a familywise error rate of p < 0.05. Color bar representslog (p) value from 1.4 to 2.6.
## (s20) Prenatal Chlorpyrifos Exposure and Morphometric MRI in New York Children
(p20.0) Rauh and colleagues investigated associations between prenatal chlorpyrifos (CPF) exposure and brain morphology using T1-weighted anatomical MRI in 40 children (ages 5-11 years) recruited from an urban, New York City, community-based cohort [37]. Classifying exposure groups by umbilical cord blood CPF concentrations, twenty high-exposure children were compared with 20 low-exposure children for morphological features. After adjusting for age and height, brain sizes were not significantly different between the groups. However, high-exposure children showed frontal and parietal cortical thinning and revealed an inverse dose-response relationship between CPF and cortical thickness. Children in the higher exposure group demonstrated regional enlargements of the cerebral surface area in the superior temporal, posterior middle temporal, and inferior postcentral gyri bilaterally, and in the superior frontal gyrus, gyrus rectus, cuneus, and precuneus along the mesial wall of the right hemisphere [37]. These regions support cognitive and behavioral processes including attention, receptive language, social cognition, reward, emotional, and inhibitory control.
## (s21) Prenatal Organophosphate Exposure and Morphometric MRI in Generation R Study Subset
(p21.0) Mother-child pairs (n = 518) participating in the Generation R Study, a populationbased birth cohort from Rotterdam, the Netherlands, were studied to determine whether maternal organophosphate (OP) pesticides were associated with child brain morphology [38]. Maternal urine concentrations of OP pesticides collected throughout pregnancy were analyzed for 6 dialkylphosphates (DAPs) including 3 dimethyl (DM) and 3 diethyl (DE) alkyl phosphate metabolites. Anatomical T1-weighted MRI and DTI were acquired when children were between the ages of 9 and 12 years. Brain volumes, surface-based cortical thickness and cortical surface area, and diffusion metrics, FA and MD, were compared with prenatal OP exposures. DM and DE metabolite concentrations were not associated with brain volumes, cortical thickness, and cortical surface area. However, a ten-fold increase in averaged DM metabolite concentrations across pregnancy was associated with lower FA and higher MD. Similar associations were observed for DE concentrations [38]. The models were adjusted for age of child at time of imaging and sex, and maternal age, ethnicity (Dutch, other-western, and non-western), education, income, marital status, alcohol consumption during pregnancy, body mass index, parity, and smoking during pregnancy.
## (s22) Prenatal Organophosphate Exposure and Motor Inhibition Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(p22.0) Binter et al. evaluated the association of prenatal OP exposure on inhibitory control employing an fMRI motor inhibition (Go/No-Go task) paradigm [39]. Ninety-five children (ages 10-12 years) from a longitudinal birth cohort completed the fMRI and had maternal OP concentrations available for comparisons. OP exposure was assessed by measuring six DAP metabolites in the urine of women in early pregnancy (<19 weeks gestation). Concentrations were categorized into levels of exposure: low (reference), moderate, or high. Task performance was characterized by average response latency, commission rate, and composite performance score. The models were adjusted for maternal fruit/vegetable consumption and the duration of breastfeeding. Moderate levels of DAP were associated with a decreased commission rate indicating improved performance. Increasing levels of DM and DE were associated with decreased brain activity in the left inferior and bilateral superior frontal regions during successful inhibition. The investigators did not observe any differential activation related to inhibitory demands [39].
## (s24) ETS, Multimodal MRI, Cognitive Control Circuitry in Urban Children
(p24.0) To evaluate the effects of ETS exposure, Margolis et al. recruited from a prospective longitudinal urban birth cohort, selecting non-smoking mothers and their children ages 7-9 years [40]. Prenatal maternal and postnatal child urine samples were analyzed for cotinine concentrations. Those with concentrations between 0.05 and 0.99 ng/mL were regarded as non-exposed to ETS in comparison to those with concentrations between 1 and 16 ng/mL considered ETS-exposed. The children completed anatomical T1 weighted MRI (n = 41, 24 ETS-exposed) and fMRI using the Simon Spatial Incompatibility Task (n = 30, 10-exposed). Compared to non-exposed children, prenatally ETS-exposed children had smaller left and right thalamic and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) volumes, and increased activation in the IFG during the resolution of cognitive conflict measured with task fMRI. Reduced thalamic volume was associated with increased IFG activation and attention problems. Post-hoc analyses of postnatal exposure were not associated with brain measures when prenatal exposure was included in the model. Margolis et al. suggested that maternal ETS exposure during pregnancy posited deleterious effects on the structure and function of cognitive control circuitry which impacted attentional capacity in school-age children [40].
## (s25) ETS, Go-No-Go fMRI
(p25.0) Using an event-related fMRI design, Bennett et al. compared the brain function of ETS-exposed (n = 7) and unexposed (n = 11) 12-year-olds during a Go/No-Go response inhibition task [41]. Exposure grouping was derived from maternal and child self-report. ETS-exposed children showed greater activation within many regions, especially the left frontal, right occipital, and bilateral temporal and parietal lobes compared with activation patterns in unexposed children. However, children not exposed to ETS showed greater activation in the cerebellum and the occipital lobe. ETS exposure was associated with a different pattern of brain activation among children in early adolescence while controlling for potential confounding factors [41].
## (s26) Flame Retardants
(p26.0) Flame retardants are chemicals applied to consumer and industrial products such as home, school and office furnishings, electronics, building materials, and other materials to prevent or impede the growth of fire. These chemicals can contaminate the air, water, and soil during production, leak from products into dust to be handled and inhaled and become airborne with electronic waste. Emerging evidence suggests these chemicals adversely impact health through endocrine and thyroid disruption, which can also affect fetal and child development, neurologic, and immune function. Further studies indicate reproductive toxicity and cancer linkage to flame retardants. These chemicals are classified into categories based on whether they contain boron, bromine, chlorine, metal, nitrogen, or phosphorus.

(p26.1) de Water and colleagues used rs-fMRI to examine associations between prenatal polybrominated diphenyl ether (PBDE) concentrations measured in maternal serum and intrinsic functional network organization in 5-year-old children (n = 34), adjusting for sex, maternal education, and home environment [42]. Children with higher prenatal PBDE serum concentrations showed increased global efficiency of brain areas involved in memory (hippocampus) and visual attention (lingual gyrus, inferior and superior occipital gyrus, posterior inferior and middle temporal gyrus), and decreased global efficiency of brain areas involved in sensorimotor functions (precentral gyrus) and visual (middle occipital gyrus), and auditory processing (superior temporal gyrus). Children with higher prenatal PBDE serum concentrations showed more parent-reported executive function problems, including poor inhibition and shifting. Children who showed increased global efficiency of brain areas involved in visual attention, specifically the lingual gyrus and inferior occipital gyrus presented with more parent-reported executive function problems [42].
