# Mitochondria-Targeted Nanocarriers Promote Highly Efficient Cancer Therapy: A Review

CorpusID: 243990244 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/edfcb67bd7866eccda8e41ca12b88cbc1d451fe8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/edfcb67bd7866eccda8e41ca12b88cbc1d451fe8)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s1) MITOCHONDRIA AND MITOCHONDRIA-TARGETED NANOCARRIERS Introduction of Mitochondria-Targeted Multifunctional Nanoparticles
(p1.0) Mitochondria contain the inner mitochondrial membrane, intermembrane space, and outer mitochondrial membrane (Friedman and Nunnari, 2014). Each membrane has a distinct protein population (Porporato et al., 2018). Mitochondria are energy-producing structures and play the major part for cells' aerobic respiration (Bhandary et al., 2012). Thus, mitochondria are called the "powerhouse of the cell" (Peixoto et al., 2010). They play important roles in apoptosis regulation, cell signaling, and energy metabolism in drug-induced cancer cell death and are thus considered targets in cancer chemotherapy (Grad et al., 2001). Many scholars have reviewed the development of chemotherapeutic drugs for mitochondria in fighting cancer (Costantini et al., 2000;Wen et al., 2013;Wu et al., 2018a).
## (s2) Lipophilic Cations-Based Mitochondria-Targeted Nanocarriers
(p2.0) At the beginning of the 1960s, liposomes were discovered, and in the 1970s they were proposed as a drug carrier system (Bangham et al., 1965a;Bangham et al., 1965b). Liposomes are currently considered as the archetype of all pharmaceutical nanocarriers. These nanovesicles can sequester lipophilic drugs in their phospholipid bilayer membranes and hydrophilic drug molecules in their aqueous inner space (Weissig, 2012). Liposome-based systems have the ability to deliver agents to the mitochondria and treat cancer. Using liposomes as a vehicle has many advantages in drug delivery such as many ranges of morphologies, ability to envelope, compositions, protection of types of therapeutic biomolecules, differential release character, lack of immunologic response, and low cost (Tros de Ilarduya et al., 2010). Kawamura et al. (2020) developed the MITO-Porter system which can be used to deliver genes, proteins, nucleic acids, and small molecules to the mitochondria specifically through membrane fusion.
## (s4) MITOCHONDRIA-TARGETING NANOSYSTEMS FOR CANCER THERAPY Mitochondria-Targeted Nanocarriers in PDT
(p4.0) Compared with conventional therapeutic strategies for cancer treatment, PDT has characteristics of high selectivity, rapid action, and no severe side effects (Hilf, 2007;Yang et al., 2019). PDT is a safe treatment which relies on oxygen to produce cytotoxic ROS under visible light and photosensitizers (PS) in cells (Castano et al., 2006). PS can combine together to induce cancer cell death (Jeena et al., 2019). Under light irradiation, PS can be excited and can transfer energy to molecular oxygen to generate ROS. In the tumor microenvironment, oxygen (O 2 ) can convert into singlet oxygen ( 1 O 2 ) and cause damage to cancer cells (Ethirajan However, there exists a barrier for PDT of behaving actively in the cancer area. The tumor microenvironment is always hypoxic, thus hampering the production of toxic singlet oxygen. Inhibition of mitochondrial respiration can increase the production of intramitochondrial oxygen, thus enhancing the efficiency of PDT. Therefore, PDT becomes hotter if mitochondria are targeted compared with subcellular targets or any other cells. PDT agents can be modified with metal complexes which have lipophilic cations, IR-780-based PS, or cyanine (Jeena et al., 2019). Combination of PS with cationic peptides is the most common adopted method to direct the PS inside the mitochondria of the cell.
## (s5) Mitochondria-Targeted Nanocarriers in Chemotherapy
(p5.0) Chemotherapy is extraordinarily critical in systemic therapy of cancer therapy. Chemotherapeutics such as doxorubicin (Dox), cisplatin (Pt), and their combinations are commonly used in cancer therapy . However, chemotherapy has its own shortcomings such as drug resistance of cancer cells, lowtargeting selectivity to malignant areas, and some adverse side Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org November 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 784602 effects to healthy tissues . Thus, it is significant to circumvent obstacles and improve the efficiency of chemotherapy. There are many nanosized chemotherapeutic formulations, which include liposomes, polymeric micelles, and albumin NPs which have been used in different stages of clinical trial (Mehra et al., 2015). For example, Abraxane and Doxil have been demonstrated to improve the patients' safety and decrease the toxic side effects. Mitochondria-targeted anticancer agents can conjugate mitochondria-targeting moieties, such as TPP, cationic peptides, or pyridinium, with anticancer drugs such as doxorubicin, chlorambucil, cisplatin, and camptothecin (Jeena et al., 2019).

(p5.1) TPP is known as a mitochondrial targeting ligand. Studies showed that doxorubicin (Dox) and TPP-linked cisplatin (Pt) can disrupt mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), raising the levels of the mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mtROS) and leading to mitochondrial dysfunction (Jin et al., 2018;Babak et al., 2019). However, some anticancer effects cannot be achieved by delivering traditional drugs to mitochondria (Luo et al., 2021). Luo et al. (2021) reported new activatable mitochondria targeting organoarsenic prodrugs by incorporating traditional DNA targeting chemotherapy drugs with mitochondria-targeting organoarsenicals through cleavable linkers for treating cancer effectively ( Figure 6). Under the help of the TPP-targeting group, prodrugs can accumulate in the mitochondria selectively. The prodrugs were able to release trivalent organoarsenicals and chemotherapeutics upon reduction, leading to mitochondriamediated apoptosis in cancer (Luo et al., 2021). Han et al. (2015) established a self-delivery system PpIX-PEG-(KLAKLAK) 2 which was designated as PPK. PPK has a high drug loading ability and capacity in reactive oxygen species. The in situ generation of reactive oxygen species in mitochondria could enhance PDT efficacy through a long-time irradiation, thus leading to cell death and decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential. They demonstrated that PPK with a dual-stage light irradiation can be a good nanoplatform to treat cancer. FIGURE 6 | Illustration mechanism of underlying mitochondria targeting organoarsenic prodrugs for bioenergetic cancer therapy (Luo et al., 2021).
## (s6) Mitochondria-Targeted Nanocarriers in Combined Immunotherapy
(p6.0) Immunotherapy can boost the protective immune responses and emerge as a promising treatment in cancer (Topalian et al., 2015). On the one hand, immunotherapy can harness the immune system to achieve an anticancer effect. On the other hand, it engendered a long-term memory effect and had characteristics of anti-relapse. However, immunotherapy of cancer faces challenges of having low tumor immunogenicity and an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (Turley et al., 2015). Dendritic cell (DC)-based cancer immunotherapy was also limited by the low potency of generating tumor antigen-specific T cell responses. Marrache et al. (2013) demonstrated that mitochondria-targeted nanoparticle-based light-activated breast cancer cell antigens have the potency of stimulating DCs for cancer immunotherapy (Figure 7). Mitochondrial antigen presentation was considered as a reason for autoimmune disease development. Matheoud et al. (2016) showed that Parkin and Pink 1 proteins are in adaptive immune responses and demonstrated autoimmune mechanisms to be possible which involved Parkinson disease (PD) antigen presentation. This finding was the first to link a neurodegenerative disease like PD to autoimmunity. Voo et al. gave a mitochondrial immune target of CD4 + T cells which expanded from a melanoma patient. By high-dose IL-2 from this patient, the tumor-infiltrating T cells can be expanded, demonstrating a peptide which translated from another open reading frame of the mitochondrial cytochrome b (cytb) (Yang et al., 2014). Pierini et al. established a cancer vaccine which was based on using aberrant mitochondrial protein and isolating it from the tumor as an important immunotherapeutic strategy (Yang et al., 2014;Pierini et al., 2015). It was the first vaccine which based on mtDNA-mutated peptides and derived from tumor cells that induced an immune response.

(p6.1) All these studies indicated cancer patients who bear mutations in mitochondrial DNA. Tumor-associated mitochondrial antigens meet the criteria of an ideal tumor-associated antigen (Pustylnikov et al., 2018). The implementation of the immune system as the mechanism in targeting unhealthy mitochondria within cancer cells attracts researchers' interest.
## (s7) Mitochondria-Targeted Nanocarriers in sonodynamic Therapy
(p7.0) Sonodynamic therapy (SDT) is an excellent treatment for cancer; it utilizes ultrasound (US) irradiation and sonosensitizers to damage cancer cells (Qian et al., 2016;Pan et al., 2018;Zhu et al., 2018b). SDT is able to target the zones of lesion precisely and thus will not damage surrounding normal tissues at the same time (Qian et al., 2016;Pan et al., 2018;Zhu et al., 2018b). Ultrasound is a cheap method with a nonradioactive stimulus mechanical wave and has miniinvasiveness and deep penetration of tissue. Sonosensitizers can transfer energy upon a high-energy input to oxygen molecules and then generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) subsequently, leading to further cytotoxicity for therapeutic purposes (Chen et al., 2014). What is more, US can directly induce cancer cell apoptosis itself (Qian et al., 2016).
