# Fair Division of Indivisible Goods: A Survey *

CorpusID: 246863533 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/22c77744d7f4d514340b386a37daad92a166944b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/22c77744d7f4d514340b386a37daad92a166944b)

Fields: Economics, Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s1) EFX for restricted valuations:
(p1.0) In [Plaut and Roughgarden, 2020], it was also shown that EFX allocations exist and can be computed in polynomial time when all agents agree on the ordering of the goods with respect to their values. For instances where there are only two distinct possible values that an agent may have for each good, Amanatidis et al. [2021a] showed that EFX allocations exist and can be efficiently computed for any number of agents; later, Garg and Murhekar [2021] showed that this is possible even in conjunction with PO. In fact, Amanatidis et al. [2021a] also demonstrated an interesting connection between EFX and MNW allocations for bi-valued instances, by showing that MNW implies EFX. A similar result was later shown by Babaioff et al. [2021b] for general valuations with binary (i.e., 0 or 1) marginals.

(p1.1) Here, it is instructive to mention that in the related literature, the requirement that the inequality must hold only for positively-valued goods in the definition of Caragiannis et al. [2019b] stated above is o en dropped. is stronger version of EFX is usually called EFX 0 [Kyropoulou et al., 2020]. In the case of binary valuations, a special case of bi-valued instances, the distinction makes a difference but in more general se ings, the existence and computation of EFX 0 allocations can be reduced to the existence and computation of EFX allocations; see [Amanatidis et al., 2021a] for a related discussion. It is easy to see that envy-freeness implies EFX 0 , which implies EFX, which in turn implies EF1.
## (s3) Maximin Share Fairness (MMS)
(p3.0) Besides the two additive relaxations of envy-freeness discussed so far, an extensively studied fairness notion in discrete fair division is maximin share fairness, also introduced by Budish [2011]. e notion can be seen as a generalization of the rationale of the well-known cut-and-choose protocol, which is known to guarantee an envy-free partition of a divisible resource. Here the goal is to give to each agent i goods of value at least as much as her maximin share µ n i (M ), which is the maximum value this agent could guarantee for herself by partitioning the goods into n disjoint bundles and keeping the worst of them. As such, it is a relaxation of proportionality. Example 3. Returning to the instance of Example 1, we can see that µ 3 1 (M ) = 6, since it is not possible to partition the items into three sets with strictly more value, but 6 is guaranteed by the partition {g 1 }, {g 2 , g 3 , g 4 }, {g 5 }. Similarly, µ 3 2 (M ) = 7 and µ 3 3 (M ) = 6. erefore, B 1 = {g 4 , g 5 }, B 2 = {g 2 , g 3 }, B 3 = {g 1 }, from Example 2, is an MMS allocation, but A 1 = {g 3 , g 4 }, A 2 = {g 2 , g 5 }, A 3 = {g 1 }, from Example 1, is only a 2/3-MMS allocation as agent a 1 gets a bundle of value 4 = 2/3 · µ 3 1 (M ) (see also below).
## (s6) Open Problem 7. Does an EFR allocation always exist?
(p6.0) PMMS and GMMS: Several variations of MMS have also been considered. Caragiannis et al. [2019b] defined the notion of pairwise maximin share fairness (PMMS) according to which, for every pair of agents i and j, i's value for A i must be at least as much as the maximum she could obtain by redistributing the set of goods in A i ∪ A j into two bundles and picking the worst of them. In other words, instead of requiring the maximin share guarantee to be achieved for the set of all agents, PMMS requires that it is achieved for any pair of agents. Despite the apparent similarities in the definitions of PMMS and MMS, Caragiannis et al. [2019b] showed that their exact versions are actually incomparable. e main open problem here is the following.
## (s9) Fair Division with Strategic Agents
(p9.0) Most of the papers mentioned so far, studied the problem from an algorithmic perspective under the assumption that the agents are non-strategic. In the strategic version of the problem, an agent may intentionally misreport how she values the goods in order to end up with a be er bundle. is introduces an additional layer of difficulty, as the goal is to produce fair allocations according to the true values of the agents, while their declarations might be far from truth. is version of the problem has been considered mostly from a mechanism design without monetary transfers perspective, in which the utility of an agent is defined as her (true) value for her bundle.

(p9.1) A first direction was the design of truthful mechanisms (i.e., mechanisms where no agent has an incentive to lie) that are also fair. Caragiannis et al. [2009], showed that no truthful mechanism for two agents and two goods can always output allocations of minimum envy. Amanatidis et al. [2016] revisited the problem for the case of two agents and any number of goods, and showed that no truthful mechanism can always output α-MMS allocations, for α > 2/m. A characterization of truthful mechanisms for two agents, showing that truthfulness and fairness are incompatible (in the sense that there is no truthful mechanism with bounded fairness guarantees under any meaningful fairness notion) was provided by Amanatidis et al. [2017a].

(p9.2) is impossibility, however, does not apply to restricted cases. Halpern et al. [2020] showed that for binary valuations, there is a polynomial-time truthful mechanism that produces EF1 and PO allocations, and Babaioff et al. [2021a] showed an analogous result with respect to MMS. In fact, Babaioff et al. [2021a] also showed that for the submodular analog of binary valuations, there is a truthful mechanism that always outputs EFX allocations.

(p9.3) More recently, the aforementioned impossibility results led to a different direction, where the focus was shi ed to the stable states of non-truthful mechanisms. In particular, Amanatidis et al. [2021b] studied mechanisms that always have pure Nash equilibria, and showed that every allocation that corresponds to an equilibrium of Round Robin is EF1 with respect to the (unknown) true values of the agents.
## (s12) Group Fairness
(p12.0) In the model we discussed in the main part of the survey, each agent is assumed to be unrelated to other agents. However, there are applications where it makes more sense for agents to be grouped together (e.g., each group might correspond to a family). Several models capturing scenarios along these lines have been considered in the literature. Suksompong [2018] focused on a se ing where each agent derives full value from all the goods allocated to the group she belongs to, and showed bounds on the best possible approximation of MMS. Kyropoulou et al. [2020] considered EF1 and EFX allocations in the same se ing, as well as in se ings with dynamic group formation; some of these results were later improved by Manurangsi and Suksompong [2021] using ideas from discrepancy theory. Segal-Halevi and Suksompong [2019] focused on the case of democratic fairness, where the goal is to compute allocations that are considered fair (e.g., satisfying EF1) by a high fraction of the agents in each group. A different model was studied by Conitzer et al. [2019], where goods given to a group are then distributed among its members, and thus the agents derive value only from the goods allocated personally to them.
## (s14) Randomness in Fair Division
(p14.0) Until very recently there were barely any works on randomized algorithms for discrete fair division. is is partially due to the strong general preference for deterministic algorithms / mechanisms within the Computational Social Choice community (which is well-justified in many se ings, yet such a discussion is beyond the scope of this survey), but also due to the nature of the problem itself. On one hand, randomness cannot help with achieving ex-post fairness, i.e., fairness in each resulting allocation, for any of the deterministic notions mentioned herein. On the other hand, achieving ex-ante envy-freeness, i.e., envy freeness with respect to the expected utilities, is trivial; just allocate all the goods to a single agent uniformly at random. Freeman et al. [2020] proposed an algorithm that achieves ex-ante envy-freeness but is also ex-post EF1, i.e., all the possible allocations it outputs are deterministically EF1. Aziz [2020] gave a simpler algorithm with the same fairness guarantees that also satisfies a weak efficiency property. Finally, in a somewhat different direction,  studied interim envy-freeness, a notion which lies between ex-ante and ex-post envy-freeness.
## (s15) Subsidies
(p15.0) As we saw in Section 6.2, even in a game-theoretic se ing no monetary transfers are allowed in fair division problems. Indeed, arbitrary payments would significantly alter the flavor of these problems and o en go against their motivation. A recent line of work, however, considers the question of whether it is possible to pay the agents just a small amount of money (subsidy) on top of a given allocation in order to make it envyfree (when the subsidies are also taken into consideration). Allocations for which this can be done are called envy-freeable. Halpern and Shah [2019], who introduced the problem, showed that the total subsidy needed in order to turn an envy-freeable allocation to envy-free is at most (n − 1)mv * , where v * is the maximum value any agent has for any good. is upper bound was later improved to (n − 1)v * by [Brustle et al., 2020]. More recently, Caragiannis and Ioannidis [2021] provided approximation guarantees and hardness results for computing an envy-freeable allocation that minimizes the total amount of subsidies.
## (s16) Fair Division under Constraints
(p16.0) Depending on the application, some allocations may not be feasible due to various restrictions, such as connectivity, cardinality, separation, or budget constraints. Such models have recently a racted the attention of the community. Rather than referring to specific works, we point the reader to the survey of Suksompong [2021] which discusses this part of the literature in detail.
