# SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS AND META-ANALYSES Machine learning to guide clinical decision-making in abdominal surgery-a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 240157389 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/be4203eeb80b9d371fe20cbb42731c9499c4404e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/be4203eeb80b9d371fe20cbb42731c9499c4404e)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s2) Identification and selection of studies
(p2.0) We performed a systematic literature search to assess the evidence of ML's use for CDM in abdominal surgery. To establish a relevant query, the PICO framework was applied [13]. Insufficient evidence in CDM in abdominal surgery depicts the addressed problem. We aimed to evaluate ML's use as intervention and compared it to conventional decision-making. Outcome of interest was a more precise determination of either benefits or risks of abdominal operations for a subsequently more personalized CDM. Assessed risks included mortality and morbidity and benefits were assumed if a desired effect of a given operation (i.e., cancer survival, cure of disease, positive effect of surgery) was given. A distinct search algorithm was applied using the PubMed database, whereas the search was guided by The PRISMA Statement for systematic reviews [14]. The query was conducted January 2021 by inserting the keywords "surgery machine learning" into PubMed. Each article was processed using a standardized procedure: We considered articles between 1 st of January 1990 and 31 st of December 2020 that were published in peer-reviewed journals in the English language. Reviews, comments, and any other articles representing no original research were excluded. Articles were then screened for their contribution to CDM in abdominal surgery, whereas only articles that aimed for assessment of perioperative risk or benefits for surgery were included. At first, titles were analyzed and in case of interest associated abstracts were extracted and examined. Secondly, full-text review was undertaken whenever the abstract fulfilled our criteria and addressed the search question. References of every article included were scrutinized for additional research studies of interest. Figure 1 shows the PRISMA flow diagram of our query.
## (s5) Study characteristics and design
(p5.0) Our search resulted in 4,396 records, of which a total of 47 articles were included in the final literature review process. A large fraction of articles (N = 1,708) was excluded for non-English language or lack of original research. Furthermore, 2,627 records were excluded because they were not addressing topics in abdominal surgery (e.g., neuro-, cardiothoracic-, trauma-, orthopedic-, and ENT-surgery). After fulltext review, fourteen articles were excluded since articles did not investigate the assessment of risks or benefits of surgery. From 1990 until today, the number of studies regarding ML in abdominal surgery has increased with significant rise in the past decade (see Fig. 2). Articles were mainly published in journals of the following medical areas: surgery (N = 19, 40.4%), internal medicine (N = 8, 17.0%), bioinformatics (N = 8, 17.0%), anesthesia (N = 3, 6.4%), and others (N = 9, 19.1%). To provide an overview of encompassed fields of diagnosis, those publications were grouped into the following clinical domains: general surgery (N = 13, 27.7%), colorectal surgery (N = 7, 14.9%), liver transplantation (N = 6, 12.8%), acute appendicitis (N = 5, 10.6%), bariatric surgery (N = 4, 8.5%), pancreatic surgery (N = 4, 8.5%), hepatic surgery (N = 3, 6.4%), emergency surgery (N = 2, 4.3%), oncologic surgery (N = 2, 4.3%), and esophagus surgery (N = 1, 2.1%). In Table 1, an overview of included research articles is provided. The mean patient number was 55,842.5 (SD, 167,592.3; median, 1003.0; IQR 377.0-47,189.5). Mean period of research was 95.5 months (SD, 66.8; median, 82.5; IQR, 49.3-130.0). With exception of one prospective study [15], all other research was conducted in a retrospective fashion. Studies either focused on predicting the risk (N = 26, 55.3%) or the benefit (N = 21, 44.7%) of procedures.
