# A review on essential oil analyses and biological activities of the traditionally used medicinal plant Thymus vulgaris L

CorpusID: 247163422 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2fd06520ad88a7061fa59237b0c71bceacd784e1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2fd06520ad88a7061fa59237b0c71bceacd784e1)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s4) Pharmaceutical Importance of T. vulgaris
(p4.0) Since ancient times, people have been using thyme in alternative traditional systems to treat numerous respiratory diseases, especially chronic cough, bronchitis, and asthma . Based on the active ingredient, the plant species are also used to treat vascular problems, diseases of the urinary tract, teeth pain and indigestion (Hudaib et al., 2002;Karaman et al., 2001). The plant contains the highest percentage of thymol (approximately 60%); thymol has a good ability to increase appetite as well as to kill bacterial infections. Recently, the plant has been used for treating asthma. In the last decades, the authors carried out several studies and concluded that the essential oil and plant crude extracts showed significant biological activities. The plant is also a good source of Fe, Ca, Mg and vitamin K that can increase blood flow (Hudaib et al., 2002;Karaman et al., 2001;Hwang et al., 2004).
## (s9) Nutritional Value
(p9.0) The selected thyme species showed remarkable health benefits that can be endorsed due to its nutritional value. The main nutrients in this species are namely vitamins, minerals, volatile oils and antioxidants. Most of them have strong disease-preventing activities as well as healthpromoting properties (Naghdi-Badi et al., 2004;Ozguven & Tansi, 1998;Penalver et al., 2005). The selected plant species contain different phytonutrients, natural minerals and vitamins that are energetic for maintaining good health (Ozguven & Tansi, 1998). Thyme is a natural source of vitamins C and A and carbohydrates. In addition, the plant also contains vitamin B-complex and vitamin B6. All these vitamins are essential for maintaining healthy skin and protecting the infectious diseases. The selected plant also contains several minerals such as K, Ca, Mg, Fe, and Se. These minerals are essential to maintain the electrolyte balance in the human body (Penalver et al., 2005).
## (s13) Cytotoxic Activity
(p13.0) The preliminary screening of cytotoxic activity of various polarity plant extracts and essential oil of the thyme herb is assessed against the Brine Shrimp Lethally (BSL) and 96-cell wall described by several authors ( (Vichai et al., 2006;Vukovic-Gacic & Simic, 1993;Zaidi & Crow, 2005). The majority of reports showed that both plant extracts and essential oil at different concentrations attribute potential cytotoxic activity against (BSL) and 96-cell walls. However, some of the researchers mentioned that the cytotoxic activity only showed when the concentration of chemical ingredients is high of the extracts and essential oil. They mentioned that low concentration extracts and essential oil of the selected species did not show any activity. In addition, the non-polar extracts showed high activity compared to polar extracts which mean that the toxic compounds are present only in the non-polar extract. Similar results were also obtained by the 96-cell wall method.
