# Pollutants: a candidate as a new risk factor for osteoarthritis-results from a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 249675462 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/777a672ea2303dc3762b51830b263a58c463505d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/777a672ea2303dc3762b51830b263a58c463505d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s3) RMD Open RMD Open RMD Open
(p3.0) born before 1963 were selected and matched with nonexposed control group to participate in an evaluation of morbidity. The risk of arthritis-reported was significantly higher in exposed patients than non-exposed people, in men only: OR 4.1 (95% CI 1.8 to 11.2) (in women OR=1.3 (95% CI 0.8 to 2.3)).

(p3.1) The third study reported the PCB contamination of animals from 1049 farms in Michigan in 1976. 16 The data involved farmers and families who had eaten meat/ dairy products/eggs contaminated. The control group was farmers from another state (Wisconsin). Declarative questionnaires that included questions on joint pain and joint swelling, physical examination and laboratory tests including blood PCB measurement were performed. The prevalence of musculoskeletal symptoms was higher in PCB-exposed Michigan farmers (40%) than others farmers (30%), χ2=3.8 p=0.05. However, the prevalence of degenerative arthritis, namely OA, as current illness under treatment was 10% in Michigan farmers versus 17% in others farmers, χ 2 =4.22 p<0.05. In the last publication, they use cross-sectional data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) cohort, which accurately reflect the US general population. 1721 participants underwent an interview, a physical examination and a blood sample for pollutants (polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD), PCDF, dioxin-like PCB, non-dioxin-like PCB and OC pesticides) measurements. 17 Among these participants, 414 reported arthritis (116 reported OA). According to concentration of these pollutants, participants were ranked in four quartiles. The adjusted factors were age, ethnicity, poverty income ratio, BMI and smoking. Arthritis was more frequent in patients having higher level of pollutants. The risk to report arthritis was higher in PCDD/PCDF/PCB/OC pesticides detectable versus non detectable. Adjusted OR (aOR) between 1.1 and 1.5 in men (non-statistically significant) and between 1.3 and 2.9 in women (p=0.02 for PCB). In women, for subgroups of PCB, higher aOR was 3.2 (95% CI 1.6 to 6.7), p<0.01. Of note, the higher serum concentration of PCB was especially associated with higher risk of arthritis. This association was statistically significant for 5/9 subtypes of PCB (PCB 74, 118, 170, 180, 187). In women, the risk to report arthritis was higher in OC pesticides detectable versus undetectable, with higher aOR 3.1 (95% CI 1.3 to 7.1), p<0.01, statistically significant for only ¼ subtype of OC pesticides (oxychlordane). When the authors differentiated the subtypes of arthritis, the association persisted for rheumatoid arthritis, but not for OA.
## (s5) dIsCussIon
(p5.0) In addition to the traditional risk factors, external environmental factors could also influence the development and progression of OA. Our SLR raises the following assumptions (1) high exposition to PCB, OC pesticides and PFOA/PFOS is potentially associated with an increased risk of OA, (2) there might be an association between serum lead levels and radiographic knee OA, (3) lead concentration is high in cartilage harvested during arthroplasty for OA (without knowing concentration in healthy cartilage) and (4) some heavy metals, BPA and fluvic acid could promote human chondrocyte death or dysfunction in vitro. Altogether these results suggest a possible link between OA and pollutants.

(p5.1) Various types of pollutants were studied for a potential role in OA such as PCB and other POPs, OC pesticides, PFOA, PFOS, lead and other chemical elements. Such a list is based on studies availability and the wide and common exposure in general population. However, at least three factors need to be considered here. First, the ever-increasing number of chemical pollutants currently used, second, their relative half-lives and third, the effects of mixtures of chemicals. Mixtures of chemicals have been studied for other disease (eg, effect of contaminants in human amniotic fluid on thyroid hormone signalling and brain development), but we have not found such studies in OA.

(p5.2) BPA is produced worldwide and used extensively in epoxy resins lining food and beverage containers and polycarbonate plastics in many consumer products. Many studies demonstrated estrogenic activation, decreasing sperm production, alteration in the onset of sexual maturity and obesogenic effects. [36][37][38] It is now banned in most countries, at least for baby product and food containers, but still present in human fluid.
## (s14) RMD Open RMD Open RMD Open
(p14.0) born before 1963 were selected and matched with nonexposed control group to participate in an evaluation of morbidity. The risk of arthritis-reported was significantly higher in exposed patients than non-exposed people, in men only: OR 4.1 (95% CI 1.8 to 11.2) (in women OR=1.3 (95% CI 0.8 to 2.3)).

(p14.1) The third study reported the PCB contamination of animals from 1049 farms in Michigan in 1976. 16 The data involved farmers and families who had eaten meat/ dairy products/eggs contaminated. The control group was farmers from another state (Wisconsin). Declarative questionnaires that included questions on joint pain and joint swelling, physical examination and laboratory tests including blood PCB measurement were performed. The prevalence of musculoskeletal symptoms was higher in PCB-exposed Michigan farmers (40%) than others farmers (30%), χ2=3.8 p=0.05. However, the prevalence of degenerative arthritis, namely OA, as current illness under treatment was 10% in Michigan farmers versus 17% in others farmers, χ 2 =4.22 p<0.05. In the last publication, they use cross-sectional data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) cohort, which accurately reflect the US general population. 1721 participants underwent an interview, a physical examination and a blood sample for pollutants (polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD), PCDF, dioxin-like PCB, non-dioxin-like PCB and OC pesticides) measurements. 17 Among these participants, 414 reported arthritis (116 reported OA). According to concentration of these pollutants, participants were ranked in four quartiles. The adjusted factors were age, ethnicity, poverty income ratio, BMI and smoking. Arthritis was more frequent in patients having higher level of pollutants. The risk to report arthritis was higher in PCDD/PCDF/PCB/OC pesticides detectable versus non detectable. Adjusted OR (aOR) between 1.1 and 1.5 in men (non-statistically significant) and between 1.3 and 2.9 in women (p=0.02 for PCB). In women, for subgroups of PCB, higher aOR was 3.2 (95% CI 1.6 to 6.7), p<0.01. Of note, the higher serum concentration of PCB was especially associated with higher risk of arthritis. This association was statistically significant for 5/9 subtypes of PCB (PCB 74, 118, 170, 180, 187). In women, the risk to report arthritis was higher in OC pesticides detectable versus undetectable, with higher aOR 3.1 (95% CI 1.3 to 7.1), p<0.01, statistically significant for only ¼ subtype of OC pesticides (oxychlordane). When the authors differentiated the subtypes of arthritis, the association persisted for rheumatoid arthritis, but not for OA.
## (s16) dIsCussIon
(p16.0) In addition to the traditional risk factors, external environmental factors could also influence the development and progression of OA. Our SLR raises the following assumptions (1) high exposition to PCB, OC pesticides and PFOA/PFOS is potentially associated with an increased risk of OA, (2) there might be an association between serum lead levels and radiographic knee OA, (3) lead concentration is high in cartilage harvested during arthroplasty for OA (without knowing concentration in healthy cartilage) and (4) some heavy metals, BPA and fluvic acid could promote human chondrocyte death or dysfunction in vitro. Altogether these results suggest a possible link between OA and pollutants.

(p16.1) Various types of pollutants were studied for a potential role in OA such as PCB and other POPs, OC pesticides, PFOA, PFOS, lead and other chemical elements. Such a list is based on studies availability and the wide and common exposure in general population. However, at least three factors need to be considered here. First, the ever-increasing number of chemical pollutants currently used, second, their relative half-lives and third, the effects of mixtures of chemicals. Mixtures of chemicals have been studied for other disease (eg, effect of contaminants in human amniotic fluid on thyroid hormone signalling and brain development), but we have not found such studies in OA.

(p16.2) BPA is produced worldwide and used extensively in epoxy resins lining food and beverage containers and polycarbonate plastics in many consumer products. Many studies demonstrated estrogenic activation, decreasing sperm production, alteration in the onset of sexual maturity and obesogenic effects. [36][37][38] It is now banned in most countries, at least for baby product and food containers, but still present in human fluid.
