# Effectiveness of Pharmacotherapy for Depression after Adult Traumatic Brain Injury: an Umbrella Review

CorpusID: 249644514 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dbfa60a2e3e4ac428735d9f5428585f74491c1d1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dbfa60a2e3e4ac428735d9f5428585f74491c1d1)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Participants
(p3.0) Eligible reviews included studies of participants who were adults (16 years and over) of both sexes who had sustained a TBI (penetrating or non-penetrating; medically confirmed or self-report) of any cause and severity. There were no restrictions on age at injury or time since injury. Reviews of both TBI and non-TBI participants (i.e., other acquired brain injury such as stroke), were eligible if the findings from the TBI samples were presented separately or if greater than 80% of the sample was TBI. Given the age of adulthood is defined differently internationally, the minimum age of 16 was chosen. Reviews with studies in which 80% of the sample were 16 years and older were also eligible.

(p3.1) Participants had to present with depression of any severity as diagnosed through a standardized diagnostic interview procedure (e.g., Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders criteria (DSM)) or valid rating scale. There are multiple depression rating scales that have been validated in the TBI population, including the Hospital Anxiety & Depression Scale (HADS) (Dahm et al., 2013;Schwarzbold et al., 2014), the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D) (Schwarzbold et al., 2014), the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) (Schwarzbold et al., 2014), Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) (Cohen et al., 2018;Donders & Pendery, 2017), Traumatic Brain Injury Quality of Life subscale (TBI-QoL-Depression) (Cohen et al., 2018) and the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales -21 (DASS-21) (Dahm et al., 2013;Randall et al., 2017). Depression symptoms could be reported by the individual with TBI, by their clinician or other informant (e.g., family member, carer).
## (s11) Inclusion criteria -adults 16 years and over
(p11.0) It was not explicitly stated in all reviews that only primary studies of adult patients would be included For those reviews in which it was not explicitly stated in the eligibility criteria, information that the study comprised adult patients could be deciphered from the study characteristics tables or our knowledge of the included studies (Albrecht et al., 2015(Albrecht et al., , 2019Alway et al., 2016;Barker-Collo et al., 2015). Reviews that included patients less than 16 years of age were included if the findings for those aged 16 years or older were provided separately (Maksimowski & Tampi, 2016). We include this here as a point of clarification as it was not specified in the protocol. This change does not deviate from the inclusion criteria we set out in the protocol.
## (s24) Primary Studies Included in Reviews
(p24.0) Twenty-one primary studies published between 1985 and 2017 were included across the systematic reviews (Table 2). We only extracted from primary studies that met our inclusion criteria, resulting in a total of between 1 to 15 primary studies per review (Mean = 6.41). The overlap between reviews, that is the extent to which primary studies in the reviews were the same, was determined by calculating the corrected covered area (CCA) (Pieper et al., 2014). The CCA was determined to be 0.27, corresponding to a "slight" overlap (Pieper et al., 2014). The overall sample size of TBI participants and healthy controls included in reviews was 30 to 650 participants (Mean = 214.80; Table 3).

(p24.1) The reviews provided varying amounts of descriptive details about the primary studies with respect to comparators, participants and outcome measures (Table 3). Studies that included a group comparison usually included a placebo condition as the comparator. However, there were a small number of studies that used a control condition without a placebo or used non-TBI controls (i.e., 'healthy controls' with depression) as the comparator condition.

(p24.2) Participant characteristics (i.e., gender and age) were often not reported or only partially reported (n = 14/22). Where sex was reported, the samples consistently included more males than females. Half of the reviews provided information about the depression entry criteria required in the primary studies (n = 11/22). There was much variation both in the measures used and the cut-off values within measures. The HAM-D or HAM-D 21 were the most common measurement tools used within the primary studies. Other popular tools included the BPRS, CGI, BDI/ BDI-II and PHQ-9. The majority of reviews included primary studies with samples of any TBI severity (14/22). One review restricted included studies to those with moderate to severe TBI only, and two reviews only included mild TBI. Five reviews did not provide this information.
## (s26) Interventions
(p26.0) Six drug classes (MAOIs, TCAs, SSRIs, SNRIs, stimulants and anti-convulsants) and 10 individual drugs were examined across the 22 reviews (Table 3). The majority of reviews did not specify the follow up time point (n = 15/22), and only one study in the reviews examined outcomes post drug cessation, with outcomes assessed 7 days and again at 21 days post intervention (Newburn et al., 1999).
## (s36) Depression
(p36.0) Three meta-analyses pooled findings across studies examining either sertraline, citalopram or escitalopram. Only the pre-post meta-analysis found in favour of SSRIs, and reported a large effect size for the difference in depression scores from pre to post intervention in samples of mild to severe TBI. The two control comparison meta-analyses failed to find a significant effect in mild to moderate TBI (Beedham et al., 2020) and mild to severe TBI (Paraschakis & Katsanos, 2017). Although one of the control comparison meta-analysis reviews did have an intermediate risk of bias, the other review was assessed as low risk of bias.
## (s37) Harms
(p37.0) For sertraline, a control-comparison meta-analysis from a review of moderate to severe TBI with a low risk of bias showed that the risk of harms was not greater in the treatment group for diarrhoea, dizziness, dry mouth and nausea/ vomiting. Further information provided in narrative summaries confirmed this, summarising from primary studies that although the treatment group did report greater intestinal gas, agitation, decreased libido, gastrointestinal palpitations and sweating, this was not significantly greater than that reported by the control group (Reyes et al., 2019;Fann et al., 2009a). No meta-analytic or quantitative data were provided for harms relating to citalopram. Further information provided in narrative summaries stated that common side effects of citalopram included decreased libido, dry mouth, nausea, sedation and diarrhoea (Fann et al., 2009a;Plantier et al., 2016).
## (s39) Stimulants -Methylphenidate
(p39.0) Depression Four meta-analyses in two reviews with low risk of bias provided mostly favourable data with large effect sizes for the use of methylphenidate for post TBI depression (Beedham et al., 2020;Peppel et al., 2020). The majority of participants across all analyses had sustained a mild to moderate injury and were early post injury; however, these details were not consistently provided. Both pre-post and control comparison analyses using HAM-D showed methylphenidate to result in significantly reduced depression scores. Notably, the single meta-analysis not in favour of methylphenidate differed only in the measures used -using BDI for depression scores as opposed to HAM-D.
## (s42) TCAs -Amitriptyline & Desipramine
(p42.0) Depression A pre-post meta-analysis of three studies from a review with low risk of bias examining amitriptyline and desipramine treatment found a significant improvement in depression scores following mild to moderate TBI with a large effect size (Salter et al., 2016). Two pre-post meta-analyses of amitriptyline also found a significant impact of the drug on depression scores, with both reporting large effect sizes in samples of mild and 'minor' TBI (Beedham et al., 2020;Wheaton et al., 2011).
## (s49) Pharmacotherapy -Multiple Drug Classes
(p49.0) Depression Three reviews with intermediate to low risk of bias provided five meta-analyses pooling across multiple drug classes to examine the effects of pharmacotherapy more broadly on post TBI depression (Beedham et al., 2020;Slowinski et al., 2019;Salter et al., 2016). The single control-comparison meta-analysis from a review with intermediate risk of bias was the only analysis to conclude not in favour of pharmacotherapy. The TBI severity in that meta-analysis was not reported. The four meta-analyses finding in favour of pharmacotherapy reported moderate to large effect sizes, were all pre-post analyses and were drawn from reviews with intermediate (n = 2) and low (n = 2) risk of bias. TBI severity was only provided for two of these meta-analyses, for which one was mild to moderate and the one was mild to severe.
## (s52) Other drugs
(p52.0) There were six drugs that were either included in meta-analyses that pooled across drug classes or were not included in any meta-analyses. We provide brief details from the primary studies examining these drugs below (Appendix 8). Given this evidence is drawn from single primary studies, it should be given considerably less weight then the meta-analyses findings summarised above.

(p52.1) Phenelzine (MAOI) treatment was not associated with a significant change in HAM-D scores over 4 weeks in 22 survivors of mild TBI (time since injury unclear) (Saran, 1985). No harms data provided.

(p52.2) Desipramine (TCA) treatment was associated with a significant reduction in scores compared to placebo on a researcher generated affect/mood scale in a total of 10 survivors (6 TG; 4 CG) of TBI sustained an average of 1.5 years previously (injury severity was moderate or less) (Wroblewski et al., 1996). Two participants withdrew due to seizures and mania, with two further participants reporting action tremors and mild seizures but remaining in the trial.

(p52.3) Moclobemide (MAOI) treatment was associated with a mean reduction in HAM-D scores of 80.79% in 26 survivors of TBI (injury severity and time since injury not reported) (Newburn et al., 1999). Twenty four adverse events were reported by 14 subjects, with five drop-outs due to adverse events.

(p52.4) A combination of Citalopram (SSRI) and Carbamazepine (Anti-Convulsant) was associated with a significant reduction in BPRS scores over 12 weeks in 20 survivors of a moderate to severe TBI an average of 4.6 to 34.6 months post injury (Perino et al., 2001). No harms data was provided.

(p52.5) Milnacipran (SNRI) treatment was associated with a significant improvement in HAM-D scores over 6 weeks, with a 66.7% response rate and 44.4% remission rate in 10 survivors of TBI sustained an average of 152.8 days prior (injury severity was unclear). One participant withdrew due to nausea.
## (s55) Protocols
(p55.0) Only one study had pre-published a protocol for their systematic review (Beedham et al., 2020). However, the authors did not address whether there were any deviations from the protocol. Comparison between the protocol and review (completed by two study authors independently and in duplicate; AH & AJ), identified only one change: searching of clinical trials registries was completed in the review but not stipulated in the protocol.
## (s63) Injury Severity
(p63.0) A clearer picture of depression pharmacotherapy may be achieved by stratifying pooled results by TBI severity. Most meta-analyses examined across the spectrum from mild to severe TBI, and did not provide sub-analyses comparing injury severity groups. Given the association between injury     (Osborn et al., 2014;Singh et al., 2018;Ouellet et al., 2018;Mauri et al., 2014;Singh et al., 2019;Senathi-Raja et al., 2010), it is important to include stratified analyses where possible. When analyses are pooled across TBI severities, an overall non-significant finding may obscure a treatment effect specific to one TBI severity group. Alternatively, an overall significant result may be driven by treatment efficacy in only one severity sub-group from which concluding efficacy in other injury severities may be misleading. At a biological level, it is conceivable that medication metabolism may be impacted by injury severity, due to factors such as greater neuronal damage and disturbance to neurotransmitter systems, as well as greater disruption to cerebral blood flow and the blood brain barrier (Levine, 2013;Lo et al., 2001). Finally, the overall treatment plan for depressive symptoms after moderate to severe TBI may differ from that of mild TBI in whom symptoms are more likely to resolve over time Theadom et al., 2018). As such, for individuals with mild TBI, evaluating the balance between possible symptom reduction and possible harms from a trial of pharmacotherapy is likely to be different.
## (s64) TBI Specific Outcome Measure
(p64.0) Use of TBI-appropriate measures is also critical. It is likely that the use of sub-optimal measures in the primary studies contributed to mixed findings. A clear impact of this was seen in the evidence for sertraline and methylphenidate, in which the measures used changed the meta-analyses conclusions (Peppel et al., 2020). As discussed above, measures which include TBI sequalae may overstate depression at baseline, and underestimate change over time, as the TBI related sequalae are unlikely to be impacted by the pharmacotherapy (Peppel et al., 2020). Measures such as the HADS, which purposefully omit items which are likely to overlap with symptoms of common medical disorders, are recommended as they may provide a more accurate means of detecting post TBI depression (Barker-Collo et al., 2015;Singh et al., 2018). Despite this, the HADS was not used in any primary study. Rather, the HAM-D was the most common measurement tool used within the primary studies, despite evidence suggesting it is not ideal for TBI samples and less responsive to treatment than other depression measures (Caplan et al., 2016).
## (s65) Depression Entry Criteria
(p65.0) The lack of robust response to medications identified in some reviews may be related to participant's low depression severity at baseline. The most common measures used, DSM criteria and HAM-D scores, may have inflated baseline depression scores due to overlap in symptoms of depression Y* is used to denote when a review fulfilled the criteria for an item, however, there were small caveats that may have introduced some minor bias. The explanation for each caveat is provided in Appendix 9

(p65.1) We derived an overall risk of bias judgement (low; intermediate; high) through examining performance across the 11 items, and detailed discussion to arrive at consensus with common sequalae of TBI (Barker-Collo et al., 2015), resulting in samples with lower rates of actual depression symptoms. The cut-off values used may also have been too low. A patient level meta-analysis showed that HAM-D scores needed to be greater than 25 at baseline for the treatment to show a clinically meaningful difference (Fournier et al., 2010). No primary studies in the current review had depression entry criteria of HAM-D over 25, with the highest cut-off score being 18. This is of concern given evidence in non-TBI samples that depression severity is strongly associated with response to anti-depressant medication, with the most robust effects found in those with more severe depression (Fournier et al., 2010).
## (s66) Depression Measurement
(p66.0) The measurement and conceptualisation of depression within the primary studies may have also introduced bias. The included depression measurement tools were all multi-dimensional and include a diverse set of symptoms.

(p66.1) Research suggests that the overlap in symptoms captured on common depression rating scales is low (Fried, 2016). This may lead to research results idiosyncratic to the scales used (Fried, 2016), and poor correspondence between depression measures within the same individuals. There is some evidence of this issue within TBI samples, with research showing the HADS does not strongly correspond with clinical diagnosis of depression on DSM-IV-TR (Whelan-Goodinson et al., 2009). The heterogeneity in depression scales reflects the diversity of clinical opinions regarding what depression is (Fried, 2016). Given this diversity, the idea of depression as a homogenous concept has been questioned, and it has been suggested that depression could be better understood by examining individual symptoms . This new approach could provide a more sensitive examination of drug efficacy by evaluating treatment response at the individual symptom level or to more homogenous symptom dimensions (Fried, 2016;Fried et al., 2016;Fornaro et al., 2021). Re-analysis of anti-depressant trials in non-TBI populations have indeed shown that single item/ symptom end points are more sensitive to treatment effect than sum scores from rating scales (Hieronymus et al., 2016). For example, a re-analysis of SSRI trials shows that while 18 out of 32 comparisons (56%) failed to separate active drug from placebo at week 6 with respect to reduction in HAM-D, only 3 out of 32 comparisons (9%) were negative when depressed mood was used as an effect parameter (Hieronymus et al., 2016). Notably, depressed mood has been identified as the most frequent MDD symptoms at 6 and 12 months post injury (Gould et al., 2011a), suggesting this symptom may be a sensitive marker for anti-depressant treatment efficacy in TBI samples.
## (s67) Placebo Effect
(p67.0) The non-significant results for the control-comparison meta-analyses may have been contributed to, in part, by a placebo effect in the control group. Such placebo effects have been seen in other recent TBI pharmacotherapy studies (Hammond et al., 2014(Hammond et al., , 2015(Hammond et al., , 2018 and are common in depression trials more broadly. Factors driving the placebo effect include therapeutic alliance, participation in a research study, anxiety reduction and hope, as well as placebo neurobiology including top-down cortical regulation, reward system activation and dopaminergic and serotoninergic neurotransmission (Polich et al., 2018).

(p67.1) It has been suggested that TBI survivors may be highly responsive to placebos, through both neurobiological pathways and psychosocial factors (Polich et al., 2018). Interpersonal factors and access to healthcare providers may be particularly salient for TBI survivors who may be experiencing social isolation particularly in the chronic post injury period where access to services may have reduced (Polich et al., 2018;Hammond et al., 2015;Lefkovits et al., 2020). From a neurobiological perspective, there is overlap in some of the dysregulated systems post TBI that are targeted in pharmacological treatment and those implicated in the placebo response, including the dopaminergic and serotonergic pathways (Polich et al., 2018). As a result, those taking a placebo may experience similar activation of these systems, while for those in the treatment group, placebo effects may either act alone to drive symptom improvement, or act synergistically with the active drug to promote an even greater effect (Polich et al., 2018).
## (s68) Length of Treatment
(p68.0) The variation in intervention duration may have confounded response to treatment and impacted the combined results. Indeed, one of the meta-analyses included in this review found that length of treatment was significantly associated with change in depression symptom severity, and suggested that greater reductions in depressive symptomatology might have been observed if treatment periods had been prolonged (Salter et al., 2016).
## (s71) Recommendations for Systematic Reviews
(p71.0) Generalizability of results from reviews would be improved by including clear details of participant characteristics including age, gender, injury severity and time since injury. Analyses should be stratified by injury severity where possible. Although it is acknowledged that depressive disorders may occur after TBI of any severity, metabolism of medication may be impacted by injury severity (Levine, 2013;Lo et al., 2001).

(p71.1) It is of critical importance for primary studies to measure harms, and for systematic reviews to include these as part of their primary outcomes. Harms were not mentioned in half of the reviews, and only six commented on study-drop outs, which is an important indicator of drug acceptability. Although harms data from non-TBI populations can provide useful preliminary guidance, harms must be studied within TBI populations given the possible impact of abnormal brain function on the metabolism of drugs (Levine, 2013;Lo et al., 2001;Waldron-Perrine et al., 2008). Harms may also be more burdensome for TBI survivors, due to the overlap in TBI related sequalae and common side effects of anti-depressants such as sleep problems and sexual dysfunction (Castriotta et al., 2007;Mathias & Alvaro, 2012;Hibbard et al., 2000;Ponsford, 2003;Downing et al., 2013;Ferguson, 2001).

(p71.2) Finally, the utility of broad reviews that include metaanalyses combining medical conditions or both pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatments is unclear, and indeed may contribute further methodological ambiguity to the interpretation of pharmacotherapy intervention.
## (s73) Pharmacotherapy
(p73.0) Although the findings of this umbrella review do not provide support for any specific drug class, they do show that post TBI depression is a treatment responsive condition in at least some individuals. Lack of significant findings may have been contributed to by small pooled samples, the outcome measures used, short treatment duration, low methodological quality and low severity of depression at baseline. While the evidence base develops for specific drugs, this umbrella review suggests that a trial of anti-depressants may be sensible with careful monitoring of harms objective assessment of depressive symptoms, and discontinuation if no benefit is observed. The selection of which antidepressant to prescribe should be made considering the likelihood of responsiveness to the treatment and vulnerability to the adverse events associated with that drug for each individual (Carvalho et al., 2016). Once a patient has been started on an anti-depressant they may benefit from an alternative or adjunctive medication if the agent prescribed first does not achieve a depression remission (Silverberg & Panenka, 2019).

(p73.1) One final consideration is the length of treatment. Research in non-TBI populations has shown that ongoing anti-depressant use may only be appropriate for people with high risk of relapse, with the optimal treatment period not yet known for those deemed at low risk of relapse (Geddes et al., 2003). Treatment duration must also be balanced with the risk of adverse events, with non-TBI evidence suggesting that greater duration of treatment with anti-depressants is associated with longevity of adverse events (Carvalho et al., 2016). On the other hand, premature discontinuation of therapy may give the impression of less than optimal response to treatment in an individual who might otherwise show treatment gains. This may be particularly problematic in TBI samples who may require different medication management (i.e., different dosage, frequency) to achieve a treatment response as compared non-TBI samples (Morgan et al., 2012;Dinan & Mobayed, 1992). Adequate followup with symptom monitoring and drug augmentation as required is recommended.
## (s74) Other Intervention Possibilities
(p74.0) Given the multi-faceted aetiology of post TBI depression, the value of providing multi-modal treatment should be further explored, with pharmacotherapy forming one part of a comprehensive biopsychosocial response to depression treatment (Fann et al., 2009a). In light of promising metaanalyses findings for psychotherapy in post ABI depression (Stalder-Lüthy et al., 2013), a combination of these modalities may be prudent. Evidence in non-TBI populations has found that a combination of pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy was more effective in achieving a treatment response than pharmacotherapy alone (Cuijpers et al., 2020). Psychotherapy also has the additional benefit of being able to focus on issues that may be having a bi-directional impact on depression post TBI such as fatigue, changes to identity and issues with social relationships and return to work. Exercise interventions and rTMS (Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation) also have a growing evidence base mostly in non-TBI populations, and may be particularly helpful in cases of medication refractory depression (Hu et al., 2020;Hoy et al., 2019;Fann et al., 2009b).
## (s75) Limitations
(p75.0) Our review was limited to publications in English only, resulting in one review being excluded (Richard et al., 2003). This review was published in 2003, and as such it is unlikely to contain papers not captured in the 22 reviews included in this umbrella review that were all published after this date. Seven of the reviews did not restrict their search to English language only, suggesting that any relevant primary studies not available in English would have been included in those reviews.
