# The role of diet in renal cell carcinoma incidence: an umbrella review of meta- analyses of observational studies

CorpusID: 246482043 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5de099fcad51723cb4df649130f2740407d1ed30](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5de099fcad51723cb4df649130f2740407d1ed30)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Inclusion and exclusion criteria
(p1.0) The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) dose-response or high vs low SRoMAs of observational studies (including case-control studies, prospective cohort studies, or pooled studies); (2) SRoMAs reporting odds ratios, relative rates, risk ratios, or hazard ratios as effect sizes, and SRoMAs including summary hazard ratios (SHRs) and 95% CIs. PICO definitions: (1) population: people of any sex, age, source of cases, country, and ethnicity; (2) intervention: dietary factors including various foods, dietary patterns, dietary quality index, beverages, alcohol, macronutrients, and micronutrients (see Additional file 1: Table S1); (3) comparator: the abovementioned dietary factors versus no dietary factors or varying levels of dietary factors (dose-response or high vs low); and (4) outcome: patients with RCC.

(p1.1) Studies that met any of the following criteria were excluded: (1) individual study, (2) animal or experimental study, (3) conference literature, (4) editorial, (5) systematic review without meta-analysis (i.e., no combined effect size), (6) meta-analysis of individual patient data, (7) exposures were plasma levels or biomarkers, and (8) diseases were other urologic tumors.
## (s5) Outdated and overlapping publications
(p5.0) SRoMAs are continually updated by incorporating relevant evidence from new studies to maintain validity and applicability. Otherwise, there would be a risk of inaccurate evidence or even a situation where erroneous evidence misleads decision-makers or researchers [39][40][41][42]. Moreover, different investigators or research institutions perform SRoMAs of the same exposure and population. Therefore, there can be two or more overlapping SRoMAs on the same research topics [43,44]. Some studies have reported that up to 2/3 of published SRoMAs overlap at least partially or completely [45]. Inclusion of data from overlapping SRoMAs would lead to a risk of bias, resulting in inaccurate results and estimates [46,47]. In addition, considering that up to 50% of published systematic reviews become outdated after 5.5 years [42], we used 2015 as the cutoff year. We referred to overlapping SRoMAs published before 2015 as outdated overlapping SRoMAs and overlapping SRoMAs published after 2015 as contemporary overlapping SRoMAs. If a contemporary SRoMA overlapped with an outdated SRoMA, the outdated SRoMA was excluded.
## (s6) Credibility assessment
(p6.0) As in previous umbrella reviews [23,24,27,29,30], we classified evidence associating diet and RCC incidence into 5 categories. Evidence was judged to be convincing (class I) if the following criteria were met: statistically significant results were observed for both the association and the largest study (p<10 -6 and p<0.05, respectively), the number of cases exceeded 1000 or the number of participants for consecutive outcomes exceeded 20,000, there was low heterogeneity (I 2 <50%), the 95% prediction interval (PI) did not include a null value, there was no excess significance bias, and there were no small study effects ("p<0.10 of Egger's regression" plus "the random-effects summary estimate being larger than the point estimate of the largest study in the meta-analysis" can be considered as small study effects). Evidence was judged to be highly suggestive (class II) if the following criteria were met: statistically significant results were observed for both the association and the largest study (p<10 -6 and p<0.05, respectively); and the number of cases exceeded 1000 or the number of participants for consecutive outcomes exceeded 20,000. Evidence was judged to be suggestive (class III) if the following criteria were met: associations with statistical significance were observed for the association (p<10 -3 ); the number of cases exceeded 1000 or the number of participants for consecutive outcomes exceeded 20,000. Evidence was judged to be weak (class IV) if it met the criterion of a statistically significant association (p<0.05). The evidence was judged to be nonsignificant (class V) if no statistically significant association was observed (p≥0.05)
## (s8) Assessment of heterogeneity
(p8.0) We used I 2 to assess the heterogeneity of each published SRoMA. I 2 values range from 0 to 100% and are used as a measure of the magnitude of heterogeneity among individual studies and can be used to present the percentage of the total variance caused by heterogeneity [54]. I 2 <50% can be considered nonsignificant heterogeneity. τ 2 was also calculated, which can explain the betweenstudy variance associated with risk estimates because I 2 is affected by study size [55]. In addition, we calculated a 95% PI for the SHR, which further explains the heterogeneity among studies. This interval with 95% certainty provides a prediction range for the potential true effect size of future studies [55]. The I 2 , τ 2 , and 95% PI for each published SRoMA were calculated with the meta package in R [53].
## (s9) Assessment of publication bias and small study effects
(p9.0) For published SRoMAs, contour-enhanced funnel plots were used to assess whether indications of publication bias existed [56]. The presence of missing studies in areas of the plot without significant differences suggests that the funnel plot asymmetry may be due to publication bias; the presence of missing studies in areas with significant differences suggests that the asymmetry may be due to other causes, such as heterogeneity [57], rather than publication bias [56].

(p9.1) Egger's regression asymmetry test was employed to see if indications of small study effects existed (i.e., small studies provide greater effect size estimates than large studies) [57]. As in prior umbrella reviews [23][24][25], a p value<0.10 with a more conservative effect in the largest study (the study with the smallest standard error) than in the random-effects meta-analysis was deemed to be indicative of small study effects. To estimate true effects, the "trim-and-fill" approach was applied when Egger's test was statistically significant [58]. The contourenhanced funnel plots, Egger's test, and the trim-and-fill method were conducted with the meta and metafor packages in R [53,59].
## (s14) Methodological quality
(p14.0) Detailed information on the methodological quality of the 29 meta-analyses assessed using ASMTAR 2 has been provided (see Additional file 1: Table S5) [15][16][17][18]. Of the 29 meta-analyses, none were rated as having high methodological quality, 34% (n=10) were rated as moderate, 38% (n=11) were rated as low, and 28% (n=8) were rated as critically low. Most of the 11 low-quality meta-analyses did not meet the 3 critical items in AMSTAR 2, which were failure to state that the protocol was registered before conducting the metaanalysis, failure to conduct a comprehensive and adequate search, and failure to provide a summary of excluded publications and give reasons for exclusion. In addition to the 3 critical items mentioned above, the 8 critically low-quality meta-analyses largely failed to meet the following 2 critical items: the risk of bias of individual studies was not assessed using appropriate instruments, and the appropriate statistical methods were not used to combine hazard ratios when performing a metaanalysis [36].
## (s16) Associations and level of evidence
(p16.0) The SHR and level of evidence for each dietary factor are summarized in Table 2 and are shown in Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. The SHR and 95% CI excluded the null value for 20 of the 64 exposures, including 4 (67%) for dietary patterns or dietary quality indices; 6 (46%) for foods; 0 for beverages; 3 (42%) for alcoholic beverages; 3 (20%) for macronutrients; and 4 (21%) for micronutrients. The SHR was statistically significant (P<0.05) for 18 (28%) of the 64 exposures, with 4 (67%) exposures for dietary patterns or dietary quality indices, 6 (46%) for foods with 1 (8%) that were unavailable due to missing data, 0 for beverages, 2 (29%) for alcoholic beverages, 2 (13%) for macronutrients with 4 (27%) that were unavailable due to missing data, and 4 (21%) for micronutrients. Sixty (94%) exposures in the included meta-analyses had more than 1000 cases or 20,000 participants. Table 2 and Fig. 2 show the SHR, 95% CI, and level of evidence associating dietary patterns or dietary quality indices with the incidence of RCC. No dietary factors showed convincing or highly suggestive evidence of an association with RCC. There was 1 instance of weak evidence (class IV) that long-term adherence to a healthy dietary pattern 0.66 (0.51 to 0.85) was associated with a lower risk of developing RCC compared with nonadherence to a healthy dietary pattern. Similarly, there were 3 weak pieces of evidence (class IV) that chronic exposure to an   Drinking pattern and glycemic load were not significantly associated with the incidence of RCC. Table 2 and Fig. 3 show the SHR, 95% CI, and level of evidence for the association of foods with the incidence of RCC. No exposures for RCC showed convincing or highly suggestive evidence of an association. There was 1 case of suggestive evidence (class III) of an inverse Forest plots and the level of evidence of the association of foods with RCC incidence. SHR summary hazard ratio, NS nonsignificant. *Association was not statistically significant after using the trim-and-fill method. -The level of evidence could not be assessed because data related to 95% PI, I 2 , small study effects, and excess significance bias could not be calculated association between increased vegetable (0.74, 0.63 to 0.86) intake and the incidence of RCC. There were 3 pieces of weak evidence (class IV) that increased intake of all meats (1.27, 1.08 to 1.49), processed meat (1.13, 1.01 to 1.26), and poultry (1.23, 1.02 to 1.47) were positively associated with the incidence of RCC. There was 1 instance of weak evidence (class IV) that increased intake of cruciferous vegetables (0.81, 0.71 to 0.92) were negatively associated with the incidence of RCC. Fish, fruits, fruit and non-starchy vegetables, non-starchy vegetables, tomatoes, and citrus fruit intake were not associated with the incidence of RCC. Seafood intake was not associated with RCC incidence. However, the level of evidence could not be assessed because data related to 95% PI, I 2 , small study effects, and excess significance bias could not be calculated. Table 2 and Fig. 4 show the SHR, 95% CI, and level of evidence for the association of beverages with the incidence of RCC. No exposures for RCC showed convincing or highly suggestive evidence of an association. The intake of sweetened carbonated beverage, sweetened beverages, tea, and coffee was not associated with the incidence of RCC. Table 2 and Fig. 5 show the SHR, 95% CI, and level of evidence for the association of alcoholic beverages with the incidence of RCC. No exposures for RCC showed convincing or highly suggestive evidence of an association. There were 2 pieces of weak evidence (class IV) that increased intake of wine (0.70, 0.52 to 0.94) and spirits (0.80, 0.64 to 0.99) was inversely associated with the incidence of RCC. Beer intake was not significantly associated with the incidence of RCC. Dose-response meta-analyses showed that light drinking (<12.5 g/d), moderate drinking (12.5-37.5 g/d), and heavy drinking (>37.5 g/d) were not significantly associated with the incidence of RCC. A high vs low meta-analysis also showed that any drinking was not significantly associated with the risk of developing RCC. Table 2 and Fig. 6 show the SHR, 95% CI, and level of evidence of the association of macronutrients with RCC incidence. No exposures for RCC showed convincing or highly suggestive evidence of an association. There was only 2 instance of weak evidence (class IV) showing that  an inverse association between increased dietary fiber (0.82, 0.71 to 0.95) intake and the incidence of RCC and that increased animal protein (1.10, 1.00 to 1.20) intake was associated with the risk of RCC. Fruit fiber, vegetable fiber, cereal fiber, total fat, saturated fat, monounsaturated fat, polyunsaturated fat, total protein, and plant protein were not significantly associated with the incidence of RCC. The remaining dietary factors (legume fiber, animal fat, plant fat, and cholesterol) could not be assessed for their level of evidence because the data related to 95% PI, I 2 , small study effects, and excess significance bias could not be calculated. Table 2 and Fig. 7 show the SHR, 95% CI, and level of evidence of the association of micronutrients with the incidence of RCC. No exposures showed convincing or highly suggestive evidence of an association with RCC. There was 1 instance of suggestive evidence (class III) that increased intake of vitamin C (0.77, 0.66 to 0.90) was associated with a lower risk of RCC. There were 3 pieces of weak evidence (class IV) that increased intake of vitamin E (0. 81 
