# Impacts of Social Media on Language Learning: A Review of Literature

CorpusID: 247203377 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/76702d796b142b7453447dd142ce6aa0f26c5b57](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/76702d796b142b7453447dd142ce6aa0f26c5b57)

Fields: Education, Linguistics

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) The emergence and rapid growth of social media captured the attention of second language researchers. They inspired plenty of studies to explore how social media can be used as educational tools. In fact, an increasing body of studies in various fields, perspectives and methodologies have been conducted and generated fruitful implications. In this respect, it is necessary to develop a synthesis to review what has been studied, what conclusions have been summarized, and what deserves more attention. To be more specific, this review paper endeavours to answer two research questions: the impacts of social media as language skills development tools on language learning and the impacts of social media as intercultural communication platforms on language learning. Those two research questions are of significance because it is commonly recognized that language learning includes both learning linguistic knowledge and intercultural competence development [1]. By reviewing related studies, this study attempts to identify significant findings, frame pedagogical implications for both educators and learners, and conclude theoretical suggestions for future research and practice.
## (s9) Limitations of Social Media
(p9.0) Though many benefits of social media usage in the language education context have been explored, they are not free of limitations that require educators and learners' attention. Identifying the potential limitations and problems of social media activities should help educators and learners circumvent the risks in exploiting social media as language learning and teaching tools. Noticed limitations and suggestions are concluded as below.

(p9.1) From the perspective of social media as resourceful input, both learners and educators need to be critical of the linguistic resources received from social media as they may expose learners to culturally inappropriate or linguistically conflicting content. For instance, due to different geographical locations and personal styles, linguistic variants of grammar use and lexical information constitute an amalgam of linguistic Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 615

(p9.2) repertoire. Though some of them can benefit learners as they legitimate and value the use of language variations, others may lead to confusion or even a mistake. In this regard, educators should provide necessary guidance with learners to maximize the pedagogical affordances of authentic online resources. In addition, it should be noted that the cultural contents carried by social media platforms can not fit in every context. That is, one expression that is acceptable in one place might be offensive in another place. As a result, learners need to pay special attention to what they bring to social media and what they obtain from social media [41].
