# An Overview on Actual Knowledge About Immunohistochemical and Molecular Features of Vitality, Focusing on the Growing Evidence and Analysis to Distinguish Between Suicidal and Simulated Hanging

CorpusID: 245908240 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/665cddb78ccf1d1e615678a89353e2901b16c299](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/665cddb78ccf1d1e615678a89353e2901b16c299)

Fields: Law, Medicine

## (s2) RESULTS
(p2.0) A description of tested molecules is provided, focusing on useful immunohistochemical markers for ligature mark vitality ( Table 2). Data on molecular expression, comparison of markers expression with non-injured surrounding tissues, comparison with deceased by other causes, comparison with cases of simulated hanging are discussed. Not all listed cases present a comparison with post-mortem suspended cadavers. Ishida et al. (18) tested 35 cases of hanging and 21 cases of strangulation, immunostaining skin samples with Aquaporin 1 (AQP1) (dermal capillaries) and Aquaporin 3 (AQP3) (epidermidis). Samples were collected within 72 h from death. In each case (where the forensic autopsy was performed), the cause of death was diagnosed on macroscopic and microscopic findings along with toxicological data. Authors incubated collected sections with anti-AQP1 or anti-AQP3 antibodies and after, they incubated biotinylated secondary antibodies.

(p2.1) Sections were later incubated with rabbit serum, and no positive signal could be detected, indicating the specificity of the antibodies. AQP1 was expressed in dermal capillaries of both injured and uninjured skin samples. AQP3 was greatly expressed on ligature marks skin. Since epidermal cells of ligature marks are significantly dehydrated, it is possible to suppose that AQP3 expression was significantly enhanced by neck compression (24). In one case, AQP3 immunostaining revealed the vitality of different skin wounds produced before suicidal hanging. AQP3 tested positive only in vital wounds (25).  Including human and non-human samples and different testing techniques. ICP-AES, inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry; IHC, immunochemistry. Selected molecules are singularly described and data are illustrated according to relevance. SCD, sudden cardiac death; ABI, Acute brain injuries; "-" , non-significant or P > 0.05; *where non-specified, consider positive; PMI, post-mortem interval; "//", same as precedent; "N/A", not applicable. Bold values are those statistically significant.

(p2.2) De Matteis et al. (16) evaluated the use of Troponin Ifast skeletal muscle (TNNI2) to perform differential diagnoses about vitality in suicide by hanging and simulated hanging. TNNI2 is a 21.3 kDa protein able to rapidly bind ATP, enabling a rapid oxygen muscular exchange. The authors assumed that ligature neck compression produces muscular tissue ischemia.
