# Value-Based Healthcare From the Perspective of the Healthcare Professional: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 245882693 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0b985b9f9d5e0774ca3d0660919d3884176a02ee](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0b985b9f9d5e0774ca3d0660919d3884176a02ee)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Search Strategy
(p2.0) An extensive three-armed search strategy was developed in consultation with the Erasmus Medical Center's Medical Library. The search string followed the PICO statement by including keywords that describe (1) the population, i.e., healthcare professionals, their teams or specific occupations, (2) the intervention, i.e., VBHC, and (3) outcomes, i.e., how the population impacts VBHC or vice versa (see Supplementary Material 1). The comparator is not applicable in this work.

(p2.1) The first part of the search string included generic descriptions of professionals or care teams, such as "professional, " "staff, " "nurse, " and "clinician, " as well as specific occupations derived from the International Standard Classification of Occupations ISCO-08 (26). Occupations both in hospital and other healthcare settings were included.

(p2.2) In line with terminology used by Porter and Teisberg (1), we included "high-value care" and "value driven care" in the search string as synonyms for VBHC. In the second arm of the search strategy, we searched for the use of "value-based" OR "valuebased" OR "high-value" OR "value-driven" mentioned within three words-distance of the word "care" OR "healthcare" since a Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) term for VBHC is missing. Studies only reporting on value-based payment methods were excluded, as these are beyond the scope of our work.

(p2.3) Third, we searched for keywords describing a relation, a characteristic or action of a professional or an outcome relevant to professionals. Examples of keywords describing a relation were "affect, " "cause, " and "benefit." Keywords describing a characteristic or action of a professional included, among others, "attitude, " "knowledge, " and "behavior." Keywords describing an outcome relevant to professionals were abstracted from relevant literature and lists of human values (27,28) and included, among others, "workload, " "autonomy, " and "engagement."

(p2.4) The search string was piloted by checking whether a preselected set of 10 relevant studies was indeed retrieved when conducting the search, which was the case for all 10 studies. 
## (s7) The Relation Between VBHC and the Healthcare Professional
(p7.0) First, an inductive approach was applied to analyze the relation between VBHC and the healthcare professional using thematic analysis (28). This started with familiarization with the "Results" sections in the included studies and selection of relevant quotes. Afterwards, semantic codes that closely reflected the original authors wording were attached to the selected quotes. Subsequently, repeated patterns of meaning in these codes were clustered to generate latent themes describing the underlying codes. Last, the themes were revised and possible interconnectivity between themes was indicated to derive a thematic map. Atlas.TI software was used to facilitate this process.

(p7.1) The resulting thematic map showed various similarities with the Job Demands-Resources (JD-R) conceptual model (12). JD-R is a recognized psychosocial model applied to explore and design the interaction between "the job" and "the professional". More specifically, JD-R describes that work has certain characteristics that make professionals feel engaged or strained, depending on whether these are perceived to give energy, i.e., job resources, or take energy, i.e., job demands. The level of engagement and job strain can subsequently be used to predict performance. Since JD-R allows flexible use and tailoring to fit specific contexts (29), we iteratively adapted the JD-R model by including all abstracted data regarding the relation between VBHC and the professional. Use of JD-R as an underlying conceptual model allowed for our findings to be compared to earlier scholarly work on job demands and resources.

(p7.2) Subsequently, the resulting modified JD-R model was used for deductive analysis. Quotes from the "Results" sections in the included studies were selected and attached to one or multiple components of the modified JD-R model using Atlas.TI software. Consistent with the eligibility criteria, data about value-based payment and VBHC education were omitted. The resulting quotes were analyzed at both a latent and semantic level. The latent approach was applied to define whether experiences were a job resource or demand as this was often not explicitly mentioned. Next, we worked from the wording as used by the original author to inductively cluster similar data within the JD-R components to form codes. The resulting codes included among others "workload" and "joy in practice." Overall, the analysis process was iterative and evolved from description to interpretation. Throughout this process the descriptive evidence and interpretations were discussed with all co-authors to validate line of reasoning, comprehensiveness and adequate representation of the included studies.
## (s12) Study Setting
(p12.0) Healthcare professionals from the USA (n = 23), Sweden (n = 8), and The Netherlands (n = 7) were most frequently studied. No studies were performed in low-income countries. Four Swedish studies reported on the same intervention and population (24,(31)(32)(33). Hence, from the 45 studies included in this review 42 are unique.

(p12.1) From all studies, 24 took place in a hospital. The other studies focused on "accountable care organizations" (ACOs) (n = 2), primary care (n = 2), ambulatory care (n = 2), medical laboratory (n = 1), oral healthcare (n = 1), home care (n = 1), not applicable/specified (n = 3), or different combinations of care settings (n = 9), which included the above and new settings such as elderly care, maternity care, midwifery practice, and physiotherapy. The included studies focused on various medical specialties such as internal medicine, orthopedics and cardiovascular care. The studied populations were trained healthcare professionals (n = 31), residents (n = 7), or a combination of both (n = 2). Five studies focused on other healthcare actors or did not specify the composition of professionals involved.
## (s14) Research Design and Quality
(p14.0) Whereas few studies explicitly investigated the implementation process of VBHC [e.g., (24,34,35)], the majority of studies did not clarify the time frame between VBHC implementation and data collection for scholarly work. Other than one study deploying the JD-R model (23), none of the included studies built on existing conceptual models. Five validated research instruments to study VBHC in relation to the healthcare professionals were used, containing three full-scales (36)(37)(38), one sub-scale (39), and one observer-based instrument (40).

(p14.1) Quality appraisal showed that 22 studies were rated as high quality, 12 studies medium quality, and 11 studies low quality. Supplementary Material 2 provides details. Overall, qualitative studies scored highest and mixed methods studies had the lowest scores.

(p14.2) The Modified JD-R Model Figure 2 presents the modified JD-R model that the authors developed based on inductive analysis, subsequently applied for deductive analysis. Two modifications were made to the original JD-R model (12). First, an additional column was added on the left-side with elements specific to VBHC. These included the "professional, " the "job" of pursuing value in care and the "environment" in which VBHC takes place. This additional column allowed studying antecedents of job demands and resources. The column in the middle reflected the demands and resources that professionals experienced when providing VBHC. These demands and resources were connected to the right column comprising the constructs of employee well-being and job strain.

(p14.3) Second, as outcomes of employee well-being and job strain, we distinguished between "day-to-day" performance and long-term performance. The JD-R construct "performance" at the end of the conceptual model was omitted as it suggests a long-term focus. Although work can impact professionals' long-term performance, such as absence and intention to leave practice (41, 42), we concluded from the analysis of the included studies that VBHC needs to mature before it is possible to observe long-term effects of VBHC on professionals' performance. Hence, outcomes related to employee well-being and job strain were linked back to the left column that described the professionals' day-to-day performance in value-based work. Patient performance, such as health outcomes (18, 43), and organizational performance, such as operational and performance metrics (44,45), have been studied. However, these were omitted as they are not the scope of this study.
## (s25) Work Method
(p25.0) Professionals appreciated VBHC's contribution to easier, more effective and better structured ways of working (24,31,32,49,50). VBHC was mentioned to make patient follow-up easier, to bring more focus, specific tasks, and better insight in care processes. Moreover, VBHC was considered a tool for well-founded decisions and documentation (31,32). However, professionals mentioned to lack an approach to quality improvement and felt hindered by pathways and guidelines that were inexplicit and difficult to access and interpret (14,49,73). Organizational structure and division of financial responsibilities were environmental factors experienced to obstruct care processes (24).
## (s28) Teamwork and Communication
(p28.0) VBHC created organizational imperative for professionals to cooperate and was considered to facilitate cooperation by providing a shared language. This resulted in the perception of more and better teamwork (24,32,44,53,61,66,73). However, collaboration between silos was mentioned to cause confusion (24). Prompted by the environment, participants felt it was difficult to maintain staff engagement, faced adverse behavior of colleagues, and reported on being tangled up in discussions about (im)possibilities regarding data collection (33,47,49,51,73).
## (s30) Feedback and Opportunities for Personal Development
(p30.0) VBHC education and training, as environmental factors, have not been included in this study. However, it is of interest to note that professionals reported on learning potential being stimulated by outcome information (9,56), feedback tools (57), and pathways (73). However, professionals also recognized that pathways possibly limit learnings (73). Feedback tools were considered useful and when absent professionals experienced this as hindering (57).
## (s33) Authority and Say
(p33.0) Some professionals felt obstructed to participate in VBHC and drive VBHC as a team leader (14,24,33,55,76). This was caused by a lack of authority and say within their work environment. This lack was considered problematic as it hindered decision-making.
## (s35) Organizational Support and Legitimacy
(p35.0) Professionals experienced legitimacy in value-based work as a result of involving patient representatives (24), which was consequently considered a resource stemming from VBHC. There was variation to what extent professionals felt supported in their work environment. On the positive side, professionals described, among others, support from managers, leadership, and champions as role model (24,33,48,50,69). On the negative side, professionals described, among others, disinterest of managers, skepticism in IT departments and lack of, and unclear, policy (24,32,33,35,55,72,76). VBHC consultants and guidelines were mentioned to potentially be helpful but also risked to cause drawbacks when utilized inappropriately (24,55).
## (s39) Job Strain
(p39.0) Concerning job strain in VBHC, professionals experienced four negative outcomes, namely: exhaustion and energy drain (24,32,33), negative emotions (24,33,47,55,73), losing focus and getting stuck (24,33), and several concerns (24,31,32,48,50,51,53,55,56,69,(73)(74)(75)(76). Negative emotions comprised frustration, fear, and feelings of guilt. Concerns related to care quality, VBHC continuity, pathways use, legal repercussions in combination with use of outcomes, hierarchy, and sustainability of the care system. A single study investigated burn-out as an input variable, showing that residents who felt burned out after their education scored lower on the "high-value care culture" scale (38).

(p39.1) Exhaustion and energy drain was associated with the job demand inadequate "data and IT." Negative emotions were triggered by the job demands lack of "available time, " "teamwork" challenges, "role strain, " and inadequate "data and IT" including professionals' inabilities to change the IT system. Negative emotions also resulted from staffing constraints, hindering organizational structures and were associated with possible adverse consequences of pathways. Participants lost their focus and mentioned to risk not being able to uphold VBHC due the job demands "role strain, " insufficient "organizational support, " inadequate "pace of change and time availability, " challenging "patient contact, " meso-level obstacles and because of various concerns professionals had concerning VBHC.
## (s41) Job Demands-Resources in VBHC
(p41.0) This review confirms that VBHC "brings change to the current landscape by introducing new or different roles for people, different workflows or processes, and new tools or existing ones that have been used in other settings or all the above" (65). These changes impact the job demands and resources professionals experience in VBHC and, in turn, their well-being and job strain. More specifically, this review reveals that healthcare professionals in VBHC may experience 16 job resources and/or job demands, four constructs related to their well-being, and five constructs related to job strain. Figure 3 visualizes these outcomes in a modified Job Demands-Resources (JD-R) model.

(p41.1) Among others, the identified job resources suggest that VBHC connects professionals with their role and interest, making them appreciate VBHC as an approach to caring. Professionals report on increased meaning in their work and improved patient contact, teamwork, and communication. However, implementation of VBHC also takes energy from professionals. Although some studies report on reduced administrative workload in VBHC, other studies suggest that VBHC increases workload. This difference, as well as how other work factors are evaluated, may be partly explained by variety in professionals' work environments such as the level of organizational support, as elaborated below. Other job demands professionals may experience are role strain, teething problems with the transformation to VBHC and overall challenges evoked by change. Furthermore, within their organization, professionals seem to experience paucity of adequate IT resources, authority to implement VBHC and time to become acquainted with VBHC. Professionals also report on difficulties in discussing costs with patients. The latter is striking as we do not find literature that advises professionals to discuss costs with patients as part of VBHC besides themselves taking accountability for adequate use of resources. Hence, this disparity may suggest that the job demand that relates to discussing costs with patients is redundant.
## (s43) Limitations
(p43.0) This study has five biases. First, the identified outcomes of VBHC on professionals' experiences and their well-being may not be generalizable to all professionals working in a VBHC context for three reasons. Namely, scholars may use different criteria for judging whether their intervention is part of VBHC, studies report on different combinations of VBHC activities and -as this review concludes -experiences may be partly work environment specific. A second bias is that studies reporting on high-value care and high-value, cost-conscious care are generalized while there may be subtle differences between these care models. Hence, we may expect professionals to pursue slightly different behaviors in each of these care models, which, in turn, may evoke slightly different experiences and outcomes. Third, this review does not distinguish between the type of healthcare professional and her educational status. Clinicians, nurses, and residents, who form the main populations in the included studies, may fulfill different roles in VBHC and hence can be expected to have different experiences and encounter different personal outcomes. Consequently, based on this review, it is not possible to target focused interventions to specific populations. Fourth, the temporality of the findings is uncertain as some experiences and outcomes may be connected to implementation efforts more than being a lasting characteristic of VBHC. However, judging whether VBHC has become part of the normal work is complicated as this perception is suggested to vary from professional to professional (24). Last, assessing whether a job demand or resource is a characteristic of VBHC or a characteristic of the environment is a delicate task and requires certain interpretability as all care activities take place in an environment. This implies that different takes on the resulting overview of job demands and resources are possible.
