# An overview of solutions for airborne viral transmission reduction related to HVAC systems including liquid desiccant air-scrubbing

CorpusID: 242995623 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b6e519b17cea2b0ed8ecc103aac0e72070b1c2ce](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b6e519b17cea2b0ed8ecc103aac0e72070b1c2ce)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Medicine

## (s7) Use of light
(p7.0) The use of light has also been identified as a potential engineering control strategy for air cleaning due to its characteristics to inactivate microorganisms, such as bacteria, viruses and fungi [39,66]. Schuit et al. investigated the potential of using sunlight to inactivate the influenza virus [67] and SARS-CoV-2 [31], identifying an inverse correlation between the level of sunlight and virus transmission. Although potentially interesting considering the large availability of sunlight, further research is required to fully understand the characteristics of sunlight to inactivate coronaviruses [39].
## (s8) Working principle and sanitising characteristics
(p8.0) Liquid desiccant solutions could be employed as a potential alternative strategy for the inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 or other airborne pathogens in buildings, enclosed spaces or public transports. Liquid desiccant is a technology that uses hygroscopic solutions, usually LiCl, LiBr, CaCl 2 , HCO 2 K, TEG, etc., to dehumidify the air [12]. A schematic diagram of a liquid desiccant system in its conventional configuration is shown in Fig. 7, where the desiccant solution depending on its temperature and concentration is able to produce dry and hot/humid (usually as scavenging air) in the dehumidifier and regenerator, respectively.
## (s31) Use of light
(p31.0) The use of light has also been identified as a potential engineering control strategy for air cleaning due to its characteristics to inactivate microorganisms, such as bacteria, viruses and fungi [39,66]. Schuit et al. investigated the potential of using sunlight to inactivate the influenza virus [67] and SARS-CoV-2 [31], identifying an inverse correlation between the level of sunlight and virus transmission. Although potentially interesting considering the large availability of sunlight, further research is required to fully understand the characteristics of sunlight to inactivate coronaviruses [39].
## (s32) Working principle and sanitising characteristics
(p32.0) Liquid desiccant solutions could be employed as a potential alternative strategy for the inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 or other airborne pathogens in buildings, enclosed spaces or public transports. Liquid desiccant is a technology that uses hygroscopic solutions, usually LiCl, LiBr, CaCl 2 , HCO 2 K, TEG, etc., to dehumidify the air [12]. A schematic diagram of a liquid desiccant system in its conventional configuration is shown in Fig. 7, where the desiccant solution depending on its temperature and concentration is able to produce dry and hot/humid (usually as scavenging air) in the dehumidifier and regenerator, respectively.
## (s55) Use of light
(p55.0) The use of light has also been identified as a potential engineering control strategy for air cleaning due to its characteristics to inactivate microorganisms, such as bacteria, viruses and fungi [39,66]. Schuit et al. investigated the potential of using sunlight to inactivate the influenza virus [67] and SARS-CoV-2 [31], identifying an inverse correlation between the level of sunlight and virus transmission. Although potentially interesting considering the large availability of sunlight, further research is required to fully understand the characteristics of sunlight to inactivate coronaviruses [39].
## (s56) Working principle and sanitising characteristics
(p56.0) Liquid desiccant solutions could be employed as a potential alternative strategy for the inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 or other airborne pathogens in buildings, enclosed spaces or public transports. Liquid desiccant is a technology that uses hygroscopic solutions, usually LiCl, LiBr, CaCl 2 , HCO 2 K, TEG, etc., to dehumidify the air [12]. A schematic diagram of a liquid desiccant system in its conventional configuration is shown in Fig. 7, where the desiccant solution depending on its temperature and concentration is able to produce dry and hot/humid (usually as scavenging air) in the dehumidifier and regenerator, respectively.
