# Neuro-Ophthalmological Optic Nerve Cupping: An Overview

CorpusID: 245195120 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/65c2def4c7ec3b76b2f2c4558ba6e0179505d67e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/65c2def4c7ec3b76b2f2c4558ba6e0179505d67e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) "Cupping" is a term used to describe enlargement of the cup-to-disc ratio and is widely recognized as a feature of glaucoma; however, it is not pathognomonic. Since its discovery over 170 years ago, a large volume of the literature on optic disc cupping has accumulated, yet the mechanism is still not fully understood. Based on initial histopathological studies, the optic nerve cupping in glaucoma was thought to result from the loss of ganglion cell axon fibers and thinning and the posterior displacement of the lamina cribrosa. [1][2][3] When intraocular pressure is high, diagnosis of glaucoma is relatively easy. Glaucoma is also well known to spare central visual acuity and color vision until late stages. It also produces characteristic visual field defects such as nasal steps and arcuate defects. Diagnosis may become challenging if intraocular pressure remains within the generally considered normal limits and optic disc cupping is present. This cupping may be physiologic or related to a nonglaucomatous process and the better recognized processes include compressive optic neuropathies, hereditary optic neuropathies and arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy. Nonglaucomatous optic disc cupping is well known to occur with greater neuroretinal rim pallor and less profound excavation than seen in glaucoma and often has different visual manifestations. 4 However, clinically differentiating glaucomatous and non-glaucomatous optic nerve cupping remains challenging even for experienced observers, especially since pallor is a subjective sign. When there is advanced cupping and the visual function is severely depressed, this can be even more challenging and ancillary testing such as magnetic resonance imaging of the orbits with contrast may be necessary. The history of presenting illness is also important since acute vision loss and rapid vision loss are less likely to be glaucomatous unless there is a corresponding high intraocular pressure. Reviewing old records is also usually helpful since previous optic disc edema or a normal appearance of the optic nerve with vision loss argue against glaucoma. The highest payouts for medicolegal insurance claims were found to involve missed or poorly followed intracranial tumors causing optic nerve and visual field changes. 5 Trobe et al showed that 44% of eyes with nonglaucomatous optic atrophy were misdiagnosed as showing glaucoma in fundus stereophotographs by at least one observer. 4 The focus of this review is to describe the non-glaucomatous optic neuropathies that may present with cupping and review clinical features that may help differentiate nonglaucomatous cupping from glaucoma. The term "cupping" in this review will refer to the enlargement of the cup-to-disc ratio determined by clinical examination.
## (s3) DovePress
(p3.0) Eye and Brain 2021:13 256 form of cupping, and occurs in optic neuropathies in which the connective tissues of the optic nerve head have been damaged, becoming more susceptible to intraocular pressure (IOP) induced deformation. Whether the optic nerve head is initially damaged due to inflammatory, ischemic, or genetic causes, the process that leads to deformation of the damaged tissue is IOP related. 12 This explains how optic nerve head damage can occur due to a non-IOP related process yet appear "glaucomatous". Recent modelling studies investigating optic nerve head biomechanics have found that laminar cupping may be a biomechanical feedback mechanism to restore mechanical homeostasis. 13 This theory is also supported by studies showing that laminar cupping and thickening can have stress-lowering effects. 14,15
## (s7) Dovepress
(p7.0) Waisberg and Micieli neuroretinal rim and visual field defects that respect the vertical meridian. Glaucoma typically spares the papillomacular bundle until the late stages, which is why central acuity and color vision tend to be spared. 30 The advent of optical coherence tomography (OCT) has also been helpful since compressive optic neuropathies tend to cause atrophy of the temporal retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) and nasal hemi-macular ganglion cell layer-inner plexiform layer (GCIPL). In Figure 1, this 45-year-old woman had optic disc cupping greater in her right optic nerve due to a tuberculum sellae meningioma. In the right eye, she has temporal OCT RNFL thinning, which is not consistent with glaucoma and more consistent with a compressive optic neuropathy. Her visual field testing was not reliable and the OCT findings prompted neuroimaging that showed a tuberculum sellae meningioma compressing the right optic nerve. In many previous case reports reporting optic disc cupping from compressive lesions, it was clear that the patient did not suffer from glaucoma. For example, Portney and Roth 21 described a 51-year-old woman who reported reduced vision in her left eye and was found to have a "vertically oval cup elongated superiorly" due to left ophthalmic artery aneurysm. However, this patient had reduced visual acuity (20/50), which is atypical for glaucoma and color vision, which is also often reduced, was not reported. Moreover, Ahmed et al 31 presented a series of 4 of 62 patients (6.5%) of patients thought to have normal tension glaucoma who had compressive lesions of the anterior visual pathways. However, since only the visual fields and optic nerve photographs were provided, it is not known whether the patients had reduced visual acuity, colour vision or other clinical signs to suggest a compressive optic neuropathy that would prompt neuroimaging. Some patients may have both glaucoma and a lesion in close proximity to the anterior visual pathways that are incidental in nature. This requires special attention since patients may undergo unnecessary decompressive surgery. For example, Blumenthal et al 17 presented a case of an 87-year-old man with an early superior arcuate defect in the right eye and cup-to-disc ratios of 0.8 OD and 0.6 OS, but showed an MRI image where there was barely contact with the optic chiasm, which would not be expected to have any effect on vision. The intraocular pressure was reported to be 16 mm Hg or less in all visits, but the central corneal thickness was not reported.
## (s9) Ischemic
(p9.0) Ischemic optic neuropathy is the loss of function of a portion of the optic nerve due to ischemia and is categorized as anterior or posterior and arteritic and nonarteritic. Anterior ischemic optic neuropathies present with optic disc edema in the acute period and are far more common than posterior ischemic optic neuropathies, which are almost always seen in giant cell arteritis or postnon-ocular surgeries. Arteritic refers to a vasculitis and this is most often giant cell arteritis. Hayreh 3 hypothesized that three factors are responsible for optic nerve cupping in ischemic optic neuropathy: 1) destruction of prelaminar neural tissue, 2) retrolaminar fibrosis causing backward bowing of the lamina cribrosa and 3) destruction of laminar neural tissue and weakness of laminar connective tissue. As previously mentioned, cupping occurs more often and to a greater degree in arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AAION) compared to NAION. 8 In arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy 66 In the AAION group, the cup-to-disc ratio was of the normal eye was on average 0.33 compared to 0.85 mm in the affected eye. The NAION optic discs were classified as having segmental pallor (72%) or diffuse pallor (28%) rather than prominent cupping. This study made it very clear that the end-stage optic disc appearance is very different in AAION compared to NAION and an example of this is shown in Figure 5 of patients with AAION and NAION. It is thought that there is preservation of some blood flow in NAION since the pathophysiology likely involves transient hypoperfusion of the optic nerve head. This is in contrast to giant cell arteritis and AAION, which involves more dramatic ischemia likely involving occlusion of the posterior ciliary arteries and even the ophthalmic artery in some cases. It is also possible that the "disc-at-risk", the optic nerve with a small or absent physiologic cup, considered a necessary substrate for NAION, may make it more difficult to appreciate cupping. However, the very low recurrence rate of NAION in an 
## (s12) Dovepress
(p12.0) Waisberg and Micieli eye is likely related to a small increase in the cup-to-disc ratio seen with optic atrophy in this setting, resulting in the absence of a "disc-at-risk". Indeed, Contreras et al 70 reported that following the development of NAION, 48% of eyes had a cup-to-disc ratio that differed from the fellow eye by more than 0.1. An assessment of cupping by the minimum rim width at Bruch's membrane opening (MRW-BMO) is a metric that has shown value in differentiating glaucomatous and nonglaucomatous optic neuropathies including ischemic optic neuropathies. Leaney et al 71 compared 27 patients with normal tension glaucoma to 54 patients with non-glaucomatous optic neuropathies, including 22 with ischemic optic neuropathy. They determined the MRW-BMO using Spectralis OCT scans and found that MRW-BMO measures had a high level of sensitivity and specificity for differentiating Posterior ischemic optic neuropathy (PION) is a much rarer form of ischemic optic neuropathy and is considered a watershed infarct in a vulnerable arterial territory. Specifically, this is the pial capillary plexus that surrounds the optic nerve and is derived from collateral branches of the ophthalmic artery. In the acute setting, the optic nerve appears normal in those with PION and pallor is thought to be a characteristic chronic feature. Like anterior ischemic optic neuropathy, PION can be arteritic (related to GCA) or non-arteritic (typically related to post-operative vision loss). Hayreh reported that there was no difference in the optic disc pallor among the different types of PION and in a retrospective study of 42 patients with non-arteritic PION, an increased cup size was found in 2 eyes. 73 Significant cupping in non-arteritic PION is mainly limited to case reports and considered rare. 74 Other Optic Neuropathies (Infection, Traumatic)

(p12.1) Optic neuropathies other than compressive, hereditary, inflammatory, and ischemic are much rarer in the Western world. Case reports of other types of optic neuropathies with prominent cupping in the later stages of the disease have been reported, however. These include infectious optic neuropathies, particularly those caused by syphilis. Mansberger et al 75 presented a case of a 52-yearold woman with a history of neurosyphilis and chorioretinitis who was referred for optic disc cupping and worsening vision. She had been treated with intramuscular penicillin-G 4 years prior, but it remained unknown whether this was truly a change produced by syphilis. Rosdahl et al 76 reported the case of a 49-year-old man with neurosyphilis presenting with symmetric optic nerve cupping, significant temporal thinning of the RNFL and in the macula and loss of macular thickness in the superior 
## (s15) Dovepress
(p15.0) Waisberg and Micieli hemisphere of the left eye. However, it is not known as to when these visual field defects were truly from syphilis or whether he had optic disc cupping related to glaucoma and also had syphilis. Traumatic optic neuropathy may also result in cupping, but evidence is limited to case reports. Powell et al 77 reported the case of a 41-year-old male with a unilateral optic neuropathy following a medial orbital wall fracture. Examination revealed optic nerve pallor in the right eye, a significant visual field defect in the right eye, asymmetric cupping of the optic nerve, and an asymmetric colour deficit.
## (s17) High Myopia
(p17.0) Discs with high myopia require special attention, as high myopia is a risk factor in primary open-angle glaucoma. 92 Myopia can also cause visual field defects mimicking glaucoma in as high as 16.1% of patients. 93 Compared to normal eyes, myopic eyes typically have an optic disc that is: larger, more shallow, oval-shaped, obliquely oriented, and presence of neuroretinal rim thinning and peripapillary atrophy. 94,95 The "crescent moon" sign reported by Kim et al 96 is a useful screening tool for early detection of glaucoma when myopic tilted discs are encountered. The sign is defined as a discontinuity between the inferior or superior optic rim margin and the temporal optic rim margin, and is highly sensitive (90.0-91.4%).
