# Fat obtained from plastic surgery procedures-stem cells derived from adipose tissue and their potential in technological innovation: a narrative literature review and perspective on dissociative methods

CorpusID: 247387764 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed650ab73ce7179c1e5afe1d42d873b63b0756a1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed650ab73ce7179c1e5afe1d42d873b63b0756a1)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Fat tissue, like bone marrow, is derived from the mesenchyme and contains a stroma that is easily isolated, thus making it a potential source of regenerative cells [1,2]. It has been shown that the lipoaspirate is naturally a rich source of mesenchymal and stromal cells, exhibiting stable growth and kinetic proliferation in specific culture media [1,3]. When processed, these cells tend to concentrate in the stromal vascular fraction (SVF), which is the infranatant of the lipoaspirate [1]. When cultured in vitro, ASCs can differentiate into osteogenic, adipogenic, myogenic, and chondrogenic lineages when subjected to specific lineage factors [1]. On the other hand, the non-cultured heterogeneous population of cells, known as stromal cells (SCs) or SVF cells, contain ASCs, hematopoietic stem cells, progenitor cells, endothelial cells, red blood cells (RBCs), fibroblasts, lymphocytes, monocytes/macrophages, pericytes, and other cell types [4].

(p0.1) In clinical practice, adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal cells are generally not administered alone but as a constituent of the SVF, a heterogeneous mixture of cells resulting from aspirated adipose tissue processing [1]. Notably, the adipose tissue SVF has become the focus of mesenchymal cell research, regenerative medicine, and fat grafting, with new processing equipment and methods being developed worldwide. Indeed, the engineering associated with SVF cells represents an exciting field of research for different diseases, including degenerative, congenital, or traumatic conditions and bone, joint, and soft tissue defects. These cells are primarily used in plastic surgery to supplement fat grafts, improving graft retention and long-term results [5][6][7].

(p0.2) The SVF can be dissociated and isolated from the adipose tissue using enzymatic and nonenzymatic methods, manually, or in an automated closed system. The most used isolation protocol involves washing the lipoaspirate, digesting it with collagenase enzyme, centrifugation, and RBC lysis [1]. It should be pointed out that despite the frequent use of this technique, there are challenges and barriers associated with collagenase, making it currently only appropriate for in vitro and in vivo animal studies. This observation opens up the perspective for more innovative techniques that can be utilized in humans.
## (s8) Techniques
(p8.0) For example, in a different type of study, Vindigni et al. (2013) combined the great facility of ASCs to differentiate by applying an external mechanical stimulus that successfully creates a tendon-like structure reconstructed in vitro with a microcapillary network [38]. This study shows that physical factors influence the activity of ASCs, and mechanical stimuli, generated in vitro by bioreactors, can produce a transplantable vascularized tendon, representing an inexhaustible source of possibilities in tissue repair clinically.

(p8.1) Sesé et al. (2019) evaluated cell yields obtained from the generation of nanofat particles compared to traditional enzymatic dissociation methods [39]. Comparing the two methods showed that mechanical disaggregation provided a better cell inoculum than conventional enzymatic dissociation methods, using ten times less adipose tissue as starting material and providing a higher cell yield. The technology and products developed by Tulip Medical allow researchers and medical doctors to mechanically break down the adipose tissue into small fat particles, known as nanofat, immediately after the fat tissue is removed from the patient. The study compared chemical dissociation with mechanical but had two significant limitations. The first was that the authors used different fat tissue collection processes for each dissociation method. For more reliable and acceptable results, the same collection procedure should have been performed. The second concerns mechanical digestion, which discarded fluids after the liposuction process, eliminating a substantial percentage of the cell precipitate.

(p8.2) Vezzani et al. (2019) [34] performed cellular phenotyping and characterized mechanically fragmented human liposuction material. The authors found that mechanical dissociation of liposuctions resulted in the production of micro-fragmented adipose tissue (MAT), consisting of adipocyte aggregates with a microvascular network. They found that the mechanical micro-fragmentation process did not affect the perivascular cell compartment due to the presence of perivascular cells, both pericytes and adventitia, which were confirmed by flow cytometry. Furthermore, cytokines and angiogenic factors produced by both MAT and the SVF were more abundant in the MAT supernatants. Consequently, MAT digested with collagenase and placed in culture produced a secretome similar to conventional SVF. These results demonstrate that MAT is therapeutically beneficial and amenable to phenotypic and functional investigations. Additionally, the small size of the MAT clusters allows researchers to measure culture secretory activity, which is more challenging with larger adipose tissue pieces. It is important to point out that identifying specific cells in the fragmented lipoaspirate promoted the development of this innovative technology.

(p8.3) The study of Bi et al. (2018) compared mechanical dissociation (i.e., nanofat) with slight chemical dissociation (0.2 mg/mL collagenase type I for 15 min), referred to as Vivo nanofat [40]. The size of the transplanted nanofat graft was smaller than Vivo nanofat. The authors also observed that the number of viable adipocytes, colony formation, and MSCs expression was more remarkable in Vivo nanofat. However, the authors reduced the collagenase concentration and incubation period (0.2 mg/ml for 15 min) for the chemical dissociation compared to standard methods for isolating MSCs from adipose tissue (0.075% for 30 min). Notably, the experiments should have been limited to the animal model and not used in humans since even small concentrations of collagenase could harm the patient. Moreover, only the supernatant is collected after digestion, and the infranatant is apparently discarded. As previously mentioned, ASCs are concentrated in the SVF, which is the infranatant following enzymatic digestion.
## (s9) Computational model
(p9.0) Our search also identified a 3D computational fluid dynamics model based on a differential pressure laminar flow bioreactor prototype developed to examine the performance of constant changes in the culture environment [41]. This model characterizes the flow and pressure distribution within a perfusion bioreactor prototype, uniting biotechnology with computational Big Data, resulting in more precise control of the culture media. Next, we will discuss articles that reported innovative approaches for incorporating ASCs into tissue scaffolds, a theme observed in most of the selected articles.
## (s10) Tissue scaffolds
(p10.0) In the study by Tang et al. (2019), the effect of monocytes/ macrophages on the osteogenic differentiation of adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) in three dimensional (3D) cocultures was evaluated [42]. The authors showed that monocytes and macrophage subtypes inhibit the osteogenic differentiation of ASCs in 3D PLGA/PCL structures. More specifically, the cocultured monocytes/macrophages decreased the expression of osteogenic markers such as ALP, BSP, and RUNX2. These results highlight the overlooked fact that inflammation can regulate osteoblasts from MSC-based bone constructs within the bone microenvironment. In this sense, the tight control of inflammation may be necessary to create an anabolic environment and improve cell-based bone construct performance.

(p10.1) McMaster et al. (2019) demonstrated that melt electrowriting (MEW) could be adapted for seeding multicellular spheroids [43]. The authors manufactured this scaffold in sheet form and produced spheroids containing 1000-2000 ASC aggregates inside each pore. The cultures are easy to handle and can be transferred to other sites for mixed implants containing living organic and inorganic elements, augmenting implant grip and adaptation. This purely innovative and applied technology was due to the utility of 3D printers and the new electro-engraving by fusion technique.

(p10.2) In the study by Pati et al. (2014), the authors developed a method of biological imprinting with laden cells incorporated into a decellularized extracellular matrix (dECM) [44]. The bioink provides a favorable microenvironment for 3D tissue growth. The ability to print analog tissue structures by providing living cells with the appropriate material in a defined and organized way, in the right place, in sufficient numbers, and in the right environment, is critical for many emerging technologies. The concept of tissue and organ printing or bioprinting is performed in a liquid medium, making it useful for in vivo tissue engineering experiments and in vitro experiments with drugs and tissue models and tumor growth.

(p10.3) In the study by Rath et al. (2016), stem cells from ASCs or bone marrow MSCs were tested for their ability to differentiate into highly porous 3D 45S5 Bioglass® scaffolds [45]. Interestingly, after five passages, ASCs differentiate into a bioactive glass, even without any means of differentiation. This technology, based on Bioglass scaffolds, opens up new possibilities for use in bone tissue engineering.

(p10.4) The study by Tong et al. (2018) was the first to evaluate the effect of breast epithelial cells on human ASCs in 3D culture [46]. This study revealed that ASCs form structures similar to acinar cells and exhibit characteristics of epithelial differentiation when stimulated by the HBL-100 mammary epithelial cell lineage in 3D. In the clinical context, the findings show that ASC characteristics are beneficial for cell-assisted lipotransfer for breast reconstruction since they can promote mammary gland growth. However, care must be taken when ASCs are cultured and expanded in vitro and then transplanted because little is known about the interactions between exogenous ASC and the breast epithelium.

(p10.5) An innovative 3D cell mass (3DCM) based on cell adhesion was described by Park et al. (2014). This study evaluated the therapeutic potential of 3DCMs composed of ASCs [47]. The 3DCM culture promoted efficient vascular stem cell differentiation. Additionally, 3DCM transplantation resulted in direct vascular regeneration of the injected cells and improved therapeutic efficacy. The authors also showed that 3D cell aggregates prevent cell apoptosis and promote cell stabilization. In ischemia models, stem cell spheroids improved therapeutic efficacy through enhanced cell viability and paracrine effects.

(p10.6) Other tissue scaffold-related articles described specific supplements that could serve as therapies or improve surgical outcomes. For example, the effects of exosomes derived from human ASC (ASC-Exos) on the regeneration of peripheral nerves in vitro and in vivo were investigated by   [48]. The authors observed that human ASC-Exos promoted the axonal growth of neurons. This study represents a potential treatment for nerve regeneration and nerve tissue engineering.

(p10.7) In the study by Wang et al. (2018), collagen scaffolds and ASCs were combined for bone regeneration of the oral and calvaria mucosa using resveratrol (RSV) [49], which affects the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. The experiment proves to be innovative since it aimed to identify active substances like RSV that can activate the cellular potential of ASCs.

(p10.8) The study by Mou et al. (2019) showed that extracellular vesicles from adipose tissue-derived MCSs improve the vascularization of fat grafts and increase their retention rate [50]. The innovative aspect of this study is that the authors used adipose tissue MCSs and the extracellular vesicles, a by-product of the cell culture. Furthermore, using tissue engineering in which a Matrigel scaffold was colonized with umbilical vein endothelial cells supplemented with extracellular vesicles, the authors evaluated the angiogenic retention regenerative potentials of the transplanted adipose tissue. This complex but simultaneously simple and innovative process has great potential for clinical applicability.

(p10.9) In the study by Lin et al. (2009), it was hypothesized that polyethersulfone (PES) surfaces modified with the fibronectin-based Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) peptide sequence would increase ASC adhesion compared to the unmodified cells [51]. By evaluating ASC fixation and proliferation on PES surfaces modified with different fibronectin-derived peptide sequences and using cutting-edge biotechnology to evaluate RGD-treated surfaces to attach a more significant number of ASCs, the authors were able to develop a model that bridges bioreactor technology to in vitro 3D cell cultures and prospective studies of 3D tissues with fluid mechanics. Hu et al. (2015) microencapsulated insulin growth factor-1 (IGF1) in poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) scaffolds and implanted them into mice. The authors found that IGF1 positively regulates Axin2 and PPARc and simultaneously attenuates Wnt/b-catenin under adipogenic conditions, promoting a lineage bias towards CD31( −)/34( +)/146( −) cells at the expense of CD31( −)/34( +)/146( +) cells and leading to adipogenesis in vitro and in vivo [52]. This innovative study has direct implications related to obesity and adipose regeneration.

(p10.10) In the study by Kim et al. (2015), the effect of different sized silicon dioxide particles on the growth of and mitogenactivated protein kinase signaling in ASCs was verified [53]. This study demonstrated that only nanoparticles (NPs) with a 50-120 nm diameter are beneficial, while microparticles can induce apoptosis. Silica-based scaffolds and coated plates have hydrophilic properties, and it was also shown that only silica NPs entered cells, and some were clustered in vesicles, suggesting that silica NPs enter cells partly by endocytosis.
## (s11) Therapies/treatments
(p11.0) Beyond describing and discussing some innovative and exciting emerging technologies in the field, other articles provided insights into novel therapies and treatments. For example, the immunomodulatory effect of purified human perivascular stromal cells (PSCs) implanted during bone formation was reported by   [34]. The study demonstrated that differentiated cells from the perivascular region of the adipose stroma have a different phenotypic differentiation from the total cells of the SVF. These observations are particularly relevant to bone induction and differentiation and open up several lines of research investigating PSC versus SVF bone differentiation.

(p11.1) In another study by , high WISP-1 expression was observed in human PSCs in vivo after purification and transplantation into a bone defect [62]. Previously, WISP-1 was defined for its role as a bone matrix protein and its upregulation of osteoblastogenic differentiation into other types of osteoblastic cells. However, this study demonstrated a new role for WISP-1 signaling in stromal progenitor cells in the perivascular niche of human adipose tissue. Moreover, the authors implicated WISP-1 in promoting angiogenesis, especially tumorassociated angiogenesis. This study complemented the previous one and built upon it by showing the relationship of perivascular adipose stromal cells with the WISP-1e activity of the osteogenic marker, implicating these cells as progenitors of osteogenic activity and opening up several research paths with these differentiated cells that do not need expansion.

(p11.2) In the study by Chen et al. (2019), a new method which is immobilization method by self-assembly of biotinylated MSC-EVs on the surface of biotin-doped polypyrrole titanium (Bio-Ppy-Ti) was reported to improve in vitro and in vivo biofunction that could be applied to bone regeneration [63]. In this study, human fat ASC-derived exosomes were stably anchored in a scaffold produced by the electropolymerization of a biotin-doped polypyrrole film on titanium EV-Bio-Ppy-Ti and incorporated into the differentiation process of cultured osteoblasts. The authors assessed osteoinduction and found it to be 185 times greater than the control cells [48]. This technology is particularly relevant to individuals requiring metallic titanium implants. Tawonsawatruk et al. (2016) investigated the capacity of human bone marrow-derived MSCs and human adipose tissue-derived pericytes percutaneously administered to the bone fracture gap to prevent pseudarthrosis [64]. In this study, innovation and technology came together to create a method for measuring bone healing of non-atrophic fracture union, from mathematical methods for measuring bone callus to the use of Micro-CT to assess bone density and thickness of trabeculae, histological evaluations and mechanical tests to determine final load and tension and ending with radioisotope cell tracking tests to track and display the contribution of transplanted cells to repair and remodeling. Thus, it shows the preparation and scientific rigor in detecting functional evidence using state-of-the-art technology from different technological sectors. It also brought an immense contribution to clinical applicability.

(p11.3) A novel physical approach was also identified to produce a cell-free aqueous extract of human adipose tissue [65]. The therapeutic potential of fat extract (FE) was investigated in the hindlimb of nude mice following ischemia. This study is extraordinarily innovative and uses a different mechanical dissociation from those previously demonstrated. The in vitro and in vivo experiments showed that endothelial cells assume a tubular formation and are induced with and without FE when combined with Matrigel scaffold formation. A significant advantage of this technology is that no immunological rejection should occur when using cell-free FE, meaning that FE could be marketed as an "off-the-shelf" product for treating ischemic disorders. This study, in particular, supports the idea that no fluid should be discarded from the chemical or mechanical dissociation of adipose tissue without fully understanding its properties since it is possible that these "waste products" contain valuable material with regenerative potential. The innovative adipose tissue dissociative methods and all of the currently available information could attenuate the waste of cells and derivatives and generate different products from the human lipoaspirate.

(p11.4) Based on the results of this review article, it is clear that biotechnology, Big Data, and technological disruption have entered the plastic surgeon's world and have started to change our way of thinking, guiding us to a horizon of new ideas and innovation.
