# Current Status of Evidence for a New Diagnosis: Food Addiction-A Literature Review

CorpusID: 245828796 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bfe6cb2a0701859f23b02f291558b6ccc0f5eb0d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bfe6cb2a0701859f23b02f291558b6ccc0f5eb0d)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s5) Clinical Definitions and Suggested Criteria for Diagnosis
(p5.0) Food addiction is defined as an "eating behavior involving the overconsumption of specific foods in an addiction-like manner" (21). Not all foods are equally addictive, therefore an investigation of the chemical characteristics that may trigger addictive behaviors is needed. Hyperpalatable foods, containing high proportion of saturated fat, sugar, artificial flavors, or sodium have been associated with addictive properties, and public health interventions focused on reducing the impact of addictive drugs may have also a role in targeting obesity and other, related, metabolic diseases (4). "Sugar addiction" is a subtype of food addiction which is considered to be defined by overconsumption of highly processed foods with rich sugar content (22). Sugar may be addictive through potent reinforcing effects via both gustatory and postingestive pathways (23). If sweetness or nutritional signals engage distinctive brain pathways to motivate ingestion is still a matter of debate (23). In mice there are evidence that separate basal ganglia circuitries are responsible for the hedonic and nutritional actions of sugar, and the cell-specific ablation of dopamine-excitable cells in dorsal, but not ventral, striatum inhibited sugar's ability to drive the ingestion of unpalatable foods (23). The non-alimentary stimulation of dopamine-excitable cells in dorsal, but not ventral, striatum determined the ingestion of unpalatable foods (23). In conclusion, sugar recruits a specific dopaminergic circuitry that acts to prioritize energy-seeking over taste quality, and its localization and functioning indicate a possible involvement of the reward system (23). A literature review focused on sugar and food addiction did not find, however, enough evidence to support the existence of sugar addiction in humans, while data from the animal literature suggest that addiction-like behaviors occur only in the context of intermittent access to sugar (as a consequence of limited access to sweet tasting/highly palatable foods, not due to the neurochemical effects of sugar) (22). "Chocolate addiction" was investigated in a study (N = 50 participants, self-defined as "chocoholics") and the average consumption reported was 60 grams chocolate per week, with specific craving for chocolate about 6 times a week (24). The amount of chocolate consumed was significantly correlated with disinhibition, and 76% of the respondents centered their definition of chocolate addiction on a lack of control around the trigger-food (24). The addictive factor in chocolate was reported to be orosensory, i.e., taste, smell, and texture (16). Consumers who preferred to eat in secret reported a higher degree of aberrant eating (24). Another study (N = 15 subjects, self-labeled as "chocolate addicted, " age between 18 and 49) identified several psychological effects reported secondary to the chocolate consumption (an average of 50 g per day of pure cacao): feelings of increased energy, increased concentration ability, and anxiolytic effect during stress (25). Minor withdrawal symptoms were described in 7 cases, and mood disorders, anxiety disorders, pathological personality features were identified in this sample (25).

(p5.1) "Fast food addiction" is yet another controversial subject, with factors like certain nutrients, the characteristics of fast food consumers and the presentation/packaging of fast food being analyzed as potential triggers for dependence (26). High fat and salt content of the fast food, combined with caffeine and rich in sugar beverages served in this type of restaurants contribute to the addictive potential (26). Fast food advertisement provide environmental cues that may trigger addictive overeating, and another important aspect is that obese patients tend to eat more fast food than general population (26). Therefore, obesity may be supported by the rewarding properties of fast food, and lead to tolerance due to leptin and other hormonal imbalance, a phenomenon which further lead to lack of appetite suppression.

(p5.2) "Fat rich food addiction" can be a diagnosable condition, as this food (usually combined with high salt or sugar) is hyperpalatable, and it is liable to be consumed in excess amounts (27). Psychological vulnerabilities like attentional biases have been identified in people presenting tendency toward this type of addiction, while craving and liking for fat has been explored in patients reporting high consumption of saturated fats, meat, butter, sweetened cream desserts, and pastries (27).

(p5.3) Diagnostic criteria for food addiction have mainly been extrapolated from the DSM criteria for substance dependence, based on the model of a common pathogenetic and clinical background for behavioral and drug addictions (28). The consumption of more than initially desired substance/food, or for a longer period of time, intense preoccupation with the substance/food, craving for specific substance/food, and continuous use despite knowledge of adverse events have been the core criteria for the diagnosis of food addiction (7,28).
## (s6) Psychometric Evaluation
(p6.0) The Yale Food Addiction Scale (YFAS) was created in 2009 for the measurement of the food addiction severity, based on the DSM-IV criteria for substance dependence and updated to YFAS 2.0 after the publication of DSM-5 (29,30). The content of YFAS is represented by 25 questions adapted to assess the full range of diagnostic criteria for dependence in case of overconsuming high fat-or high sugar-containing foods in the last 12 months (29). This scale has good internal consistency, incremental, and convergent validity (29). The YFAS uses two scoring systems for food addiction symptoms (from 0 to 7, according to the DSM-IV diagnosis criteria) and diagnosis (in patients who endorse 3 or more symptoms plus clinical impairment/distress in the past year) (29). There are several limitations in the interpretation of the YFAS scores derived from the fact that it is self-administered and from its restrictive, DSM criteria-based, perspective.

(p6.1) The latest form, YFAS 2.0, is a longer version that contains 35 items, with 4 new criteria added, namely craving, use despite interpersonal or social consequences, failure in role obligations, and use in hazardous situations, according to DSM-5 criteria (30,31). This version has unifactorial structure and presents high convergent validity with measures of impulsive eating, obesity, and weight cycling (30,31).
## (s7) Prevalence and Risk Factors
(p7.0) Food addiction was found more frequently in patients with obesity, severe depression, higher impulsivity, posttraumatic stress disorder, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in childhood (8). According to a systematic review (n = 25 studies, N = 196,211 patients, 60% overweight/obese) the prevalence of food addiction was almost 20%, based on the YFAS scores (8). Factors like the age >35, female gender, and higher BMI values were correlated with higher risk for food addiction (8).

(p7.1) In obese/overweight sample the incidence of food addiction was double than in the healthy BMI sample (25 vs, 11%), and it was also double in females compared to males (12 vs. 6.4%) (8). In both food addiction and substance use disorders similar clinical, neurobiological, psychopathological and sociocultural risk factors have been found by multiple studies (35).
## (s9) Treatment
(p9.0) Food addiction is a complex and multidimensional disorder, with an intricate bio-psycho-social pathogenesis, therefore requiring an integrated therapeutic approach, consisting of psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, and social oriented support (Figure 4) (35).

(p9.1) Because no well-defined diagnostic criteria for food addiction exist, and the population reported to present this disorder is very heterogeneous, no clinical trial focused on the treatment was identified in the literature. Therefore, data regarding the therapeutic interventions are derived from trials with other, related, eating disorders and from different case management strategies that are based on the presumed neuropathological substrate.

(p9.2) Serotonin, dopamine, and endogenous opioids are considered the main neurotransmitters involved in the dysregulation of eating behaviors, therefore pharmacologic agents targeting these systems have been suggested as possible interventions in food addiction. Lorcaserin is a 5HT2C receptor agonist administered for the treatment of obesity, but it has also been recommended for patients diagnosed with drug dependence, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and gambling disorder (43). Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors were efficient for treatment of binge eating disorder and they were associated with the highest rate of symptoms reduction in placebo-controlled trials (54). Tricyclic antidepressants (desipramine, imipramine) and dual, serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (duloxetine) may also be useful for this pathology (54). Bupropion may also be useful in the treatment of food addiction based on its favorable effects in obese patients with binge-eating disorder (55). Anticonvulsants (topiramate, lamotrigine) have been proven efficient in binge eating disorder, anti-obesity agents may help by targeting consequences of food addiction, while antiaddiction drugs (acamprosate, opioid antagonists) may target the reward system involved in the response to hyperpalatable stimuli (54). The synergistic combination naltrexone/bupropion has been proven more efficient when combined with lifestyle intervention and calorie reduction for patients with obesity than each individual medicine alone (56).

(p9.3) Based on the high degree of overlap between binge eating disorder and food addiction, the main psychotherapeutic interventions recommended are cognitive-behavioral therapy (with anti-binging effects maintained on followup), interpersonal therapy (decreased binge eating behavior and depressive comorbidity), dialectical behavior therapy (decreased binge eating behavior and associated eating disorder psychopathology), behavioral weight loss, self-help techniques, or combined therapies (54). Overeaters Anonymous (OA) and Weight Watchers International (WW) are self-help groups emphasizing psychological and spiritual components (OA) or behavioral strategies (WW) that provide a framework for developing positive, adaptive, and self-nurturing modalities to cope with eating disorders and obesity (57).

(p9.4) Neuromodulation techniques have also been explored for their potential of reducing craving and addictive behaviors (58). Decrease of substance craving has been demonstrated for transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) or repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) applied to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), an area involved in the inhibitory control, mediated by dopaminergic neurotransmission (58). In adults with food craving (N = 19), tDCS improved the percentage of change in cravings rating from pre-to poststimulation significantly more than sham tDCS (59). Posthoc analyses suggest that active prefrontal tDCS acutely and significantly decreased food cravings for sweet foods more than sham tDCS (59).

(p9.5) Macro-social interventions may be focused on changing the availability of addictive foods, on increasing the taxation for these products or for their ingredients, on decreasing the marketing of these type of products for children and adolescents, or on increasing the availability of healthier foods (4).

(p9.6) Preventive measures are important for food addiction and for decreasing the incidence of obesity, although it should be noted that not all patients with food addiction are obese or viceversa. Avoidance of triggers for food consumption that may be included in the daily routine (e.g., visual stimuli, like commercials, or olfactory stimuli, like passing by a bakery on the way to work), eating only when someone is feeling hungry (using a 0 to 10 points scale, from starvation to overeating, may be useful in grading the need to eat), improving the emotional control, and regular physical exercise are simple methods that may have a significant impact (60).
## (s10) DISCUSSION
(p10.0) Food addiction is a controversial diagnosis which is not included in the current classificatory systems created by either American Psychiatric Association or World Health Organization (1, 3). Also, no unanimously accepted, well-defined diagnosis criteria were detected in the literature during this review. However, the vast majority of the found papers used the same criteria for food addiction that are commonly used for substance use disorders. A set of psychometric instruments has been validated (YFAS, mYFAS, YFAS 2.0, YFAS-C) for quantification of the food addiction severity in adult and children populations.

(p10.1) As in the case of other behavioral addictions, the neurobiological, and psychological factors contributing to the food addiction pathophysiology are common with other substance use disorders. The main explanation for the pathogenesis of food addiction remains a dysfunction in the reward system. Similar clinical, neurobiological, psychopathological, and sociocultural risk factors have been identified in food addiction and substance use disorders (35).
