# Artificial intelligence and data processing in injury diagnosis and prevention in competitive sports: A literature review Volume 13 Issue 2 -2021 Artificial intelligence and data processing in injury diagnosis and prevention in competitive sports: A literature review 35

CorpusID: 244916775 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6dcda3d4121ae5c92f4628ccde3f67e82bfd7914](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6dcda3d4121ae5c92f4628ccde3f67e82bfd7914)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s2) The use of fuzzy sets
(p2.0) Even from the previous decade researchers examined how fuzzy systems can help in the multifaceted decision-making process. Innocent et al. 1 reviewed the case of fuzzy systems for medical diagnosis. In their paper, the authors referred to the categorical consistency, which can help achieve repeatable classification performance. Categorical consistency is a requirement for consultation systems, where one should be able to classify the same situation in the same category in a repeated way. The creation of consistent groups for classification is based upon intelligent processing, which allows the re-consideration of the classification schemes, as in sports injuries and different patients' cases. In this complex situation, fuzzy neural networks can understand and facilitate the classification procedure. The system developed by Inoccent et al. 1 is based on the extraction of features from bone scan (radiographic) images that were later analysed through a clustering algorithm, within the framework of Adaptive Resonance Theory (ART). This resulted in the creation of the ART fuzzy neuro-clustering technique. The authors concluded that vague representation and the fuzzy neural clustering methods had improved the radiographic images' classification process, even though there is intrinsic vagueness. However, these two studies do not refer to sports medicine; hence, more research in the application of these techniques in the prevention and diagnosis of the sport-related injury is vital.
## (s3) The use of artificial neural networks
(p3.0) Jaspers et al. 14 used in their research an artificial neural network (2018) to examine the association between external and internal training load in athletes of professional soccer. This study aimed to investigate the prediction of perceived exertion in this sport, which may be used to prevent injuries. This study indicated that artificial neural networks could be successfully used to predict the training load, and thus for load monitoring in soccer athletes. Similarly, Bartlett et al. 15 used artificial neural networks to examine their added value in predicting perceived exertion from training load variables in team sport athletes. Their study concluded that machine learning approaches might perform better compared to more traditional methods. Thus, they are promising in accurate training prescription and evaluation, hence avoiding overtraining and injury.
## (s4) The use of other models
(p4.0) The study of Whiteside et al. 19 examined the use of naïve Bayes and support vector machine to predict factors in ulnar collateral ligament reconstruction surgeries in the case of players in Major League Baseball. The model successfully classified 66.8% of patients and identified six primary elements. Overall, this study's results indicate that machine learning models can improve the prevention of UCL reconstruction surgery in baseball players. Bayesian regulated neural networks, along with Gaussian distributions, were used in the study of Ertelt, et al. 20 to examine ground reaction force patterns in a sample of male athletes from different sports. The model successfully classified 94.29% of cases, leading to a promising and adequate method for classifying forced patterns. Bayesian classification and Assistant algorithm for top-down induction of decision trees classifier as artificial intelligence tools were used from Zelic et al. 21 to diagnose sports injuries. The model was not successful initially, and for this reason, the authors added expert-defined diagnostic rules as preclassifiers. The authors proposed the final model that the Bayesian classifier with the fuzzy discretisation of numerical attributes was accurate, and for this reason, as a promising machine learning tool that can help physicians in their decision-making process. Lu et al. 22 used Bayesian theory, likelihood ratios, and predictive data mining to improve the precision in the diagnosis of rotator cuff tears. The authors concluded that this model could be a useful tool in classification and the diagnosis of rotator cuff tears.

(p4.1) The use of EMG vectors was examined in the study of Malfait et al. 23 in the case of jump landing activities, to identify potential associations between neuromuscular activation patterns and landing kinematics multidirectional sports (e.g. volleyball and handball), to determine possible risk injury. The results were promising for the use of EMG vectors. Various machine learning approaches were examined in the study of López-Valenciano et al. 24 to identify the best-performing injury risk factor model to identify athletes at risk for lower extremity muscle injuries case of professional handball and soccer players. The authors concluded that the best model was the model generated by the Smoote Boost technique. Rossi et al. 25 developed an artificial intelligence multi-dimensional model based on machine learning and GPS training data to forecast soccer players' injuries. The model proposed it was both interpretable and accurate, leading to promises in the field of injury prevention in soccer players and interpreting the relation between training and injury. The performance of various artificial intelligence tools, with an emphasis upon artificial neural networks, was examined in weight training from Novatchkov and Baca. 26 The study results indicated that artificial intelligence could assess and help in the classification in the case of weight training, which can help in the prevention of sports injuries.
## (s5) Future challenges
(p5.0) One possible future trend in applying artificial intelligence in sports medicine is related to crowd innovation, along with the use of artificial intelligence. As Mak et al. 27 argue, "crowd innovation has been successfully applied to a variety of genomic and computational biology problems by using prize-based competitions to identify extreme value solutions that outperform those developed by conventional academic approaches, whereas "artificial intelligence has been successfully applied to diagnostic subspecialties of medicine". The authors implemented a three-phase, prize-based crowd innovation program of ten weeks, where 34 contestants submitted 45 algorithms, identified multiple AI solutions in the case of lung tumours within the context of radiation therapy. The authors concluded that online content could help address unmet needs and apply new skills in medicine's artificial intelligence methods. This program can also be implemented in sports medicine, to create new ways for preventing and diagnosing injuries and the risk of injury in the case of athletes.

(p5.1) Artificial intelligence applies machine learning techniques that can help physicians in complex decision-making processes, especially in risk predictions and prevention, based upon the power of computers to make predictions and model patterns, through learning by their associations. However, this computational intelligence comes with some limitations, concerning two significant areas: a) bias concerning the interpretation of the data and data inputs to better understand the quantified benefit for athletes; b) ethical dilemmas concerning legislation and athlete-related information. 28 Also, more empirical research is needed to examine the performance of specific artificial intelligence techniques. This is based on the fact that there are studies where these techniques have poor performance. For instance, Ruddy et al. 29 used various machine learning techniques and the Bayesian network to predict hamstring strain injury in elite Australian footballers. However, according to their conclusions, these models were characterised by poor predictive performance. Hence, the authors do not recommend the use of artificial intelligence techniques. In another study, the study of Taylor et al, 30 artificial intelligence integrated into a combination of ground reaction force patterns and biomechanics (screening) was used in risk injury assessment in the case of activities such as jump landing in female athletes playing multidirectional sports. This study aimed to examine the extent to which lower extremity biomechanics measured during a jump landing on a double leg after a sagittal plane movement is representative of biomechanics measured during single-leg or frontal plane jump landing tasks. The results indicated that standard doubleleg sagittal plane jump landing tasks might not adequately represent the lower extremity biomechanics during single-leg activities. For this reason, more research is needed in the case of screening and preventing injury risk in neuromuscular injury prevention programs.

(p5.2) Finally, within the framework of computational intelligence, Fister, Ljubic, Suganthan, Perc and Fister (2015) argue that there is one more significant challenge that needs to be addressed and overcome: data mining. The authors conclude that sport research studies are based on data mining. However, the current data mining techniques are not sufficient and adequate in addressing the complexity of the sports medicine field. For this reason, Fister et al. 31 call for an artificial trainer, who should provide all the services provided by a human coach at a lower cost. For this artificial trainer to be effective, should incorporate the following features: clustering, classification, sequential pattern mining, and association rule mining. Furthermore, computational intelligence algorithms that can virtual simulations and detect factors related to injuries are also necessary.
