# How Does Learning Analytics Contribute to Prevent Students' Dropout in Higher Education: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 243785565 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/abcec95da0d4c7cd5aa33b902362556dd62d5181](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/abcec95da0d4c7cd5aa33b902362556dd62d5181)

Fields: Education, Computer Science

## (s18) How Has LA Been Deployed in the Studies Produced?
(p18.0) For this part of the study, we focused on the main objectives of the analysed articles. Most of the studies aim at providing some prediction, such as, for example, [73], where the authors wish to predict a set of 8 variables. Some studies aim at predicting student performance [79,91] or grades [71,90,111] in order to improve it [100].
## (s20) How Effective Is LA in Reducing Student Dropout?
(p20.0) In general terms, the models and works described in the analysed documents are able to perform early prediction of the intended information (for example, students' performance or grades), allowing the teacher and/or the institution to take actions to avoid undesired effects (attrition, dropout, desertion, risk of failure or retention). Next, we present a summary of the work described in each of the analysed studies.

(p20.1) In the work in [71], the objective of the study was to implement an algorithm to predict grades. The results indicate that the early prognosis of students at risk of failure can be accurately achieved, compared to supervised models, even for a small amount of initially collected data from the first two semesters. This yields an early alert tool with interpretable models. The future work of the study includes generating synthetic data, applying preprocessing stages that may help discriminate better the initially gathered data, combining semi-supervised clustering with other learners and active learning with semi-supervised learning, the use of transfer learning, and the modification of transductive approaches.

(p20.2) In [72], the objective was to perform an in-depth analysis of the learning behaviour patterns of MOOC learners; for this, the authors proposed a feature matrix for keeping information related to the local correlation of learning behaviours and a CNN model for predicting the dropout. The results showed that the proposed CNN model can be used for temporal dropout prediction and early dropout prediction once a sufficiently large amount of data are obtained. In the future, the authors wish to construct more reasonable network structures to predict dropout and further explore the correlations between parallel MOOCs selected by learners.

(p20.3) In [73], the authors used sentiment analysis on the activity, polarity and emotions of tutors and students, aiming at the implementation of DM methodologies to provide timely, personalised and accurate predictions of students' grades. Several results were obtained in this study, including that polarity and emotions as independent variables provide better performance in comparative models and that tutors' variables are highlighted as an important factor for more accurate prediction of student grades. The model allows timely prediction of student grades in different periods during the academic year, promoting "tutors' self-evaluation and focused interventions, learning content evolution but mainly, students' retention in the learning process". Future work includes evaluating the results of the polarity and emotion analysis system, adding the human factor and methods of machine learning and the use of transfer learning methodologies.

(p20.4) The study in [74] explored deciphering the attributes of student retention in e-learning. The total number of events during a MOOC course, days active, played video and the number of chapters explored were exhibited as influential attributes to predict early dropout from a course.

(p20.5) The aim of the work in [75] was to prevent students from abandoning the university by means of retention actions focused on the most at-risk students, trying to maximise the effectiveness of institutional efforts in this direction. They developed SPA (dropout prediction system in Spanish), an early warning system that uses these models to generate static early dropout-risk predictions and dynamic periodically updated ones.

(p20.6) The aim of the study in [76] was to understand the key determinants of dropout, to accurately identify students likely to drop out, and recommend interventions to reduce student attrition.

(p20.7) In [77], the main objective was to evaluate the predictive performance of a parametric forecasting methods in comparative perspective models to predict the learners' performance. They stated that deep parametric methods perform better than a non-parametric prediction.

(p20.8) The study described in [78] aims to construct prediction models in different subpopulations, considering student gender, age, and attendance type. They found that the rule-based and tree-based methods generated models with higher interpretability, making them more useful for designing effective student support.

(p20.9) To predict student performance in a web-based distance course, a set of classification and regression algorithms were used [79]. The proposed method has an accuracy that varies from the initial stage, based on demographic characteristics of students in 70.07%, and before the final exam in 87%. An accuracy of 82.25% was found to identify students at risk of failing before the middle of the school year.

(p20.10) To support pedagogical actions that reduce dropout rates in the context of distance education [80], the hypothesis that the teaching-learning process, as well as prior knowledge of student profiles, for systematic monitoring is assessed. The results suggest that the use of MonSys caused a significant reduction in dropout. The results showed a greater association between the variables that denote the presence of a monitoring system and female gender.
