# Playing it safe: A literature review and research agenda on motivational technologies in transportation safety

CorpusID: 247984643 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9be99d5a68b71792a180c00b280be8eb605c98a9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9be99d5a68b71792a180c00b280be8eb605c98a9)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s1) Background
(p1.0) While there is no unambiguous definition for safety, it is commonly understood as a state of being free from harm or danger [18]. More specifically, safety often refers to the absence of accidents, defined as unplanned events causing unacceptable loss in relation to humans, distinguishing it from security which relates intentional threats, such as terrorism [19,20]. From a system viewpoint, safety emerges from the interactions of system components, including hardware and software, as well as humans and organization [3]. Safety is then enhanced by implementing barriers, which can either protect system components from failures, or mitigate the consequences of a failure event [3].
## (s2) Methods
(p2.0) This systematic literature review aims to reveal trends within its research area [31]. More specifically, this review aims to synthesize the state of the art of motivational technologies in transportation safety, including publication details, transportation facets, safety improvement measures, types of motivational interventions, applied research methodologies and motivational technology effects. To achieve this, the methodology employed includes search conduction, studies screening, and data extraction.

(p2.1) Three keyword categories have potentially relevant results: (i) motivational technologies: serious or simulation games, gamification, and persuasive technologies; (ii) transportation: road, rail, waterway, aviation, and transportation; and (iii) safety: security, emergency, accident, risk management, and safety. Given that transportation keywords prevented relevant studies from returning during searching tests, only motivational technologies and safety-related keywords were employed. The search was conducted on Scopus, which indexes many of the literature databases available, and considered conference papers, journal articles and book chapters that meet ("serious gam*" OR "simulation gam*" OR gamif* OR "persuasive technolog*") AND (security OR emergency OR accident OR "risk management" OR safety) in their title, abstract or keyword fields.

(p2.2) Of the 873 studies returned in August 2019, 11 were not written in English, six were not accessible and 818 did not focus on motivational technologies aimed at enhancing transportation safety, which was expected given our search string did not include transportation keywords. Backward and forward searches of the 38 included studies identified eight additional records that met the selection criteria mentioned above. In December 2020, a search iteration using the same keywords was conducted in the Scopus database to identify studies published since the initial search. Of the 372 papers published in 2019-2021, 355 did not focus on motivational technologies aimed at enhancing transportation safety, four were not accessible and four already identified by the prior search. Thus, a total of seven new studies meeting the inclusion criteria were revealed. Backward and forward searches of these studies revealed one additional study. A third search iteration was conducted in January 2022 using the same keywords in the Scopus database to identify records published since the two prior searches. Of the 439 studies published in 2020-2022, 421 did not focus on motivational technologies aimed at enhancing transportation safety, seven were not accessible and four were already identified by the last search. Thus, a total of seven new studies that met the inclusion criteria were identified. Backward and forward searches of these studies revealed one additional study.

(p2.3) The 62 studies that met the criteria were analyzed using a concept matrix to capture relevant data [32]. While each study was analyzed by one researcher, two researchers took part in analyzing the studies and discussed ambiguous cases. An initial scheme for data analysis was created based on prior studies in related fields and iteratively revised during the analysis process. Finally, to provide a comprehensive overview of the corpus, the extracted data comprised publication details, transportation facets, safety improvement measures, motivational interventions, methodology and outcomes, as detailed in Table 1 and described below.
## (s6) Future avenues
(p6.0) The reviewed studies indicate the motivational technologies potential for enhancing transportation safety by promoting psychological and behavioral change. However, there are limitations and shortcomings to overcome, many of which relate to the motivational technologies research legacy, such as the lack of comprehensive theory-driven designs and evaluation of the effects of individual affordances as well as the incomplete descriptions of interventions [14,28]. Additional thematic and methodological gaps and corresponding future research directions are further discussed below.

(p6.1) Future research should cover a broader scope of transportation modes. Literature predominantly examined roadway transportation, which is the most accident-prone mode [21], while 11 out of 62 studies targeted airway safety. Surprisingly only two non-empirical studies focused on waterway safety, whereas no studies related to railway safety were found. While accidents occurring in these modalities do not pose a prominent global problem similarly to roadway transportation, human behavior is still essential to ensure their safety. On the one hand, the risks of maritime accidents become prevalent especially under complex waterway traffic and environmental circumstances, and similarly to airway emergencies, appropriate passenger and crew behavior is crucial in maritime disasters, making it a prominent context for motivational technology interventions that aim to educate and bring about attitudinal change [117,118]. Additionally, maritime shipping is becoming increasingly autonomous, posing novel challenges, such as lack of training and experience of daily operations, which motivational technologies could tackle [110]. On the other hand, in the railroad safety domain, motivational technologies could support the sustained alertness of train operators who perform highly monotonous tasks in their daily work.
## (s23) Background
(p23.0) While there is no unambiguous definition for safety, it is commonly understood as a state of being free from harm or danger [18]. More specifically, safety often refers to the absence of accidents, defined as unplanned events causing unacceptable loss in relation to humans, distinguishing it from security which relates intentional threats, such as terrorism [19,20]. From a system viewpoint, safety emerges from the interactions of system components, including hardware and software, as well as humans and organization [3]. Safety is then enhanced by implementing barriers, which can either protect system components from failures, or mitigate the consequences of a failure event [3].
## (s24) Methods
(p24.0) This systematic literature review aims to reveal trends within its research area [31]. More specifically, this review aims to synthesize the state of the art of motivational technologies in transportation safety, including publication details, transportation facets, safety improvement measures, types of motivational interventions, applied research methodologies and motivational technology effects. To achieve this, the methodology employed includes search conduction, studies screening, and data extraction.

(p24.1) Three keyword categories have potentially relevant results: (i) motivational technologies: serious or simulation games, gamification, and persuasive technologies; (ii) transportation: road, rail, waterway, aviation, and transportation; and (iii) safety: security, emergency, accident, risk management, and safety. Given that transportation keywords prevented relevant studies from returning during searching tests, only motivational technologies and safety-related keywords were employed. The search was conducted on Scopus, which indexes many of the literature databases available, and considered conference papers, journal articles and book chapters that meet ("serious gam*" OR "simulation gam*" OR gamif* OR "persuasive technolog*") AND (security OR emergency OR accident OR "risk management" OR safety) in their title, abstract or keyword fields.

(p24.2) Of the 873 studies returned in August 2019, 11 were not written in English, six were not accessible and 818 did not focus on motivational technologies aimed at enhancing transportation safety, which was expected given our search string did not include transportation keywords. Backward and forward searches of the 38 included studies identified eight additional records that met the selection criteria mentioned above. In December 2020, a search iteration using the same keywords was conducted in the Scopus database to identify studies published since the initial search. Of the 372 papers published in 2019-2021, 355 did not focus on motivational technologies aimed at enhancing transportation safety, four were not accessible and four already identified by the prior search. Thus, a total of seven new studies meeting the inclusion criteria were revealed. Backward and forward searches of these studies revealed one additional study. A third search iteration was conducted in January 2022 using the same keywords in the Scopus database to identify records published since the two prior searches. Of the 439 studies published in 2020-2022, 421 did not focus on motivational technologies aimed at enhancing transportation safety, seven were not accessible and four were already identified by the last search. Thus, a total of seven new studies that met the inclusion criteria were identified. Backward and forward searches of these studies revealed one additional study.

(p24.3) The 62 studies that met the criteria were analyzed using a concept matrix to capture relevant data [32]. While each study was analyzed by one researcher, two researchers took part in analyzing the studies and discussed ambiguous cases. An initial scheme for data analysis was created based on prior studies in related fields and iteratively revised during the analysis process. Finally, to provide a comprehensive overview of the corpus, the extracted data comprised publication details, transportation facets, safety improvement measures, motivational interventions, methodology and outcomes, as detailed in Table 1 and described below.
## (s28) Future avenues
(p28.0) The reviewed studies indicate the motivational technologies potential for enhancing transportation safety by promoting psychological and behavioral change. However, there are limitations and shortcomings to overcome, many of which relate to the motivational technologies research legacy, such as the lack of comprehensive theory-driven designs and evaluation of the effects of individual affordances as well as the incomplete descriptions of interventions [14,28]. Additional thematic and methodological gaps and corresponding future research directions are further discussed below.

(p28.1) Future research should cover a broader scope of transportation modes. Literature predominantly examined roadway transportation, which is the most accident-prone mode [21], while 11 out of 62 studies targeted airway safety. Surprisingly only two non-empirical studies focused on waterway safety, whereas no studies related to railway safety were found. While accidents occurring in these modalities do not pose a prominent global problem similarly to roadway transportation, human behavior is still essential to ensure their safety. On the one hand, the risks of maritime accidents become prevalent especially under complex waterway traffic and environmental circumstances, and similarly to airway emergencies, appropriate passenger and crew behavior is crucial in maritime disasters, making it a prominent context for motivational technology interventions that aim to educate and bring about attitudinal change [117,118]. Additionally, maritime shipping is becoming increasingly autonomous, posing novel challenges, such as lack of training and experience of daily operations, which motivational technologies could tackle [110]. On the other hand, in the railroad safety domain, motivational technologies could support the sustained alertness of train operators who perform highly monotonous tasks in their daily work.
