# European Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies Hostile Takeovers: Desirable or Dangerous? A Survey Study into the Circumstances Under Which Hostile Takeovers in the Netherlands Are (Un)Permissible

CorpusID: 243842816 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45bbcd6de06d9b12f74b926dae6d180bc8d4871b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45bbcd6de06d9b12f74b926dae6d180bc8d4871b)

Fields: Business, Law

## (s1) What circumstances make a hostile takeover permissible?
(p1.0) To answer this question, 21 participants/respondents were selected to participate in a survey. All participants were involved in mergers and acquisitions from various angles and play important roles in hostile takeover decisions. First, using open questions, they were asked to provide the characteristics of a hostile takeover as well as to indicate when protection against a hostile takeover attempt is justified and when not. Subsequently, a number of factors were presented to the participants. For each of these factors, they indicated whether it justifies protection against a hostile takeover attempt or not. The selected factors were derived from previous research of Dutch case law evolution on mergers and acquisitions, literature review, and previous in-depth interviews with stakeholders from practice. Besides, these factors were submitted in advance to a panel of experts.

(p1.1) This research contributes to our understanding of how a hostile takeover is perceived in the professional field. It provides insight into the factors that influence the permissibility of a hostile takeover and the protection against it. The research is unique in its kind in that it is not limited to the outcomes of a theoretical discussion, but it also tests these theoretical outcomes in practice. As far as we know, such an investigation has never been conducted; it may contribute to new directions and insights regarding corporate governance and hostile takeovers. This paper proceeds as follows. First, to provide insight into the Dutch company law perspective, elements of Dutch case law regarding corporate interests and the purpose of the company in a takeover context are discussed (2). Then, the state of the art of literature on the circumstances under which a hostile takeover is permissible will be discussed. From this, the hypotheses are formulated (3). Thereafter, the methodology and the model of the research will be discussed (4). Then, the results will be presented (5). The paper ends with a conclusion (6).
## (s2) Evolution of elements in Dutch case law
(p2.0) The notion that a company is a legal person with a definable purpose is accompanied with the acknowledgment that the company could be seen as an actor with its own interest, to be distinguished from those involved in or who have a stake in the company and its activities. The view that company interest could exist, distinct from the interests of the stakeholders of the company, applies best in the situation when a company maintains a firm. In a series of judgments in the takeover context,1 the Dutch Supreme Court explicitly acknowledged the distinction between the 'company's interest' and the interests of 'others involved in the company'. The Supreme Court has consistently rendered its decisions based on the directors' obligation to act in the interest of the company and its affiliated firm (article 2:129/239(5) DCC, as codified in 2013), in conjunction with the standards of reasonableness and fairness to take due care of the interests of those involved in the company (article 2:8 DCC).

(p2.1) The growing body of case law in the Netherlands indicates that -although recognizing the open ended nature of the purposes companies may have -in the typical situation where a firm is connected to a company, the purpose of the company is to promote the interests of the firm. Yet, it was not until the Cancun judgment in 2014, that the Dutch Supreme Court explicitly assigned legal significance to the interest of the firm by interpreting the scope of the company's interest: 'if a firm is connected to a company, the company's interest is, as a general rule, mainly determined by promoting the sustainable success of this firm'. 1 After Cancun, the amended Dutch Corporate Governance Code 2016 (DCGC 2016) acknowledged that the purpose of the company was 'to create long-term value'. 2 It is important to note that before the amendments to the Code, from 2003 onwards, the view of the Corporate Governance Monitoring Committee was that 'a company endeavours to create long-term shareholder value [emphasize added]'. 3 Moreover, in the recent high profile takeover contest between Akzo Nobel and PPG, the Dutch Enterprise Court applied the Cancun formula and decided that company boards are obliged to direct their actions towards 'the long-term value creation of the company and its affiliated firm' [emphasize added]. 1 The legal translation could be argued as follows: that the company's interest to create value is regarded as a legal norm which is addressed to the company, to the constituents of the company such as the board of directors, the supervisory board and the general meeting of shareholders, and any other stakeholder involved in the company and its affiliated firm. Accordingly, acknowledging the company's interest as a legally enforceable norm is not without consequence, nor does it leave the corporate governance debate unaffected. 2 The following three principles regarding the dichotomy between shareholders and stakeholders are of importance in the Dutch corporate governance code:
## (s5) Research Method
(p5.0) In the above section, a number of factors and related hypotheses are introduced that may affect the attitude regarding (non) protecting a Target from a hostile takeover attempt by the Bidder. The selected factors are derived from previous research of Dutch case law evolution on mergers and acquisitions, and literature review. Moreover, this paper builds on previous research by the authors in which in-depth interviews were conducted concerning some major takeover conflicts, international developments in corporate governance, recent court decisions, and the adoption of long-term value creation of the company and its connecting firm in the Dutch corporate governance system (Pham et al., 2018).

(p5.1) To carry out empirical testing of the selected factors and their determinants, a survey study is being conducted. Before this survey is conducted among the participants, the questionnaire as well as the factors have first been submitted to a panel, consisting of experts from practice, business law and science. In a round First, using open questions, the participants are asked to provide the characteristics of a hostile takeover as well as to indicate when protection against a hostile takeover attempt is justified and when not. Subsequently, the previously mentioned factors that may affect the preference for (not) protecting the bidder against a hostile takeover from the Target, are presented to the participants. For each of these factors, the participants indicated whether it justifies (non) protection against a hostile takeover attempt.
## (s9) Elements: Number 2 A bid or intention that is considered undesirable by the board and/or supervisory board. 9
(p9.0) There is no agreement about the intention to bid 6 1 The motives behind target resistance have been subject to some controversy and are diverse in nature: financial, personal, strategic and social (Nègre et al., 2018, 804). 2 Numbers add to more than 21 because some participants mentioned more than one element.
## (s20) Concluding remarks: Overall view and Limitations
(p20.0) There are three limitations of this study/survey. First: the factors are presented separately. In practice however the factors are weighed against each other. Second: some factors are presented as fact, others as opinion. Participants have to consider the reliability of the statements. Three: during the hostile takeover process the critical factors can shift; the importance could depend on the stage in the hostile takeover process.

(p20.1) This research examines the circumstances that justify protection of the target company against a merger or acquisition. From Dutch case law evolution on mergers and acquisitions, literature review, and previous research by the authors, several factors were derived that may be determining for justification or non-justification of protection against a hostile takeover attempt. These factors were clustered in the following nine main themes: (1) performance of bidder and (2) target, (3) strategic fit, (4) takeover process, (5) method of payment -deal structure, (6) characteristics of CEO's of bidder and (7) target, and the (8) societal risks and (9) societal consequences of the hostile takeover, culminating in 6 hypothesis. The factors are included in a survey investigation that is submitted to 21 experts. The outcomes show that the participants advocate non-protection in case of relatively high performance of the bidding company, new value creating opportunities for the Bidder as well as for the Target, a non-responsive board of the Target with personal interest of the board, and cash payment for the target. They are in favor of protection in case of takeover attempts that incur personal board benefits of Bidder or Target, intended debt push down financing, and in case of takeover attempts that incur considerable social risks and consequences. Participants apply a balanced stakeholder view and they implicitly use a kind of SWOT analysis, sometimes use a checklist (Pham et al., 2018). The results from the survey confirm the assumption that long-term value, and societal considerations are important arguments for the decisions to protect or not protect a target against a hostile takeover. More research into the position, function, and purpose of listed corporations is urgently required.
