# AI-Enabled Opportunities and Transformation Challenges for SMEs in the Post-pandemic Era: A Review and Research Agenda

CorpusID: 248424867 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6d462c4b5e5ce4d7088c432488b188d15f9202b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6d462c4b5e5ce4d7088c432488b188d15f9202b)

Fields: Environmental Science, Business, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are the main driving force of employment and economic growth (1). The outbreak of COVID-19 in 2020 and resultant (regional) pandemic control and lockdown policies have made SMEs vulnerable (2). Compared with large corporations, SMEs are facing greater challenges and uncertainties (3,4), which will likely continue to the postpandemic era (5,6). Despite the rapid response of governments to curb business closures by providing mitigation measures such as loans, wage support and subsides, the financial difficulties of SMEs have not been significantly improved. Some mitigation measures to reduce this burden are not as effective as expected, therefore its vital to find urgent measures to properly resolve the difficulties of SMEs and subsequently promote their continuous development.
## (s1) METHODOLOGY
(p1.0) This study adopts the realist systematic approach to reviewing the relevant literature (20,21). The detailed search process is shown in Figure 1. We first determined the most basic search terms through informal search and applied them to the core collection of Web of Science, and then expanded the collection scope according to the citation of the literature. Specifically, under the TS column of Web of Science, we first use small and mediumsized enterprises (e.g., "SMEs, " "small enterprise, " "micro enterprise, " and "medium enterprise"), artificial intelligence or digitization (e.g., "artistic intelligence, " "Ai, " and "digital * ") and sustainable development (e.g., "sustaina * ") as keywords. The timeframe is limited to "2019-2022", The literature type is limited to "articles, Early access or review", and 62 articles are obtained through preliminary search. Next, we exported the detailed information of these studies [i.e., journal, author, title, year, abstract, and PDF (if any)] to an Excel spreadsheet.

(p1.1) We then checked whether these articles met the scope of the review and further refined the keywords by browsing the titles, abstracts, and keywords. After eliminating irrelevant and duplicate studies, we retained 10 articles. Next, according to these articles, we carried out a pre-citation and post-citation search (22), and expanded the search scope to electronic databases such as Springer and ScienceDirect. Using this method, we finally obtained 19 articles. Collectively these articles explain the mode of AI technology enabling SMEs to promote their sustainable production and consumption.
## (s3) The Difficult Situation Brought by the Pandemic
(p3.0) The COVID-19 pandemic and the lockdown and other control measures have made SMEs' operating environment the most fragile and unpredictable ever in recent history (2,4). First, the destroyed global production and business practices have increased the uncertainty of the production and operation of SMEs (23). Second, the global or regional logistics is blocked and the supply chain is interrupted (4). Many raw materials urgently needed for production are difficult to be in place in time. In addition, due to the shortage of labor, the decline of demand, and the cancellation of orders, a large number of manufacturing SMEs have ceased to operate (24). Third, interaction or working time restrictions and the decline of customers' purchasing power reduced or suspended business activities, and the business revenue shrank sharply. The cash flow shortage of SMEs (especially tourism, catering, and other service industries) with small capital reserves was even more obvious. This change in the business environment occurred during the pandemic but will last for a long time after the pandemic (5, 6).
## (s4) Opportunities Enabled by AI
(p4.0) New technologies such as AI can help SMEs win competitive advantages or provide means of survival in the fields of manufacturing, e-commerce, accounting, human resources, marketing, and customer relations (25). Research of AI technology enabling SMEs during the pandemic mainly focuses on two aspects: One is to improve the operation of SMEs through gradual process improvement and optimization within the organizational boundary; the other is the external AIdriven transformation to fundamentally promote SMEs to create business models, develop new organizational strategies and cultures, build business alliances, and others (3).
## (s5) Process Improvement and Optimization
(p5.0) Solutions based on AI can help manufacturing SMEs realize automation, which leads to process improvement and optimization (11). AI can help to solve the problem of labor shortage and enable SMEs to achieve world-class production standards and promotion activities with the least manpower (26). It can automate customer management, collect and process advanced data to improve trend analysis, logistics planning and inventory management, reduce costs, increase sales and increase profits. It can save time and limit defects, avoid risks and improve performance (12), so that suppliers can create value closer to customer operations (10). During the pandemic, AI technology provided new service modes for SMEs and realized asymptotic process improvement with the help of image recognition and speech recognition.
## (s6) Real-Time Customer Insights
(p6.0) AI are not only able to identify, verify and monitor customers in real time, but also determine purchasing power and interest in purchased goods, according to use traces, and then market segment products according to customers' specific needs. The pandemic control policy enables most consumers to switch to online consumption, and every customer must leave traces when using online services. Popular online sales provide AI with a large database to understand the actual needs and preferences of customers, and to advise manufacturers or retailers to target specific audiences for advertising, promotion, and sales optimization (27). AI can analyze all activities performed by consumers online, study their behavior and computing possibilities through algorithms, manage demand-supply and perform all back-end operations. AI can also assist in social media marketing and identify new market opportunities. Big data analysis in AI technology can be used to develop customers' personalized files and predict their purchase habits (11), which helps to increase the customer base and overall profitability of SMEs (28).
## (s7) Product and Service Innovations
(p7.0) AI-based innovations such as virtual mirrors and visual search can provide services for garment or tourism organizations to improve customer interaction and narrow the gap between physical and virtual shopping experiences. The future smart kitchen and smart restaurant based on intelligent technology and highly intelligent auxiliary robots can provide a healthier kitchen lifestyle and develop a large health industry. During the COVID-19 pandemic, smart technologies have been widely used in the service industry, enabling the service organizations to carry out business activities within a safe distance, enhance customer delivery, create businesses for the organization, and provide competitive advantages during the new crown pneumonia pandemic. The customer service function of AI (such as chatbot) can help organizations answer simple requests from customers (11).
## (s9) Demand Forecasting
(p9.0) Due to the difficulty of demand forecasting caused by the pandemic, it is more important than ever to understand and predict consumer demand through an integrated supply chain, and AI technology may become a key component (11). In retail SMEs can use AI technology in demand forecasting and supply chain implementation, thereby informing the ability to trigger response demand when customers choose the last item and then track the store's rapid replenishment of products (11). SME manufacturing firms can fight against tacit knowledge by using AI to promote technologies, such as decision support systems (DSS) (12,30). The Internet of things combined with AI can also be used for predictive analysis in maintenance to reduce machine downtime and increase part-production (12).

(p9.1) The COVID-19 pandemic has driven SMEs to open the upstream and downstream ecology of the industry, fully meet the broad market demand of AI applications, and realize a complete industrial closed loop. For example, under the lockdown policy during the pandemic, some SMEs in the food supply chain, such as restaurants, cafés and retail organizations, could quickly carry out remote operations and allow online ordering, delivery and distribution (3). Furthermore, by enabling the traditional QR code with AI, the data of various activities (such as cinemas, scenic spots, retail stores, etc.), other than inventory management, can be recorded or executed (27). It can record high-quality data while reducing personnel contact, to understand customer preferences, predict future needs, and provide high-quality data for organizations to improve production efficiency.
## (s12) Organization Readiness
(p12.0) A considerable number of SMEs fail to successfully integrate AI capabilities into their business models due to the lack of readiness by the organization, which includes the readiness in human, financial, and material resources (42).
## (s13) Human Resources
(p13.0) To seize the opportunities enabled by AI, firms need to develop the capabilities of using AI technologies (11). Lack of AI knowledge and professional skills is the primary challenge for the implementation of AI in most SMEs (12,26,52). AI systems do not yet have the essence of human intelligence (53), therefore AI algorithms will not produce clear answers, but will provide tentative solutions (for example, probability-based prediction), which requires human explanation, demonstration, and action to create specific and valuable results (54). The choice of AI level of SMEs may depend on human factors (11), such as organizational leaders, experts, employees and so on.
## (s14) Financial Resources
(p14.0) The cost of digital technology (25) and financial return are important factors that SMEs need to consider. The application of AI in SMEs is more likely to produce the so-called "digital paradox", due to the rising cost (3), even the increase of digital service revenue cannot bring greater profits to organizations (8). In the digital economy of the post-pandemic era the development of computing power was limited, not always readily available nor affordable when SMEs consider cost efficiency, even though, utilizing digital services and the implementation of AI can strategically develop and provide numerous sources of new revenue. However, the increasing availability of solutions 
## (s16) Material Resources
(p16.0) There is little doubt that digital technology has improved quality and efficiency, according to Sjödin et al. (36) it is important to recognize the digitization of SMEs and the need to expand AI in digital services (56). The construction of new infrastructure such as the industrial internet is the key to the digital upgrading transformation of SMEs.

(p16.1) Organizations need a lot of data to adopt or deploy AI (42), which depends on the type of infrastructure provided by enterprises (27), and the data available to them. However, a considerable number of SMEs currently lack the high-quality infrastructure to support the adoption of AI (3). Furthermore, SMEs may hinder the improvement of AI solutions because they are unable to obtain a large amount of data or obtain low-quality data (11).
## (s18) Technology Complexity
(p18.0) The concept of technical complexity is conceptualized through ease of use (40). Therefore, Technology Acceptance Theory (TAM) should be considered by SMEs when adopting AI for its practicability (27) and ease of use (40). The adaptation of cloud computing solutions are high in SMEs as its simple and easy to understand, easy to use and practical (47), or ease of use of social media platforms that have been widely used in the development of new products for SMEs (1). Therefore, continuous improvement of one's own processes and systems, further supported by investment in technologies, are the key areas for SMEs to maintain competitiveness (12). Nonetheless, the complexity of AI technologies (such as deep learning) is not acceptable and far too complex for most SMEs.
## (s19) Technology Compatibility
(p19.0) Compatibility is the degree to which technology is assimilated and integrated within an organization's existing processes and available infrastructure (40). Currently, there is a lack of unified standards amongst products, equipment, software, and systems related to AI. The implementation of AI is down to the quality of data; however, AI applications face a variety of challenges in this area. These challenges include an insufficient size of data availability, data collection standards, format, integration, continuity, transparency, repeatability, quantity, quality of data input, and dimensional obstacles (11). The data challenges are more obvious to SMEs, especially standards and data structures. Generally, SMEs lack data, or the standardized formats required to verify limited data to gain a real benefit from AI solutions. Simply AI requires the need to create a consistent format that is able to share data among different organizations or industries (11). However, it is questionable whether different algorithms for an SME can solve problems based on different organizations or industries.
## (s22) Ethical and Trust Risks
(p22.0) The collection of large data sets, its storage and sharing of that data derived from AI technology and raises ethical issues related to governance, quality, security, standards, privacy, and data ownership (60). Therefore, SMEs need to take certain measures to reduce these risks when using AI. For example, trust is an important factor in the diffusion of AI technology (11,41). Individuals and organizations may lack trust and worry about the moral dimension of the AI systems and the use of shared data (43). This is prevalent when there are analyses before decisionmaking based on the AI system. However, it is not clear how to solve moral and legal problems (11,33). Developing solutions based on AI requires a large amount of data, creating an element of risk due to user privacy, especially when the government issues user privacy laws that propose data collection cannot be at the expense of user privacy. The data collection based on protecting user privacy may limit the development of AI within SMEs, particularly "specialized and new" organizations who would worry about potential risks such as core technology leakage caused by data sharing.
## (s24) Future Research on Organization Readiness
(p24.0) The pandemic has affected organizations in all industries. The current research focuses on the application of AI technology in SMEs in the manufacturing industry and mainly focuses on the optimization, improvement, and upgrading processes. There is limited research in other industries and provides very little in way of new models, therefore, further research in AI technology in SMEs for other industries in the future is necessary and evaluate the preparation of SMEs for AI applications (11).

(p24.1) First, organizations obtaining quality talents is a primary objective. Organizations should focus on training, recruiting, and retaining employees with AI technology (26). Consideration should be given to the appropriate systems that ensure the infrastructure related to AI technology in SMEs is always available to support personnel needs.

(p24.2) Second, understand the principles required to use AI in the heart of the business model, such as what special resources and knowledge are needed by SMEs to formulate the transformation strategy of AI? When multiple organizations participate what are the routines that provide the basis for the large-scale implementation and use of AI in response to the pandemic? What is the accumulated knowledge and what are the interdependent actions (36)? How to change the operation mode to increase the scale, scope, and learning opportunities of AI in the organization (7)? Consider how to integrate AI technology into its Revitalization Strategy in the post-pandemic era to ensure business continuity. At the same time, we should also consider how to apply AI technology to replace/increase additional sales channels to increase the revenue of SMEs.

(p24.3) Thirdly, we should think about how SMEs choose AI automation tasks and the degree of automation of each task (such as information acquisition, information analysis, decisionmaking, action selection and action implementation). At the same time, we should consider how human intelligence can provide support in case of AI automation errors (11).
## (s26) Future Research on Environmental Threats
(p26.0) The pandemic may stimulate or accelerate the technological advancements of SMEs, including issues related to data protection and the decision-making process, which may directly affect the activities of the manufacturing sector. At this present moment, SMEs lack resources and knowledge to formulate special transformation strategies (12), and governments or relevant industrial organizations need to provide various support such as awareness enhancement, capacity training, platform construction and scheme simplification (45). Governments enhancing policy measures in helping SMEs obtain big data (64) for example. Furthermore, enabling normal operations to resume and attract new organizations, investors, and talent to the region to build a good AI industrial ecosystem.

(p26.1) Future research can focus on the scope, strength, and type of support the government and relevant organizations can provide. For example developing an AI education strategy that can be embedded in government departments, higher education, and employers (26), whilst developing policies, regulations and ethical guidance and framework (33). This can be formulated and implemented by government regulators in terms of intervention and supervision (7). This will prevent the abuse of AI in the future.

(p26.2) The management of data privacy is the key to the intelligent management of SMEs. It is necessary to explore the impact of security and privacy risks on the application of AI technology in SMEs. First, future research can include paying attention to how AI technology changes the working mode of SMEs, and the impact of this change on users and data privacy. Second, it can consider the specific policies that SMEs need to formulate to collect, share and analyze data (4), so as to determine how to collect the absolute minimum data with the consent of the subjects to meet the needs of AI applications.
