# A Survey on Arabic Handwritten Script Recognition Systems

CorpusID: 240864028 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f7999c1327e68a123dbc9ae0d2bc35a8d4dc2d77](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f7999c1327e68a123dbc9ae0d2bc35a8d4dc2d77)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) THe ARABIC LANGUAGe ANd SCRIPT, oRIGIN ANd CHARACTeRISTICS
(p0.0) The Arabic language (also Quranic and liturgical language) is being used by around 1.8 billion people. The estimated number of people speaking all varieties of Arabic language is as many as 422 million throughout the Middle East and northern Africa (Alginahi, 2013). It is celebrated as a global (universal) language on Dec 18 of each year. The Arabic language is famous for its beauty and diversity of its styles. It is a semi-cursive language in both forms (i.e., printed and handwritten). It is written from right to left. The Arabic writing and alphabet have many different characteristics, which make it unique, as also shown in Table 1.
## (s4) on-line Systems
(p4.0) On-line systems have ability to recognize a text or a character in real time employing special equipment such as a pen and a tablet (Jumari, 2002). In this type of systems, for further processing, handwritten characters in a particular script is classified and stored as Unicode or ASCII format. Online handwritten character recognition systems further can be divided into (1) writer dependent and (2) writer independent character recognition system (Kasturi, 2002).
## (s5) off-line Systems
(p5.0) This type of Arabic OCR systems is used in recognizing manuscripts from written/printed documents, the image of the written/printed text is scanned using a scanner. Please refer (Plamondon, 2000) for more details about the difference between these main two types systems. Further off-line systems can be of two modes as detailed below: 
## (s9) Preprocessing Phase
(p9.0) After the image acquisition, the next important step in any recognition system is the preprocessing that includes different operations on the digitized image of a raw image to minimize noise and increase the capability of extracting features by cleaning and thinning the image. The operations are binarization (converting a grayscale image into bi-level image), smoothing (removing unwanted variations in the input image), thinning (minimizing the width of a line), normalization (scaling character to a fixed size and to center the character before recognition) and baseline detection (baseline means the line which contains information about the text orientation and the connection points between characters) (Jumari, 2002).
## (s11) Feature extraction Stage
(p11.0) Feature extraction is the central part of any recognition system, where the character produced in segmentation stage is used to extract some essential traits for the classification stage (Jumari, 2002).
