# Utilization of CRISPR-Mediated Tools for Studying Functional Genomics in Hematological Malignancies: An Overview on the Current Perspectives, Challenges, and Clinical Implications

CorpusID: 246362613 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b260c059f8df1567d8e5025be40910a20703ae9d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b260c059f8df1567d8e5025be40910a20703ae9d)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Hematological malignancies (HM) are cancers that begin in the cells of blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow or generally in the cells immune system. In the revised World Health Organization (WHO) classification, hematological malignancies are divided according to morphology, immunophenotype, and genetic and clinical features (Taylor et al., 2017). Further divisions can be made which are myeloid malignancies that are categorized into the following groups: myeloproliferative neoplasms, myelodysplastic/ myeloproliferative neoplasms, myelodysplastic syndromes, acute myeloid leukemias, acute leukemias of ambiguous lineage, and precursor lymphoid neoplasms. Then there are lymphoid malignancies that are categorized into mature B-cell neoplasms, mature T-and NK-cell neoplasms, Hodgkin's lymphoma, histiocytic and dendritic cell neoplasms, and posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorders.

(p0.1) The current advancement in the field of molecular biology has spurred the way toward understanding a disease in an extensive manner and especially deepens our knowledge of hematological malignancies. Many advanced molecular biology and bioinformatics tools such as PCR, NGS, and karyotyping are currently utilized to understand the pathogenesis of hematological malignancies. Nevertheless, these methods only allow us to map genes but not fully understand the function. Therefore, it is imperative for researchers to utilize functional genomics to decipher and unravel new mechanisms that were previously unknown.

(p0.2) Advancement in molecular biology has now paved the way for us to understand the roles of genes that are involved directly or indirectly in the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying hematological malignancies. The way forward now is to take the optimal charge through unraveling the roles of specific genes by manipulating their functions through gene editing. Currently, there are many techniques available to study gene function including site-directed mutagenesis and siRNA-mediated gene silencing (Gavrilov and Saltzman, 2012).

(p0.3) Nevertheless, these techniques are regarded to be less efficient and specific as compared to the various gene editing techniques (Zhang and McCarty, 2017) which will be reviewed in the next section.
## (s1) GENE EDITING TECHNIQUES
(p1.0) Gene editing is the ability to make extremely precise changes in the DNA sequence of a living organism and essentially customizing its genetic makeup. Gene editing is achieved by using enzymes, predominantly nucleases, that have been synthesized to target a specific DNA sequence. This is when they introduce cuts into the DNA strands, allowing the removal of existing DNA and the insertion of a replacement DNA. It is a type of genetic engineering tool to insert, delete, or replace a DNA in the genome of an organism using "molecular scissors" (Saha et al., 2019). These nucleases create site-specific double-strand breaks (DSBs) at desired locations in the genome (Vítor et al., 2020). The induced double-strand breaks are then repaired through non-homologous endjoining (NHEJ) or homologous recombination (HR) which results in targeted mutations also known as "edits" (Salsman et al., 2017). There have been three important families of bioengineered nucleases being used such as zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs), transcription activator-like effector-based nucleases (TALENs), and CRISPR-Cas systems .
## (s2) Zinc-Finger Nucleases
(p2.0) The discovery of zinc-finger nucleases (ZFN) in the 1980s added value to the gene editing approach by being a precision tool in genome editing: it carried a site-specific recognition pattern in editing the desired gene. The ZFNs are composed of two parts, namely, Fokl nuclease that is fused with zinc-finger DNA-binding domains. The zinc-finger DNA-binding domain has a unique characteristic of recognizing a 3-base pair site on DNA, and it can be combined to recognize longer sequences (Wu et al., 2007). Furthermore, the ZFNs act as dimers by upsurging the length of the DNA recognition site and increasing the specificity. Cys 2 -His 2 ZFNs are fusions between a custom-designed Cys 2 -His 2 zincfinger protein and the cleavage domain of the FokI restriction endonuclease. Cys 2 -His 2 ZFPs bind DNA by inserting an α-helix into the major groove of the double helix (Wu et al., 2007) ZFNs function as dimers, with each monomer recognizing a specific "half site" sequence, typically nine to 18 base pairs of DNA, via the zinc-finger DNA-binding domain. One major concern associated with the use of ZFNs for genome editing is offtarget mutations (Chen et al., 2014). As a result, several approaches have been undertaken to enhance their specificity; among the most successful of these has been the creation of obligate heterodimeric ZFN architectures that rely on charge-charge repulsion to prevent unwanted homodimerization of the FokI cleavage domain, thereby minimizing the potential for ZFNs to dimerize at off-target sites. Additionally, protein-engineering methods have been used to enhance the cleavage efficiency of the FokI cleavage domain (Chen et al., 2014). The main hurdle in using ZFNs was the 3-base pair site on DNA requirement that made the design more challenging (Gupta and Musunuru, 2014). The upper hand was the guanine-rich target sites that appeared to be more efficient at editing when compared to the non-guaninerich sites. Furthermore, the ZFN interaction with DNA is modular, and each ZF interacts with DNA independently that hampered the editing efficiency. Therefore, scientists needed to address these issues if they wanted to have more efficiently edited genome. According to a study which adopted the ZFN approach for genome editing in human pluripotent stem cells, the scientists observed multiple off-target genomic sites based on highsequence similarity to the on-target site and found a single off-target mutation in the 184 clones assessed (Hockemeyer et al., 2009). Therefore, scientists should be aware of the likelihood that ZFNs that are designed for a purpose may experience undesired off-target effects at a low rate. There are ways to reduce off-target effects, by using a pair of ZFNs that have different FokI domains that are obligate heterodimers. Through this approach, we will be able to prevent a single ZFN from binding to two adjacent off-target sites and in turn generating a DSB. The second approach would be the introduction of purified ZFN proteins into cells. Although it is efficient at inducing DNA edits, ZFNs are cumbersome and laborious to assemble. Currently, the ZFN approach is still at the early stage and there are some difficulties that need to be addressed and sorted off before it is clinically used to treat human diseases. ZFN-based strategies for gene editing of human cells may provide a viable option to treat human disease in the future.
## (s3) TALENs (TALE Nucleases)
(p3.0) Transcription activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN) has rapidly emerged as an alternative to ZFNs for genome editing, and they are bacterial effector proteins. In 2009, the code used by TALE proteins to recognize DNA was uncovered. TALE DNA-binding domains can be constructed using a variety of methods, with the most straightforward approach being the Golden Gate assembly (Maeder et al., 2013). TALENs comprise a non-specific DNA cleavage domain fused to a customizable sequence-specific DNA-binding domain to generate DSBs. This DNA-binding domain consists of a highly conserved repeat sequence from transcription activator-like effector (TALE), which is a protein originally discovered in the phytopathogenic Xanthomonas bacteria that naturally alters the transcription of genes in host plant cells. The binding of TALE to DNA is mediated by a central region that contains an array of 33 to 35 amino acid sequence motifs. The amino acid sequence of each repeat is structurally similar, except for two hypervariable amino acids (the repeat variable di-residues or RVDs) at positions 12 and 13. DNA-binding specificity is determined by RVDs, with ND specifically binding to C nucleotides, HN to A or G nucleotides, NH to G nucleotides, and NP to all nucleotides. There is a one-to-one correspondence between RVDs and contiguous nucleotides in the target site, constituting a strikingly simple TALE-DNA recognition cipher.

(p3.1) Functional endonuclease FokI is factitiously fused to DNAbinding domains to create site-specific DSBs and thereby stimulate DNA recombination to achieve TALEN-induced targeted genomic modification. To cleave the two strands of the targeted DNA, the FokI cleavage domain must be dimerized. Hence, like zinc fingers, such a TALEN module is designed in pairs to bind opposing DNA target loci, with proper spacing (12-30 bp) between the two binding sites. However, compared to zinc-finger proteins, there is no need to redesign the linkage between repeats constituting long arrays of TALEs, whose function is to target individual genomic sites. Following pioneering studies on zinc-finger proteins, multiple effector domains have become accessible to support the fusion of TALE repeats for different genomic modification purposes, including nucleases, transcriptional activators, and site-specific recombinases. Although their simpler cipher codes provide better simplicity in design than triplet-confined zinc-finger proteins, one of the primary technical hurdles for cloning repeat TALE arrays is the design of identical repeat sequences on a large scale. To address this limitation, a few strategies have been established to facilitate the fast assembly of custom TALE arrays, including "Golden Gate" molecular cloning, high-throughput solid phase assembly, and connection-independent cloning techniques. More recent advances in TALEN assembly, though, have focused on the development of methods that can enhance their performance, including specificity profiling to uncover non-conventional RVDs that improve TALEN activity, directed evolution as means to refine TALE specificity, and even fusing TALE domains to homing endonuclease variants to generate chimeric nucleases with extended targeting specificity (Liu et al., 2014). TALENs attach FokI to arrays of DNA-binding modules, originally from plant pathogens, that each targets a single base pair. TALENs are smaller than Cas9 but larger than ZFNs. The modules have high DNA-binding affinity but include repeated sequences that create cloning challenges. According to a study conducted by Bethany K. R. and Randall S. P. in 2015, they have stated that TALENs are not efficient at making biallelic modifications, and it requires further cloning steps or alternative animal breeding step to produce animals with the intended biallelic mutations.
## (s4) CRISPR
(p4.0) Although recently developed programmable editing tools such as zinc-finger nucleases and transcription activator-like effector nucleases have significantly improved the capacity for precise genome modification, these techniques have limitations. The new kid on the block, CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) technology represents a significant improvement over these, reaching a new level of targeting, efficiency, and ease of use. CRISPR nucleases lead the geneediting platform because they are the most powerful and direct to use gene-editing tools available now. Based on their cas gene content, CRISPR-Cas systems can be classified into six major types (I-VI) (Koonin et al., 2017). The systems are classified into two general parts, namely, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) arrays and CRISPR-associated (Cas) proteins. The CRISPR immunological signature represents the memory of the previous infections encoded within individual spacers separated by conserved repeats. Cas proteins carry out the adaptive immune functions and are highly diverse, resulting in CRISPR-Cas systems currently being grouped into two classes, six types, and over 30 subtypes (Wimmer and Beisel, 2020). The speedy unearthing and continuous development has led to the availability of choices; hence, choosing the right nuclease for an experiment is a mandatory part of this approach. The CRISPR system allows for site-specific genomic targeting in virtually any organism (Guilinger et al., 2014). It also offers platform that is an efficient way of making precise genetic changes to the human genome. This can be employed for disruption, addition, and correction of genes, thereby enabling a new class of genetic therapies that can be applied to hematological disorders.
## (s7) Cas13 System
(p7.0) DNA targeting CRISPR enzymes, such as Cas9 and Cas12a, have enabled many new possibilities for manipulating and studying DNA. Recent computational efforts to identify new CRISPR systems uncovered a novel type of RNA targeting enzyme, Cas13. The diverse Cas13 family contains at least four known subtypes, including Cas13a, Cas13b, Cas13c, and Cas13d (Elliott et al., 2021). One of the most straightforward applications of Cas13 in vivo is targeted RNA knockdown using mammalian codon optimized Cas13 and guide expression vectors. Knockdown of RNA relies on cleavage of the targeted transcripts by the endogenous RNase activity of the dual HEPN domains of the protein, the efficiency of which varies between different orthologs and subtypes of Cas13. The Cas13a is an RNA-guided, single-component enzyme that possesses two higher eukaryotes and prokaryotes nucleotide-binding (HEPN) domains that target single-stranded RNA (ssRNA). It encompasses a functionally distinct nuclease that is responsible for catalyzing crRNA maturation to form a Cas13a:crRNA complex that is competent for target RNA binding. The binding of the said complex to a complementary ssRNA is termed as activator-RNA. This binding activates the HEPN-nuclease for both target and general ssRNase activity. The action of the HEPN-nuclease is repressed by fractional occlusion of the HEPN active site until binding to the activator-RNA occurs. This effectively makes the activator-RNA the allosteric switch for RNase activity (Narimani et al., 2019). While the mechanism appears conserved between homologs, Cas13a enzymes can be functionally separated into two distinct subtypes based on their processing activity and HEPN-nuclease nucleotide preference . As a result, guide design and restrictions on targeting depend on the system used . In a study conducted by Cox et al. (2017), they expanded the RNA targeting ability of Cas13 to direct ADAR2 deaminase for RNA base (adenosine to inosine) modifications in human cells to recover functional proteins and halt disease progression. The application of Cas13a for nucleic acid detection and targeting are active Cas13a HEPN nuclease, which will turn over multiple ssRNA substrates, a biochemical behavior that can be leveraged for signal amplification in target detection by coupling Cas13a activation to specific ssRNA reporter cleavage, resulting in liberation of a quenched fluorophore. Expanding on this, the specific high-sensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking (SHERLOCK) platform was developed as a tool for nucleic acid detection (Narimani et al., 2019). The method starts with RNA sequence amplification via RPA or reverse transcriptase RPA (rt-RPA), before incubating the sample with Cas13a and reporter probes, and fluorescence is then measured. SHERLOCK can detect nucleic acids in patient biofluids down to low atto molar concentrations, allowing the detection of tumor mutation in cell-free DNA (cfDNA). In mock cfDNA samples, SHERLOCK can detect two cancer mutations, EGFR L858R and BRAF V600E, under low allelic fraction with single-base mismatch sensitivity. In addition to in vitro RNA target detection, catalytically inactive Cas13a retains its RNA-binding activity such that it can be coupled to a fluorescent probe to enable live cell RNA tracking. This provides an alternative method to recognize and visualize RNA (Pandolfi, 2001).
## (s9) Summary on Gene Editing Methods
(p9.0) In summary, the CRISPR system allows for site-specific genomic targeting in virtually any organism (Guilinger et al., 2014). It also offers platform that is an efficient way of making precise genetic changes to the human genome. This can be employed for disruption, addition, and correction of genes. Thus, the remaining parts of this review will focus on the utilization of CRISPR tools for understanding the functional genomics of various hematological malignancies, its challenges, as well as the clinical implications.
## (s10) APPLICATION OF VARIOUS CRISPR SYSTEM IN STUDYING THE FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS OF AML
(p10.0) AML is a multifaceted genetic disease caused by an interwoven process in which numerous collaborating mutations that allow a cell to evade the checkpoints that normally safeguard it against DNA damage and other disruptions of healthy cell growth (Babaei et al., 2013). It is a type of blood cancer which causes excessive proliferation of abnormal immature leukemic cells known as blasts. Uncontrolled growth occurs through mutations in the FLT3, NPM1, CEBPA, RAS, and c-KIT genes among others. A key gene involved in AML pathogenesis is the FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3, a receptor-type tyrosine-protein kinase (FLT3), positioned at chromosome 13q12 encoding a class III receptor tyrosine kinase that regulates hematopoiesis. This receptor is activated by the binding of the related tyrosine kinase three ligand (FL) to its extracellular domain which induces homodimer formation in the plasma membrane and autophosphorylation (Rivera-Torres et al., 2020). The activated receptor kinase phosphorylates multiple cytoplasmic effector molecules in cellular pathways involved in apoptosis, proliferation, and differentiation of hematopoietic cells. Protein kinase activation can be induced by somatic mutations, a common mechanism of tumorigenesis led by the constitutive activation of the receptor resulting in acute myeloid leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Advancement in the treatment of leukemia over the last 40 years has impacted and transformed a uniformly fatal disease into one that is somewhat manageable. There are, however, several subtypes of pediatric and adult leukemia that evade treatment and continue poor prognosis; many of these involve FLT3 mutations. For example, the FLT3 ITD associated with a single point mutation in the tyrosine kinase domain is known to induce resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) treatment (Rivera-Torres et al., 2020).
## (s11) APPLICATION OF VARIOUS CRISPR SYSTEMS IN STUDYING THE FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS OF ALL
(p11.0) ALL can be characterized by looking at the development of precursor lymphoid into B or T cell. This type of leukemia is usually rare but requires immediate treatment as ALL leukemogenesis is rapid and aggressive (Hsu et al., 2013). Accumulation of lymphoid blast could be observed in patient bearing this disease which is usually translated by enlarged lymph nodes (Kebriaei et al., 2002;Inaba et al., 2013;Litzow and Ferrando, 2015).

(p11.1) The CRISPR/Cas9 knockout system was utilized in the manipulation of ALL's genomics and in studying the differentiation of ALL into erythrocytes. A study conducted by Xie and group reported that GATA-1 motif flanking 5 kb upstream ARHGEF12 was impaired due to the CC to TT SNPs in hematopoietic cells of ALL patients suggesting that GATA-1 transcriptional activation of ARHGEF12 is crucial in driving erythrogenesis in which ALL patients lacked. The luciferase reporter assay confirmed GATA-1 interaction onto the ARHGEF12 flanking region when compared to the impaired motif brought about by the CC to TT SNPs. To further ascertain that this switch was responsible in driving erythropoiesis, the group employed CRISPR/Cas9 knockout where guide RNA was designed to be specifically targeting the ARHGEF12 gene directly. Result showed a stunted production of red blood cells and immature erythrocytes accumulation (Terwilliger and Abdul-Hay, 2017).

(p11.2) Furthermore, blockade of transcriptional machinery via the use of CRISPR system was also demonstrated when the MYBbinding site located proximally upstream of LMO2 was targeted using Cas9. In this study, a second binding motif of MYB was found to occur on LMO proximal site, this occurs due to the translocation event of the LMO2 gene which shift the MYBbinding site to a second MYB-binding site thus duplicating the MYB motif resulting in an increase in LMO2 activation by MYB. Interesting enough, Cas9 cleavage of the duplicated MYB motif resulted in a significant reduction in LMO2 expression .

(p11.3) ETV6/RUNX1 fusion oncogene commonly found in ALL was also successfully targeted using CRISPR/Cas9. In this case, guide RNA was designed to target the specific ETV6 and RUNX1 fusion region. Subsequent qPCR reported a reduction in the mRNA of ETV6/RUNX1 fusion construct following CRISPR/ Cas9-mediated knockout of the fusion region. Furthermore, functional studies of the ETV6/RUNX1 abrogated REH cells, and ALL cell line showed a reduction in proliferative potential which also translates to a reduction in chemoresistance where REH cells were shown to be more apoptotic following chemodrug treatment (Rahman et al., 2017). Moreover, it was also reported that the BCR-ABL fusion gene was successfully targeted in Philadelphia positive ALL cells. Small guide RNA was designed to target a specific region of the fusion protein; this group used the nickase system of CRISPR/Cas9 where cleavage occur between the exon-exon junction, and this resulted in total abolishment of the fusion protein trailed by rapid apoptosis of ALL cells (Montaño et al., 2020). Derivative of the Cas9 knockout system, the dCas9 repressor, was also used in studying the leukemogenesis of ALL. A study sought to look into the function of ARID5B in ALL resistance toward treatment. The dCas9-KRAB repressor system was used to repress ARID5B, and the knockdown showed a significant increase in IC50 following MTX (chemodrug) treatment, suggesting that ARID5B could probably be downregulated in ALL for chemoresistance. This was interesting as patients with relapse showed significant downregulation of ARID5B (Tan et al., 2020). This study reflects the usage of the CRISPR system in studying the functional genomics of disease progression.

(p11.4) Additionally, ALL metabolism dysregulation was also studied in further understanding the mechanism of ALL leukemogenesis, and it was reported that the PAX5 transcription activator was deactivated in which this trailed increase in glucose uptake of ALL thus supporting ALL development. Using the CRISPR activation system (VP64), the same group induced PAX5 expression which in turn would activate PAX5 repressed gene; this attenuated glucose uptake thus restoring the gate keeping function of PAX5 as a metabolic switch .
## (s15) CHALLENGES IN USING CRISPR TOOLS IN THE STUDY OF FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS
(p15.0) While CRISPR-Cas9 technology has emerged as a promising tool in interrogation of gene functions, it has been recognized that several technical challenges greatly mar the progression of this field. Some of the more perplexing issues have been encountered through the use of CRISPR in pooled screening, occurrence of offtargets, false positive and false negative results, low efficiency of HDR events, use of high passage number cell lines, and limitations to the types of genes that can be studied.

(p15.1) One of the major disadvantages in CRISPR, which has been identified early in the development of this technology, is the potential to generate off-target double-strand cuts. Although the typical sgRNA which consists of 22bp is able to provide high enough diversity for it to remain unique even within the human genome of over three billion bp, many studies have demonstrated that a degree of base mismatch is well tolerated by the Cas9 system, leading to the cleavage of alternative sites (Hsu et al., 2013;Lin et al., 2014). Furthermore, it has also been shown that if these mismatches are to occur further away from the PAM sequence, the likelihood of binding and cleavage would be higher (Hsu et al., 2014). Moreover, the presence of minor DNA or RNA bulge resulting from insertions or deletions in the genome are also tolerated (Lin et al., 2014). Some solutions to this problem has been devised including development of predictive scores in guide RNA design software (Tycko et al., 2016) and also incorporating the use of enhanced specific Cas9 (eSpCas9) and high fidelity Cas9 (SpCas9-HF1) (Kleinstiver et al., 2016;Slaymaker et al., 2016). Alternatively, Cas9 can also be delivered in a protein form to provide immediate activity and degrade shortly thereafter to prevent binding and cleavage of other sites (Kim et al., 2014). A recent study has further demonstrated that the precision of CRISPR editing can be significantly enhanced with the incorporation of a hairpin sequence at the 5' end of the sgRNA (Kocak et al., 2019).

(p15.2) Another major hindrance lie in the shortcomings encountered when pooled library screens are performed, whereby paracrine signaling from wild-type cells may mask the effects of knockout (KO) cells (Ford et al., 2019). This is exemplified in growth factor KO cultures where continued compensatory secretion by adjacent unaffected cells is able to prevent the emergence of the true phenotype. Therefore, pooled library screens of heterogenous cultures may fail to identify the full set of genes responsible for particular phenotypes. Additionally, another disadvantage of pooled screening is that the range of phenotypes that can be read is restricted, typically only to survival and proliferation studies. Some initial efforts made in this area have been able to partially address the abovementioned limitations. FACS, for example, has been shown capable of enriching cultures of positively transformed cells via expression of fluorescence proteins and also cell surface markers, which have been demonstrated even in patientderived xenografts (Hulton et al., 2020). This would allow for more precise investigations of cells by exclusion of crosstalk by neighboring wild-type cells.

(p15.3) Another major concern is that genes which are essential for survival cannot be interrogated via complete knockout (Ford et al., 2019). In such cases, it would be suitable to employ CRISPR interference for knockdown studies. On the other hand, it would be appropriate to utilize KO approaches to investigate genes which are capable of maintaining function at low expression levels considering the phenotype could be misinterpreted with knockdown studies. These circumstances would need to be identified prior and addressed with the use of appropriate CRISPR systems to avoid the emergence of perplexing outcomes.
## (s16) CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS OF CRISPR APPLICATIONS IN HEMATOLOGICAL MALIGNANCIES
(p16.0) Advancements in CRISPR/Cas9 technology have greatly impacted basic research in hematological malignancies which have immense potential to be translated into clinical applications in the near future. Among the most promising are in the areas of drug discovery, identification of treatment resistance, disease modeling, and genetic manipulation to improve other cancer therapies such as CAR-T cells and editing HSCs for autologous hematopoietic reconstitution.

(p16.1) CRISPR has been extensively explored for discovery of drug targets as potential treatments through genetic screens on cancer cell lines. This approach, among others, has the capacity of identifying essential genes for survival, thereby establishing actionable targets for therapeutic development. A study conducted on AML cell lines, which employed genome-wide CRISPR screening, has identified that survival of the cancer cells is dependent on the mRNA decapping enzyme scavenger (DCPS) (Yamauchi et al., 2018). Further study on inhibitors of DCPS indicated strong anti-leukemic effects by causing missplicing of pre-mRNA. Transcription factors (TF) have also been known to be dysregulated in cancers and can be a main vulnerability in its pathogenesis. PAX5 and IKZF1 are among the most commonly altered TFs in B-ALL, affecting approximately 80% of patients (Mullighan et al., 2007). CRISPR screens on these TFs were able to identify downstream effectors including CB2, TXNIP, and NR3C1, which are targetable by inhibitors . This approach, aside from identification of specific genetic vulnerabilities present in cancer cells, is also applicable for delineating the roles of genomic aberrations in affecting cellular fitness which may further provide clues to underlying causes in drug resistance development and how these polymorphic variants drive the growth of cancer (Shalem et al., 2014;Wang et al., 2014;Hart et al., 2015).

(p16.2) In identification of drug resistance genes, a genome-scale CRISPR KO screen has been explored in BCR-ABL1 CML cell lines (Lewis et al., 2020). This approach was found to identify novel drug resistance mechanisms which are related to MAPK signaling and apoptosis via the intrinsic pathway. The information generated from such screens could potentially be used to design combinatorial therapies to simultaneously target the resistance and vulnerable survival genes, thereby reestablishing treatment susceptibility.

(p16.3) The absence of cellular models which closely recapitulates disease state in leukemic patients has been a major hurdle in the drug discovery process. Among the most burgeoning issues are the heterogeneity of mutations and non-uniform leukemic cell distribution that co-exist in vivo. In these terms, gene editing with the CRISPR system has presented a simple and versatile solution to leukemic disease modeling with the capability of introducing multiple deletions and insertions to simultaneously manipulate expression of several genes and alleles (Lucas et al., 2017). Furthermore, downstream identification of targets for leukemia treatment could also be streamlined with this strategy. This has been exemplified in the generation of a CLL line with complete biallelic loss of the ATM gene function to mimic this adverse prognosis state found in approximately 1/3 of patients (Quijada-Álamo et al., 2020). Furthermore, drug screening revealed a previously unknown susceptibility of del (11q)/ATM-mutant to inhibition of PARP and BCR. This discovery has unraveled that this high-risk cytogenetic abnormality is treatable with a combination of olaparib and ibrutinib, which confirms the feasibility in utilizing CRISPR in modeling and therapeutic discovery for hematological malignancies.
## (s17) SUMMARY AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
(p17.0) This review has clearly demonstrated that CRISPR has served well in deciphering and understanding the genetic basis of hematological malignancies and has bloomed to become the new gamechanger in the field of genome editing by overcoming all the limitations that were displayed by other editing techniques earlier. In spite of all the merits posed by this so-called prime technique, CRISPR also come with certain limitations like its earlier predecessors.

(p17.1) Currently, CRISPR systems can be delivered in different modes whereby, gene editing can be achieved through transient or stable delivery system. Viral-based transfection of CRISPR is the most efficient method for producing stablymodified cells (Lino et al., 2018). Nevertheless, there has been a recent paradigm shift where non-viral methods are becoming the main homestay given biosafety and ethical issues when utilizing viral vectors. Non-viral vector systems include systems such as lipid nanoparticles, cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs), DNA "nanoclews," and gold nanoparticles. Having said that, the efficiency of the delivery still remains a challenge in hematological-related malignancies. There has been special technique developed to shuttle the cargo of the CRISPR system into the cell via rapid cell mechanical deformation (Peyravian et al., 2021). This has, to a certain extent, alleviated the limitation posed earlier and has allowed high delivery efficiency in hematological malignancies.

(p17.2) The issue of specificity in the CRISPR system is a major concern since Cas9 binds to unintended genomic sites for cleavage, termed as off-target effects. The target efficiency of the CRISPR system is only determined through 20 nucleotide sequences of guide RNA (gRNA) and PAM sites adjacent to target loci. If there are more than three mismatches between target sequences and 20 nucleotides of gRNA, it can result in off-target effects. Researchers have proposed two types of off-target effects, the first types of off-target effects likely to occur due to the sequence homology of the target loci and the next types of offtarget sites occur in the genome other than the target site (Naeem et al., 2020). The effect causes multiple cellular issues at the genomic level and in turn leads to deletions, alterations in the respective gene, and sometimes could lead to lethal genetic mutations. There are different methods established to validate the off-target effects and the most unique of them all is the Genome-wide Unbiased Identification of DSBs Enabled by Sequencing (GUIDE-seq). This provides an unbiased and genome-wide method for detecting CRISPR RNA-guided DSBs in cells . This groundbreaking study has increased the practical viability of the off-target detection. With standardization of all the methods that has been drawn FIGURE 1 | Timeline describing the research progress of CRISPR applications in hematological malignancies. Key studies contributing to major breakthroughs in the field are highlighted. Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 767298 16 over the years, it makes the gene editing tool known as CRISPR to be a possible therapeutic approach in field of hematological malignancy.

(p17.3) The molecular scissors known as "CRISPR" provides complete silencing, and knockdown of gene can still be a valuable means depending on the type of malignancy. This method of gene silencing usually involves an extended time frame to generate a stable cell line. Taking into consideration on the other gene editing tools available with the likes of ZFN, TALENs, and meganucleases, it can be said that CRISPR is the most efficient, stable, and effective. CRISPR is appropriate for delineating gene functions, and genome-editing technology is the apparent option for creating a true genetic null allele, introducing a point mutation, and correcting a specific mutation.

(p17.4) In conclusion, through current advancement in terms of gene editing, we can say that CRISPR has taken the research world by storm, evidently allowing us to make changes to the once impossible. CRISPR has made its way onto the freezers of labs all around the spectrum, easily accessible for researchers to use it. It is also becoming a mainstream methodology to study cancer biology given its versatility. It has now matured its way from experimental approach toward customized treatment involving cancer patients. CRISPR gene editing tools have also sparked significant advancements in enhancing our knowledge regarding hematological malignancies, which in essence presents us with potential therapeutic applications which holds much promise for alternative treatments for patients with this group of malignancies. Development of CRISPR utilization in studying the functional genomics of haematologic malignancies is depicted in Figure 1 and a general summary for studying functional genomics via CRISPR based tools is presented in Figure 2.  
