# Citation: Dominic, D.; Baidurah, S. Recent Developments in Biological Processing Technology for Palm Oil Mill Effluent Treatment-A Review

CorpusID: 247861731 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/52d25e4c5affac33d153d877f24ec09aee179808](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/52d25e4c5affac33d153d877f24ec09aee179808)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s3) Factors Affecting Microorganism Activity during the Biological Processing Treatment
(p3.0) Figure 1 delineates five bioenvironmental factors affecting microorganism activity during biological processing treatments, namely, temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen, concentration of nutrients, and toxicity. Temperature is one of the main factors that affects microorganism activity during a biological processing treatment. The regulation of ambient temperature is important because it influences the outcome of a study in terms of treatment stability and performance in biological wastewater [29]. If the temperature is regulated at the optimum level, the growth and metabolism of bacteria at an excellent level can be achieved. Consequently, a high yield of the bioprocess can be obtained as the environment provided to the microorganisms during the biological treatment is fulfilling the demand of the normal biological reaction. Consequently, the temperature will affect the enzymatic reaction of the bacteria. This is because the growth of each species is dominantly determined by the specific temperature of its enzyme. If the temperature is high, the enzymatic reaction of the bacteria will increase. Conversely, the enzymatic reaction of the microbes will reduce when exposed beyond the maximum temperature limit due to the denaturing of the enzyme. Moreover, the enzymatic reaction of the microbes will decrease if the temperature is lowered; however, some microorganisms have the ability to adapt to new living conditions rapidly after the temperature is lifted from the mesophilic range to the thermophilic range while some would just vanish from the system due to their low tolerance to high temperatures [29]. Microorganisms that possess high-temperature tolerance would be able to grow, but significantly, when there is no microbial growth, there will be no soluble COD removal either [30]. Thus, an optimum temperature needs to be regulated to ensure the effective biological treatment of wastewater.

(p3.1) The growth and distributions of microorganisms are influenced by pH during biological degradation. A study conducted by Nwuche et al. (2014) evinced the pH of the medium was found to affect the efficiency of COD removal from the POME [31]. The biological macromolecules activities of the microorganisms depend on the pH value [32] and bacteria have a narrower pH range for growth as compared to fungi [33]. The pH may affect the bacteria's thermodynamic force of chemical reactions involving protons as metabolites and the energetic metabolism, provided that the proton motive force is used to be the main source of electrochemical potential for ATP synthesis [32]. The pH below the normal physiological range tolerated by the bacterial cells leads to bacterial growth inhibition [33]. Similarly, a pH above the normal physiological range tolerated by the bacterial cells will deter the bacterial growth. Moreover, increasing or decreasing the environmental pH by one unit in natural environments will lower the metabolic activity of microbial communities by up to 50% [34]. Withal, the biodegradation of POME using a consortium of microorganisms in unfavourable pH conditions will obstruct the growth of bacteria. This is because the bacteria will be outcompeted by other bacterial species that are more adapted to the pH conditions [34]. The optimum pH is upmost required to maintain the microorganisms' metabolism, physiological mechanisms, and structural integrity during the biological degradation of the POME. Bioenvironmental factors affecting microorganisms' activities during biological processing treatment.

(p3.2) A study conducted by Tajuddin et al. (2004) [35] evinced the growth of the bacteria can be accelerated and the aerobic digestion process period can be shortened, with the increase of oxygen concentration. Liao et al. (2011) [36] also reported that a higher degradation efficiency can be achieved with a higher dissolved oxygen (DO) level. This observation pinpoints that the oxygen supplied to the microorganisms through aeration will allow them to respirate and satisfy the BOD [35]. The aeration would also increase the oxygen concentration and at the same time enhance the microorganisms' growth, thus, reducing the COD concentration [35]. Moreover, the oxygen acts as an agent in the oxidation of undesirable contaminants [35]. As the DO concentration increases, the pollutant removals and biomass production increases [37]. If the concentration of DO is low during the biological treatment, the microbes are unable to degrade the organic matter. A sufficient concentration of DO is required by the microorganisms to degrade the copious organic matter present in the POME.

(p3.3) The ability of microorganisms to grow also depends on the concentration of toxicity and exposure. The toxicity for all compounds is enhanced when the acid concentration increases [38]. The high toxicity will inflict undesirable low microorganisms' growth rates and a reduction in cell concentrations, while the severe growth inhibition of the microorganisms will disrupt the biodegradation of organic matter present in the POME. Most importantly, the target action of the toxicity is dependent on the concentration of the toxic chemical [39]. A surfeit of toxic chemicals will alter the molecular structure of the microorganisms and subsequently revise the mode of action during the biodegradation of organic matter. In lieu, at a minute concentration, the toxic chemical can be utilized as nutrients [39].

(p3.4) Nutrients play a significant role during microbial growth. It is extremely necessary for nutrients to be present in any media to ensure microorganisms are properly cultivated in the laboratory as they are in their natural environments. There are many types of nutrients available for proper growth and the supply of nutrients is dependent on the requirement of the study itself. The nutrients supplied will be used by the microorganisms principally in their metabolic processes and for their cellular needs. The types of nutrients essential to be supplied must contain a fermentable sugar such as carbon and energy sources for the microorganisms. The availability and concentrations of the nutrients within the microorganisms' environment could become a factor that determines their development. In the case of an inadequate amount of nutrients supplied, the growth process will be retarded. In lieu, with sufficient availability and ideal concentrations of the nutrients, the bacterial growth will thrive. At high concentrations, the specific growth rate is independent of the concentration of nutrients, but at low concentrations, the specific growth rate is a strong function of the nutrient concentration [40]. In this regard, the nutrients could become a limiting factor during the microorganisms' growth.
## (s5) Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket Reactor (UASBR)
(p5.0) An upflow anaerobic sludge blanket reactor (UASBR) is a type of anaerobic digestion treatment utilized for industrial effluent treatment. Up until 2011, there were approximately 500 UASBRs installed worldwide [80]. The main highlight of the system is its integration of biological and physical processes consisting of granules. The formation of granules in POME treatment is associated with the presence of acetate in the POME itself. The formation occurs when the POME to be treated using an UASBR is concentrated with butyrate. The butyrate will be degraded by acetogenic bacteria into acetate by nature and the formation of granules can be controlled by adding phosphorus and nitrogen into the influent stream.

(p5.1) This system is affordable and a positive energy balance of the anaerobic treatment processes is achievable [81]. The physical process of the system involves the separation of solids and gases from the liquid simultaneously, and the biological process of the system involves the degradation of decomposable organic matter under anaerobic conditions [82]. Ahmad successfully removed 99% of COD from POME with the application of an UASBR within 7.2 days with a working volume of 4.7 L at 37 • C [41].
## (s6) Ultrasonic Membrane Anaerobic System (UMAS)
(p6.0) The ultrasonic membrane anaerobic system (UMAS) is one of the anaerobic digestion treatments applied for the biological treatment of industrial effluent. This system offers a cost-effective method for POME treatment. In this system, an ultrasonic device is applied to reduce the fouling of the membrane and to simultaneously increase the COD removal efficiency [85]. UMAS is one of the alternative methods of treating POME. Based on a study conducted by Abdurahman et al. (2013), a COD removal efficiency of 98.5% with the working volume of 200 L was achieved for 480.3 days of POME treatment by utilizing an UMAS at 30 • C [42]. The study also recorded 98.0% of COD removal efficiency within 20.3 days. There was no significant difference of the COD removal efficiency when both HRTs were compared. This was because the increased biomass concentration in the system subsequently led to the washout phase of the reactor [42]. The 98.6% reduction of COD removal was equivalent to 3000 mg/L of COD content.

(p6.1) The introduction of an ultrasonic device eliminates the presence of membrane fouling in the system and a high COD removal percentage can be achieved in a shorter treatment time [85]. The accumulation of particles at the membrane surface of the UMAS is reduced as the fouling effect is overcome by the presence of ultrasonic waves [85]. For that reason, the COD removal efficiency can be observed to increase gradually throughout the biodegradation of POME. In the case without the application of an ultrasonic device, fouling could build up over time while the COD removal efficiency would decrease. This is because the resistance of the POME flowing over the surface would increase, due to the reduced cross-sectional area of the flow channels. Nonetheless, the COD removal efficiency from the POME by the UMAS is lower compared to the COD removal efficiency from the POME by an UASBR. This is because the longer the HRTs, the greater the fouling effects and along with the biological treatment of POME using a UMAS, huge deposits of solids would form on the membrane surface. Concomitantly, the membrane pores will become blocked and the performance of the UMAS system will be reduced as compared to the UASBR.
## (s9) Biological Treatment of POME Using Fungi
(p9.0) Fungi have also been utilized in biological processing technologies for POME treatment, as delineated in Table 3. • C = degree Celsius; HRT = hydraulic retention time; COD = chemical oxygen demand; BOD = biochemical oxygen demand; TSS = total suspended solids; OLR = organic loading rate; L =litre; SVI = sludge volume index; NH 3 -N = ammoniacal nitrogen; ND = no data.

(p9.1) Yarrowia lipolytica is a non-pathogenic marine hydrocarbon-degrading yeast. Based on a study conducted by Oswal et al. (2002), Y. lipolytica NCIM 3589 isolated from Mumbai, India successfully removed 97.40% to 97.80% of COD from POME within three to four days without dilution of the POME and nutrient supplement [88]. Specifically, approximately 5500 mg/L (equivalent to 97.80% COD removal efficiency) of COD was removed efficiently from the POME within four days. There was no significant difference of the COD removal efficiency when the POME was treated with Y. lipolytica for three and four days. A high COD removal efficiency within the designated HRTs indicated that the yeast possessed many advantages which included a wide range pH tolerance. The POME sample used in Oswal et al.'s study was initially acidic. Notably, the yeast was capable to grow between pH 3.0 and 8.5 [88]. This was due to the yeast having developed a uniquely broad spectrum of biological features that enabled them to grow in different environments as compared to their native environment. Moreover, with a high efficiency of COD removal from the POME, Y. lipolytica has emerged as a paradigm organism to produce several advanced biofuels and chemicals [98].

(p9.2) The yeast is an oleaginous microorganism also known as the degrader of alkanes in crude oil that has the ability to accumulate lipids [99,100]. It does not only serve as a biological treatment of POME, but it also can serve as a biological tool for biofuel production. The presence of alkanes, fatty acids, grease, and triacylglycerols in POME can be utilized by Y. lipolytica as food during the biological treatment of POME. Y. lipolytica also has the ability to remove oil and grease from POME due to the production of enzymes. For example, the production of lipases and enzymes can partially or completely metabolize these compounds [101]. Generally, the enzymes are produced in the presence of oils or inducers including triacylglycerols, fatty acids, hydrolysable esters, Tweens, bile salts and glycerol [102]. The expression of lipase activity has frequently been caused by the carbon source [103], while the direct transesterification of yeast lipid by its own lipase also indicated a potentially high use of this yeast in environment-friendly biodiesel production [103]. Substantially, the degradation of the POME sample from a factory site in India recorded a 99% (1500 mg/L) COD reduction utilizing the POME sample sequentially treated with flocculant, ferric chloride and then with a consortium of microorganisms developed from a local garden.
## (s10) Biological Treatment of POME Using Bacteria
(p10.0) This subtopic highlights the effective biological processing technologies in the presence of bacteria applicable to POME treatment, as delineated in Table 4. Karim et al. (2019) successfully treated POME biologically using Bacillus cereus MF 661,883 with the highest COD removal efficiency at 79.35%, BOD removal efficiency at 72.65%, 0.2 L working volume at 35 • C, and HRTs of six days [117]. The highest COD removal efficiency was recorded for the 50% diluted POME prior to biological treatment by B. cereus MF 661883. The remaining COD and BOD in the treated POME were equivalent to 4859 ± 605 mg/L and 4054 ± 368 mg/L. The POME contained an enormous amount of organic compounds that were primarily composed of cellulolytic material originating from cellulose fruit debris. Cellulase-producing bacteria are needed to degrade cellulose, such as B. cereus; a sporeforming bacteria that has the capability to produce cellulase and perform the degradation of cellulose-based agro-industry waste. Bala et al. (2015) has also reported that cellulolytic activity in a liquid medium could be facilitated by B. cereus due to the ability of B. cereus to excrete enzymes [113]. The COD and BOD in POME reduced significantly after being biologically treated with B. cereus MF 661883. This observation indicated that the bacteria had degraded the cellulolytic material using cellulase by reducing it into sugar. The B. cereus MF 661,883 also utilized carbon from the POME for growth, therefore the abundance of organic compounds in POME that is responsible for the BOD and COD makes POME itself a suitable substrate for the cultivation of the various growth of microorganisms [93]. • C = degree Celsius; HRT = hydraulic retention time; COD = chemical oxygen demand; BOD = biochemical oxygen demand; TSS = total suspended solids; OLR = organic loading rate; L = litre; SVI = sludge volume index; NH 3 -N = ammoniacal nitrogen; ND = no data.
