# Technology and jobs: A systematic literature review

CorpusID: 247939494 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5ee85abdb363a533ff11ec4d3e395a133508c8a0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5ee85abdb363a533ff11ec4d3e395a133508c8a0)

Fields: Computer Science, Economics

## (s7) Coding scheme
(p7.0) Throughout the process of screening the selected studies, we developed a simplified coding scheme for the effect considered, technology type, method, and level of analysis to cluster studies relying on similar measures and approaches. The coding scheme consists of categories (e.g. different technology types) and is based on common thematic patterns across the papers.

(p7.1) First, we classified a study as "support" if it provides results that offer data-based support for the existence of the effect of interest examined, i.e. replacement, reinstatement, and real income. Some studies find that the effects vary depending on the type of technology or the (sub)sample analyzed, for example distinguishing between industries, demographic groups, occupations, and types of labor. In this case we assigned the study to the category "depends". Studies that report negligible effects in terms of the magnitude or effects of low statistical significance were classified as "weak". Finally, studies were labeled as "no support" if they find that the effect of interest is insignificant or opposite to what was hypothesized. Note that a study can investigate more than one type of effect, but the assigned labels, i.e. support, depends, weak or no support, are mutually exclusive within each effect. In the same spirit, we classify studies as "positive", "negative", "depends", and "weak" based on the extent to which they provide evidence on net employment effects.

(p7.2) The studies in our sample differ by the technologies examined and the empirical indicators used to measure them. We identified five broader classes of measures of technological change: ICT, robots, innovation, TFP-style, and a residual category other/indirect. The residual category accounts for technology types that are used by a small number of studies and are rather too heterogeneous to form separate technology groups.

(p7.3) The increased availability of ICT was one major technology trend of the post-1980s. Empirical studies investigating its economic impact rely on different measures of ICTdiffusion such as ICT investments or capital, as for example found in EUKLEMS (2019) and other comparable databases which are mostly publicly available. Other studies rely on survey data of computer use and ICT investment at the firm-level or occupation-level.

(p7.4) Another technology that raised much attention in economic research is the impact of robots. In most studies, robot-diffusion is measured using data for industrial robots from the IFR (IFR, 2020) which, to our knowledge, is the only source consistently covering a large set of countries, time-periods and all relevant industries where industrial robots are adopted. A few other studies use country-specific data from the Japanese and Danish national associations for robot manufacturers on robot sales (Dekle, 2020;Graetz and Michaels, 2018), or trade in robots (Blanas et al., 2019). Two studies rely on survey data about industry level robot use (Camina et al., 2020;Edler and Ribakova, 1994), and one study relies on survey data on self-reported job losses in response to the adoption of robots at the workplace (Dodel and Mesch, 2020). Robots received much attention because they can be interpreted as a pure automation technology, substituting human workers performing manual tasks.
## (s14) Studies not supporting the replacement effect
(p14.0) The number of studies that provide evidence against any significant impact of technology on employment is somewhat smaller (n=17). Nine of them are on ICT, two on robots, two on innovation, one on TFP-style study, and three studies use other/indirect technology measures. Fung (2006) proxied ICT by expenses on IT and computer data processing and examined whether ICT had a labor-saving impact on firms in the US banking industry between 1992-2002. The author rejected the presence of labor-saving effects for the technologies considered, observing that the more technology-intensive firms increased their employment. Similarly, Aubert-Tarby et al. (2018) analyzed whether digitilization in the French newspaper and magazine press industry creates or destroys jobs. Overall, they found digitalization to be associated with higher wages and a reduced probability to be laid off. Atasoy et al. (2016), Gaggl and Wright (2017), and Pantea et al. (2017) made similar observations for EU countries and Turkey looking at different firm-level ICT usage indicators. They estimated either insignificant or positive effects of these technologies on employment in SMEs. Gaggl and Wright (2017) showed that the introduction of these technologies is associated with changes in the composition of tasks performed by workers. In line with that, Biagi and Falk (2017) and Ivus and Boland (2015) did not find any significant effect of ICT on employment in European industries and Canadian regions, respectively. Behaghel and Moschion (2016) did not observe that ICT-diffusion increases the probability of dismissals in French cities. If anything, they provided only weak support of increased job instability for high-school dropouts. Borland and Coelli (2017) provided a descriptive historical analysis documenting a decrease in routine labor which does not deviate from historical patterns. They could not identify any noteworthy relationship between ICT-diffusion and employment changes. Dekle (2020) and Fu et al. (2021) evaluated the impact of robots on employment (n=2). Fu et al. (2021) studied a sample of seventy-four countries, including the EU-27 and twenty-nine developing countries. They found insignificant effects in developing countries and positive employment effects accompanied with productivity increases in developed countries. The authors also reported heterogeneity by gender, but they did not find evidence for robot-induced replacement. Dekle (2020) analyzed the impact of robot-diffusion during 1979-2012 in twenty Japanese industries, but could not identify any significant negative effects on employment.

(p14.1) Among innovation studies (n=2), Calvino and Virgillito (2018) concluded in a literature review that the relationship between product innovation and employment is rather positive if statistically significant at all. The impact of process innovation remains controversial and the authors emphasized that the existing evidence is insufficient to support the existence of a replacement effect. Fung (2006) studied -in addition to ICT -the impact of in-house process innovation in the banking sector. But again, they could not find any support that these innovations reduce employment.

(p14.2) Three studies considered other/indirect technology measures. Using regressions, Scholl and Hanson (2020) did not find any significant impact of automation risks on pay or employment. Sargent (2000) assumed that changes in economic regularities during the 20th century, such as the relationship between unemployment rates and vacancies, are an indication of technological change. The author found descriptive evidence that such shifts occurred and linked these patterns to employment shifts across industries, occupations and educational groups, but he could not find any evidence of increased unemployment. Raval (2019) explored plant-level information to examine whether capital-labor substitution possibilities have changed between 1987-2007. They found that capital-labor elasticities have been very persistent over the time period covered.
## (s15) Studies with ambiguous findings and indirect evidence
(p15.0) Ambiguous results are reported in twenty studies coming in the following decreasing order from innovation (n=7), ICT (n=5), other/indirect (n=5), and TFP-style (n=3). No robot study reports ambiguous results. Among the studies with ambiguous results, some of these-classified as "weak"-provide only indirect evidence that may be consistent with the replacement effect. The remaining studies-classified as "depends"-provide contradicting evidence when using different specifications. In both cases and irrespective of the technology, all of them remain inconclusive on whether or not technology replaces labor.

(p15.1) Among the ICT studies, Gallipoli and Makridis (2018) provided indirect support for the replacement of non-IT by IT-intensive occupations with a higher wage premium. Breemersch et al. (2019) showed ICT adoption to be associated with increased polarization towards high pay jobs within manufacturing only, but with minimal contributions between manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries. Maurin and Thesmar (2004) found that the share of skilled labor increased in response to ICT adoption which may be accompanied with the simultaneous replacement of unskilled labor. Autor et al. (1998) observed rapid skill upgrading processes since 1970 and provided suggestive evidence that these processes evolve faster in computer intense industries. These studies point to a declining employment share of certain types of jobs, i.e. mostly routine task intensive, low-skill, and low-wage jobs. However, it is not necessarily true that changes in employment shares are accompanied by the replacement or "phasing out" of certain occupations. O'Mahony et al. (2021) studied the impact of ICT and innovation-related capital investments, but did not find any conclusive results on whether the labor share is positively or negatively affected. Intangible investments related to innovation tend to have a positive impact, while investments related to firm organization tend to show the opposite pattern. Low-and middle-skill workers appear to be more negatively affected.

(p15.2) Three studies of those relying on TFP-style measures report ambiguous results (Boyle and McCormack, 2002;Dixon and Lim, 2020;Fort et al., 2018). Fort et al. (2018) made a detailed descriptive analysis showing a negative relationship between TFP-growth and employment in some but not all manufacturing industries. They reported that this does not realize through the shut-down of existing plants but through lower shares of labor input in plants that are new entrants. Boyle and McCormack (2002) and Dixon and Lim (2020) did not directly evaluate the impact of TFP on labor, but showed that the decline in the labor share can be partly attributed to labor-saving technological change.

(p15.3) Seven studies analyzed the impact of innovation (Bogliacino and Pianta, 2010;Cozzarin, 2016;Evangelista and Vezzani, 2012;Falk, 2015;Kwon et al., 2015;Pellegrino et al., 2019;Van Reenen, 1997). All of them are firm-level analyses -except for the industry-level study by Bogliacino and Pianta (2010) -and explored whether there are any effects of process/product innovation on labor demand. Evangelista and Vezzani (2012), Falk (2015), and Kwon et al. (2015) also studied the impact of organizational innovation. None of these studies could identify any significant impact of product and organizational innovation on labor. For process innovation, Pellegrino et al. (2019) and Van Reenen (1997) either found only weakly significant negative effects or showed that the result depends on the size of firms. Falk (2015) showed a negative association between process innovation and labor, but only for a subset of industries. Cozzarin (2016) found ambiguous results depending on the type of innovation and technology considered: For example, he found no effect of advanced manufacturing technologies, a negative effect of product innovation, and a positive effect of process innovation. Evangelista and Vezzani (2012) found weak evidence of a labor-saving impact of organizational product innovation in manufacturing but not in services. Next to the labor-saving effect, they also observed an innovation-induced increase in sales which may offset the negative effect on employment. Kwon et al. (2015) reported a negative impact of process but not product innovation.

(p15.4) Among those studies using other/indirect technology measures (n=5), three used investment in high-tech capital or R&D as technology proxies (Breemersch et al., 2019;Flug and Hercowitz, 2000;Idris et al., 2021) 2021) found heterogeneous results depending on the type of the technology considered: R&D-based knowledge investments seem to mitigate the ICT-driven declining trend in the labor share, while innovation-related intangible investments are related to a rising labor share, opposite to the effect found for organization-related investments.

(p15.5) Finally, Green and Sand (2015) provide a descriptive analysis of technology trends and explored polarization in the Canadian labor market since the 1970s. They cannot confirm any hypothesis about skill-biased technological change. Rather, the drivers of the polarization differ from those in the US and other countries. The authors documented some occupations to be shrinking but argued this to be driven by the resource boom in Canada, rather than by technological change.
## (s18) Studies supporting the reinstatement effect
(p18.0) Among those studies that support the reinstatement effect, twenty-three look at the impact of ICT (Atasoy, 2013;Aubert-Tarby et al., 2018;Autor, 2015;Autor and Dorn, 2013;Autor et al., 2015;Autor et al., 2003;Baddeley, 2008;Balsmeier and Woerter, 2019;Behaghel and Moschion, 2016;Berman et al., 1994;Blanas et al., 2019;Fossen and Sorgner, 2021;Fung, 2006;Gaggl and Wright, 2017;Gallipoli and Makridis, 2018;Ivus and Boland, 2015;Jerbashian, 2019;Kaiser, 2001;Kristal, 2013;Luker and Lyons, 1997;Maurin and Thesmar, 2004;Morrison, 1997;Morrison and Siegel, 2001). At the city-level, Behaghel and Moschion (2016) studied the impact of ICT on skill upgrading and job-to-job transitions showing that ICT adoption is associated with an increased demand for skilled labor, but not with higher dismissal rates. Gaggl and Wright (2017) and Ivus and Boland (2015) argued that the impact of ICT on net employment depends on various dimensions. Gaggl and Wright (2017) found a positive relationship between ICT adoption and the demand for non-routine cognitive labor, but did not observe effects on job replacement. However, they found that the positive effect diminishes over time which may indicate that it is only a transitory phenomenon. The detailed descriptive analysis of industrial job creation and destruction dynamics by Borland and Coelli (2017) provides evidence that the positive employment effects in Canada are heterogeneous across regions: ICT-diffusion only exhibits significant positive interactions with labor in rural regions with stronger effects in ICT-intensive industries.

(p18.1) Gallipoli and Makridis (2018) listed numerous empirical stylized facts for the US between 1980-2013 using micro-level census data and detailed occupational employment statistics. They documented the emergence of new and well-paid IT occupations, mostly in services. They showed that productivity growth can be mostly attributed to services while the employment share in manufacturing declined. However, their findings do not allow to draw conclusions about the existence of simultaneous replacement or net employment effects. Maurin and Thesmar (2004) explored employee-level data on different types of computer technologies used at work. They found a positive correlation between the diffusion of computers and the share of high-skilled labor. The authors also showed that the impact of ICT on labor demand is conditional on the type of ICT, and on the occupations and their task content.

(p18.2) Only the study by Atasoy (2013) reports findings exclusively for the reinstatement effect, but not on any of the other two effects. The authors studied the impact of broadband deployment on county level labor markets in the US between 1999-2007. They found a positive effect of broadband access on employment and wages. The positive wage effects are larger in counties with more skilled labor supporting theories of skill-biased technological change.

(p18.3) In an economic history essay, Autor (2015) documented in detail how the demand for labor for certain occupations in services, such as managers, personal care, food services and others, continuously increased since the 1980s until the financial crisis when the patterns of growth slowed down. Furthermore, he illustrated patterns of skill polarization reflected in the highest growth rates in the lowest and highest skill percentile. Similarly, Luker and Lyons (1997) documented shifts from manufacturing to services. They showed that a net increase in high-tech industries can be mostly attributed to services. Generally, high-tech service employment appears to grow faster than employment in the rest of the economy.

(p18.4) Thirteen regression studies on ICT simultaneously support the replacement and reinstatement of labor (Autor and Dorn, 2013;Autor et al., 2015;Autor et al., 2003;Baddeley, 2008;Balsmeier and Woerter, 2019;Berman et al., 1994;Blanas et al., 2019;Fossen and Sorgner, 2021;Jerbashian, 2019;Kaiser, 2001;Kristal, 2013;Morrison, 1997;Morrison and Siegel, 2001). The two Regional level studies by Autor and Dorn (2013) and Autor et al. (2015) found support for routine-biased technological change and observed increasing employment in abstract and manual tasks which neutralizes the negative employment effects of routine-task replacement. Autor and Dorn (2013) also documented a rise in polarization, i.e. both a rise in low-skill service jobs and a differential wage growth across occupations. The study by Baddeley (2008) is a macro-level analysis confirming that computerization, next to financialization, was associated with employment shifts from manufacturing to services in the UK between 1979-2005.

(p18.5) At the meso-level, Autor et al. (2003), Berman et al. (1994), Blanas et al. (2019), Jerbashian (2019), Kristal (2013), Morrison (1997), and Morrison and Siegel (2001) observed that ICT adoption is associated with the creation of new jobs. Autor et al. (2003) found an increase in non-routine jobs. Morrison (1997) showed that investments in computers and R&D are associated with skill polarization patterns, i.e. an increased demand for high-and low-skill workers. Berman et al. (1994) documented a rise in nonproduction labor which coincides with a skill upgrading process. A similar skill bias is confirmed by Blanas et al. (2019) who showed that robots and ICT are associated with higher employment in high-and middle-skill jobs and in services. Relatedly, Jerbashian (2019) showed a positive correlation between falling IT prices and employment in highwage occupations.

(p18.6) Balsmeier and Woerter (2019) and Kaiser (2001) provided evidence at the firm-level and Fossen and Sorgner (2021) at the level of individual employees. The two firm-level studies found that increased investment in IT is associated with the creation of high-skill jobs. Fossen and Sorgner (2021) found evidence for the creation of another class of jobs showing that digitalization significantly increases the probability that high-skill workers engage in entrepreneurial activity.

(p18.7) Nine reinstatement supporting studies analyzed the impact of Robots (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2019;Blanas et al., 2019;de Vries et al., 2020;Dekle, 2020;Edler and Ribakova, 1994;Gentili et al., 2020;Graetz and Michaels, 2018;Labaj and Vitaloš, 2020;Leigh et al., 2019). Two thirds of them reported ambiguous effects on net employment and the remaining three (Dekle, 2020;Gentili et al., 2020;Leigh et al., 2019) found positive effects. None of these studies documents a clear negative impact of robots on net employment. This suggests that whenever evidence for robot-driven reinstatement is found, it tends to (over)compensate the replacement of labor. Edler and Ribakova (1994) built on an empirical input-output model and found a higher demand for skilled labor in response to robot-diffusion. Gentili et al. (2020) performed a descriptive clustering analysis and attributed changes in the robot intensity to changes in employment measured by hours worked finding that industries with the highest robot intensity experienced the highest productivity and employment gains. The effects are clustered in high-tech industries which account for a small share of total employment.

(p18.8) Labaj and Vitaloš (2020) offer a macro-level regression analysis exploring how variations in the economy wide wage bill and labor share are explained by robot-diffusion rates in the US and Europe. They decomposed aggregate changes in the task content of production into a reinstatement and replacement effect and found evidence for both. However, the authors emphasized that whether reinstatement or replacement dominates varies across countries (especially between the US and EU) and that this variation cannot be explained by robot-diffusion.

(p18.9) For six meso-level regression-based analyses (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2019;Blanas et al., 2019;de Vries et al., 2020;Dekle, 2020;Graetz and Michaels, 2018;Leigh et al., 2019) we observed that they mostly report increases in high-skill and in service jobs. Dekle (2020) found similar effects for total employment, i.e. not only for high-skill and service jobs. Leigh et al. (2019) also showed that in US manufacturing the impact of robots tends to be positive.

(p18.10) Continuing, eight studies relying on innovation offer support for the reinstatement effect. Calvino and Virgillito (2018) made a literature review on the impact of innovation, captured by different indicators (R&D intensity, CIS, patents) on employment at the firm and sector-level. They documented that the employment effect is mostly positive, but also depends on the sector and the type of innovation (i.e. process or product). They confirmed a mostly positive effect of product innovation and a negative effect of process innovation. Tether and Massini (1998) descriptively explored employment creation by small innovative firms at the micro-level, where innovative firms are defined as inventor award winning firms. The authors showed that these firms have faster than average employment growth patterns, but it remains unclear to which extent this observation can be generalized beyond this specific setting. Three studies are micro-level regressions using firm-level data (Dachs et al., 2017;Fung, 2006;Vivarelli et al., 1996). Fung (2006) studied labor-saving product and process innovation in the banking sector and found: (a) a positive association between labor-saving technologies and higher firm-level employment and (b) positive spillovers from patented process innovations on labor demand in non-innovating banks. The latter effect suggests the presence of technology-induced employment externalities to nontechnology-adopting sectors and how these channels contribute to the creation of labor in the economy.

(p18.11) Both Vivarelli et al. (1996) and Dachs et al. (2017) observed that product innovation is positively associated with sales and labor demand, but Vivarelli et al. (1996) found this pattern only for a subset of sectors which are characterized by higher design and engineering intensities and higher percentages of product innovations. Cirillo (2017) and Xiang (2005) performed industry-level analyses. Cirillo (2017) found a positive relationship between the share of firms introducing product innovations, industry-level demand, and employment growth. Similarly, Xiang (2005) showed that the introduction of new goods is positively associated with the relative demand for skilled labor in the US manufacturing industry. Capello and Lenzi (2013) confirmed the positive association of product innovation with employment using regional-level data for the EU. Applying spatial regressions, they showed a positive relationship between the share of firms that introduce product innovations and regional employment and wage growth in sub-national regions (NUTS2) that are characterized by a high share of blue collar workers. The authors also highlighted that the effect in regions with low shares of blue collar workers may be negative, but with no insights on whether these relationships have changed over time.

(p18.12) Ten studies rely on TFP-style measures. In a descriptive analysis, Angelini et al. (2020) inferred technological change from shifts in the skill content of production and provided evidence for the reinstatement of service jobs reflected in employment shifts from manufacturing to services. Fort et al. (2018) conducted a detailed descriptive analysis of the impact of labor productivity changes on employment shifts at the industry and plant-level emphasizing that displacement and net effects are industry-specific.

(p18.13) The other eight papers are regressions, largely at the industry or macro-level. They rely on different proxies of productivity changes, mostly captured by TFP or labor productivity, and study labor demand in absolute and relative terms. Bessen (2020) investigated the role of the elasticity of demand with respect to productivity for three industries since the 19 th century. The author highlighted that final demand was historically a key driver of the reinstatement of labor in the steel, textiles and automobile industry. The studies by Baltagi and Rich (2005), Ho (2008), Kim and Kim (2020), and Sala and Trivin (2018) showed that the reinstatement of labor may be biased, as reflected in an increasing demand for skilled and non-production labor. The other three studies provide similar findings in different settings. Boyle and McCormack (2002) found that capital accumulation and technological change are key drivers of employment growth. Autor and Salomons (2018) investigated TFP shocks in upstream industries and showed that this is positively associated with hours worked and employment in downstream industries. Graham and Spence (2000) showed that regional employment increases can be attributed to technology.

(p18.14) Twenty studies fall into the residual category other/indirect. Among these, Fagerberg et al. (1997), Feldmann (2013, Kim and Kim (2020), Morrison and Siegel (2001), Vainiomaki and Laaksonen (1999), Van Roy et al. (2018), and Yildirim et al. (2020) used R&D expenditures or patents as a measure of technological change. Morrison and Siegel (2001) and Kim and Kim (2020) observed a positive relationship between R&D expenditures and employment of high-skill labor. Fagerberg et al. (1997), Van Roy et al. (2018), and Yildirim et al. (2020) all documented a positive relationship between R&D and labor, whereas Van Roy et al. (2018) found that this only holds in high-but not in low-tech industries. Vainiomaki and Laaksonen (1999) found that high-technology sectors, measured by R&D intensity, have the highest job creation rates. Feldmann (2013) provided only indirect support for the reinstatement effect: In the short term, increased innovation reflected in patent applications had a negative employment effect, but this effect diminished over time which indicates that employment was reinstated after a labor reducing technology shock.

(p18.15) Three studies used different indicators of specific types of capital investment as proxies for technological change. Ho (2008) used a price index-based approach to capture quality improvements in equipment and found that these enhancements are associated with an increase in demand for non-production labor in US manufacturing. Morrison (1997) considered investments in specific high-tech equipment and Raval (2019) used the evolution of the capital stock as a technology measure. They all reported a positive relationship between labor demand and the capital indicators, suggesting a complementarity between these factors. The results by Morrison (1997), similar to Ho (2008), suggest that this relation is particularly strong for non-production labor.
## (s19) Studies not supporting the reinstatement effect
(p19.0) The two non-supporting studies are the studies by Acemoglu and Restrepo (2020) and Goaied and Sassi (2019). While they do not support the reinstatement effect, they offer support for the replacement and real income effect. Both studies rely on regression analyses and report an overall negative impact of technology on net employment. Acemoglu and Restrepo (2019) studied the impact of robots on the regional employment to population ratio in 1990-2007 in the US. The authors found that robot-diffusion is associated with an increase in unemployment driven by employment losses in manufacturing and routine manual, blue collar occupations. The effects are larger for men than women. Additionaly, they reported positive productivity effects and increases in capital income. Goaied and Sassi (2019) studied the long term impact of ICT-diffusion in 167 countries grouped into five regions using the number of mobile phone and internet users as a technology indicator. Distinguishing between long and short term effects, the authors reported negative short and long term employment effects. They reported a positive relationship between GDP and employment, but cannot attribute this to technology.
## (s20) Studies with ambiguous findings and indirect evidence
(p20.0) Fifteen studies report ambiguous or only indirect evidence for the reinstatement effect. Six of them rely on ICT, six on innovation, one on TFP-style measures and two more looked, next to ICT, into the role of R&D intensity (coded as other/indirect).

(p20.1) The TFP-style study by Dupaigne and Patrick (2009) estimated the macroeconomic employment effect of positive labor productivity shocks using a vector auto-regressive model. The authors found that the impact, whether positive or negative, is heterogeneous across countries and also depends on how technology shocks are measured.
## (s22) Studies supporting the effect
(p22.0) Among the real income supporting studies, ten investigated the impact of ICT (Autor, 2015;Autor et al., 2002;Baddeley, 2008;Berman et al., 1994;Blanas et al., 2019;Chun et al., 2015;Goaied and Sassi, 2019;Oulton, 2002;Strohmaier and Rainer, 2016;Vu, 2013). Seven of them reported a positive impact of ICT on productivity, three found positive income effects, and two provide evidence of a positive relationship between output growth and labor demand. The three studies by Autor (2015), Autor et al. (2002), and Oulton (2002) rely on descriptive analyses using industry-level case studies, macro-level growth accounting methods, and macroeconomic history. The other seven are regressions are macro-or meso-level, as well as one firm-level study by Chun et al. (2015). Another six studies examined the impact of robots using Meso or regional-level regressions (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2019;Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2020;Blanas et al., 2019;Dekle, 2020;Graetz and Michaels, 2018;Jung and Lim, 2020). They all provide evidence of the productivity increasing effect of robots. Blanas et al. (2019) also found a positive effect of robots on the wage bill of high-skill, old and middle aged men which may indicate an increase in the demand for certain types of jobs like engineers and managers.

(p22.1) Five papers rely on TFP-style measures (Autor and Salomons, 2018;Bessen, 2020;Boyle and McCormack, 2002;Chen and Yu, 2014;Graham and Spence, 2000). All of them are regressions, mostly at the macro-level except for the study by Bessen (2020) who performed a detailed analysis of the steel, auto and textile industry at a historical scale, and the region-industry-level study by Graham and Spence (2000). Four of these studies reported positive productivity effects. Boyle and McCormack (2002) and Autor and Salomons (2018) documented a positive impact on wage income, Bessen (2020) additionally found decreasing prices in response to labor productivity growth, and Graham and Spence (2000) confirmed that higher output is positively associated with the demand for labor. Cirillo (2017) examined the impact of innovation and found at the industry-level that an innovation-induced expansion of output and sales is positively associated with labor demand, especially for clerk and manual workers.
## (s23) Studies not supporting this effect
(p23.0) Only four studies did not find supporting evidence for the real income effect (Badescu and Garces-Ayerbe, 2009;Colombo et al., 2013;Dixon and Lim, 2020;Samaniego, 2006) not finding any positive impact of technology on productivity. Dixon and Lim (2020) provided additional explorations on income effects. Badescu and Garces-Ayerbe (2009) and Colombo et al. (2013) studied the impact of ICT-diffusion at the microlevel. Dixon and Lim (2020) used TFP-style measures, and Samaniego (2006) relied on indirect measures of technological change to study the impact on macro-level TFPgrowth. Badescu and Garces-Ayerbe (2009) and Colombo et al. (2013) could not confirm any significant relationship between productivity and ICT-diffusion, while Dixon and Lim (2020) and Samaniego (2006) reported even negative effects. Dixon and Lim (2020) additionally found that the impact of technology on income is negative. Based on an empirically estimated general equilibrium simulations, Samaniego (2006) studied the impact of productivity shocks. The author argued that the negative productivity effect of a new technology can be explained by the incompatibility of an existing technology with a new one. However, Samaniego (2006) also argued that this may be only temporary.
## (s29) Net employment effects of innovation
(p29.0) The least support for the replacement effect is found by innovation studies. Only three studies support the real income effect (25%, Table 3). The innovation studies showing support for the replacement effect found that the labor-saving effect is mostly driven by process innovation, but overall, the available evidence is insufficient to conclude that process innovation is labor-saving. Those studies that did not support the replacement effect or reported ambiguous evidence suggest a positive effect of product innovation on employment. However, a high number of studies remain inconclusive and found no significant or only weak effects of product, organizational or process innovation on employment.

(p29.1) For the reinstatement effect, we identified eight (57% , Table 5) studies supporting the effect. Another four studies (29%) indicate that the reinstatement effect depends on the type of innovation. In general, studies seem to find a positive employment effect in the case of product innovation and a negative or ambiguous effect of process innovation.

(p29.2) Thirteen innovation studies provided insights on the net employment effect, but none of them found a negative effect. Six studies suggest that the impact is positive, while seven report ambiguous results.

(p29.3) In line with other reviews (Calvino and Virgillito, 2018;Ugur and Mitra, 2017;Vivarelli, 2014), our findings suggest that the distinction between process and product innovation is essential when speaking about the employment effects of innovation. It is not surprising that process innovation can be labor-saving as it is by definition an innovation aimed to make production processes more efficient, which is mostly equivalent with input-saving. However, process innovation is not necessarily labor-saving for three reasons: (1) Process innovation can also save other inputs rather than labor; (2) efficiency improvements may lead to lower prices and an expansion of output which can be associated with the creation of new jobs; and (3) process innovation can coincide with the introduction of technologies that complement human labor, creating labor in industries where new machines are produced.

(p29.4) It is also not surprising that product innovation tends to be labor-creating. The successful launch of a product innovation is associated with the acquisition of new markets which may lead to an expansion of economic activity of a firm, and thus with the creation of new jobs.
## (s30) Net employment effects of TFP-style technology
(p30.0) Among the TFP-style studies, we found strong support for the simultaneous destruction of production labor, mostly in manufacturing, and creation of new non-production labor, mostly in services. We identified thirteen studies (76%, Table 3) that support the replacement effect. Many of them showed labor demand shifts, particularly from production to non-production labor within and across industries, and from low-to high-skill workers. For the reinstatement effect, we found ten studies (91%, Table 5) supporting it by documenting employment shifts from manufacturing to services and employment increases for skilled non-production labor. Moreover, one reinstatement study showed that TFP shocks in upstream industries are associated with employment increases in downstream industries. These observations support the idea that technological change leads to structural change with a reallocation of economic activity down the value chain, i.e. from more primary and secondary industries towards increasingly processed sectors and services (Krüger, 2008;Syrquin, 1988).

(p30.1) We also identified five studies supporting the real income effect that report rising wage incomes and decreasing prices. One study also confirmed a positive relationship between income and employment. The number of TFP-style studies finding support for the replacement effect is roughly balanced compared to the number of studies finding support for one of the two labor-creating mechanisms.

(p30.2) Among the TFP-style papers, only thirteen provided insights on net employment effects, among which only one suggests a positive impact, five suggest a negative impact, and the remaining found that the net impact is weak or depends. The theory of structural change suggests a reallocation of labor from high to low productivity growth industries with increasing capital intensity and automation as major drivers of productivity growth (Syrquin, 1988). Theoretical models of structural change further suggest that the elasticity of demand is decisive for the sufficient reinstatement of labor (Ngai and Pissarides, 2007) which we aimed to capture through the assessment of the real income effect. Our results for the net employment effect are rather inconclusive, but suggest that the net impact is more negative than positive. This finding indicates that the reinstatement of labor in more downstream and service-related industries may be insufficient to offset the labor-saving impact. However, as a critical note, it should be flagged that historically productivity and welfare increases coincided with a reduction of weekly working hours, which may be seen as a very desirable effect (Bick et al., 2018).
## (s32) Conclusions
(p32.0) This study systematically reviewed the available evidence on the impact of technological change on employment. Overall, we found that a substantially larger number of studies provide evidence for the labor-creating impact of technological change than for the labor-displacing impact. Several studies providing support for the labor-creating impact of technology report positive effects on productivity and prices, income, and final demand or output. Through these channels, technological change is expected to indirectly increase the demand for labor. However, only a few studies measure the actual employment implications of these mechanisms.

(p32.1) Although we are careful in concluding that, if anything, technological change has a positive net effect on employment, we do conclude that the replacement effect is likely to be more than offset by the labor-creating effect of technology. Hence, there does not appear to be an empirical foundation for the fear of technology-driven unemployment. We also investigated whether different types of technology have a differential effect on total employment. For almost all technology measures (i.e. robots, ICT, TFP-style, other/indirect measures) we found a comparable number of studies that support the labor-displacing as well as labor-creating effect of technology. Only for innovation measures, the empirical evidence suggests that product innovation is mostly labor-creating, while the evidence concerning process innovation remains inconclusive.

(p32.2) Despite the fact that we found no evidence for a negative net employment effect in quantitative terms, the qualitative impact of technological change on employment cannot be neglected. As our systematic review has pointed out, different types of technology have adverse effects on predominantly low-skill and production labor, manufacturing jobs, and workers performing routine tasks. Given the considerable labor-saving potential of technology, reskilling or retraining workers whose jobs are susceptible to automation is essential. However, not only individuals whose jobs have disappeared due to automation would benefit from (re-)training. Research shows that technological change also has induced within-occupational changes in skill requirements. In fact, according to estimates of the OECD (Arntz et al., 2017), the share of jobs that will face changes in the task content due to automation is higher than the share of jobs that is of high risk of being automated. Hence, upskilling is also of utmost importance for workers whose jobs are not directly threatened by technological change. Furthermore, some displaced workers may not be able to make the transition to new jobs after experiencing job loss. These workers might have to rely on social support systems.
