# A survey of dental services in England providing targeted care for people experiencing social exclusion: mapping and dimensions of access

CorpusID: 249885435 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b31e3e82684a9f0d2e77b64afd6615b51306d2c1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b31e3e82684a9f0d2e77b64afd6615b51306d2c1)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s1) Methods
(p1.0) The structure of this report has been guided by the Strengthening The Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology reporting guidelines. 16 Study design, setting and participants To conceptualise aspects of health service accessibility, the survey design and analysis have been structured using Penchansky and Thomas' modified model of access, which includes the following domains: affordability (direct and indirect costs to patient); accessibility (location, proximity to patient); accommodation (organisation, appointments, facilities); availability (supply and demand); awareness (communication and information); and acceptability (consumer perception). 17,18 Inclusion and exclusion criteria Any dental setting, independent outreach organisation, or individual that provided targeted dental care for people experiencing social exclusion, were eligible for inclusion in this study. Socially excluded populations considered in this research project included adults experiencing homelessness, people misusing substances, Travellers, vulnerable migrants or asylum seekers, refugees and sex workers.
## (s16) Acceptability
(p16.0) • Fear of going to the dentist caused by anxiety, social stigma, low self-esteem, fear of being judged • Oral health is not a priority among other competing needs • Patient group come with challenges to staff caring for them • Non-judgmental, compassionate, reassuring and respectful attitudes • Sufficient time for a slow approach to building relationships with sometimes challenging patients • Understanding that some patients only want to address acute dental problems not access comprehensive care • Use of befrienders or peer support • Standard operating procedures and guidance to support consistent care delivery • Need very experienced individuals with comprehensive skills Availability • Lack of resources including personnel, time, training, equipment and inadequate support from public health and clinical colleagues • Difficulty engaging with stakeholders, service users (who are not ready to engage), charities • Inability to respond to increasing demand for service

(p16.1) • Targeting the right groups, volunteers and staff to make contact with Accommodation • Booked/fixed dental appointment slots led to times where clinic faced non-attendance or random attendance • Non-attendance at appointments prohibited completion of care plans • Lack of flexibility to accommodate diverse care needs • Consent, interpretation and legal issues • Complex social and dental care needs • Protracted courses of treatment • Competing pressures including meeting targets and service redesign • Some difficulties with patient willingness to sit and wait • Plenty of promoting, advertising and communicating services to staff and service users • Appointment reminders Table 7 Summary of key challenges and recommendations identified across domains of access times of operation, flexibility with appointment scheduling and options for drop-in access were all described as facilitating access. Rigid approaches to appointment booking may lead to poor utilisation of time and thus diminished cost effectiveness of services.

(p16.2) Operational barriers described by providers included under-resourcing, service inflexibility, lack of appropriately skilled dental workforce and unmet training needs. The findings from this study suggest that it is imperative to find ways to mitigate service delivery barriers to enable socially excluded groups to access free treatment through the NHS with ease. However, as Freeman and colleagues acknowledge, charity should not be a substitute for taking responsibility to tackle the complex issues associated with social exclusion. 5 Most services were rigidly structured and lacked adaptation to the needs of the patient group. The confluence of these provider, patient and organisational barriers led to frequent unfinished care plans, frustration, pressured working environment, competing priorities and challenges in delivering appropriate dental care for patients with complex dental, medical and mental health needs.
## (s17) Implications for policy and practice
(p17.0) Consistency, flexibility, transparent costs or no charges, familiarity, adaptation to complex needs and outreach and collaborations with other medical, social and charitable organisations are essential considerations for designing services to meet the needs of socially excluded groups. Opportunities to address financial issues may be found in the use of flexible commissioning or other innovative commissioning arrangements. Furthermore, the models of remuneration being trialled as part of the dental contract reform programme may offer opportunities to reduce health inequalities and address issues of access. 22 Other important considerations for running an appropriate service included well-trained dental teams who have time, patience and provide care which respects the patient and maintains their dignity. Studies have suggested that encouraging philosophies of social responsibility can begin even at undergraduate level. 23 This study identifies that teams running dental services would benefit from bespoke training, both in clinical and nonclinical aspects of providing services for people experiencing social exclusion. In the absence of adequate support and training, not only are staff at risk of poorly managing challenging patients or themselves (ie experiencing burnout), but there is also a risk that there will be a lack of workforce competency in the future and a resultant void in appropriately trained dental professionals to deliver inclusive dental services. Ultimately, services would benefit from understanding that people may only decide to engage when they feel they are ready. In the interim, services must be non-judgemental in supporting people experiencing social exclusion to engage when they feel prepared to do so and cultivate environments that foster trust and maintain an open invitation to engage. 19,20 Strengths

(p17.1) The key strengths of this study that give it a unique place in the literature include mapping of diverse inclusive dental services from across England, including NHS, private and charitable organisations. Prior to its implementation, the survey was reviewed by stakeholders in homelessness advocacy organisation Groundswell, community dental services, charitable organisations and Dental Public Health colleagues who contributed to and enhanced the study design. A broadbased recruitment strategy was used which included dental media, national representative organisations and all NHS England dental providers/performers based on contact details held on the Compass management system. By using this approach, we were able to capture a diverse range of dental settings including initiatives taking place in general dental services.
