# Optical Fiber Sensors for Ultrasonic Structural Health Monitoring: A Review

CorpusID: 243815441 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a84141c6a7058a531a70252d77cd1cf8df6ce1d8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a84141c6a7058a531a70252d77cd1cf8df6ce1d8)

Fields: Medicine, Physics, Engineering, Computer Science, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Structural health monitoring (SHM) systems are necessary in structures in order to detect any deterioration in the structure and avoid catastrophic failures. In addition, SHM systems can minimize maintenance costs and the down-times of critical structures, thus allowing a very high return on investment [1]. As a result, SHM systems are receiving great interest from the scientific community [2,3]. SHM can be loosely defined as the assessment of the condition of the structure through the monitoring if its in-service performance. Typically sensors used to detect vibration, strain, corrosion, etc., are placed on the structure and through monitoring damage sensitive features the condition of the structure can be determined. A wide range of SHM techniques have been developed over the last few decades, which make use of several different technologies and damage sensitive features [4][5][6][7].
## (s1) Classification of FO Sensors
(p1.0) The broadest classification of the FO sensors is into intrinsic sensors and extrinsic sensors. For extrinsic sensors (Figure 1a), the optical fibers serve as a delivery mechanism in order to carry the light to the sensing region, which is outside of the fiber. The light is then affected by the physical environment and the optical fiber carries the modulated response to a detector for processing. For intrinsic sensors, as shown in Figure 1b, the optical fiber works as a communication medium as well as the transducer. The earliest FO sensor, an extrinsic sensor, was developed and patented in 1967 as a proximity probe. The development of the intrinsic sensor can be traced back to Davies et al. [19], who observed the effect of mechanical strain on the light passing through the fiber. The possibility of having a continuous medium and the ease of the intrinsic use attracted a lot of further interests in the area and resulted in several different types of sensors, making use of a wide range of operating principles.

(p1.1) The modulation of the light based on physical conditions gives us another way of classifying the sensors. The FO sensors can be classified into (i) Scattering-based sensors; (ii) Intensity-based sensors; (iii) Polarization-based sensors; (iv) Phase-based sensors;
## (s3) Polarization-Based Sensors
(p3.0) When a light-wave propagates along the optical fiber, its polarization state can change due to the difference in the phase velocity of the two polarization components in a birefringent fiber. The polarization properties of light propagating through an optical fiber are sensitive to external conditions such as stress, strain, pressure, and temperature. This sensitivity is harnessed in a fiber polarimetric sensor to retrieve the sensing parameter based on the change in the polarization [27]. Cross sensitivity between different external parameters is a major challenge to these types of sensors. The capability of polarimetric fiber sensors to measure strain, temperature, and pressure is demonstrated in a variety of applications including for SHM [28]. This sensor is popularly used as a hydrophone for acoustic measurements. However, the sensitivity of the polarization state to low amplitude ultrasonic structural waves is low [29]. This is primarily due to the fact that a large amount of birefringence in the optical fiber must be induced to produce measurable changes in the polarization state. For a surface mounted sensor, the loading is only applied along one side of the optical fiber and the transverse pressure is not near that induced by a loading state such as hydrostatic loading. Additionally, methods based on birefringence do not make use of any systematic amplification (such as the high slope of the FBG sensor in edge filtering).
## (s4) Intensity-Based Sensors
(p4.0) Microbend sensors are the most popular example of intensity-based sensors. Any perturbation in the structure introduces small microbends in the optical fiber [30]. These microbends result in a change in the intensity of the transmitted light, which may be monitored for detecting the perturbations [31]. This phenomenon can be used for detecting a propagating wave or acoustic event. However, the amplitude of guided waves are extremely small and are again only applied to one side of the optical fiber for surface mounted sensors. The resulting bending and therefore bending loss in the optical fiber is extremely low. Therefore, microbend sensors are unsuitable for GW monitoring.

(p4.1) These challenges with microbend sensors have been overcome through the use of fused tapered couplers. In this sensor (Figure 3), two tapered optical fibers are fused together using a high temperature flame [32]. This process brings the core region of the two optical fibers in contact, which in turn allows the light transfer across the tapered region [33]. For the input energy P 0 , the output energy in the two output ports is given by Equation (2) [34].
## (s5) Phase-Based Sensors
(p5.0) Phase-and wavelength-based sensors have a higher sensitivity to ultrasonic waves. Many different configurations have been used for ultrasonic sensing, several of which are discussed in the next two sections. Phase-based sensors are based on the principle of interferometry. They are among the most sensitive of the the fiber optic sensors. There are several different configurations of phase-based sensors. Some of the most important ones are: There are several other modifications of these configurations which have found applications in diverse fields. However, for GW sensing only the top four namely, FPI, MZI, MI, and SI, have been used and will be discussed in detail here.

(p5.1) An FPI (Figure 4) is generally composed of two parallel reflectors separated by a certain distance (cavity length). Both extrinsic [40,41] and intrinsic [42] configurations may be used for AE detection. The first use of FPI sensors as AE sensors was shown in 1978 by Bucaro and Carome [43]. The reflectors may be in the form of mirrors [44], interfaces between two dielectrics [45], or even Bragg gratings [42,46]. Interference occurs due to the multiple super-positions of both reflected and transmitted beams at the two parallel reflectors. The reflected and transmitted spectra of such an interferometer are functions of cavity length, index of refraction of the medium, and reflectivity of the mirrors. The earliest MZI's consisted of two arms-a reference and signal arm. The reference arm is unaffected by the outside stimulus while the signal arm is sensitive to the strain or temperature [48]. Due to the external parameters, a phase change is introduced between the signal and the reference arms. Splitting and recombination of the lightwave are performed at optical fiber couplers, as shown in Figure 5. In the later applications, in-line MZI configurations have been used [50,51]. In the in-line configurations, a portion of the core mode of a single mode fiber is uncoupled from the fiber core mode into another mode and then re-coupled to the core mode by two interfaces or other elements. This approach allows the sensor to be compact. Additionally, having the two arms in-line allows ease of fabrication.

(p5.2) MI operation is based on the interference the lightwaves in the two arms, each reflected from mirrors placed at the end of the arm, as shown in Figure 6. The use of this configuration increases the compactness of the interferometer and allows multiplexing. In more advanced configurations, the generic light source may be replaced by a low coherence source, which allows the elimination of the phase ambiguity and the reflectionbased problems. Sagnac Interferometers (SI) are also phase-based sensors, but the optical path length difference is determined by the polarization-dependent propagating speed of the mode guided along the loop. As with other interferometers, the light is split using a coupler. A loop is included in the sensing arm to achieve a configuration where the two counter propagating beams are combined in the same coupler, as shown in Figure 7. The polarizations are adjusted by a polarization controller attached at the beginning of the sensing fiber. The signal at the output port of the fiber coupler is governed by the interference between the beams polarized along the slow axis and the fast axis. The benefit of the SI is that the sensitivity for different applications can be customized by use of different fibers.

(p5.3) Another benefit is the potential for simultaneous sensing capability with the help of other fiber optic devices. In general, the sensitivity of interferometric sensors is very high and hence may be used for ultrasonic measurements. However, these sensing techniques are susceptible to static temperature or strain change along all the optical fibers [54]. This drift leads to the requirement of an expensive feedback controller and difficulty in measuring the time of arrival [55]. In addition, these sensors lack robustness in harsh environments, apart from low coherence configurations, and hence their use for ultrasonic SHM is limited to laboratory settings and more in the bio-medical industry where the conditions can be more controlled. Their applications in civil and mechanical engineering sectors are limited.
## (s7) FBG Sensors for GW Sensing
(p7.0) Fiber Bragg gratings (FBGs) have been widely used for SHM in structures based on guided waves. As mentioned earlier, FBGs can provide high sensitivity to the low amplitude strain waves propagating through a structure, particularly when the slope of the FBG rising or leading edge is high. The key challenge to the measurement of GWs with any sensor is the need of a high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), so that the waveform can be well resolved. The sensitivity of optical fiber sensors, including FBGs, is reduced by the small contact area between the fiber and the structure. This contact area can be significantly less than the comparable disc-shaped PZT sensors. In addition, the adhesive layer bonding the FBG to the structure typically demonstrates frequency dependent attenuation of the ultrasonic waves, with increasing attenuation at higher frequencies.

(p7.1) Four main approaches have recently been taken to increase the SNR for FBG sensors: (1) increasing the sensitivity of the FBG to a fixed amplitude guided wave; (2) focusing the guided waves in the structure prior to coupling to the FBG; (3) changing the fiber coating and coupling agent; and (4) remote bonding.

(p7.2) The first approach is to maximize the sensitivity of the FBG sensor to the propagating wave in the fiber. As has been mentioned in the previous section, in the edge filtering configuration the sensitivity of the FBG is proportional to the slope of the FBG reflectivity spectrum. Thus, by modifying the index modulation of the FBG, this slope can be increased. For example, by keeping the other parameters the same, the slope can be adjusted by the length of the FBG. Long FBGs produce steeper spectral slopes, up to a limit [86,87]. Significantly higher spectral slopes have been achieved with phase-shifted FBGs (PS-FBGs). While producing the FBG, a π phase shift is introduced in the middle of the grating length as shown in Figure 13a. This shift results in an intermediate loss peak in the reflected spectrum with orders of magnitude and a higher slope than the leading or trailing edge of the standard reflected spectrum, as shown in the inset in Figure 13b. As a result of the increase in the slope, the sensitivity is improved [88]. The key drawback of the PS-FBG is the significantly increased complexity in the manufacturing of the FBG. Additionally, the width of the spectrum is drastically reduced, which leads to reduced robustness with changes in the ambient conditions. Active control feedback loops are often necessary to keep the input wavelength tuned to the narrow spectral peak. In addition to the sensitivity, the directionality of the sensor is impacted by the phase-shifted modulation. Liu and Han [88] showed that the phase-shifted length is much smaller than the ultrasonic wavelength, the sensor is essentially omnidirectional. However, as the FBG length increases, the sensor becomes more directional with the maximum sensitivity occurring at the normal incidence of the ultrasonic wave. Gatti et al. [89] combined the PS-FBG with a modulated laser source to reduce the laser power source noise and the frequency noise, further increasing the SNR. In this technique, a high frequency modulation (several hundred MHz) is applied to the laser. The ultrasonic signal received by the photodetector is then mixed with the electrical modulated signal and the error in the mixed signal is the ultrasonic signal. Following the second approach of focusing the guided waves in the structure prior to the FBG, Sakai et al. proposed the use of an acoustic lens [90]. The lens amplifies the wave by acting as a wave guide. The refraction and resonant type waveguides indeed act as lenses and improve the signal amplitudes. Researchers have also bonded curved plate slices to the structure to serve as plano-convex lenses for Lamb wave focusing prior to the detector [91,92]. While all of these efforts have successfully increased the wave amplitude and therefore the sensor output, they result in the addition of a significant mass to the structure. As each FBG would require its own lens, this strategy is not suitable for multiplexed arrays of FBG sensors.

(p7.3) The third approach is to modify the optical fiber coating or coupling agent. Moccia et al. [93] used an intermediate coating between the FBG and the water to improve the coupling from the medium into the the fiber. While this soft coating well matched the impedance to the liquid environment, it is less suitable for the extraction of guided waves from solid structures. Takeda et al. [94] developed a small diameter optical fiber with 40 µm cladding and 52 µm polyimide coating to allow embedding in a carbon fiber composite and improving the amplitude of strain detected by the FBG. For the sensing of signals in the ultrasonic range, viscous coupling of the optical fiber to the structure provides an extremely high SNR, for example by using vacuum grease [95]. However, viscous coupling is not practical for many SHM applications where the sensor needs to remain connected to the structure. Lee and Tsuda [96,97] applied viscous coupling to create a 'mobile sensor' where the FBG sensor was bonded on an acrylic plate with a viscous couplant between the plate and the structure. The acrylic plate ensures more surface contact and as a result better coupling of the wave into the plate. Furthermore, the mobile sensor allows scanning of the entire structure rather than having the sensor at fixed locations. The mobile sensor was also insensitive to static strains due to the viscous coupling, thus allowing for better ultrasonic measurements.

(p7.4) The final strategy to increase the SNR for FBG detection of Lamb waves is referred to as remote bonding. In this configuration, the FBG is not directly adhered to the structure. Instead, the optical fiber is adhesively bonded to the structure at the location where the guided wave is to be extracted. The interaction between the adhesive bond and the structure creates guided ultrasonic waves, which propagate in the optical fiber. These propagating waves are also present when the FBG is directly bonded to the structure, but are not measured. For the case of remote bonding, shown in Figure 14, the FBG is located at a distance along the optical fiber, away from the bond, therefore the guided, ultrasonic wave propagating through the optical fiber is what is measured by the FBG. To better explain this behavior, the next sections describe the interaction between the propagating waves in the structure and the fiber as well as how the wave coupled in the fiber affects the FBG output response. 
## (s9) FBG Length Effects
(p9.0) As with any ultrasonic sensor, the relative gauge length of the sensor compared to the wavelength of the ultrasonic wave to be measured is a critical factor in the sensor output. Betz et. al. [105] first noted that the reflected spectrum of a FBG when receiving the Lamb wave is a complex function of the resulting strain, because the strain due to the ultrasonic wave is non-uniform along the length of the FBG.

(p9.1) Generally, the sensor output is dependent on the ratio of the wavelength of the propagating wave (λ GW ) to the gauge length (L) of the FBG. The earliest work by Coppola [106] and Minardo [107] identified three regimes based on the λ GW /L ratio. In the regime where λ GW /L 1, the grating undergoes uniform deformation, leading to a shift of the Bragg wavelength proportional to amplitude of the GW. Takeda et al. [94], Betz et al. [105] Culshaw et al. [108], Thursby et al. [109], all recommended that for a sufficient Bragg wavelength shift, the relative ratio should be in this regime. The recommended ratio for the reliable shift in Bragg wavelength was determined between six and seven by Takeda et al. [94] and Culshaw et al. [108]. Betz et. al. [105] demonstrated that in this range, the linear assumption produces an accurate reconstruction of the symmetric or anti-symmetric Lamb waves. This limit on the length of the FBG also limits the size of damage that can be detected with a FBG sensor network. Although the excitation frequency of the input Lamb waves could be changed, the condition that λ GW is smaller than the defect dimensions must still be met.

(p9.2) However, it is not always possible to select a FBG length to satisfy the condition of L FBG λ GW , particularly for higher frequency Lamb waves in the MHz range. In this range, Lamb wavelengths in thin metallic structures are on the order of millimeters.

(p9.3) In the transition regime where λ GW /FBG L 1, the Bragg wave length undergoes a shift, but also the bandwidth of reflection spectrum increases with decreasing L. In this region, the sensitivity increases approximately linearly with λ US /L. Some recent work by Goosens et al. [110] has given insight into the response of the FBG spectrum to the GW in the regime II. The result investigates waves at 50 kHz and 250 kHz with sensors from five different gauge lengths, namely 2, 3, 5, 8, and 10 mm. The ratios achieved are in regimes I and II. By sweeping the wavelength over the entire reflectivity range of the FBG sensors, the FBG spectrum has been reconstructed. They show that for regime I the Bragg wavelength shift is seen for a while, and for regime II the widening of the peak is seen. The widening of the peak is due to the non-uniform strains on the different parts of the FBG. The coupling mechanisms, namely Bragg wavelength shift (∆λ B )and the peak widening (∆ FWHM) for the different ratios, were given and their contribution to the GW measurement is determined. The study shows that the FBG sensors can be reliably used for GW sensing even in regime II, albeit the main mechanism of transduction is ∆ FWHM rather than the peak shift. This paves the way for the use of FBG sensors with longer gauge lengths, which improve the sensitivity without losing out on the ability of the FBG sensors to detect higher frequencies of GW.

(p9.4) In the third regime, where the λ GW /FBG L 1, the original index modulation of the FBG as written and the index modulation of the FBG due to the wave induced strain are of the same order, creating a beating interaction between the two. This behavior results in a damped oscillatory behavior for λ GW /L < 0.8. Generally, the sensitivity of the FBG is low in this region.

(p9.5) To solve the problem of achieving a sufficiently high λ US /L ratio at higher Lamb wave frequencies, Davis et. al. [111] developed a specialized fabrication process for short FBG sensors. Through a combination of specialty photosensitive optical fibers and a variable aperture lens in the frequency doubled AR-ion laser beam path during writing of the FBG, the authors were able to write FBGs with a 75% (6dB) reflectivity at lengths down to 200 µm. The authors defined a stricter criterion for successful measurements than Minardo et al. [107] and Betz et. al. [105], i.e., the measured wave should have 98% correlation with the input Lamb waves, λ GW /L ≥ 8.8. Even with this criterion, Davis et. al. [111] were able to measure Lamb waves in a 0.8 mm thick aluminum plate at wavelengths down to 2 mm, corresponding to 1.1 MHz for the A 0 mode and 2.4 MHz for the S 0 mode.
## (s11) Detection of Multiple Modes
(p11.0) Much of the SHM applications using guided waves actuated in a thin structure using PZTs or other actuators have focused on frequencies at which only the fundamental guided modes, A 0 and S 0 , are possible in the structure. The main motivation is to reduce the number of propagating modes and therefore the complexity of the damage identification problem. When only the fundamental modes are present it is often possible to separate the waves in time at any sensor location, due to their different propagation velocities in the structure. In contrast, when more modes are present, this time separation may not be physically possible at all sensor locations, particularly when multiple back reflections are present. In addition, by choosing a mode that is relatively non-dispersive, for example the S 0 mode, measurements do not need to be made with a high spatial density in the structure [118].
## (s12) Optical Fiber-Based Ultrasonic SHM
(p12.0) A recent review by Wu et al. [16] covers much of the literature on FBG sensors for GW detection prior to 2018. So, the primary focus of this paper is on fiber optic sensors other than FBG sensors for GW detection, and more recent advances in FBGs for GW detection. Similar to Wu et al. [16] we classify SHM processes into impact detection, acousto-ultrasonic (using actuators and sensors) or acoustic emission. The distinction is made typically on the source of the ultrasonic signal, the amount of energy in the system, and the dominant frequency range.
## (s13) SHM Using Sensors Other Than FBG Sensors
(p13.0) As mentioned in earlier sections, there are several different types of transduction techniques. The earliest work in acoustic emission detection was using the intensity based microbend sensor for composites [121,122]. A laminated composite was subjected to tensile tests, and when cracking occurs, the micro-bend sensor detects the acoustic event. The setup needed for the acquisition is simple, but the signal processing requirements were deemed high according to the state-of-the-art in algorithms 20 years ago. The main drawback is the high noise content, which makes the signal processing and extraction of damage sensitive features a challenge.

(p13.1) The sensors based on interferometric principles are known to be extremely sensitive to ultrasonic waves and hence have been commonly used. The work by Liang et al. [123] made use of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. In their work, the acoustic emission event may be detected by measuring the time delay between the signals of two MZIs. The setup has been validated for remote sensing, with a range of up to 20 km. The localization accuracy with this setup is of the order of 1%, which is desirable for distributed sensing. Xu [124] also make use of a MZI for detecting delamination in composite structures. The sensor configuration makes use of the MZI with a 2 × 2 coupler and a 3 × 3 coupler in order to convert the change in intensity of the light to a change in the phase to obtain the interference pattern. The MZI has been implemented for notch detection in pipes by Zhou et al. [125]. All these techniques show the readiness of the MZI-based sensors for SHM applications. Due to the transduction principle, they may be used for distributed measurements, which are essential in large civil engineering structures. The key problem with these MZI-based techniques is the relatively lower AE frequencies that may be captured. To overcome this, a double MZI approach was proposed by Kong et al. [126]. The proposed approach improves the localization accuracy even further while enhancing the frequency range of the signal acquisition. The interferometric principle has also been used by Fracarolli et al. [127] for monitoring of bushings in power transformers. The acoustic event makes changes in the frequency of the light propagating in the sensing arm, which is coupled with the light with a carrier frequency. The resulting beating consists of the two components, which can be captured. The optical fiber sensors are ideal in this application due to the presence of a large voltage in the transformer. A similar concept of the beating frequency has been used for SHM using Doppler effect-based sensors. The FOD sensors have been successfully applied for debonding detection in lap joints [128] and corrosion detection [129].

(p13.2) In addition to the interferometric sensors, polarization-based sensors have been applied for AE detection. Pitropakis et al. [130] applied them for impact detection composite plates, while Verstrynge et al. [131] used polarization-based sensors for AE detection in arches. They validated the sensor results in three point bending tests on actual masonary structures. The polarimetric sensors were also used by Thursby et al. [132] for the detection of a hole in the plate. The authors commented that the polarization-based sensors are distributed sensors, which do not need expensive equipment for monitoring. However, the directional nature of the sensor and the distributed measurements may make signal processing challenging [133]. Rapid developments in optical technology, such as tunable lasers, have since made other FO sensor interrogators less expensive. Therefore, these benefits may be less critical.
## (s14) SHM Using FBG Sensors
(p14.0) FBG-based techniques indeed are the most popular among the FO sensor technologies for GW-based SHM. Since the review paper by Wu et al. [16] in 2018, more papers have been published for GW-based SHM using FBG sensors than all other optical fiber sensors combined. Therefore, we divide this section into the different SHM processes using FBG sensors.
## (s16) Acoustic Emission
(p16.0) Acoustic emission signals are typically low energy and high frequency broadband signals that are generated during crack formation or damage propagation. Several passive systems for their detection have been proposed, making use of FBG sensors. Some of the key publications have been reviewed by Willberry et al. [33]. More recently, Jinachandran et al. [151] performed a variety of experiments for AE-based detection in weld structures. They first proposed a novel packaged FBG sensor that is robust and applied it in conditions simulating in-service conditions due to hydrogen induced cold crack monitoring. Xu et al. [152] employed FBG sensors for debond monitoring of T-joints using cantilevered FBG sensors. The T-joint is a very important structural component of aerospace structures and the FBG sensors offer an inexpensive method for the assessment of the debond.

(p16.1) Violakis et al. [153] studied the effect of the diameter of the optical fiber on the sensitivity of the FBG as AE sensors. They concluded that the use of smaller diameter FBG are more suitable for AE detection as their sensitivity is higher over a larger frequency range.

(p16.2) Recently, advances have also been made in the signal processing of the FBG sensors for acoustic emission events. Pang et al. [154] developed a barycentric coordinate-based algorithm for acoustic source localization. They used the Morlet wavelet transform to enhance the features and simplify the identification of the velocity and time of arrival. Fu et al. [155] trained an artificial neural network to analyze the complex non-linear relationship between the AE wave source location and the arrival time. They analyzed a 3-dimensional polymer bonded explosive structure. The neural network has its limitations as the quality of the training data severely affects the localization accuracy, but through proper training and large data sets it has the potential to be useful for AE source localization.

(p16.3) Almost all methods for AE source localization make use of triangulation with three or more sensors. An innovative approach was proposed by Yu et al. [156] who used a single FBG sensor for the localization of the acoustic event. The continuous wavelet transform allows the separation of the dominant frequency and the arrivals of the two modes (anti-symmetric and symmetric). The difference in the velocity of the two modes is used to determine the location. They made use of the remotely bonded configuration and showed that the output sensitivity is independent of the distance between the bond and the FBG sensor.
## (s17) Acousto-Ultrasonic
(p17.0) For acousto-ultrasonic detection systems, piezo-electric actuators are typically used for generating GWs in the structure. These GW are then detected using FBG sensors. These systems are often referred to as hybrid systems, as they make use of two different sensor technologies. The key issues to tackle for such an hybrid system is ensuring the multiplexing ability of the sensors and tackling the challenges associated with the directionality of the FBG sensors. The directionality challenges can be overcome through innovative signal processing techniques.

(p17.1) Boffa et al. [157] developed such an hybrid system, which makes use of surface-bonded as well as embedded FBG sensors in a composite structure. They used an off-the-shelf optical fiber sensing interrogator from Redondo optics (FAESense M400), which uses twowave mixing integrated microchip technology. The authors showed that multiplexing and tuning of the frequencies is possible along with a very high sampling frequency. The results clearly show that the packaged system captures the GW signal with very low distortion and can be implemented on any smart structure.

(p17.2) Lambinet et al. [158] developed a hybrid system for detecting barely visible damage in a patch-repaired composite. The method outlined provides temperature compensation by taking into consideration the changes in the GW propagation due to the temperature as well as the effect of temperature on the FBG spectrum. The method successfully detects damage at higher frequencies, owing to the higher contribution of the S 0 mode. The temperature compensation tends to limit the contribution of the A 0 mode and is given as the reason for the selective sensitivity.

(p17.3) Soman et al. [159] propose a two-step damage detection process. The two-step method not only overcomes the passive nature of the FBG sensors, which reduces the number of actuator-sensor pairs, but also overcomes the directional sensitivity of the FBG sensor. In the first step, the damage is detected and the hot spots identified based on the time of arrival of reflections from the damage location. For identifying the exact location, edge reflections are used. The edge points of reflections act as pseudo actuators, allowing for more actuator-sensor paths, thus overcoming the passive nature. By taking the ratio of the relative amplitude for a particular path, the directional sensitivity is accounted for. The work was extended with an hyperbola-based approach, and shows that the ellipse -based approach gives a closed form damage localization, thus improving the damage localization [160]. The time difference-based approach is more suitable in the remote bonding configuration, where there is uncertainty in the location of the wave coupling or the velocity of the wave propagation in the fiber. This is particularly useful in applications with embedded FBG sensors.
## (s18) Conclusions and Future Trends
(p18.0) The industry standard for GW-and AE-based SHM are piezo-electric-based systems because of their lower cost and wider commercial availability. However, optical fiber systems provide key attributes, such as immunity to electro-magnetic interference and their ability to be easily multiplexed. Large, dense networks of sensors can be easily installed and interrogated for structural systems. The gauge length and resolutions of the measurements can also be tuned based on the choice of optical sensor applied. Although the cost of some OF sensors and interrogators can be much higher than equivalent piezo-electric transducers, the fact that a single interrogator can monitor a large number sensors means that the cost of the overall SHM system can be lower.

(p18.1) One challenge to optical fiber systems for GW measurements is that edge filtering interrogation techniques are required to measure the high frequency, small amplitude waves. However these edge filtering techniques are not easily multiplexable, which presents challenges when scaling to large structures. Therefore, there is a strong need for strategies to multiplex equipment for high frequency and low amplitude measurements. Multiplexing will not only allow for a reduction in the fibers deployed on the structure, but also reduce the instrumentation cost through the use of fewer laser sources.

(p18.2) Furthermore, OF-based sensors are mostly passive sensors, therefore they need additional actuation systems to generate GWs, except for acoustic emission applications. The need for actuators, for example piezo-electric devices, can undermine the advantages of the FO-based sensor systems. Some initial work has been conducted on the actuation of the GWs through optical fibers [170,171]. However, at the present moment, the actuation amplitudes are not as comparable as those achieved by piezo-based systems. Work in this direction would go a long way in replacing piezo-based systems in real applications.

(p18.3) In addition to offering the abilities of multiplexing and actuation, more developments at the sensor level and system level are necessary before the OF-based systems will be accepted in industrial applications. Novel sensor configurations continue to emerge frequently, but they remain at the lower end of the technology readiness level and their advantages or disadvantages for GW detection have not been explored. For example, tilted FBG sensors offer easy temperature compensation and may be interrogated similar to conventional FBG sensors [172]. Another promising area is the use of polarization maintaining (PM) FBG sensors. The slow and the fast axes of PM fibers have different sensitivities to GWs propagating in different directions [173] and may enable GW mode separation. In addition, the two axes may be used for temperature compensation. Similar arguments could be made for the use of photonic crystal fibers, as they can be fabricated to have significantly different wave speeds for the slow and fast axes. These fibers have been widely applied for strain and gas sensing. Wideband acoustic detection has been performed using photonic crystal slabs [174], so there is the potential to transition this technology to fiber sensors.

(p18.4) As discussed earlier, the coupling of GWs to optical fibers and their interactions is a complex phenomenon which depends on the materials at the interface as well as the bonding or contact conditions. In order to realistically understand this complex phenomenon, in depth numerical studies are necessary. Numerical modeling of these interactions remains computationally expensive due to the different time and space scales involved. Computationally efficient methods of simulation, such as the use of time and frequency domain spectral finite element methods with higher order shape functions, reducing the number of nodes and elements, need to be applied to these problems. These simulations could provide additional insights into the physics of the sensor response and methods to enhance their sensitivity to GWs.
