# Development of Thermochemical Heat Storage Based on CaO/CaCO 3 Cycles: A Review

CorpusID: 244580124 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/677aa65e73f51a0c59d43022d58b4639baf30fb2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/677aa65e73f51a0c59d43022d58b4639baf30fb2)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s2) CaO/CaCO 3 TCHS
(p2.0) System design represents a major contribution to the application of CaO/CaCO 3 heat storage in CSP plants. The concept of calcium looping (CaL) TCHS can be traced back to the 1970s [42], but most of the subsequent CaL research has focused on CO 2 capture [43]. Only with the increasing demand for heat storage in recent years has the application of CaL in TCHS been extensively studied. Although the CaO/CaCO 3 heat storage technology and the CO 2 capture technology have the same chemical reaction principle [44], they have remarkable differences in factors, such as reaction conditions and applications [45]. When the CaL process is utilized for CO 2 capture from the flue gas of coal-fired power plants, the carbonation stage of CaO occurs in a carbonator with the flue gas containing about 15 vol% CO 2 to form CaCO 3 at the optimal temperature of 600-700 • C [46,47]. The calcination stage of CaCO 3 occurs in a calciner at above 900 • C under a high concentration of CO 2 (>90 vol%) for CO 2 enrichment, where the required heat is provided by fuel oxygenenriched combustion [48]. When CaL heat storage is implemented in CSP stations, its carbonation and calcination conditions are more flexible. The carbonation reaction is carried out under pure CO 2 for high temperature and power generation efficiency in the exothermic stage. Gases with different concentrations of CO 2 are fed into the carbonator as required, so the exothermic temperature of 600-900 • C can be reached [37]. Increasing the carbonation pressure can improve the limited temperature of the carbonation reaction [49].
## (s3) CSP-CaL Schemes
(p3.0) The integration of CaL-CSP has attracted much attention due to the unique advantages of the CaO/CaCO 3 heat storage system. The system coupling CaO/CaCO 3 heat storage and CSP integrated power generation is developing rapidly, and its basic process is exhibited in Figure 2 [61]. The sunlight is converged on the solar calciner where CaCO 3 decomposes into CaO and CO 2 at a high temperature (~725-950 • C [52,61]). The generated CaO is stored at atmospheric pressure, and the released CO 2 is stored after the compression. According to the needs of power generation, CaO and CO 2 are fed into the carbonator (~850 • C or higher [52]). The heat released during the carbonation means the excess CO 2 is heated to a high temperature, and then CO 2 enters a turbine to achieve power output. Adding heat exchange systems after the heat storage and heat release process can improve the heat utilization rate. Edwards et al. [62] proposed an open CO 2 /air Brayton cycle CaO/CaCO 3 heat storage system, including a pressurized fluidized bed carbonator and a solar calciner, as shown in Figure 3. In the carbonation stage, the compressed CO 2 and high-pressure air entered the reactor together. It assumed that CO 2 was completely consumed in the carbonator, and then only high-temperature and high-pressure air was sent to the turbine to do work. Finally, the air experienced the Brayton cycle was discharged into the atmosphere.
## (s11) Natural CaO-Based Materials
(p11.0) Benitez-Guerrero et al. [97] compared the cyclic heat storage performance of natural calcium-based materials, such as limestone and dolomite. After the 20 heat storage cycles, the effective conversion of limestone (<45 µm) dropped from 0.8 to 0.42. The cyclic effective conversion of dolomite was more stable, which decreased by 28% after 20 cycles. This was because that the MgO in dolomite could relieve the sintering and pore plugging of CaO. However, the initial effective conversion of dolomite was not high, about 0.6.

(p11.1) In addition, Benitez-Guerrero et al. [115] also compared the cyclic heat storage performance of natural calcium carbonate minerals such as limestone, chalk, and marble, and their thermograms were shown in Figure 9. The initial reaction kinetics and conversion rates of the three calcium-based materials were very similar, as presented in Figure 9a. The carbonation reaction of CaO derived from calcium carbonate minerals was almost completely carried out in the chemical reaction-controlled stage, while that in the diffusioncontrolled stage could be ignored. This provided a crucial reference for the optimization of reactor design. However, as demonstrated in Figure 9b, the inactivation degree of the CaO derived from three calcium carbonate minerals was significantly deference in their crystallinities and sizes of the CaO grains. Limestone had the higher effective conversion (0.51) while marble had the lowest conversion (0.27). Durán-Martín et al. [111] tested the heat storage performance of limestone particles with different particle size distributions in multiple cycles and studied the effect of particle size on the deactivation mechanism of limestone. It was found that when calcined under He at low temperature, the utilization of small particles of limestone was more beneficial for heat storage, but this promotion was only effective for limestone particles below 15 µm. 
## (s18) Improvement on Optical and Thermal Properties of CaO-Based Materials in CaO/CaCO 3 TCHS
(p18.0) The Tammann temperature of calcium-based materials is relatively low, so CaO grains agglomerate and grow up during cyclic heat storage process at high temperature, leading to the blockage of the pore structure, which is manifested as a gradual decline in heat storage performance [43,123]. A large number of researches have focused on slowing down the sintering speed of calcium-based heat storage materials to improve cyclic stability. As mentioned in Section 3.2, the volumetric heat collection is more suitable for CaO/CaCO 3 heat storage system, which requires calcium-based materials with great optical and thermal properties. However, natural calcium-based materials usually have poor optical absorption capacities and thermal conductivity. In recent years, the optical absorption capacity and thermal conductivity of natural calcium-based materials have been given more attention and represent a valuable research direction.

(p18.1) Han et al. [142] prepared composite materials by impregnating in H 3 BO 3 solution with CaCO 3 and adding expanded graphite with high thermal conductivity for heat storage. They found that the thermal conductivity of the composite materials increased by 60% when 3 wt% expanded graphite was added. The expanded graphite exhibited strong sintering resistance. The heat storage density of the composite material was 1313 kJ/kg after 50 cycles, while that of limestone was only 452 kJ/kg. On this basis, Han et al. [143] also studied an effective compression method to make graphite nanosheets better support the pore structure of CaO-based materials, so the obtained composites possessed a higher volumetric energy density. However, it is worth noting that CO 2 attaches to graphite at high temperatures to form CO gas. More consideration should be given when choosing graphite as an additive. Da et al. [79] put forward a new idea to increase the blackness of calcium-based materials to achieve the direct absorption of solar energy in a CaO/CaCO 3 heat storage system. Their experiments showed that adding black FeMnO 3 and Fe 2 O 3 to CaO by the sol-gel method improved the optical absorption properties of the materials. When the molar ratio of Ca/Mn/Fe was 100:4:8, the solar absorption of the composite reached 89.81% as exhibited in Figure 11. In addition, the existence of FeMnO 3 and Fe 2 O 3 also enhanced the sintering resistance of CaO. The effective conversion of Ca/Fe/Mn composites remained as high as 0.8 after 20 cycles. Moreover, Teng et al. [82] optimized the structure of the Ca/Fe/Mn composite by using calcium gluconate as the precursor to prepare a porous Ca/Fe/Mn composite with an optical absorption rate of 90%. The heat storage capacity of the Ca/Fe/Mn composite decreased by 3.31% in 60 cycles. The average heat storage density of the composite after 60 cycles was 1450 kJ/kg, which was 1.76 times as high as that of CaCO 3 , indicating that it had higher cyclic stability. Song et al. [144] used aluminum nitrate and iron nitrate as precursors to dope iron and aluminum into CaCO 3 powder by the sol-gel method. They found that the decomposition rate of the composite increased and the decomposition temperature decreased. After 50 cycles, the heat storage density of the composite only dropped by 4.5%, which was about 87% higher than that of pure CaCO 3 . Similarly, the average optical absorption rate of the composite achieved 45.6%, while that of pure CaCO 3 reached only 8%. Li et al. [145] used Ca(OH) 2 powder, MnC 4 H 6 O 4 ·4H 2 O and SiC by extrusion-spheronization method to prepare Mn/SiC doped CaO pellets. They found that when SiC and MnO 2 were both doped at 5 wt%, CaO pellets exhibited the highest the optical absorption and heat storage capacity. In addition, the effective conversion of the Mn/SiC doped CaO pellets remained 0.48 after 30 cycles, while that of the pure CaO pellets achieved only 0.34. Similarly, the average optical absorption of the Mn/SiC doped CaO pellets reached 53%, while that of the original CaO particles was only 3%. Yang et al. [146] prepared Ca/Fe/Mn composite heat storage materials by utilizing carbonaceous microspheres as templates, which mainly consisted of CaCO 3 and Ca 2 FeMnO 5 . The average spectral absorption rate of the synthetic material with the molar ratio of Ca/Fe/Mn = 100:2:7 reached 76.8%, while that of pure CaCO 3 was only 10.8%. Zheng et al. [147] examined a variety of dark composite calcium-based heat storage materials by the sol-gel method, including Ca/Cu, Ca/Cu/Fe, Ca/Cu/Co, Ca/Cu/Cr, Ca/Cu/Mn, and Ca/Al/Cu/Fe materials. The results showed that Ca/Cu/Co, Ca/Cu/Cr, and Ca/Cu/Mn materials had strong optical absorption capacities, and their average spectral absorption of solar energy was greater than 60%. Table 4 summarizes the heat storage properties of the different CaO-based materials reported in the literature. It is found that adding dopants is still the most effective and common method to improve the heat storage stability of CaO-based materials. However, it is still unavoidable that the activity of CaO-based material decreases during long-term heat storage cycles. Calcium-based materials often need to add enough supporters to maintain relatively stable heat storage performance. This also decreases the content of CaO in the calcium-based material, resulting in a decrease in the heat storage density of the material per unit mass. Thus, how to enhance the heat storage performance and cyclic stability of calcium-based materials remain important. In addition, how to improve the optical and thermal properties of CaO-based materials is also the focus of researchers. 
