# materials A Review of Irradiation Damage and Effects in α-Uranium

CorpusID: 249633229 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/65bf7ccf4955dacc038f6714a932487bc9ac01c3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/65bf7ccf4955dacc038f6714a932487bc9ac01c3)

Fields: Engineering, Physics, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s2) Crystallography and Fundamental Defect Kinetics
(p2.0) The α phase of uranium consists of corrugated sheets of atoms in a highly asymmetrical face-centered orthorhombic structure [6]. Beeler et al. calculated the lattice constants of α-U with a = 2.793 Å, b = 5.849 Å, c = 4.894 Å, as seen in Figure 1a [7]. The structure of α-U is made up of close-packed corrugated planes of atoms, including planes parallel to the densely packed flat (010) plane and planes parallel to the [100] axis. The interatomic distances of corrugated planes (e.g., line segments ab = 2.70 and ad = 2.80 Å in Figure 1b) are smaller than interatomic distances between the corrugated planes (e.g., line segment ak = 3.25 and dk = 3.34 Å in Figure 1b) [8]. This corrugated structure is responsible for the anisotropy of physical properties of α-U. There is only one type of lattice site, tetrahedral interstitial site, pentahedron site, and single vacancy site. However, there exist several types of self-interstitial configurations (eight tetrahedral, eight pentahedral pyramidal and four octahedral interstitial sites). The most stable configuration is schematically shown in Figure 1b, where atom X is in the interstice of a pentahedron.  [7], 2022, Elsevier). (b) schematic structure of α-U and the most stable self-interstitial configuration (reprinted and adapted with permission from [8], 2022, IOP publishing, Ltd).
## (s3) Electronic Properties
(p3.0) The electronic structure of uranium is dominated by 5f electron states that form narrow bands that tend to bond the atoms in complex and distorted ways. DFT results reveal that 5f orbitals are active in the chemical bonding for uranium [11]. The behavior of 5f electrons of uranium is observed to be similar to that of the d orbital electrons in the transition elements [12]. Compared with the bulk atoms, the deficit of atoms near the uranium surface breaks the balance between the delocalization and localization of 5f electrons, leading to the electrons changing from delocalized to localized. As the electrons change from delocalized to localized, the arrangement of the surface atoms is interrupted and the total energy of the surface increases. This principally leads to a high surface energy, in turn leading to a high affinity for hydrogen, oxygen and carbon [11,13].

(p3.1) The research on the electronic properties of α-U was mainly motivated by the anomalous electronic configuration of α-U [5] and the discovery of superconductivity in α-U [14]. A long-standing debate on the description of the 5f elements involved whether they should be called actinides, in which the 5f shell was progressively filled, or thorides, in which the 6d shell progressively filled. From the chemical point of view, this question was effectively settled by the production of the heavier elements Np and Pu and the early study of their spectroscopic properties, revealing the actinide nature of α-U. Superconductivity was discovered in α-U in 1942 by Aschermann and Justin and was first reported by Mott [14]. However, the existence of intrinsic superconductivity in α-U (i.e., superconductivity of α-U in the pure undoped state) is a topic of discussion even today. Multiple investigations in the 1950s found a range of superconductivity transition temperatures [5] 
## (s4) Electronic Properties
(p4.0) The electronic structure of uranium is dominated by 5f electron states that form narrow bands that tend to bond the atoms in complex and distorted ways. DFT results reveal that 5f orbitals are active in the chemical bonding for uranium [11]. The behavior of 5f electrons of uranium is observed to be similar to that of the d orbital electrons in the transition elements [12]. Compared with the bulk atoms, the deficit of atoms near the uranium surface breaks the balance between the delocalization and localization of 5f electrons, leading to the electrons changing from delocalized to localized. As the electrons change from delocalized to localized, the arrangement of the surface atoms is interrupted and the total energy of the surface increases. This principally leads to a high surface energy, in turn leading to a high affinity for hydrogen, oxygen and carbon [11,13].

(p4.1) The research on the electronic properties of α-U was mainly motivated by the anomalous electronic configuration of α-U [5] and the discovery of superconductivity in α-U [14]. A long-standing debate on the description of the 5f elements involved whether they should be called actinides, in which the 5f shell was progressively filled, or thorides, in which the 6d shell progressively filled. From the chemical point of view, this question was effectively settled by the production of the heavier elements Np and Pu and the early study of their spectroscopic properties, revealing the actinide nature of α-U. Superconductivity was discovered in α-U in 1942 by Aschermann and Justin and was first reported by Mott [14]. However, the existence of intrinsic superconductivity in α-U (i.e., superconductivity of α-U in the pure undoped state) is a topic of discussion even today. Multiple investigations in the 1950s found a range of superconductivity transition temperatures [5] depending on the purity of the samples. Conversely, several late 1960s studies indicated the possibility of superconductivity being the result of grain-boundary filamentary sheathes rather than bulk superconductivity, indicating that superconductivity is not intrinsic to α-U [15]. In fact, Geballe et al. [16] suggested that the variations in superconductive properties were correlated to the intergranular strains resulting from anisotropic expansion in α-U.

(p4.2) Three phase transitions occur in α-U below 43 K due to the presence of charge density waves and were postulated to affect the intrinsic superconductivity of α-U [17]. Charge density waves (CDW) occur when there is a spatial modulation of the electron density [18]. This CDW is typically associated with a mass density wave of the positively charged ions which make up the crystal lattice. The possibility of CDW formation is enhanced in lowerdimensional systems (1D and 2D materials) because the simple structures involved lead to a high probability of favorable Fermi surface nesting (i.e., the shifting and coincidence of two Fermi surfaces that are required for CDW formation). In bulk materials, CDW phenomena are rather rare because of the unlikelihood of Fermi surface nesting. Uranium is the only element in the periodic table to exhibit a phase transition to CDW states at ambient pressure. The three phase transitions can be seen as a drastic change in the derivative of the electric resistivity vs. temperature [18].
## (s12) Irradiation Effects on Thermal and Electrical Properties
(p12.0) Neutron irradiation increases the electrical resistivity and thermal conductivity of α-U, but the specific relationship is not well understood. A direct correlation was observed between the irradiation-increased resistivity and single crystal irradiation growth in all the available studies, albeit with limitations on the burnup range investigated. The effect of thermal neutron irradiation on the electrical resistivity of lineage single crystals (<600 ppm impurities) was studied by [42] in the CP-5 reactor up to 550 K. For a constant irradiation temperature, electrical resistivity increased with irradiation dose and was also proportional to the increase in irradiation growth strain. However, the increase in resistivity with irradiation dose is reported to saturate [42], contrary to the dimensional changes induced by irradiation growth.

(p12.1) Though the very few results about the effects of irradiation on the thermal properties of α-U are non-conclusive given the uncontrolled testing performed in 1960s, the existing results and estimates do reveal that the thermal conductivity of irradiated α-U is impacted. The overall dependence is governed by various phenomena including lattice resistance imposed by defects, microstructural damage on the grain boundaries, porosity development and the presence of fission gases. Brailsford and Major [58] theoretically estimated the reduction in thermal conductivity as well as electrical resistivity due to irradiation in the form of an equation (Equation (1)), considering various key factors,

(p12.2) where R is the % reduction in the thermal conductivity, D 0 and D 1 are the initial and final density (g/cm 3 ) (evaluated through any applicable swelling model) and b is burnup (at %). The burnup dependence implicitly accounts for changes due to lattice strains, lattice defects and fission gas bubbles and voids. Though the estimate considers several factors, several simplifying assumptions were made. Although the analysis considers the increased resistivity from irradiation effects, the effect of dislocation loops were totally neglected [59]. However, the effect of dislocation loop dynamics is expected to play a vital role in the irradiation growth rate. Given the strong, suggestive results of the dependence of electrical resistivity on the irradiation growth rate and similar mechanisms responsible for thermal resistivity, more comprehensive models need to be developed. To date, there is no reliable experimental analysis to validate Equation (1). However, recent DFT studies by Peng et al. [60] estimate the effect of U vacancies, U interstitials and Zr substitution on the thermal conductivity. Although Equation (1) does not include temperature dependence, there is reasonable order-of-magnitude agreement between its predictions and the DFT studies. Among the three types of defects studied by DFT, U vacancies have the most substantial impact on thermal conductivity. Similar to the case of irradiation effects on dimensional changes and mechanical properties, further experimental investigations are required to understand the effect of irradiation on α-U's thermal conductivity and electrical resistivity under carefully controlled conditions, including specification of the initial purity, the metallurgical condition of the specimen and the details of the irradiation (temperature, flux, fluence and neutron spectrum). Simultaneous measurements of the electrical resistivity and thermal conductivity during irradiation would be valuable to test the validity of the Wiedemann-Franz law for irradiated specimens, which forms the basis of Brailsford and Major's theoretical model.

(p12.3) The effect of irradiation on the superconductivity of α-U is a fundamental area of interest that could receive more attention. Existing results suggest that irradiation could affect the superconductivity of materials in two different ways: First, extended defects, such as column-shaped amorphous regions, act as strong, correlated pinning centers and usually increase the critical current density substantially. Second, point defects influence the microscopic parameters responsible for superconductivity, thus affecting the critical temperature and the critical fields. Analysis of the irradiation effects could provide a strong fundamental basis to characterize the intrinsic superconductivity of uranium as well as quantify the impact of irradiation-induced defects.
