# SAFETY AND RELIABILITY OF CARBON-PEEK PLATE FOR THE TREATMENT OF DISTAL RADIUS FRACTURES: A REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

CorpusID: 241735785 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e161048caf0a5375818cff8cceca303c9569580a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e161048caf0a5375818cff8cceca303c9569580a)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s6) CLINICAL OUTCOMES AND STUDIES ANALYSIS
(p6.0) All patients were clinically evaluated by ROM, DASH, VAS, Grip Strength with a mean follow-up of 15.7 months (min: 12 months; max: 19 months). None of the 15 patients had postoperative complications. 21 Allemann et al., in 2019, reported 10 patients all affected by type B fracture, treated with CFR-PEEK plate (Inc. Icotec, Altstätten, Switzerland). These patients were 53.3 ± 16.6 years old and the male/female ratio was 60:40. Patients were radiographically evaluated by X-ray and CT, and only ROM was clinically evaluated. The intraoperative rupture of the screw head in two screws has been documented, but this did not lead to any complication. No other peri-or postoperative complications were described. 29 Guzzini  Return to sporting activity was conceded after 3 months without any complication. 27 Lastly, Tarallo et al. published a retrospective study including 110 patients treated for distal radius fracture using a volar fixed-angle plate DiPHOS-RM (Lima Corporate, Udine, Italy). All CFR-PEEK plates were implanted between May 2012 and December 2017. 33 males and 77 females were enrolled. The mean age was 58 years old (min: 23 years; max:86 years) and the mean follow-up was 48 months (min: 14 months; max: 21 months). Among these, there were 14 cases of A3 fracture according to the AO Classifications system, 33 cases of B3, 18 cases of C1, 30 cases of C2, and 15 cases of C3. All patients, except 10, were evaluated with a mean follow-up of four years (range 14-81 months). Patients were radiographically and clinically evaluated at 1, 2, 3, and 12 months and then re-evaluated until complete healing. Finally, the authors reported one case of flexor pollicis longus (FPL) rupture one year after surgery, one case of infection, two cases of extensor tendonitis, and 5 cases of plate failure. 26 
## (s8) DISCUSSION
(p8.0) Fractures of the distal radius are among the most common ones in adults, and their incidence continues to rise as the average age of the population increases. Most postmenopausal women are affected due to osteoporosis. The initial treatment of non-displaced fractures may be conservative, although not infrequently, secondary displacement that requires surgical procedure are observed. ORIF with plate and screws is necessary in displaced and / or intraarticular fractures. To date, numerous types of both dorsal and volar plates are available on the market. Industries produce every year new devices that are increasingly low profile and easy to install. With this goal, carbon plates have been introduced to the market. However, they had a low diffusion, likely due to the higher costs of production and not widespread distribution. Polyetheretherketone reinforcedcarbon fiber composite radiolucent devices are characterized by complete radiolucency, which allows viewing the progress of the bone healing optimally. Furthermore, they are thin and light to ensure a minor impact on the biomechanics of a complex district such as the wrist. Moreover, these devices have some other advantages, such as low artifacts on MRI and the possibility of being designed with more appropriate strength, toughness, stiffness, or better fatigue resistance. 9, 10  In the manuscripts selected for this review, the first complication noted is tendons inflammation or damage. As many as two authors reported extensor tendons synovitis.

(p8.1) Tarallo et al., on a total of 110 patients studied, reported 2 cases of extensor tendons synovitis. 26 We agree with the authors in believing that this complication is probably due to an error in the surgical technique and not to the implanted devices. The implantation of screws that are too long from volar to dorsal implies a repeated inflammatory stimulus on the extensor tendons during their sliding. And therefore, this is a possible complication with implanted devices of any material available on the market. Tarallo et al. also described 1 case of rupture of the long flexor tendon of the thumb approximately one year after surgery; also, in this case, the suspicion falls on a surgical technique error. 26 It is documented that the implantation of the distal radius volar plate too distal to the watershed line can lead to excessive impingement with this tendon during its sliding and the risk of consequent degeneration and rupture. This complication is documented following the implantation of volar plates for distal radius also in other materials. 30,31 The case described by Merolli et al. is different. 12 The female patient came to attention about 11 months after ORIF with a PEEK-reinforced-carbon fiber plate for distal radius, complaining of swelling, pain, functional limitation of the wrist, and a complete loss of active flexion of three fingers. The intra-operative inspection showed an aggressive erosive flexor tendons synovitis with eroded stumps of flexor tendons; histopathology showed granulomatous fibrogenic process with multinucleated giant cells. The plate was intact and well-positioned and the fracture healed. However, in the soft tissues, many carbon fibers debris were dispersed, which triggered the inflammatory process. A detailed electron microscope analysis of the plate allowed us to assess the source: fibers were unmasked and disrupted. Inside the holes where screws were tightened. It is correct to think that the cause of the adverse event was not found in a defect in the carbon plates but in the coating of that specific plate. This case report, unique for the complication described, draws attention to the risk of release of carbon fibers, rare but possible, due to lesions of the device's coating during its implantation or coating manufacturing defects.
