# An overview of polycystic ovary syndrome in aging women

CorpusID: 244933021 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03ff3c1af3a56dbc319cb659e862eff4138afff2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03ff3c1af3a56dbc319cb659e862eff4138afff2)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Perimenopausal/menopausal transition in PCOS
(p1.0) Menopausal transition is a physiological process associated with aging and various associated hormonal and metabolic changes (11). Androgen levels remain stable or may even rise as menopause commences, while a marked decrease occurs in estrogen levels. Ovarian granulosa cells, the principal secretors of estradiol and inhibin, also decline. This reduced inhibition by estrogen and inhibin on gonadotropins results in increased secretion of these hormones. Antral follicule count and ovarian volume decline with age, eventually becoming incapable of responding to the effects of follicle-stimulating hormone. As ovarian aging progresses, estrogen levels may be quite variable, with chaotic patterns. In general, menopausal transition is characterized by a gradual decrease in menstrual bleeding. However, some women do experience heavy or prolonged bleeding, which has always been assumed to be due to anovulatory cycles and prolonged exposure to unopposed estrogen. The propensity for anovulatory cycles may lead to endometrial hyperplasia or carcinoma, and uterine polyps. After sometimes years of menstrual irregularity, women eventually experience permanent cessation of menses.
## (s2) Long-term complications of aging women with PCOS Obesity
(p2.0) The incidence of obesity, including visceral obesity, rises after menopause. This in turn encourages a number of metabolic disorders, including MS, diabetes and atherosclerosis (11). Visceral obesity is a frequently seen characteristic of PCOS, and one that exacerbates the severity of both reproductive and metabolic problems. Although several studies and metaanalyses showed a higher prevalence of overweight and obesity in women with PCOS than in women without PCOS, the data in aging women with PCOS are insufficient (9,27). Meun et al. (28) recently observed higher body mass index (BMI) values and increased waist circumferences in women with PCOS aged >45 years than in healthy controls. Wild et al. (29) reported significantly higher BMI and waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) values in a PCOS group than in a control group in a 31year follow-up study. The Rotterdam study reported higher BMI and WHR in patients with PCOS than in age-matched controls (30). However, a 21-year follow-up study of patients with PCOS in the 61-79 age group (n=25) determined no differences in terms of BMI or WHR between patients and age-matched controls (n=68) (31). Echiburú et al. (32) investigated women with PCOS and healthy controls in three separate periods of reproductive life; women aged 18-34 years, 35-40 years and between 41-55 years. BMI and WHR values were higher among patients with PCOS in the early and late reproductive periods, but no difference was observed between the patients and controls in the perimenopausal period. Only homeostasis model assessment-b levels were lower in the late reproductive and perimenopausal periods in the patients with PCOS compared to early reproductive age (32). Overall most studies, but not all, support the idea that women with PCOS at older ages persist in being more overweight/obese than healthy controls.
## (s3) Metabolic syndrome
(p3.0) There is increased prevalence of MS associated with central obesity, insulin resistance, and HT in women after menopause. However, limited data are available concerning the prevalence of MS in women with PCOS during the perimenopausal period (9,10). Pinola et al. (20) reported a two-to five-fold higher prevalence of MS in women with PCOS compared with healthy controls, depending on age and phenotype. The highest prevalence was determined in hyperandrogenic women with PCOS towards the end of reproductive age (20). The Study of Women's Health Across the Nation (SWAN) study indicated no association between a history of HA or menstrual irregularity and impairment of metabolic condition after menopause (33). Meun et al. (28) did not observe significant difference in the prevalence of MS between women with PCOS and controls at the age of 50. Overall, women with PCOS experience a higher risk of MS during the reproductive period. However, with menopausal transition, the risk of MS becomes similar to that of women without PCOS.
