# A scoping research literature review to explore bereavement humor

CorpusID: 247928625 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4627597f6ffa5945137c63e11c08f73375a4b18](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4627597f6ffa5945137c63e11c08f73375a4b18)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s0) Materials and Methods
(p0.0) After consultation with a university librarian, nine academic library databases were searched for published English-language research reports with abstracts using the keywords "grief or loss or mourning or bereavement" and "humor or humour or comedy or laughter or jokes," and "research." These nine databases were considered the most likely to contain relevant research articles for review: CINAHL, Directory of Open Access (online) Journals, Humanities Index, Journal Storage (JSTOR), Medline (Ovid), PsychInfo, Scopus, SocIndex, and Web of Science. Reports of all kinds of research investigations were sought, in keeping with the established methodology of scoping literature reviews (Arksey & O'Malley, 2005;Whittemore & Knafl, 2005). As this project involved a systematic search for and analysis of published literature, it did not require research ethics committee approval to proceed. Scoping reviews are a common type of literature review, although they are distinguished from other types as they gather and assess all types of research reports, and they typically focus on new topics or emerging questions of interest (Armstrong et al., 2011;Grant & Booth, 2009;Levac et al., 2010;Munn et al., 2018). Like other reviews, scoping reviews are done to assess how much research has already been done on a defined topic or question, and to determine what evidence and evidence gaps exist. However, scoping reviews do not include an assessment of the quality of the research articles that are identified for review, as all published research reports that are identified on a specific topic are considered likely to contain information of benefit. No efforts are made then to limit the review to only comprehensively-written reports of high-quality studies. Accordingly, this scoping review was carried out to identify all published English-language research reports that focused in whole or in part on bereavement humor, and explore and describe the findings to identify evidence and evidence gaps. No limit was placed on the year of publication, in keeping with our plan to scope the research conducted to date on bereavement humor. One final consideration is that this review only sought evidence on bereavement humor, as compared to humor associated with other challenging life events, such as divorce or retirement. It is possible that humor findings may be similar across them, but bereavement humor could be entirely distinct as humor is not generally associated with death, dying, or bereavement.

(p0.1) Each database was searched using the specified search terms, with varying numbers of potential articles for review identified in each database. All of the identified abstracts in each database were assessed for review inclusion or exclusion. Full papers were read whenever an abstract appeared to feature research that was focused, in whole or in part, on bereavement humor. All research publications that did not focus in whole or in part on post-death bereavement humor were rejected from review. Moreover, publications that did not describe a research investigation and reveal research findings were also rejected from review. However, as scoping reviews are undertaken on new or emerging topics or questions of rising interest, theory-based and other non-research papers were noted whenever they focused on bereavement humor and had content of relevance to building an understanding of bereavement humor. Each identified theory or non-research paper was assessed for informational relevance on a case-by-case basis, with the content of notable papers briefly outlined below.

(p0.2) A description of research and non-research findings in each database follows, in alphabetical order by database name. A PRISMA diagram ( Fig. 1) was developed to reveal this search and selection process (Tricco et al., 2018). A table of research findings was also developed to highlight research information addressing the aim of this literature review (Table 1). Once compiled, the findings were subjected to content analysis, a process focused on identifying common and diverse or contradictory findings across the reviewed research articles. The findings from this content analysis were then used to identify evidence and evidence gaps.
## (s4) Humanities Index
(p4.0) The Humanities Index database revealed 28 potential articles for review. None of these were research reports, but four papers had notable content. Willett and Willett's (2020) article explored the role of comedy in helping people make sense of their grief following a death, with death identified as a life tragedy. Sosa (2013) described humor as a means by which survivors in post-dictatorial Argentina gained an alternative source of remembrance of the dead, and with humor (including dark and bitter humor) having become a collective strategy in that country to cope with loss. Soares (2011) reviewed a book written by a woman who experienced the death of her mother as a child, with this book said to be "sprinkled" with humor, and with humor identified as one of many emotions co-mingled in that book. Macnab and Scherfig (2003) described a movie on death and bereavement that contained "unexpected" humor.
## (s7) PsychInfo
(p7.0) Eleven potential articles to review were identified in the PsychInfo database. None of the theory or non-research articles had notable bereavement humor content. Three of the research articles were relevant for review, but all three had previously been identified and retained for review (Brewer & Sparkes, 2011;Cadell, 2007;Donnelly, 1999).
## (s12) General Overview of Research
(p12.0) In total, 11 research articles were identified for review. Five of these 11 studies were qualitative in nature. Four others were quantitative in nature and two involved mixed-method approaches, where both qualitative and quantitative methods were used to gather and analyze the research data. As shown in Table 1, these 11 articles were published in the years 1997 through 2014, with 2 published in 2010. No escalation of interest in the topic of post-death bereavement humor was thus evident. Moreover, as no recent publications were found, this suggests that research and perhaps also clinical practice or lay attention has shifted away from bereavement humor. It is also possible though that the multi-year pandemic we are living through could increase societal use of and also research attention to humor.

(p12.1) The 11 research investigations conducted in whole or in part on bereavement humor were carried out in 5 developed countries; 6 studies having been done in the USA, 2 in Australia, and 1 each in England, Canada, and Ireland. Although not shown in the Table, the identified and noted non-research or theory articles were written by authors residing in these and a few other developed or developing countries. It is possible that additional studies have been conducted in other countries and the findings displayed in journals that do not use English language reporting. As such, post-death bereavement humor may be a worldwide social support and grief recovery consideration, although cultural differences are likely. This conclusion is supported by the view of Michel (2017), a humor expert, who advised that all human cultures have engaged in laughter and they continue to do so. However, what would be appropriate humor, particularly in various post-death scenarios, is likely to vary considerably across and even among cultural groups, as indicated by the findings of Lund et al. (2009), where black Americans differed in relation to bereavement humor from Americans with other ethnic or racial backgrounds.
## (s13) Prevalence or Incidence Humor Findings
(p13.0) As illustrated in Table 1, humor was often identified as being commonly employed by bereaved people (Cadell, 2007). Lund et al.'s (2009) study of 292 recently-bereaved Americans aged 50 and older revealed a daily humor incidence of 75%. Similarly, Ong et al.'s (2004) American study showed daily positive emotions, including humor, were common among bereaved people in the first three months following the death of their spouse. A study conducted in Ireland also found bereaved Irish people commonly used humor after a death had occurred (Donnelly, 1999).
## (s14) Reasons for and Impact of Humor Findings
(p14.0) Yet, bereavement humor may be useful at times. One study found humor was used by bereaved people to avoid difficult topics or discussions with other people and to distance themselves from their own grief (Brewer & Sparkes, 2011). Humor was also deliberately used at times to keep a discussion from becoming too serious or hurtful (Brewer & Sparkes, 2011). Humor was thus identified as a technique that allowed bereaved people to temporarily avoid their grief and help them with the longer-term management of their grief (Brewer & Sparkes, 2011). Moreover, other people around them could use humor to avoid distressing the bereaved person (Brewer & Sparkes, 2011).
## (s16) Review Limitations and Implications
(p16.0) Although this literature review found more theoretical and other non-research articles on the topic of bereavement humor than research articles, 11 research reports were located for review. Although the findings from these 11 studies generally demonstrate the importance of humor and the relevance of humor as an externally applied or personally-used grief intervention, the small amount of research on this topic is surprising. At this point in time, bereavement humor appears to comprise a largely unrecognized consideration for use by bereaved people and by their family members and friends; as well as grief/bereavement, hospice/palliative, gerontological/ geriatric, and other care providers or researchers. The exception, perhaps, is Ireland, where humor was identified as a cultural icon; a socially-accepted way of acknowledging and living openly with death, dying, and bereavement (Donnelly, 1999). However, social customs are not static and so it is possible that the use of bereavement humor could have changed in the two decades since the Donnelly (1999) study was carried out.

(p16.1) One possible explanation for such a limited amount of research on bereavement humor is that only a few researchers over the years appear to have realized the importance of focusing on bereavement humor to either validate it or conversely to demonstrate when or how it is not useful and should therefore be avoided. This research gap could be a result of humor being widely viewed as inappropriate when people are suffering, such as when they are grieving the death of a loved one. Another limitation with our review is that we only sought English-language articles, which meant we did not capture what may be highly important international research studies and so did not gain additional multicultural views on bereavement humor. Regardless, with only 11 English-language published research reports appearing in the last quarter century, many researchers in recent decades, and certainly the last decade (as no recent publications were identified), do not appear to have been oriented to humor as being a readily accessible, inexpensive, and perhaps highly useful and reliable form of support for grieving people. Nor does it appear that there is much recognition that humor could be and perhaps is deliberately used by grieving people to help themselves or others.

(p16.2) Regardless, some evidence exists that bereaved people, family members, friends, and care providers use bereavement humor for a number of valid reasons, such as to reduce anxiety and depression, and also the physical, social, emotional, or mental sequelae of impactful long-term bereavement grief. This reveal demonstrated that bereaved people use humor for their own benefit, and they also use humor to reassure and support other people. As such, bereavement humor was identified as having potential positive effects. It is of concern though that the research to date is entirely lacking in relation to identifying, describing, and explaining inappropriate or unhelpful bereavement humor. Insights need to be gained so it is understood when and why bereavement humor should not be attempted. Research is also needed to highlight individual and other differences in the acceptability of bereavement humor, including cultural differences to ensure that humor findings from one country or ethnic group are not applied generally in the development of educational products or bereavement services and support programs.
