# MINI REVIEW Obstetric Outcome After Surgical Treatment of Endometriosis: A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 245427357 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a473066f0050b69aba41cf12b8e8fabc958e2d7c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a473066f0050b69aba41cf12b8e8fabc958e2d7c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrial-like glands and stroma outside the uterine cavity (1). This oestrogen-dependent chronic condition affects 11.4% of reproductive age women (2) and is associated with pelvic pain and infertility (1).

(p0.1) In recent years, there has been an increasing focus on the association between endometriosis and pregnancy outcomes (3)(4)(5)(6). Endometriosis may be associated with poor pregnancy outcomes (7,8) including placenta praevia, preterm birth (PTB), premature prelabour rupture of membranes (PPROM), obstetric haemorrhage, gestational hypertensive disorders, foetal growth restriction (IUGR) and perinatal death (4). These associations are biologically plausible due to several factors: the inflammatory mileu and immune modifications established by endometriosis (9)(10)(11), the molecular, anatomical, and epigenetic abnormalities of eutopic endometrium noted in women with endometriosis (12)(13)(14), and the decidualisation of endometriosis lesions due to the hormonal changes of pregnancy (15). Several authors have attempted to demonstrate a causal relationship between endometriosis and obstetric complications (3). To date, studies are yet to explore the possibility of a common pathophysiology which predisposes to both endometriosis and adverse pregnancy outcomes. In addition, no specific management for endometriosis has been proposed to improve adverse obstetric outcomes. It is unknown whether prepregnancy surgery for endometriosis alters the risk of adverse obstetric outcomes or if there is a surgically untreatable factor influencing these outcomes. Moreover, the impact of assisted reproductive technologies (ART) on obstetric risk, as well as the influence of comorbid adenomyosis need exploration.
## (s6) Study Characteristics
(p6.0) Thomin et al. (18) reported a retrospective cohort study from France, comprising 41 patients with pre-pregnancy colorectal surgery for endometriosis, and 26 women with known in situ colorectal endometriosis having no surgical treatment prior to pregnancy. The authors reported on delivery and neonatal outcomes for both groups. All patients were symptomatic of bowel endometriosis (dyschezia, altered bowel habit, pain on defecation, or cyclical rectal bleeding). A clinical diagnosis was made based on visible blue nodules in the posterior fornix, or palpable induration on vaginal and rectal digital examinations, and then confirmed on imaging. All women in the surgical cohort had histologically proven colorectal endometriosis. The nonsurgical cohort had in situ unresected colorectal endometriosis at the time of pregnancy. The primary outcome of interest was the rate of caesarean section, with secondary outcomes being the incidence of complications dependent on mode of delivery and neonatal outcomes. Fifty percent of cases gave birth by caesarean delivery and rate of caesarean delivery was no different between the groups (OR 1.79; 95% CI 0.69-4.64, p = 0.3). Maternal outcome, which included complications during caesarean section or postpartum complications such as endometritis (OR 0.67; 95% CI 0.23-1.94, p = 0.6), neonatal outcome [birth weight, a 5 min Apgar score < 7, arterial pH < 7.20, admission to neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and neonatal death (NND)], and rates of difficulties according to route of delivery (OR 0.20; 95% CI 0.04-1.06, p = 0.1) were similar for the two groups. The authors concluded that for women with colorectal endometriosis (in situ or previously excised), there was a high rate of caesarean delivery, operative vaginal delivery, and postpartum complications related to delivery. Surgical management of endometriosis pre-pregnancy did not alter these risks.

(p6.1) Miura et al. (17) performed a case control study in Japan, comparing maternal and neonatal outcomes for an endometriosis group (n = 80) and controls (n = 2,689). They described a subgroup of their endometriosis cohort who had a documented history of surgery for endometriosis (n = 49) and separated this group from those with endometriosis who had not undergone pre-pregnancy surgery (n = 31). They identified the endometriosis cohort based on laparoscopy with histological confirmation (n = 49) or based on imaging findings of endometrioma (n = 27) or symptoms (n = 4). When comparing the two endometriosis subgroups, those with a history of surgery for endometriosis may have had a greater risk of placenta praevia compared to patients with no prior history of endometriosis surgery but this was not significant, possibly reflecting the small sample size (OR 2.83; 95%CI 0.56-14.31, p = 0.30). There was no difference in other maternal outcomes (gestational age, delivery mode, blood loss, hypertensive disorders, gestational diabetes, postpartum haemorrhage (PPH) or placental abruption) or neonatal outcomes (birth weight, Apgar score at 1 and 5 min, umbilical artery pH or NICU admission) between surgery and non-surgery groups.
## (s12) Potential Confounders
(p12.0) The role of ART as a confounder for obstetric risk in women with endometriosis has not been adequately explored and thus the independent effect of endometriosis from that of ART is unknown. Most studies include ART pregnancies which are well-recognised to be associated with an increased risk of poor obstetric outcomes (37), and thus could contribute to bias. Importantly, Farella et al. (38) demonstrated an independent association between ART and PTB, IUGR, and placenta praevia.
## (s13) Future Research Needs
(p13.0) Ultimately, prospective studies are required to firstly confirm or refute the possible associations between endometriosis and obstetric complications, and secondly to investigate whether pre-pregnancy management with either medical or surgical modalities alters this risk. At present, the predominantly retrospective literature focuses on heterogenous endometriosis "case" groups made up of women with endometriosis who have undergone surgery, but whether disease was treated, and the completeness of surgery is poorly defined. Future prospective studies should examine whether complete prepregnancy surgical treatment of endometriosis alters pregnancy outcomes compared to women without endometriosis, and to women who have untreated endometriosis. Surgery for endometriosis indicated by pain alone, vs. surgery in the setting of infertility and endometriosis may be associated with different obstetric outcomes. Studies should control for the impact of ART as well as controlling for imaging evidence of adenomyosis as a confounder to obstetric outcomes in women following surgical treatment of endometriosis.

(p13.1) Should the link between endometriosis and adverse pregnancy outcome be confirmed by well-designed prospective studies, then a pathophysiological link between these entities also warrants further investigation to identify possible treatment targets and prevention options. Several authors have hypothesised that the alterations at the endometrial-myometrial junctional zone-particularly with spiral artery remodelling-seen in endometriosis may be the link between endometriosis and adverse pregnancy outcomes (12,49,50), however this remains highly speculative. Yet, if this is the case, then surgical management of endometriosis would seem unlikely to improve pregnancy outcomes. Endometriosis has also been linked with increased peritoneal cavity inflammation and higher concentrations of cytokines and angiogenic factors (13,27,51). It is possible that pre-pregnancy surgical treatment of endometriosis lesions may reduce the presence of these inflammatory substances, though this is not supported by the evidence to date. Cha et al. (52) hypothesise that the obstetric risk noted in women with endometriosis may be due to an inherent predisposition, rather than the direct presence of the lesions. In the current literature, the most commonly cited adverse pregnancy outcome linked with endometriosis is placenta praevia (23). Authors hypothesise that this could be due to altered endometrial receptivity, endometrial inflammation, inadequate uterine contractility, and alteration in the endometrial-myometrial junctional zone (23). The role of surgical treatment in ameliorating these effects pre-pregnancy is unknown.
