# Corrosion in marine and offshore steel structures: Classification and overview

CorpusID: 246504833 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e2aef7b2e29472d64766f0fb06e242ddaebcf0be](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e2aef7b2e29472d64766f0fb06e242ddaebcf0be)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s4) The corrosion problem in the marine environments
(p4.0) According to (Kirchgeorg et al., 2018) the harsh marine environment poses a significant challenge to the constructions and longevity of offshore frameworks, that are mostly constructed of steel and are designed to more than 25 years. The chemical characteristics of the immersing medium, (such as seawater and brackish water), have a significant impact on metal corrosion. In comparison to drinking water, seawater is extremely corrosive, as corrosion increases with salinity, but other factors like oxygen concentration, pH (for seawater ranging between 7.8 and 8.3), and temperature also influence corrosion process.

(p4.1) Prabhakar and Goswami (2019), stated that in the context of Offshore structures, corrosion is electrochemical processes. In this electrochemical process, the electrolyte is the seawater, and due to various potentials between different sections of the steel structures, the metal ions travel from the structure's surface and diffuse into the electrolyte solution.
## (s14) Corrosion allowance (CA)
(p14.0) According to Kirchgeorg et al. (2018), the meaning of corrosion allowance is the use of thicker steel as necessary for the constructions. If conventional protection systems fail, or if coating damage occurs, this can be used as a backup solution. In addition, a CA is required to cover the https://www.londontechpress.co.uk time durations up to the ICCP installation and steel polarization. This can extend the structure's life in the event of technical issues with impressed current cathodic protection system or galvanic anodes (such as passivation). The thickness is determined based on the estimated erosion rate of the steel in the marine environments. Corrosion allowances of 0.2 to 1.20 centimetre are recommended. The steel is mostly made of iron, and also includes traces ranging from 0.01 to 1.65 percent of C, Si, Mn, S, P, Al, Ni, Mo, Cr, V, Co, and Cu.
## (s15) Coating systems (CS)
(p15.0) CS is a simple way to prevent corrosion. During this method, a barrier is built between the steel and the sea water, thus the surface is isolated. According to Price and Figueira (2017), While CS may combine several layers of various kinds of coatings, consistency between the layers must be ensured. Non-metallic coatings, metallic coatings, or a mixture of these 2 kinds of coatings are applied to the surface of the steel during the coating process. Metallic coatings generally consist of non-ferrous metals, usually zinc, aluminium and its alloys. Non-Ferrous metals have higher impedance to corrosion compared to carbon steels. These metallic coatings protect the steel frameworks from erosion by galvanizing and barrier. Furthermore, metallic coatings virtually conserve the steel in damaged places or where small pores in the coating exist.
