# Challenges and Opportunities of Laboratory diagnosis of Dengue virus infection: a review CURRENT STATUS: POSTED SUBJECT AREAS Internal Medicine Specialties

CorpusID: 241048907 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/015b56ae63d77868ea132ea534317881e660815d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/015b56ae63d77868ea132ea534317881e660815d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Search strategy and selection process
(p1.0) A literature search of published articles was done in PubMed, Web of Science, and Google Scholar databases from October 2018 to January 2019. The following key terms Dengue, dengue virus, dengue fever, diagnosis, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, immunoglobulin M, immunoglobulin G, non-structural protein 1, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, rapid diagnostic test, virus isolation, hemagglutination inhibition tests, immunohistochemistry, and emerging diagnostic technologies were used to identify relevant articles. An example of search strategy for PubMed database is provided as supplementary material (S2). Additional data and grey literature were collected from the World Health Organization (WHO), ProMED-mail and Google electronic sources. Our inclusion criteria were the articles published in English describing the diagnostic options for dengue without restriction to geographical scale, study design or study population. As our interest was on emerging laboratory diagnostic innovations, only the articles published recently within the past 10 years (2008 to 2018) were included in the study. We aimed to include mainly studies describing the detection of non-structural protein-1 (NS1) antigen, Immunoglobulin M (IgM) and G (IgG) antibodies against dengue virus, reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and/or virus isolation/culture. In the selection process, titles and abstracts were initially examined against the inclusion criteria, followed by full-text examination using pre-designed data extraction form built in the spread sheet (Excel 2010, Microsoft Corp., and Redmond, WA, USA). The articles with any of these terms were considered for further evaluation and data extraction described in the subsequent section. Back referencing of included articles were examined as the potential sources of additional articles. The articles identified from search databases were finally exported to Rayyan QCRI application software for duplicate removal, screening of titles/abstracts and eligibility assessment [8] according to predefined inclusion/exclusion criteria.
## (s16) Detection of dengue virus inhibiting antibodies
(p16.0) Haemagglutination inhibition test (HI) is used to measure the presence of anti-dengue antibodies in the sera through agglutination reaction. Agglutination is caused by the ability of dengue virus antigens to clump with certain types of red blood cells (RBCs). When sufficient anti-dengue antibodies are present in the sera of an infected individual, agglutination of RBCs by dengue antigens is impeded [62]. The main disadvantages of this test include cross-reactivity to antibodies of other flaviviruses, poor sensitivity and require paired sera for confirmation [63,64].
## (s18) Immunohistochemistry
(p18.0) The detection of dengue antigens in the infected tissues such as a biopsy is performed by immunohistochemical techniques (IHC). The tissues are fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin followed by detection of viral antigens by indirect fluorescent antibody staining or immunoalkaline phosphatase. The results of immunohistochemistry can be visualized by a fluorescence microscope [61,62]. This technique is less sensitive compared to culture and RT-PCR, can cause cross-reactivity and requires some expertise in pathology [63,64].
## (s19) Evaluation of sensitivity and specificity
(p19.0) The performance of diagnostic tests is important for the accurate diagnosis of dengue infection. Yet, comparison of test performance remains a challenge due to various factors such as the existence of multiple evaluation methods, the timing of sample collection (acute, late acute or convalescent sera) can impact the use/or sensitivity of particular test at different phases of infection [28].
