# Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and health outcomes: An umbrella review of systematic reviews and meta-analyses

CorpusID: 248931568 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf988e713b6290674803e0d2001ae3ae5ff20527](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf988e713b6290674803e0d2001ae3ae5ff20527)

Fields: Medicine

## (s12) Critically low
(p12.0) Mantovani et al. 16,59,60  High: 0-1 non-critical weakness. The systematic review provides an accurate and comprehensive summary of the results of the available studies that address the question of interest.
## (s13) Moderate:
(p13.0) >1 non-critical weakness. The systematic review has more than one weakness, but no critical flaws. It may provide an accurate summary of the results of the available studies that were included in the review. Low: 1 critical flaw with or without non-critical weaknesses. The review has a critical flaw and may not provide an accurate and comprehensive summary of the available studies that address the question of interest. Critically low: >1 critical flaw with or without non-critical weaknesses. The review has more than one critical flaw and should not be relied on to provide an accurate and comprehensive summary of the available studies. No 2,4,7,9,11,13, and 15 are the critical items. Table 2.

(p13.1) (Continued) journals.sagepub.com/home/taj 17 structure were also damaged by NAFLD. We demonstrated the association between NAFLD and peak A velocity and LVEDD was both graded as high. In NAFLD patients, the role of proinflammatory cytokines, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia acts together on the cardiac metabolism and function, [86][87][88] which directly causes the impairment on the heart.
## (s14) Strength and limitations
(p14.0) Our umbrella review had several strengths. To our knowledge, it is the first umbrella review of observational meta-analysis and provides a comprehensive overview of the associations of NAFLD and health outcomes. A strong search strategy and data extraction were performed by two authors independently which made the result more reliable. Furthermore, we used validated AMSTR 2 tool to evaluate the methodological quality in our umbrella review.

(p14.1) However, several limitations should be considered in the interpretation of our umbrella review. We did not evaluate the quality of the primary studies because it was beyond the scope of the current umbrella review. We conducted the review based on the published meta-analyses with the largest number of studies at present, and we might have missed some individual studies, which could have an influence on the results. In this umbrella review, 21 health outcomes publication bias could not be assessed due to the limited number of primary studies (less than two) and missing data which indicates unreliable results. Thus, more research is needed to investigate these associations that were based on small number of included studies.

(p14.2) Another limitation to consider is that we could not conduct the subgroup analysis in this study (eg. sex differences, pre-menopausal, and postmenopausal women) owing to lack of raw data. As comprehension evolves, sex differences, and menopausal status are increasingly apparent in the prevalence, risk factors, progression, and outcomes in NAFLD. Numerous studies have indicated compare to women, men have higher risk and prevalence of NAFLD. 93,94 But the prevalence of NAFLD is equal in men and postmenopausal women. 95 A meta-analysis pointed out that after age 50, women have a higher risk of   developing advanced fibrosis than men. 96 However, several studies have shown that women have a higher incidence of NAFLD in early menarche and a higher risk of NASH and advanced fibrosis. 97,98 Almost all of the included meta-analyses did not distinguish between sex, pre-menopausal, and post-menopausal women in the included participants, which made it difficult to re-analyze the results according to the sex difference and menopausal status. However, we recognize the importance of sex difference and menopausal status and will focus on this aspect in future studies.
