# Relying on the engagement of others: A review of the governance choices facing social media platform start-ups

CorpusID: 245081630 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3cae696ce75b950274c19d94b1166cfaa95a4558](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3cae696ce75b950274c19d94b1166cfaa95a4558)

Fields: Business, Medicine

## (s5) User stature and influence
(p5.0) When users have a constant identity on a social media platformwhether it is their real identity or a pseudonymthe platform owner can govern their behaviour by providing ways for them to acquire stature and influence on the platform. This can be undertaken through social endorsements that adhere to user identity and through leadership roles that the platform owner enables. In general, when entrepreneurs enable users to gain visibility and stature on a platform, they are providing a means for entrepreneurial users to pursue their own opportunities on the platform. An immediately visible signal of stature on some social media platforms is a user's network size: a count of the number of users associated with a focal user. Disclosure mechanisms vary: on LinkedIn, the disclosed network size is capped at 500, and on Facebook, a user can choose to hide their network size. Highlighting a network size can attract and retain users because it signals reputation to both the online and offline worlds, enhancing a user's ability to monetize their participation on the platform. It also provides a disincentive to leave the platform and start building a network elsewhere.

(p5.1) A user's stature on a social media platform can also be created through social endorsements of the content the user has posted. For example, on Reddit, users have a karma and a longevity score. A high karma score indicates both that someone is active on Reddit and that they post content valued by other users: it is calculated through the 'upvotes' and 'downvotes' that others make on their posts, as well as the comments they make on threads. A longevity score indicates how long a user has been a registered as a Reddit user. Given the norms of pseudonymity on Reddit and the difficulty of becoming influential through offline activities (which is possible for certain users of other platforms such as Twitter and Instagram), these scores would seem to have the potential to signify online opinion leaders, although the empirical evidence for this is scant (Kilgo et al., 2016).
