# Association between social deprivation and disease activity in rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 248322835 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb8008912680fc8b1d5334e7d16c62f8a2e1ee42](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb8008912680fc8b1d5334e7d16c62f8a2e1ee42)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) A growing body of evidence indicates that patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and lower socioeconomic status (SES) have poorer disease outcomes compared with patients with higher SES. This situation includes greater levels of disease activity, as reflected by laboratory markers, composite scores (swollen and tender joint counts, Disease Activity Scores (DAS)), worse physical function, healthrelated quality of life and pain. [1][2][3] People with lower SES also experience poorer clinical outcomes of comorbidities of RA, especially mental health. 4 Decreased levels of engagement or contact with healthcare professionals in this patient group, including allied healthcare, has further negative impacts on the RA disease trajectory, a pattern also observed in
## (s2) Summary points
(p2.0) ► Relationships underpinning the association between low socioeconomic status and worse outcomes in rheumatoid arthritis are complex and an underresearched area. ► Novel theoretical frameworks can increase our understanding of these bio-bio and bio-social interactions. ► Increased understanding of the complex association between socioeconomic status and disease activity may facilitate more holistic approaches to patient care.

(p2.1) RMD Open RMD Open RMD Open societies with both private and publicly funded healthcare. [4][5][6] Physical and mental illnesses are driven by social, environmental and economic determinants. Social deprivation, for example, was highlighted as a key factor for morbidity and mortality in people with long-term diseases in The Marmot Review. 7 People from socially deprived backgrounds are more likely to experience adverse health outcomes, including increased rates of hospitalisation and death as a result of long-term diseases, including RA. SES is also closely associated with lifestyle and other factors which affect disease outcomes in RA, such as smoking, body mass index (BMI), diet and comorbidities, for example, cardiovascular disease and diabetes. 8 SES can be measured at the individual (eg, occupation, education), regional (such as the Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD) in the UK) and national level (eg, gross domestic product). There are advantages and disadvantages to extrapolating these to determine SES, often dependent on the research question and population under study. The role of social determinants of health in driving significant levels of health inequity is widely accepted and, while some are driven in part by biological differences or lifestyle choices, others are beyond the control of individuals or groups. Current research, using novel theoretical frameworks in RA, focuses on the study of potential links and adverse interactions among comorbidities. These are more likely in the context of specific social determinants such as low education, unemployment and low household income. 9 An example of such a theoretical framework is the syndemics framework, the study of links and adverse interactions among comorbidities that are more likely in the context of specific social determinants such as, low education attainment, unemployment, low household income and racial and ethnic discrimination (figure 1). 9 A syndemic is characterised by the presence of two or more disease states, adversely interacting with each other and negatively affecting the course of each disease trajectory. Such adverse interactions are exacerbated in the setting of increased multimorbidity and/or in specific social contexts.
