# Internet of Intelligence: A Survey on the Enabling Technologies, Applications, and Challenges

CorpusID: 248851666 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f90e4db93456237d70da5b48121cb480c1255992](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f90e4db93456237d70da5b48121cb480c1255992)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s3) B. Artificial Intelligence Evolution
(p3.0) As a branch of computer science, AI has undergone more than 70 years of development since its birth. Fig. 4 illustrates a schematic diagram of the development process of AI. In the past decades, it has made a lot of progress and achievements but also experienced setbacks and frustrations. Even if the current AI is closer to the level of human intelligence than at any period in history, this automation is still far from human intelligence in the strict sense. In the following, we describe several stages of AI evolution.

(p3.1) 1) 1940-1970: At this stage, research work focuses on traditional AI problems, such as methodological inference based mainly on logic and heuristic algorithms [34]. Specifically, in 1943, W. McCulloch and W. Pitts exploited mathematical and computer models of biological neurons. N. Wienner pioneered cybernetics in 1948 to study the control and communication in animals and machines. At the beginning of 1950, the architecture of modern computers was developed by J. Von Neumann and A. Turing. Moreover, Turing, in the same year, predicted the development of thinking machines. In 1956, J. McCarthy of Stanford University, M. Minsky of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and other scholars first created the concept of "artificial intelligence" at Dartmouth College in the United States. AI is defined as the ability of machines to think and learn in a manner similar to human beings. The following two decades are the golden age of AI. A successful case was the Eliza computer program developed by J. Weizenbaum in 1966, a natural language processing tool that can simulate a conversation with human beings. Another example was the General Problem Solver program developed by H. Simon et al., which can automatically solve certain types of problems, such as the Tower of Hanoi. Thanks to these inspiring success stories, AI has gained unprecedented attention. However, since the large amount of capital and workforce investment did not receive the expected results, AI ushered in its first winter from 1974 to 1980. In particular, due to Minsky's strong criticism of perceptrons, the connectionism (or neural networks) faction has been depressed for almost a decade.

(p3.2) 2) 1980-1990: With the emergence of the first batch of microprocessors in the late 1970s, AI once again attracted attention and was closely related to expert systems [35]. Expert systems refer to systems built for specific purposes in which intelligence is embedded in tools and knowledge about its operations is publicly available in the system specifications. Expert systems are widely applied in industrial fields. A wellknown case is that IBM's Deep Blue chess program defeated world champion G. Kasparov in 1997. Expert systems are most suitable for static problems but not for real-time dynamic issues. An expert system defines intelligence in a narrow sense as abstract reasoning, which is far from the ability to simulate the world's complexity. Moreover, its development and maintenance are complicated. In the 1990s, with the failure  of the development of Japanese intelligent (fifth-generation) computers and the decline of Cyc, an encyclopedia of human knowledge led by Stanford University, AI entered the cold winter again.

(p3.3) 3) Since 2010: Since 2010, AI has taken off again due to major public successes. For example, in 2011, IBM's Watson defeated two champions in Jeopardy and won the competition. In 2016, Google's AlphaGo vanquished world champion Lee Sedol, and her predecessor AlphaGo Zero. In 2020, AlphaFold successfully predicted the shape of proteins so that they can perform life's tasks. Different from the expert system paradigm, in today's wave of AI, the critical element is the learning ability of the system. Two of these technologies play an essential role, i.e., neural networks and deep learning [36]. The purpose of the neural network is to build a model similar to the structure of the human brain structure and calculation. Neural networks use rules based on "what-if" and teach the network through examples (supervised learning) to learn the nonlinear dependencies between variables. Deep learning originated from the work of G. Hinton in the 1980s. Its learning algorithms are based on nonlinear statistics, and the learning data is organized in multilayer neural networks. The neural network is the cornerstone of deep learning algorithms, and the "deep" in deep learning refers to the depth of the layers in a neural network. Today, neural networks and deep learning form the basis of most AI applications, such as image recognition algorithms used by Facebook, speech recognition algorithms for autonomous driving, etc. However, there is still plenty of challenges to be solved for deep learning [37]. For example, deep learning systems require massive amounts of data to obtain powerful learning performance. However, in practice, due to privacy and resource constraints, the system may not be able to obtain high-quality training data. Besides, integration with prior knowledge, interpretability and explainability are also critical issues in deep learning.
## (s7) B. Architecture of Internet of Intelligence
(p7.0) Consistent with the design concept of the existing architecture, we also adopt a layered structure to design the Internet of intelligence architecture. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the architecture consists of five different layers: physical resources layer, resources virtualization layer, information layer, intelligence layer, and application layer. The physical resources layer includes various underlying physical resources of the Internet of intelligence, such as communication resources, caching resources, computing resources and sensing resources. With the latest advances in technologies such as network virtualization, SDN, and so forth, network cloudification is an important development trend for future networks, which also provides multiple benefits for the implementation of the Internet of intelligence. Driven by this trend, the data transmission of the underlying infrastructure is no longer the focus but the utilization of resources [46]. Therefore, above the physical resources layer is the resources virtualization layer, which abstracts physical infrastructure resources into logical resources for flexible scheduling through various virtualization technologies. The information layer corresponds to the network layer in the existing architecture, which supports intelligent data processing to extract useful information and transfers it to the intelligence layer. The intelligence layer then merges the information and develops comprehensive intelligence using technologies such as AI, blockchain and big data analytics. The application layer implements dynamic deployment and management of applications through various standardized interfaces. The details of the architecture are summarized as follows.
## (s12) A. Physical Resources Layer
(p12.0) The physical resources layer is mainly composed of various infrastructure resources of the Internet of intelligence, including communication resources, caching resources, computing resources, and sensing resources. In the following, a brief overview of the current communication, caching, computing, and sensing technologies that support the Internet of intelligence is given.

(p12.1) 1) Communication: The communication and networking technology of the fifth-generation (5G) network is a key driving enabler of the Internet of intelligence, which can bring users with high service quality and experience such as enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), ultra-reliable and lowlatency communications (uRLLC), and massive machine type communications (mMTC) [51], [52]. One of the significant advancements in 5G comes from the ability to virtualize and redistribute network functions. Dynamic network slicing dramatically improves the flexibility, data rate, and delay performance of the network, thereby providing support for the emergence of various Internet of intelligence services [53]. SDN and NFV technologies can further increase the flexibility of slicing [54].
## (s13) Internet of intelligence Applications
(p13.0) The design of the three-dimensional (3D) communication infrastructure that combines terrestrial, aerial radio access points and mobile edge hosts enables 6G to provide cloud functions on demand [63]. This idea can provide cloud capabilities under controllable delay constraints by managing large aerial platforms. When the request changes greatly over time and space, this strategy is more cost-effective than current methods that rely on a fixed infrastructure.

(p13.1) The endless pursuit of higher data rates has led to the exploration of higher frequency bands and corresponding communication solutions in 6G. The terahertz (THz) frequency band (0.1-10 THz) has been promoted as a key technology to meet this requirement. Due to the huge unallocated bandwidth, it can support data transmission rates above 10 Gbps, and has better confidentiality and anti-interference capabilities. Consequently, the use of terahertz can effectively alleviate the increasingly tight spectrum resources and the current capacity limitations of communication systems [64].

(p13.2) The exchange of large amounts of data, information and intelligence in the Internet of intelligence poses considerable challenges to communication networks in terms of security, privacy, trust, and multitude. Innovative cryptographic technologies are used in 6G to achieve effective integration between AI and privacy. Moreover, decentralized authentication is another critical problem in the Internet of intelligence. Technologies like distributed ledgers in blockchain are expected to play an important role in distributed authentication [65].

(p13.3) 2) Caching: With the development of the Internet of intelligence, the amount of data exchanged within the network will increase significantly, and the backhaul may become a bottleneck. By storing the content of the Internet of intelligence at infrastructures such as access points and edge computing servers, caching techniques can achieve the reuse of cached content, thus effectively reducing the use of backhaul. The caching paradigm's requirements for content distribution and retrieval-based usage patterns will lead to challenges in network mobility, availability, and scalability. Toward this end, content delivery networks (CDNs) and peer-to-peer networks (P2P) have been proposed to endow the network with content distribution and retrieval capabilities by using existing storage and computing infrastructures [66].

(p13.4) In CDN, multiple service locations (service nodes) cache content in local storage. The load balancer optimally distributes user requests to these service nodes and provides users with a duplicate of the content cached in these service nodes. Generally, when assigning backup content source locations, requests will be redirected to the nearest service nodes through the domain name server of the CDN to improve the response speed [67]. The selection of service nodes to cache the content replication will be determined based on continuous monitoring of data traffic and load balancing in the network [68].

(p13.5) P2P networks eliminate the need to use central servers, allowing all users to communicate and share content. Each user can act as a cache node/server in P2P networks. In a P2P network, a single server (also called a seeder) distributes a large content to a large number of interested peers through the Internet. Instead of uploading the content to each peer, the seeder first divides the content into data packets called blocks and then intelligently distributes these blocks so that the participating peers can exchange them with each other [69]. P2P-based content distribution dramatically reduces the download time of each peer and reduces the pressure on a single server.

(p13.6) Besides, information-centric networking (ICN) can also effectively realize information distribution and content retrieval by running common protocols at the network layer [70]. According to the caching location, caching mechanisms of ICN can be classified into two categories: i) on-path caching: On-path caching involves the transmission path, so it is usually aggregated with the ICN forwarding mechanism; ii) Off-path caching: off-path caching only cares about content storage and delivery, and does not consider the delivery path.
## (s14) 4) Sensing:
(p14.0) In the Internet of intelligence era, a wide variety of sensing devices are deployed to provide meaningful sensing data records, such as environmental sensing devices, color sensing devices, flame sensing devices, motion sensing devices, cameras, etc. With the help of identification, positioning, detection, imaging and other technologies, these sensing devices can sense the environment in real-time, thus enabling pervasive sensing and providing intelligent decision support for the Internet of intelligence [84], [85].
## (s16) C. Information Layer
(p16.0) The information layer aims to process the massive raw data in the Internet of intelligence, analyze the valuable information, and transfer it to the intelligence layer. In this layer, the information itself is more valuable than its source since it describes intelligent events. ICN can build an information/content-centric information layer architecture based on the requirements of the Internet of intelligence. ICN mainly includes two types of packets: information packets and data packets [121]. Information packets are used to record the path of the user's request to facilitate the content publisher to return response data, and data packets are the content that the publisher responds to the user's request. Both the information packet and the data packet contain three tables: content store (CS), pending interest table (PIT), and forwarding information base (FIB) [122], [123]. CS is used as a temporary cache of content to meet future requests for stored content. PIT tracks unmet interests (more precisely, interests that have been reposted but have not yet received data). Finally, FIB maintains a record of each suitable interface that can access the name prefix. Fig. 11 shows the ICN model. Unlike the IP architecture, the main focus of ICN is to disseminate, find, and deliver information, instead of concentrating on the accessibility of end hosts and maintaining the conversation between them. Users in ICN can request content without knowing where the content is located. The communication follows the receiverdriven principle, and the data follows the reverse path [124]. Therefore, the connection establishment in ICN is determined by matching the requested content rather than the endpoint providing the content.
## (s19) Smart Contact
(p19.0) Fig. 14. An example of implementing blockchain in the Internet of intelligence system. data sensing, etc.) among the Internet of intelligence devices. Every transaction on the blockchain is verified according to one-way encrypted hash functions and stored in a distributed ledger [151]. Any Internet of intelligence participants cannot arbitrarily change this ledger, and they must reach an agreement on the current state and changes of the blockchain ledger [152]. Without the general agreement of blockchain peers, unauthorized changes to the blockchain ledger will be detected and blocked. In order to reach such an agreement, consensus mechanisms are adopted by the blockchain peers. Commonly used consensus mechanisms include proof of stake (PoS), proof of work (PoW), and directed acyclic graph (DAG), and so forth [153]- [155]. Relying on the consensus mechanism and the chain structure of the blockchain, the Internet of intelligence system can use the blockchain to store, access and protect historical transactions to exploit these data further. Fig. 14 presents the significant steps of operating a blockchain-enabled Internet of intelligence system: i) Intelligent devices generate transactions (or records of important information) and broadcast them to the network; ii) Intelligent devices verify the information and transactions received, and the network uses hash algorithms to reach an agreement of new block creator; iii) All intelligent devices insert the identical copy of the new block into their local ledgers; vi) Transactions stored in the blockchain ledger trigger smart contracts in intelligent devices; v) Intelligent devices execute the corresponding tasks.

(p19.1) The deployment of blockchain can enhance the Internet of intelligence in secure data management and system scalability. Besides, data transmission and processing efficiency in the Internet of intelligence can be greatly improved due to its distributed features. The recorded historical transaction data can also be used for further system decision-making, system status rollback and data audit of the Internet of intelligence system. However, there are some challenges in integrating blockchain into the Internet of intelligence system. The deployment of blockchain needs to consider the unique characteristics of the Internet of intelligence. Blockchain needs to offer differentiated data management services for various Internet of intelligence devices [156]. Accordingly, it is unrealistic to deploy the blockchain functionalities on each device. Besides, the blockchain and non-blockchain sub-networks should be strategically organized by the blockchain-enabled Internet of intelligence system. The architecture and deployment of blockchain as a ledger need to take into account the integration with other enabling technologies in the Internet of intelligence. For instance, edge/cloud computing resources can be leveraged to execute blockchain consensus tasks for resource-constrained devices in the Internet of intelligence through computation offloading. In such cases, some issues such as the availability of edge/cloud resources and the security of edge/cloud environments need to be considered.

(p19.2) 3) Big Data Analytics: Big data analytics can be effectively used to extract the knowledge behind the massive information, and is becoming a key contributor to enriching the intelligence of the Internet of intelligence. Big data usually refers to data sets that are larger than the commonly used software tools can capture, manage, and process in a tolerable time [157]. The defining characteristics of big data are the 5Vs, i.e., volume, velocity, variety, value and veracity. Specifically, volume refers to the vastness of data, velocity describes the speed and method of data arrival, variety is the diversity of data sources and types, value describes the low value density of the data, and veracity refers to quality of big data.

(p19.3) Specific technologies and analysis methods are needed to transform the information assets represented by big data into value [158]. Big data in the Internet of intelligence requires better knowledge representation, more profound domain knowledge, and more explicit analysis of system functions to support more informed decision-making [159], [160]. Traditional big data analytics technologies may not meet the requirements of the Internet of intelligence. Fig. 15 illustrates the big data analytics in the Internet of intelligence, and the main data processing steps are discussed in the following.
## (s21) Applications of the Internet of intelligence
(p21.0) Digital twin technology has three main characteristics: i) Full life cycle: the digital twin should run through the entire life cycle of the physical object, and can even go beyond its life cycle and persist in the digital space; ii) Real-time/quasireal-time: the physical object and the twin are not completely independent, and a completely real-time or quasi-real-time mapping relationship should be established; iii) Bidirectional: the data flow between entity object and twin is bidirectional. Based on the idea of digital twin, a series of successful applications in the Internet of intelligence have been demonstrated in areas such as smart cities, manufacturing, and electric power. It has implemented various services, including 3D visualization, intelligent manufacturing, life cycle management, state prediction, and so forth [168]- [170]. In general, through the digital twin technology, the Internet of intelligence can obtain massive data and build a powerful digital twin, thereby simulating the operation rules of entity objects and helping to put them into practice in the real world. Furthermore, the digital twin can also be integrated with other application layer technologies to better serve human beings.
## (s24) A. Smart Computer/Communication Network
(p24.0) As already introduced in Section V, computing and communication are key enabling technologies for the physical resources layer of the Internet of intelligence. As the Internet of intelligence flourishes, it will in turn support the development of 5G/6G and the future Internet, promoting intelligence in computer/communication networks. By distributing intelligence and federated learning at the edge of smart computer/communication networks, the Internet of intelligence can break through the limitations of users and data in a single network node or a single domain to improve the versatility and scalability of intelligence models [178]. Meanwhile, the paradigm of intelligence networking can also enable intelligence to be effectively stored, delivered, and shared, thus effectively alleviating information redundancy within the smart computer/communication network. In addition, the security and privacy issues of smart computer/communication networks can also be effectively enhanced through the application of blockchain technology, thus facilitating intelligence sharing, decentralized intelligence, and trust in decision-making [5]. The smart computer/communication network with the Internet of intelligence has the following characteristics.
## (s25) B. Smart Transportation/Autonomous Driving
(p25.0) Smart transportation integrates people, vehicles and road infrastructure into a large and rigorous system that manages urban traffic by collecting real-time vehicle and road information and controls vehicle driving mode through end-to-end  Fig. 17. Comparison of single-vehicle intelligence, centralized approach, distributed approach and BCL approach of autonomous driving. joint decision-making. The Internet of intelligence can accelerate the transition of smart transportation from connected vehicles to fully automated driving [194]. Autonomous driving is a technology that integrates AI, visual computing, radar, monitoring equipment, and positioning systems [195]. It not only relies on efficient and real-time data computing but also requires real-time access to road infrastructure and Internet data. Consequently, autonomous driving relies on the entire network to coordinate all vehicles and road infrastructure, rather than being limited by the computing and sensing capabilities of any single vehicle. In autonomous driving, simple information processing and forwarding mechanisms are no longer sufficient. The decision model is based on the environment and is constructed from a larger set of vehicular information. In such cases, the model may reduce the load and delay of autonomous driving since the key content is extracted from a larger set of input information. Therefore, the Internet of intelligence plays a vital role in autonomous driving to obtain intelligence by processing, analyzing and understanding the collected information. Moreover, intelligence sharing between vehicles can provide more accurate location awareness and higher communication efficiency. Following we provide several fields of autonomous driving systems that can be benefited from the Internet of intelligence.
## (s27) C. Smart Industry
(p27.0) Smart industry refers to the integration of intelligence into the manufacturing process, which is an application of the Internet of intelligence in the manufacturing field. The Internet of intelligence integrates many advanced communication and automation technologies in smart industry, such as AI, machine-to-machine (M2M) communication and big data analytics, in order to improve its intelligence and connectivity [208], [209]. For example, the Internet of intelligence can connect all industrial information and processes on the factory floor and forward them to the industrial cloud data center.
## (s28) D. Smart Cities
(p28.0) Smart cities have become a new paradigm, which can dynamically exploit resources in cities from ubiquitous devices to provide citizens with a wide range of services [224]. Smart cities involve various components, including ubiquitous intelligent devices, a variety of heterogeneous networks, and data centers with large-scale storage and powerful computing capabilities. Despite the potential vision of smart cities, how to provide intelligent, secure and efficient services for smart cities is still a challenging issue [225]. In such cases, by using attractive technologies such as AI, blockchain, digital twin and so forth, the Internet of intelligence can become a promising candidate for empowering smart city services. The Internet of intelligence allows intelligence transmission rather than information transmission in smart cities, thereby providing safer and more effective services and making smart cities smarter. Compared with traditional smart cities, smart cities with the Internet of intelligence has the following characteristics: 1) Efficient Data Analytics: Hundreds of millions of intelligent devices and sensors in every corner of cities can automatically collect and monitor various data in real-time, including traffic, weather, energy, water consumption, shopping information, air quality, and so on [226]. Through data aggregation, transmission, storage, organization, and analysis, what is happening and what may happen in the future can be understood. However, to cope with such a huge amount of data, the current data processing of smart cities is of poor efficiency. In such a city-scale deployment of smart services, data is generated at a high rate, and only a small part of this massive data is typically used to improve the lives of urban residents [227]. Compared with the traditional information networking smart cities, the data processing efficiency can be greatly improved in intelligence networking smart cities through intelligence sharing. Here, we take the way of dressing as an example. When people migrate from one city to another, new ways of dressing need to be established according to the local weather. For traditional smart cities, ML may be used to learn the new environment. Based on the collected weather and dressing data, a new way of dressing can be established through a lot of learning and training. Humans are different from machines. When migrating to a new city, they will quickly obtain the correct way of dressing through the experience shared by others rather than random attempts. Therefore, as illustrated in Fig. 19, in a smart city driven by the Internet of intelligence, it is no longer to spend a lot of time, material and financial resources to re-training, but to refer to the way of human intelligence and establish the correct way of dressing through the intelligence sharing between intelligent agents.

(p28.1) 2) Improved Quality of Experience: The Internet of intelligence plays a key role in improving the QoE of users in the digital and physical world of smart cities. Smart cities driven by the Internet of intelligence can connect and integrate physical environment and real-time events into a virtual system based on AI. Based on digital twins and various immersive technologies, the Internet of intelligence can integrate the physical world with the digital world, map the real subject to the virtual space, and gather all online and offline participants, so as to provide technical support for the construction of smart digital city scenes such as smart community, smart building and smart work area. The realization of such a smart city system faces many challenges in terms of computing, storage and communication [13]. The Internet of intelligence can make full use of intelligence to coordinate computing, caching, and transmission systems to achieve a ubiquitous immersive experience. The access network is built into the Internet of intelligence, and various big data analytics and intelligent algorithms will be deployed at the edge of the smart city network to provide users with a real-time and high-quality experience.

(p28.2) 3) Enhanced Security: Ubiquitous data services have brought security challenges such as privacy, integrity, and trust to smart cities [228]. The Internet of intelligence integrates blockchain to provide advanced security services, thus playing an important role in realizing secure and high-performance smart city scenarios. By constructing a decentralized security architecture, blockchain has the potential to provide authenticity, confidentiality, integrity and non-repudiation for smart cities [229]. Moreover, with its high security, the blockchain proves the high efficiency of the Internet of intelligence in controlling the operation of smart cities in a distributed security way.
## (s29) E. Smart Healthcare
(p29.0) Healthcare is another field that benefits from the Internet of intelligence. In terms of medical services, the Internet of intelligence can effectively integrate doctors, patients, hospitals and regulatory agencies to provide reliable customized and precise health management services. Medical and health services can continue to provide high-quality services throughout their life cycle. Under the premise of satisfying privacy protection, the Internet of intelligence can store, protect, retrieve, analyze and share intelligence from patients, doctors, medical equipment, etc. Medical resources can also be shared between doctors and hospitals. Doctors or medical equipment can check patients remotely, and all shared intelligence can be retrieved from local or remote servers. As a result, the boundaries between hospitals and hospitals, and between regions and regions can be effectively eliminated, realizing the sharing of medical resources. To sum up, in medical and health services enabled by the Internet of intelligence, the physical boundaries of hospitals and the geographic boundaries of cities can be eliminated, and the work efficiency of doctors and hospitals can be significantly improved, thereby helping to change health management, treatment and hospital management. Some application domains in smart healthcare that can benefit from the Internet of intelligence technologies are summarized as follows. 1) Doctor Recommendation: Adopting medical appointment platforms in hospitals may pose challenges for patients in choosing the right doctor online. Specifically, people may not be able to understand who is the right doctor to solve their health problems without professional knowledge and experience [230], [231]. A smarter doctor recommendation system can be constructed based on the Internet of intelligence to cope with such issues. Patients can share the evaluations of the doctors they make appointments on the doctor recommendation system. Driven by the Internet of intelligence, the smart doctor recommendation system converts information collected from patients, doctor appointment platforms, patient comments, etc. into intelligence, and presents it to patients to achieve efficient doctor recommendations.

(p29.1) 2) Personalized Diagnosis: Based on the collected medical data and personalized physiological indicators, the Internet of intelligence can use various ML and cognitive computing algorithms to establish personalized diagnosis plans, so as to provide patients with personalized treatments to prevent and treat diseases [232]. Taking diabetes as an example, through the collection, storage and analysis of personal diabetes information, the Internet of intelligence can extract the intelligence from the information and adjust treatment strategies in time according to changes in the patient's condition, as shown in Fig. 20. In addition, effective intelligence sharing among patients, relatives, friends, personal health consultants, and doctors is established through the Internet of intelligence to maintain sustainability in diagnosing and treating intelligencedriven diabetes [233]. Particularly, the Internet of intelligence mainly provides personalized diagnosis to patients in two ways. On the one hand, the Internet of intelligence enables patients to maintain a healthy lifestyle to prevent them from suffering from the disease at an early stage. On the other hand, the Internet of intelligence promotes out-of-hospital treatment, which can effectively reduce the cost of long-term hospitalization for patients.

(p29.2) 3) Epidemic Prediction: A significant challenge for the current epidemic monitoring and control system is the need for a large amount of pathological, radiographic, genetic and other types of epidemic-related information to be absorbed, stored and processed. In the event of a sudden outbreak of an epidemic, such as COVID-19, it is challenging to conduct many tests manually on each test object due to time constraints [234]. The Internet of intelligence will play an important role in such crises. In the Internet of intelligence, the hospital data center acts as an intelligent agent to train and establish a smart prediction system according to different types of physiological signals and hospital test signals, including chest X-ray images, computed tomography (CT) scanning images, protease sequences, eye surface images, cough sounds, body temperature, blood pressure, etc [235]. Then, hospital data centers can extract intelligence about COVID-19 from the trained model, preserve the intelligence and share it with other hospital data centers. In this way, the Internet of intelligence can effectively process massive epidemic data and predict realtime epidemic crises. Fig. 21 illustrates the process of the Internet of intelligence to combat COVID-19-like pandemics. Furthermore, the Internet of intelligence can help healthcare providers manage patients remotely. By allowing professionals outside the shock center to diagnose patients remotely, the tremendous pressure on front-line nursing staff can be reduced.
## (s30) F. Smart Education
(p30.0) Traditional education requires more resources in terms of educational space, schedule, and human resources, making it easy to fail even with minor changes in conditions. For example, under unusual circumstances, such as the COVID-19 outbreak or natural disasters, traditional education may stagnate [236]. Therefore, emerging alternatives are inevitable. Enabling smart education is one of the most valuable values of the Internet of intelligence relative to education. The Internet of intelligence integrates students, teachers, schools, training institutions, universities, libraries and all learning resources, and has the potential for a revolutionary transformation from traditional education to modern concepts. Furthermore, by adapting to each learner's unique characteristics and expectations, such as background, goals, personality and talents, it greatly enhances the quality of education in several aspects. Fig. 22 shows the baseline ecosystem of intelligenceempowered smart education. Several application domains of smart education can be benefited, as summarized below.

(p30.1) 1) Personalized Education: Personalized education aims to design a compelling knowledge acquisition trajectory to achieve learners' expected goals by matching their strengths and bypassing their weaknesses [237]. The Internet of intelligence introduces new perspectives and enhances personalized education by integrating advanced technologies such as AI and big data analytics technologies into smart education. Leveraging the advantages of online tools and personal tutoring, a new and more flexible type of learning technology has been created to adapt to students' learning and allocate resources on demand. As shown in Fig. 23, smart education supported by the Internet of intelligence consists of a great quantity of decision-making strategies, which map available data and personal characteristics to various personalized educational materials and suggestions in the form of intelligence.

(p30.2) 2) Lifelong Learning: There is a significant gap between the curriculum provided by schools and the job requirements. For example, soft skills such as communication and teamwork may be more important than some technical skills. Future research on lifelong learning may fill this gap. However, there are also some challenges that need to be resolved [238]: i) Large decision-making space that increases as the number of courses increases; ii) The situation of attending multiple courses at the same time brings excellent flexibility; iii) Any static course is not the best because the knowledge, experience and performance of students are constantly developing and evolving during the learning process; iv) The backgrounds, knowledge and goals of students vary greatly. The Internet of intelligence can effectively combine the student's school records with possible long-term tracking of future employment results and other data sources (such as course outlines and job postings). Then, from the above educational information set, intelligence can be extracted, stored, shared and recreated to identify key skills that extend from the classroom to the profession. Educators can use this intelligence to dynamically adjust school courses and activities, so as to make fuller preparations for students' future.
## (s31) G. Smart Grid/Energy
(p31.0) Smart grids are replacing traditional grids to provide consumers with reliable and efficient energy services. Smart grids introduced distributed energy generators to improve the utilization of distributed energy, introduced smart meters and two-way communication networks to realize customers and utility providers, and introduced electric vehicles to improve energy storage capacity and reduce carbon dioxide emissions. In this way, smart grids have demonstrated outstanding reliability, efficiency, security and interactivity [241], [242]. The Internet of intelligence can effectively help smart grids achieve better performance in predictive dispatch, fault diagnosis, and network attack detection. Load forecasting is an important achievement of smart grid system. It forecasts the shortterm, medium-term and long-term demand for electricity. By identifying better power distribution among consumers or customers (homes, industries, and corporate offices), power distribution companies will particularly benefit from smart grids. Currently, different power utilization data is gathered together. Deep learning can use these data for load forecasting so that that power distributors can predict the power demand of users for power distribution. However, the vast amount of data poses a challenge to the calculation time of deep learning. Through distributed intelligent sharing, the Internet of intelligence can effectively reduce ML training and computing time and improve feature selection. For example, in [243], the authors proposed a distributed intelligent learning model for smart grid, which uses Hilbert Schmidt independence criterion (HSIC) bottleneck technology to provide higher precision learning, thus reducing the calculation time and cost in the case of limited data. In addition, the Internet of intelligence can effectively manage its load scheduling while protecting the privacy of residents. Inspired by FL, the authors in [244] proposed a distributed deep reinforcement learning approach, in which the action network is located in the distributed household, and the critic network is located in the aggregator from the trusted third party. The security of smart grids under network attacks has aroused widespread concern. In order to improve the security of smart grids, the Internet of intelligence can detect DDoS attacks by analyzing the patterns of network data. Through the automatic analysis and detection method, it can respond in time, take preventive measures, greatly reduce the damage, and improve prediction accuracy.

(p31.1) In the energy field, the Internet of intelligence energy services can effectively complete the integration of power grids, thermal power grids and fuel grids, and realize the integration and complementarity of wind, solar and other energy sources. Energy Internet (also referred to as Smart grid 2.0) aims to become a smart grid with ultra-high voltage (UHV) grid as the backbone, variable clean energy transmission as the leader, and interconnection as the main feature [245]. Through the integration of the energy industry and intelligent technologies, comprehensive management of energy production, storage, transmission and consumption can be effectively realized [246]. The Internet of intelligence can transform the traditional centralized AI into large-scale distributed intelligence networking systems, realizing self-organization, selfevolution and real-time intelligence. Distributed AI provides more accurate online real-time data training models to achieve smarter scheduling and control. Deterministic low latency and flexible network resource configuration guarantee a more realtime system response. Meanwhile, the Internet of intelligence can effectively deal with energy inefficiency or energy failures in the energy Internet. For instance, by connecting the energy market and consumers, the Internet of intelligence can realize smart management of hybrid power energy consumption and production. When consumers have their own production capacity, the Internet of intelligence realizes two-way power transactions based on real-time electricity prices. That is, consumers sell their surplus electricity to the energy market at a satisfactory price during the peak period of electricity consumption, and they can buy the electricity in the market at a lower price during the low period of electricity consumption. This will not only reduce energy waste and promote the prosperity of the free energy trading market but also help promote clean energy to replace traditional energy.
## (s34) J. Lessons Learned: Summary and Insights
(p34.0) This section is dedicated to providing a vision of the Internet of intelligence and discusses in detail the huge market potential of the Internet of intelligence in various applications, thus laying the foundation for its application in a wide range of fields. systems. First, on-board collective learning will effectively improve the efficiency, accuracy, and security of ML. Second, human characteristics and motivation are taken into account in the Internet of intelligence-driven CAVs to achieve the ultimate consumer-centric experience. Third, the Internet of intelligence has the potential to help build a secure, trustworthy and decentralized CAV ecosystem, thereby enhancing the security of vehicular communication and the QoS of vehicular services. • The Internet of intelligence greatly enhances the intelligence and connectivity of industrial production, and can be widely used in many fields of the smart industry. First, Enhanced security [16], [75], [188]- [193] Smart transportation /autonomous driving
## (s39) B. Incentives for Intelligence Sharing
(p39.0) The Internet of intelligence can reduce costs, improve resource utilization, and build a new foundation for socioeconomic systems through trusted intelligence interaction. Tracing back to the successful development of the Internet, its most striking feature is spontaneity [11]. Platform providers such as Amazon, Google are moving towards better performance platforms. The demand for various software promotes the development of software providers such as Oracle and Microsoft. Transmission pipelines put forward demands on network operators. We can observe that incentive mechanisms and business models are the main drivers for the development of the Internet. Therefore, the Internet of intelligence must provide appropriate incentives to promote practical collective intelligence between networks.

(p39.1) We always expect all participants in the Internet of intelligence to voluntarily contribute and share their intelligence and use their training data stored locally. However, in realworld scenarios, participants will not be interested in participating in the training of collective intelligence unless they can obtain satisfactory rewards. For example, due to concerns about privacy leakage and consumption of physical resources, participants in the Internet of intelligence may be unwilling to participate in the sharing of intelligence. In addition, for Internet of intelligence services, participants can be service consumers and data generators at the same time. How to cleverly price and reasonably distribute income among the participants of the Internet of Intelligence ecosystem based on the amount of intelligence contributed is a problem worthy of research. Accordingly, we need to ponder why participators are willing to contribute and share their intelligence, which is the essential shift from information networking to intelligence networking. Stimulating the driving force behind intelligence sharing and exchanges is the inner motivation for the Internet of intelligence.

(p39.2) Currently, much work has been done on motivating participants to contribute their own resources [255]- [257], data [258]- [260], information [261], [262], etc. Game theory [255], auction theory [256], contract theory [257] and reputation mechanism [262] are all commonly used optimization methods. Blockchain has also been widely adopted to guarantee reliable and trustworthy incentives [260], [263], [264]. The incentive mechanism design for the Internet of Intelligence has not been well studied. Intelligence is a further abstraction of information and has different characteristics. Therefore, on the basis of referring to the existing schemes, it is still challenging to build an efficient and secure incentive system with in-depth consideration of the modeling and quantification of intelligence.
## (s40) C. Intelligence Discovery
(p40.0) In the Internet of intelligence, some operations such as distributed intelligence, intelligence sharing, etc., can only be carried out on the premise of understanding the distributed information of intelligence. For instance, the participants in the Internet of intelligence may not know which services are available in the network they are connected to. Besides, there are many participants in the Internet of intelligence, and they may not know with which participants they should be networked or share intelligence with. Therefore, intelligence discovery is another challenge in the Internet of intelligence. Since intelligent entities are distributed in different geographic locations of the Internet of intelligence, effective intelligence discovery mechanisms are of great significance for identifying and locating intelligence.

(p40.1) What exactly needs to be discovered in the Internet of intelligence? The participants need to discover the following information: i) the availability of the intelligence and ii) the naming conventions used for invoking intelligence. The first piece of information enables participants to discover the intelligence that provides the functionality they need along with intelligence-related metadata (e.g., intelligence description, version, complexity). The second one defines how participants can invoke the intelligence, for example, what are the input parameters of the intelligence, and what are the components required to form the name of the intelligence.

(p40.2) The publish-subscribe mechanism derived from ICN may be able to help the implementation of intelligence discovery [265]. In this mechanism, intelligence publishers are only responsible for publishing intelligence, and intelligence subscribers can subscribe to intelligence published by multiple publishers without knowing the valid sources of the intelligence. Such a mode effectively eliminates dependencies among participants, thereby enhancing the scalability of the network and enabling the communication infrastructure to adapt well to asynchronous and distributed environments [266]. Currently, publish-subscribe mechanisms have been widely used in resource discovery [267]- [269] and service discovery [270], [271]. However, existing solutions are not suitable for publishing/subscribing based on intelligence changes in the Internet of intelligence. It is challenging to improve and extend the existing solutions to enable intelligence discovery in the Internet of intelligence.
## (s44) G. Security and Privacy
(p44.0) Due to security and privacy issues, users may have concerns when sharing intelligence. Therefore, security and privacy are critical issues in the Internet of intelligence. These issues are more essential in the Internet of intelligence compared to existing networking paradigms, because an action is usually involved intelligence and incorrect actions may cause more damage than incorrect information.

(p44.1) A large amount of data and model training are involved in the Internet of intelligence. The data collected from various sensors and smart devices in the Internet of intelligence are trained to build a model to take actions for the applications involved, such as user selection, resource allocation, and behavior prediction. Attackers can inject false data or countersample input, thereby making the learning of the Internet of intelligence invalid. They can also manipulate the collected data, distort the model and change the output [289]. For example, an attacker can tamper with the learning environment to incorrectly perceive the input information. Besides, by changing hardware settings or reconfiguring system learning parameters, an attacker can manipulate the implementation hardware [85]. In these cases, ensuring the high security of the Internet of intelligence system is of great importance.

(p44.2) Privacy is another issue of increasing concern for Internet of intelligence systems. The distributed intelligence and intelligence sharing of the Internet of intelligence may cause serious privacy leakage of participants, making them unwilling to share their intelligence with others. Besides, in the context of big data, ubiquitous users and organizations can easily access large data sets and computing resources (such as GPU), which brings severe privacy issues to the Internet of intelligence, such as data loss or parameter tampering [290]. Ensuring a high degree of privacy protection without affecting training performance is critical to be considered in the Internet of intelligence.

(p44.3) In this paper, we mentioned that blockchain could be adopted to cope with these issues. Much work has already been done using blockchain to enhance security and privacy in the ML process. In [291], Rathore et al. develop an ML and blockchain-driven security framework for 5G-enabled smart IoT to provide intelligent data and secure operations. Liu et al. in [292] study a blockchain-enabled secure data sharing framework in MEC systems and propose an adaptive privacy protection mechanism based on this framework to protect the identity privacy of users in data sharing. Chen et al. in [293] propose a blockchain-based decentralized privacy-preserving deep learning model for vehicle-based self-organizing networks (VANETs) to guarantee the privacy and data security during network transmission and data analysis. However, since blockchain was initially developed for cryptocurrency, some critical issues, including interoperability, scalability, and other performance indicators, need to be discussed to apply it to the Internet of intelligence.
