# processes Digital Twins for Wind Energy Conversion Systems: A Literature Review of Potential Modelling Techniques Focused on Model Fidelity and Computational Load

CorpusID: 245061261 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/007d8fb304b665ef5a272dd0a4bb0e0c4bcf311c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/007d8fb304b665ef5a272dd0a4bb0e0c4bcf311c)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s1) Definition of a Digital Twin
(p1.0) Many different definitions of a digital twin can be found in the literature. In [21,22,27], a distinction was made between a digital model, a digital shadow and a digital twin. A digital model is defined as a virtual representation of a physical system able to accurately represent a predefined set of behaviours of its physical counterpart. There is no automated exchange of information between the physical system and its digital model, i.e., any information is transferred manually.
## (s2) Modelling Techniques for Direct-Drive Wind Turbine Components
(p2.0) The virtual replica is the heart of the digital twin. It can be constructed in a modular manner by interlinking models of different components, considering the compatibility with each others inputs and outputs regarding the data type and sampling rate [32]. This section gives an overview of these components, specifically for a modern direct-drive PMSGbased wind turbine, and of the recent literature describing different relevant modelling techniques.

(p2.1) Two important properties of these models are discussed qualitatively, i.e., their fidelity and their computational load. The fidelity of the model signifies its realism, accuracy and detail. For example, a finite element model of a turbine blade or electrical machine has a high fidelity. However, a model with a high fidelity often comes with a high computational load as well. The literature overview given in this section aims to assist the reader with selecting the proper subcomponent models based on a compromise between fidelity and computational load, depending on the predefined set of required behaviours and time scales determined by the specific use case of the digital twin.

(p2.2) As it is not feasible to give an overview of all possible wind turbine component models in existence, the literature study presented hereafter is non-exhaustive. Rather, the study has the intention to provide a balanced and up-to-date overview of the state-of-the-art modelling techniques in recent scientific literature to assist the reader in the construction of a digital twin. Figure 2 gives a schematic overview of the modern PMSG-based wind turbine with its essential components. The turbine blades are connected to the hub in the nacelle. Pitch systems are integrated in the hub to adjust the blade's pitch angles. The main shaft connects the hub to the PMSG. The electrical output of the PMSG is connected to the converter to feed power into the grid. A transformer (not depicted here) is usually present at the grid side to convert the voltage to medium or high voltage levels for the distribution or transmission grid, respectively. Finally, a yaw system between the nacelle and the tower regulates the turbine's angle with respect to the wind direction. In what follows, the depicted components will be discussed in more detail. 
## (s5) Permanent Magnet Synchronous Generator
(p5.0) The PMSG converts the mechanical power on its shaft into electrical power by inducing a back-emf in the stator windings with the rotating magnetic field from the permanent magnets. Figure 5 depicts the equivalent scheme of a PMSG in the rotating reference frame with a quadrature (q) and direct (d) axis. It includes two electrical degrees of freedom, each with first order dynamics, i.e., the transfer functions of voltage to current are of the first order.

(p5.1) The q and d voltages and currents at the stator winding are depicted, respectively, as v q , v d , i q and i d . Both the q and d axes schemes contain a stator resistance R s , respective inductances L q and L d and armature reaction voltages. The q axis additionally contains the back-emf voltage induced in the stator winding by the permanent magnet flux Ψ PM . Both the armature reaction and permanent magnet back-emf are proportional to the rotor speed Ω and pole pair number N p . The torque T g of the PMSG can be related to the stator currents by:

(p5.2) The first term represents the main torque component realized by the interaction between the permanent magnet flux and quadrature current. The second term is the reluctance torque component resulting from the interaction between the direct and quadrature axis currents. As the rectifier stage of the power electronic converter is usually equipped with Field Oriented Control (FOC), the direct axis current is regulated to zero, and the torque becomes directly proportional to i q .

(p5.3) The equivalent model of Figure 5 is commonly used to study the electrical dynamics of the PMSG and to validate control techniques [105][106][107][108]. Given its limited computational complexity, this equivalent scheme is suitable to serve as a digital model of the PMSG. Regarding its fidelity, it includes the armature reaction effect, reluctance effect and copper losses.

(p5.4) However, several other effects are not included, such as magnetic saturation, iron losses, skin and proximity effects, slotting/cogging or thermal aspects. A FEM model can include these effects, e.g., the cogging torque is simulated and minimized by magnet skewing in [109], airflow and thermal performance are analysed in [110], and magnetic saturation is analysed by an FEM model in [111]. However, FEM drastically increases the computational load of the model. Luckily, efficient models can also be deduced from FEM-generated data by magnetic equivalent circuits (MEC) [112][113][114].

(p5.5) Similarly, lumped parameter thermal network models of electrical machines can be used for virtually sensing internal temperatures [115]. Several analytical models are available to extend the rotating reference frame model and increase its fidelity, without the computational burden of FEM. Iron losses can be included in the equivalent scheme of Figure 5 by means of an additional speed-dependent iron loss resistance [116][117][118], thus, modelling both the hysteresis and eddy current losses.

(p5.6) Magnetic saturation can be included by means of current-dependent inductances and permanent magnet flux [113]. Cogging torque, i.e., torque ripple caused by slotting effects wanting to align the rotor magnets with stator slots, can be included by adding an empirical position-dependent torque term to (5), as shown in [119,120]. In [121], a model was presented taking the skin effect into account. Recently, some articles were published on digital twins of electrical machines.
## (s6) Power Electronic Converter
(p6.0) Modern PMSG-based wind turbines use a power electronic converter rated for the full power of the turbine. Figure 6 (top) shows the typical topology of the back-to-back AC/DC/AC converter commonly used for large wind turbines. Due to the variable rotor speed, the generator's output voltage has a varying frequency and amplitude. The active AC/DC rectifier converts this variable AC to the common DC-link.

(p6.1) A brake chopper is often present on the DC link to dissipate power in a dump load R for overvoltage protection [125]. The DC/AC inverter injects active power into the grid, usually with a unity power factor. A transformer can be present at the converter's output to boost the voltage up to the level of the distribution or transmission grid. The rectifier controls the PMSG's torque by means of the FOC.

(p6.2) The setpoint of this torque control is determined by a higher level control loop. For wind speeds below the rating, this control loop maximizes the turbine's power coefficient by means of Maximum Power Point Tracking (MPPT). For wind speeds above the rating, the torque is limited to its rated value. In wind turbine converters with a power rating of several MW, the most commonly used switch types are the Integrated Gate-Commutated Thyristor (IGCT) and the Insulated-Gate Bipolar Transistor (IGBT) [126]. Their switching frequency ranges from a few 100 Hz for IGCTs to several kHz for IGBTs. Equivalent simulation models of switches and converters, e.g., SPICE models, are available in the literature to model their behaviour up to the switching level transients.
## (s8) Virtual Replica and Digital Twin of a Direct Drive Wind Turbine
(p8.0) The previous section presented a review of recent literature on modelling techniques for the turbine aerodynamics, shaft and bearing mechanics, the PMSG, the converter and the pitch and yaw systems. For every component, the discussed modelling techniques range from simplified lumped parameter models with a minimal computational load to high fidelity numerical models based on finite element methods. From these models, a selection can be made to construct a virtual replica.

(p8.1) This selection depends on the eventual use case and required behaviours of the digital twin in which the virtual replica is embedded. In this section, first the high-level structure of a digital twin of a direct-drive wind turbine is presented. Then, the literature study presented in Section 3 is summarized graphically to aid the reader in the model selection process for the construction of the virtual replica. Finally, an example of a virtual replica with the minimum computational load is presented based on this literature study. The model selection process itself is use-case specific and, thus, out of scope for this review article. Nevertheless, techniques are available to aid in this selection process, e.g., 'dynamic substructuring' [159]. Figure 7 schematically depicts the proposed digital twin architecture of a wind energy conversion system. The physical system (left) is connected to its virtual replica (right) by a bidirectional stream of information. At the bottom, sensor signals from the SCADA system are communicated from the physical to the virtual system. These signals feed data to the subcomponent models in the virtual replica so that the physical system's behaviour is accurately represented.
## (s13) Extensions
(p13.0) -Iron losses [116][117][118] -Magnetic saturation [113] -Cogging torque [119,120] -Skin effects [121] Averaged converter model [133,134], cfr. Figure 6 Extensions Switching and conduction losses [135,136] Rate limiter and saturation [144][145][146] 
