# The effectiveness of naltrexone combined with current smoking cessation medication to attenuate post smoking cessation weight gain: a literature review

CorpusID: 24618670 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/420711148e3f705abdabd18bd6b120291a3a22d9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/420711148e3f705abdabd18bd6b120291a3a22d9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Use of naltrexone in obese patients
(p6.0) Wilcox et al., (2010) [10], tested the use of a naltrexone with bupropion combination and behavioural therapies in already overweight and obese smokers. On completion of the study it was found there was no significant change in the weight measurements of participants when compared with their baseline measures. Existing evidence supports the perception that overweight and obese individuals may have low conscious control over their eating habits and are also prone to display hedonic eating behaviour [11,19,34,35]. The study results support the hypothesis that naltrexone may curb this behaviour leading to reduced weight gain post smoking cessation [10]. However, there was no control group in this study so there is no evidence to prove the effects were not produced by the bupropion or behavioural therapy. In fact, efficacy studies indicate that specialised behavioural therapy has been successful in suppressing weight gain over the short term during smoking cessation [22]. Whilst King et al., (2012) [32] also included individuals in their research that were classed as overweight and obese the results were not stratified by body mass index. It is hard to determine if the positive results were due to the inclusion of obese and overweight participants. However, if compared with the Toll et al., (2010) [9], study which only included highly weight concerned smokers who fitted in the normal weight category and returned negative results, assumptions may be made that suggest the results could have been positive due to the inclusion of overweight and obese participants who were more likely to exhibit hedonic eating behaviour. There is some suggestion that naltrexone may be effective in overweight or obese individuals to attenuate post cessation weight gain. Even though the aim of this review is to assess the effectiveness of naltrexone regarding weight gain it is also important to consider the effect of naltrexone on abstinence rates. It would be counterproductive to offer a weight reduction pharmacotherapy that negatively affects abstinence rates.
