# A REVIEW ON NICOTINE FOR HEALTH: INSIGHT FOR "PRO-HEALTH" NICOTINE USAGE

CorpusID: 243675028 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/23f62f2914cc2f3ce2272a799e70095ff0d6ee2d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/23f62f2914cc2f3ce2272a799e70095ff0d6ee2d)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Nicotine is an alkaloid-based plant famous for being an active ingredient of cigarette smoke. It is additive and has been related to several diseases but, as a coin nicotine, has another side that has been understudied. Recent research results reveal the health benefits of nicotine [1]; hence, it deserves a throughout review for better understanding to bring insight for pro-health nicotine usage.
## (s2) History of tobacco use for health
(p2.0) Tobacco has been used since the Mayan empire at first for religious purposes, along with other mixture of herbs, considered sacred and have medicinal use [37,38]. The odor of fresh green leaves was used to relieve persistent headaches by Catherine de' Medici and her son Francis II, hence tobacco leaves was called the Queen's herb [39].

(p2.1) The powdered leaves used to treat cough and cold and as toothpaste, the leaves can be applied topically to heal wounds and burns; believed to improve respiratory diseases and in desperate cases, until it was regarded as penicillin of the seventeenth century [38,40,41]. The dispute of tobacco usage also occurs among physicians, tough no one questions tobacco's effectiveness to ward of outbreak of plaque and outbreak, kills germs and ward of diseases, all concurs that it also brings constitutional effects [40].
## (s4) Cognition
(p4.0) Nicotine is proven to enhance parietal cortex associated with attention for both smokers and non-smokers. Neural nicotine receptors are known has major role in cognitive function in rodents and also primates including rhesus monkeys and humans. Past studies showed that treatment of nicotine and nicotinic agonist, both acute and chronic treatment, could improve the working memory of rats while the antagonist such as mecamylamine showed the opposite result. Working memory function involves nicotinic receptor α4β2 and α7 nicotinic receptors in the ventral hippocampus [47].

(p4.1) Nicotinic receptors of α4β2 and α7 have been shown to be involved in working of memory function and have a role in the release of acetylcholine. The ventral hippocampus and amygdala are known to have key role for nicotinic involvement in memory activity. The nicotinic antagonist methyllycaconitine (MLA) and dihydro-βerythrodine (DHβE) can block the α7 and α4β2 nicotinic receptors, respectively in basolateral amygdala and the ventral hippocampus. Those blocking could impair the memory function in brain [47,48].

(p4.2) Normally, the high doses of MLA and DHβE could also increasing the latencies and caused preconvulsant responses such as piloerection, head bobbing, tremor, and teeth chattering which may give an effect for memory. However, previous research proved that MLA and DHβE could harm the memory withoutany preconvulsant effects showed up and the latencies remaining steady. In addition, only DHβE was known to give an effect on the reference memory in ventral hippocampus [47][48][49].

(p4.3) The antagonist of MLA and DHβE have displayed that the receptor α4β2 and α7 are really important in memory function in the ventral hippocampus and basolateral amygdala of mammals. Moreover, more investigation also shown that the cortical area is also prominent for cognitive functions. Unfortunately, the significant result of research regarding the memory α4β2 and α7 in the dorsal hippocampus still need improvement [47,48,50].

(p4.4) The loss of nicotinic receptor has been demonstrated in Alzheimer disease (AD) patients and related to the hallmark plaques and tangles and cognitive impairment. One of the best therapeutic effect on nicotine that has been established is cognitive improvement. In previous clinical studies, memory improvement spotted in AD subjects with IV nicotine. Others discover that the administration of nicotine by transdermal patch or subcutaneous injection could enhance the cognitive function in AD [51].

(p4.5) Study conducted by Newhouse et al. [51] showed that the administered of transdermal nicotine to nonsmoking subjects with mild cognitive impairment over 6 mo will not cause any harm. In fact, the result shown the improvement in primary and secondary cognitive measures of memory, mental processing, and attention, but not in rank of clinician-rated global impression. Transdermal administration method may have a contribution to increase tolerability, especially minimize the rate of gastrointestinal side effects.

(p4.6) Those researches are related with another research that reveal the importance of nicotinic receptors in dorsal hippocampus in working memory function. Some previous studies, assess the function of nicotinic receptors in the dorsal hippocampus as a whole is connected in reference and working memory. The nicotinic α7 and α4β2 receptors give a mutual attenuation effects on part of memory in the dorsal hippocampus, that effects could be seen in basolateral amygdala. That event indicates the importance of interaction between the two receptors in memory function [47,52].

(p4.7) The stimulation of nicotinic receptors is recognized have an effect in the efflux of downstream neurotransmitters that could be as an inhibitory, such as GABA, or excitatory such as glutamate. The blockade of the two receptors may interrupt the fragile balance of transmitter release which is affecting the downstream of neural activity. The infusion of the correct ratio antagonist, could make the blockade of both subtypes, it would bring back the neural activity to its native level. In spite of the fact that each nicotinic antagonist, MLA and DHβE, itself was considered to impair the working memory function, they were found to attenuate each other's effects. Thus, at the same time, the entry of antagonist with the correct ratio could produce an attenuated effect [47,52].

(p4.8) Some of data showed that administrated of nicotine since adolescent demonstrate more major impairment of working memory and weaken the verbal memory during periods when they decided to stop, comparing it to non-smokers. Additionally, animal studies disclose that nicotine administration during young age can induce everlasting changes in brain region, such as nucleus accumbens, amygdala, and prefrontal cortex. Those changes also influence the reward-related manifestation and drug sensitivity in adulthood. However, last human and preclinical models' studies have demonstrated that nicotine has the ability to improve the function of working memory, episodic memory, attention, and fine motor function. It showed cognitive-enhancing effects [50,53].

(p4.9) Although the information about the usage of nicotine on teenagers can trigger long-lasting changes in neural signaling and emotional changes, and cognitive in juvenile, is important to be spread. However, a diversity of novel ligands for nicotinic receptors are being developed by many researches for cognitive impairment treatment, for example subject with Alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The cognitive-enhancing effects by nicotine might be critical factor in vulnerability to tobacco use disorder, particularly in someone with cognitive deficits [50,53].

(p4.10) The α7 subunit has possibility to modulate a sensory filtering function corresponding with schizophrenia and the β2 subunit may to mediate working memory, attention, and behavioral flexibility function. Furthermore, the neurotransmitter that contribute to nicotine's cognitive effects are DA, GABA, norepinephrine, acetylcholine, glutamate, and serotonin. It is a required to enrich the knowledge of the role of receptor activation facing to desensitization and the circuit basis of the way nicotinic receptors dealings with related neural system in cognitive function [50,52].

(p4.11) Further researches about nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChr) agonist are interesting to be done because nicotine has high possibility to use as a novel therapeutic. Moreover, research about determination of which type from nicotine agonist that could improve the memory and the interaction of nicotinic receptor system with the wider neural circuits as fundamental studies of cognitive function and the action from nicotinic receptors in specific brain areas. The agonist of nAChR also assume to have benefits as unique therapeutic for late life depression (LLD). LLD or major depressive disorder usually happen in 60 y old person or more [52,54].

(p4.12) Both previous preclinical and clinical studies are in agreement that nicotine and other nAChr agonist can boost the mood, depressive behavior, and cognitive performance. The nAChr agonist may also enhance the ability of emotional regulation, improve cognitive deficits, andreduce depressive symptoms that are usually found in LLD patients. Past clinical trial also proved that nicotine gives effects on cognition, network dynamics, and mood in someone with LLD [54].
## (s6) Inflammation
(p6.0) Inflammation process is a self-defense mechanism from noxious stimuli, but prolonged inflammation proven to be hazardous. One anti-inflammation pathway is cholinergic anti-inflammation pathway (CAP). Acetylcholine produced by T lymphocyte binds with α-7 nAChRs which is ubiquitous in the body and has many functions, including for memory and learning. In central nervous system, astrocytes produce both pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, and IL-1β, and also anti-inflammatory cytokines namely TGF β, which will slows microglia in inflammation process [67]. Astrocytes cells in central nervous system produces IL-1 and IL-6,
