# Mental Pain Surrounding Suicidal Behaviour: A Review of What Has Been Described and Clinical Recommendations for Help

CorpusID: 246289257 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/11f5ad859b0f3991883a9fe319e8a2f80e2d70e6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/11f5ad859b0f3991883a9fe319e8a2f80e2d70e6)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) For decades, suicide and its associated behaviours (SB) have been considered as priority problems in the health policies of many countries and the world (78). Despite this, we do not have adequate strategies to significantly reduce its incidence. This is explained by the complex nature of this behaviour, in which sociocultural, familial, biological, and psychological aspects concur. This is what many studies conducted in different countries over several decades consistently teach (1).
## (s5) DISCUSSION
(p5.0) The purpose of this paper is to contribute to the accuracy of the understanding of MP in suicide risk. Through a qualitative review of content, we have found variables which can be grouped corresponding to clinical criteria, differentiating between transitory variables associated with a psychological state in suicidal MP, including diagnostic variables on the one hand and subjective experience variables on the other.

(p5.1) In addition, we found relatively stable personality traits in suicidal MP. Figure 3 shows the central elements of the evaluation of a patient who might be suffering from MP. Each of the factors is a reminder of the facts that are paramount in this task. We have collected the results of a number of studies to highlight those aspects that are most frequently observed in a clinical population. These facts can be assessed in the first interview and at different stages of the treatment after a suicide attempt. Our recommendations are based on the identification of mental pain as the event closest to suicidal action. One of the limitations of our study on SB is that the studies selected are those that include MP, which leaves out many very valuable papers conducted from different perspectives. We understand that the problem of suicide is extraordinarily complex, and therefore, when evaluating the experience of mental pain, we can recognise the manifestation of a diversity of facts in a similar state.

(p5.2) The main task for clinicians is to identify what contributes to encouraging or attenuating psychic pain in the subject's relationships with him/herself and with others. To reduce psychic pain, interventions must be directed at those factors that determine MP in everyone. The treatment of axis I disorders (DSM-V) is a priority and has been sufficiently described for each of the pathologies by means of various clinical guidelines and systematic reviews. We will review other state variables, such as hopelessness, unbearable suffering, loneliness, and psychological pain, when describing clinical strategies and the proper psychotherapeutic interventions.

(p5.3) The different groups of factors associated with suicidenamely personality and individual differences, cognitive factors, social factors, and adverse life events (1)-play roles in the different stages of this behaviour. According to the integrated motivational-volitional model proposed by O'Connor, SB has a pre-motivational phase that includes background factors and triggering events: diathesis, environment, and life events; a motivational phase, in which ideation and intention build up; and a volitional phase, where the behaviour is enacted. MP takes place in the motivational phase, in which diverse psychological factors might lead a subject to experience a feeling of humiliation and defeat, followed by a perception of entrapment that might lead him/her to conceive of SB as the only way to alleviate mental pain. It is in the motivational phase where the presence or absence of factors might show a risk or a protective role. It is within that phase-which has a limited time frame-that those interventions might play a critical role in helping someone to avoid SB. The myriad of possible factors that might be relevant to someone's actions obliges us to select the most relevant ones leading to MP in each individual case. There doesn't seem to be a better way to approach this clinical plight. To prevent the subject from acting, we must single out the sources of individual psychological distress, addressing individual needs to foster preventive strategies (32).
## (s7) Emotional Dysregulation and Impairment in Recognising and Communicating Emotions
(p7.0) Alexithymia, defined as the inability to identify or express emotions (36), has been associated with SB. A recent systematic review and meta-analysis of the association between alexithymia and SB "found a large size effect (0.54) in the meta-correlation of alexithymia and suicide ideation, and a medium effect size (0.25) in the meta-correlation between alexithymia and SB" (37). Similarly, our review of the most frequent terms used in discussing mental pain highlights alexithymia as a trait that might interfere with the capacity to recognise the sources of mental pain. In such cases, when the pain becomes unbearable, the confusion and emotional overflow can be understood as a call for help and support (38,39).

(p7.1) In the previous stages of treatment, it is necessary to do the task of naming the emotions that are usually expressed as physical sensations and emotional storms. This exercise of cognitive structuring allows the increase of emotional awareness, with the development of progressively more sophisticated abilities to differentiate and integrate the contents of emotional activity" (40).
## (s8) Troubled Interpersonal Relationships
(p8.0) Suicide attempters often have repeatedly experienced frustrated psychic needs in interpersonal interactions, with significantly increased victimisation in their historical contexts, including recurrent situations of physical and psychological abuse. These adverse events often interfere with the development of stable and harmonious interpersonal bonds, as the patients' processes of interpersonal trust, openness, and bonding in relationships have been traumatised (42). Depressive symptoms, such as psychache, thwarted belongingness, and perceived burdensomeness, are also related to suicidality through intrapersonal and interpersonal variables (43). Clinical work can be guided by stimulating the patient's abilities to understand the context of the emotions arising in relationships (both one's own and those of others); to direct his/her attention to what is relevant for problem-solving; to adopt different points of view and multiple perspectives on issues; to discriminate the importance of events; to make his/her expectations flexible; and to concede and ask for changes to find agreed solutions (44). This ability can be obtained through joint reflection on different points of view and expectations. In addition, what the patient expects to happen and reflections on what he/she imagines others expect allow for greater flexibility in those particularly rigid views the subject may have about himself and others.
## (s9) Impulsivity in Distorted Reasoning
(p9.0) Impulsivity has always been considered to play a major role in SB. However, it is difficult to determine its actual role in SB. A particularly complex task is to figure out its place within the sequence of events preceding suicide. For several authors, impulsivity is critical to explaining these actions. According to a recent study based on the Interpersonal Theory of suicide, "trait impulsivity is related to suicidal behaviour and the fluctuation of suicidal ideation, but not to suicidal ideation itself. Thus, trait impulsivity seems to act as a distal risk factor via capability for suicide and it seems to play a role for the dynamics of suicidal ideation" (45). However, impulsivity can manifest itself in different stages of behaviours leading to suicide, from the moment in which the agent evaluates his or her difficulties and considers the options to solve them until the moment in which he or she decides to act. As we said before, SB is the result of a behaviour marked by ambivalence in which an individual conceives of actions without knowing the true consequences they would have for him/herself as well as for others. Not having the possibility of assessing the consequences of one action on another, the agent, motivated by the need to end his/her anguish and overwhelmed by the hopelessness of not finding a way out of his/her difficulties, will try to end his/her life. The action will occur under the motivational pre-eminence of one or several factors. A decision with irreversible consequences supported by a narrow view of the circumstances and encouraged by a state of emotional restraint almost always originates in an impulsive thought or behaviour. SB can be understood as acts that occurin the presence of poor decision-making and impulsivity-when someone experiences unbearable suffering. This emotional state has been recognised as a condition that might stimulate someone to take their own life as a solution to the misery they are experiencing (46,47).

(p9.1) In the clinical evaluation of patients at risk of SB, clinicians should take into consideration the patient's overall situation, avoiding a judgement based solely on a single aspect of it (Figure 4). Impulsivity might be a trait in someone's personal history, and yet, they may not have a history of SB. On the other hand, some patients may not have the trait of impulsivity in their personal history, but they might be suffering from some clinical conditions, such as a mixed bipolar state or psychosis, which by themselves increase the risk of decisions based on the patient's acute emotional status at a particular moment. Highly lethal SB has been found in the presence of an overwhelming sense of entrapment with cognitive and emotional dysregulation (6). High-lethality suicide attempters, independent of depressive symptoms, may present executive function impairments, such as rigidity-shift setting and negative cognitive biases (48).

(p9.2) Suicidal individuals are more likely to inaccurately interpret stressors, use emotion-focused coping, and adopt an avoidant approach. In such cases, we must prioritise the application of techniques such as cognitive remediation and problemsolving (49,50). Problem-solving efforts are multifaceted (social, psychological) and encompass a wide range of cognitive and emotional functions, such as autonomy, mastery of the environment, and development of a meaningful purpose in life (51).
