# Auricular avulsion injuries: Literature review and management algorithm

CorpusID: 248116357 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad9b5c5a4c026ca5875c92d0e4379c7eef752d33](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad9b5c5a4c026ca5875c92d0e4379c7eef752d33)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) T he prominent and exposed position of the ear increases its vulnerability to traumatic injuries. Traumatic ear avulsion (TEA) is relatively an infrequent event that may have tremendous psychological long-term consequences from the disfiguring deformity it entails. Reconstruction of traumatically amputated ear continues to be a major surgical challenge because of the complex shape, unique anatomical structure of the ear, and the small size of vessels responsible for its perfusion. [1,2] Selection of the surgical procedure to reconstruct the traumatic avulsed ear is driven by several factors including the injury mechanism and extent, the patient's comorbidity, and the surgeon's experience. [3] The main goal is to achieve the best cosmetic result without destroying the periauricular area to allow future ear reconstruction in case of repair failure. Numerous repair techniques have been applied with variable success rates.

(p0.1) Microsurgical repair should be considered when suitable vessels for anastomosis are revealed on the initial examination. However, despite its superior esthetic outcome, microsurgical replantation is not possible in many hospitals, especially in middle-and low-income countries. The technical complexity of microvascular plantations necessitates on-site microvascular expertise, which is only available in specialized centers. [4,5] Furthermore, it has other disadvantages including prolonged operative time, postoperative venous congestion, anemia requiring repeated transfusion, and prolonged patient hospitalization. The practice of ear reconstruction using pocket principle and periauricular skin or fascia is discouraged by many authors. [6][7][8][9] This is because it can result in cartilage resorption and fibrosis with a subsequently distorted auricle.

(p0.2) Despite the variability of different surgical approaches, there are no clear and proper guidelines to manage these injuries, which can be applied in both developed and developing countries. Direct re-attachment (DR) as a composite graft is a straightforward technique that can easily be performed in nonspecialized centers, especially in developing countries, under local anesthesia with a minimal hospital stay. However, there are no obvious indications on when to utilize the DR technique with TEA. We aimed to review the literature on surgical management of TEA with main focus on DR so as to develop a surgical management algorithm that can be applied in the absence of microsurgical facilities.
## (s3) Classification of ear avulsion injuries
(p3.0) The wording and the meaning related to ear amputation vary in the literature and can be very ambiguous. Complete or total amputations are reserved solely for a complete separation of the ear. [6,7] A complete avulsion of a smaller part of the pinna is described as partial avulsion. [3,7] Cases of amputated auricles with narrow pedicle bridges were inconsistently expressed in the literature as incomplete, near-complete, subtotal avulsion, and extended or deep laceration. [3,6,10,11] For the purpose of this review, we are going to describe ear injuries as complete and incomplete avulsion.
## (s4) Surgical approaches
(p4.0) While numerous re-attachment approaches have been described, substantial controversy remains on managing these patients best in the acute setting. Presently, the most common re-attachment techniques include DR as a composite graft, microvascular replantation, pocket technique, and reconstruction using local flaps.

(p4.1) However, choosing among these repair methods can be challenging as they vary in technical demands, cosmetic results, and complications. Several factors influence decision-making when selecting the proper repair method of the auricular avulsion at the initial presentation in the acute care setting. These include the size and the condition of the avulsed segment, the status of the adjacent skin, the mechanism of injury, the patient's comorbidities, availability of microsurgical techniques, and the surgeon's experience. [3,10] Direct re-attachment Re-attachment as a composite graft is a straightforward technique that requires short operative time and minimal hospital stay. A search of MEDLINE revealed 18 published papers with a total of 28 cases, 7 of which were complete ear amputations treated with direct surgical re-attachment [Tables 1 and 2]. The rarity of ear replantation is probably due to the low number of TEA cases in general. [16] Most of the reported cases were male (80.7%). The median (range) age of the patients was 33 (3-70) years. The mechanism of ear injury is an essential factor in determining the initial management approach. The most common mechanism of injury was cutting injury (44%), followed by motor vehicle injury (36%) and bite injuries from humans and animals (20%) [ Tables 1 and 2]. DR is desired in relatively clean wounds due to sharp cuts and wounds with minimal crush injury and often leads to better surgical outcomes. [5,9,17] Incomplete ear avulsion DR of an incomplete ear avulsion (IEA), where a narrow skin pedicle is preserved, can be safely performed with a good outcome. [10,11,22,23] According to Erdmann et al., an IEA can survive with DR as long as an attachment via the helical root is maintained. [2] Our analysis showed a total of 21 reported cases of IEA repaired with DR. The median (range) width of the skin pedicle bridge was 10 (3-30) mm with almost equally reported cases with superior and inferior skin pedicles [ Figure 1]. General anesthesia was used in repairing 60% of incomplete auricular avulsion. However, local anesthesia can potentially damage the vessel at the pedicle site; therefore, it must be cautiously used. [11] As shown in Table 1, complications after DR of incomplete auricular avulsion were reported in nine (42.8%) cases. The most commonly observed complication was venous congestion in 5 patients, necrosis of the lobule in 3 patients, and necrosis of helical root in 2 patients. All cases reported in the literature have achieved satisfactory clinical and esthetic outcomes except in one patient who required a secondary reconstruction of the lobule using a local flap [ Figure 2]. [20] Complete ear avulsion Literature describing successful replantation of complete ear avulsion is exceptionally sparse. Mcdowell reported the first case of successful auricular composite graft replantation in 1968. [21] A total of seven cases of complete ear avulsion repaired by DR had been presented in the literature [ Table 2]. With respect to the involved anatomical region, the uppermost two-third was the most affected by the traumatic injury in 57%.
## (s5) Microsurgical repair
(p5.0) Although it yields the best cosmetic outcome, microvascular replantation of an amputated ear segment may not be an available or appropriate option for all patients. [5,6] This approach should be attempted when the facility can handle microsurgical repair, suitable vessels are identified on initial examination, and the amputated segment is repairable. Furthermore, the patient should be adequately counseled about the possible complications and expected postoperative care. Preferably, venous anastomosis is achieved, but this will not be possible in most cases because of a lack of appropriately sized veins. [4,34,38] The first successful clinical microvascular replantation of a completely amputated ear was reported in 1980 by Pennington et al. using the vein grafts from the superficial temporal vessels. [39] Ever since, many authors have replicated the approach and a variety of technological advancements have been suggested. [4,5,28,40] The most common complication associated with microvascular replantation of the auricle is venous congestion which, in many cases, can lead to complete loss of the ear segment. [4,5] Venous congestion can be dealt with using leach therapy, skin puncture of the replanted segment, and anticoagulation. [4,40] Microsurgical replantation has some disadvantages; it requires longer operative time and hospital stay, multiple blood transfusions, and has a significant failure rate. [4] The average operative time reported by Kind was 6 h, with an average hospital stay of 11.4 days. [16] Nevertheless, the technique offers the best cosmetic outcome when successful revascularization is achieved. [6,16,40] 
## (s6) Other techniques
(p6.0) Various other nonmicrosurgical techniques have been described in the literature, including the pocket method, local flap reconstruction, and temporoparietal fascia (TPF) flap reconstruction. Studies showed that techniques utilizing periauricular skin or fascia flaps would result in auricular shrinkage and distortion due to cartilage resorption. [6,9] The principle of the retroauricular pocket was first proposed in 1971 by Mladick et al. [41] The method is a two-step technique that involves removing the skin of the amputated segment followed by re-attachment to the stump and then burial in a retroauricular pocket. In this way, a greater contact surface with the vascular bed is created to enhance the probability of graft "take." A second procedure is required after 28 days to remove the ear from the pocket. [41] The TPF flap is another nonmicrosurgical technique that provides a vascularized flap, based on STA and vein, to an amputated auricle. The skin of the amputated part is first removed, preserving an intact perichondrium, suturing the cartilage to the stump, applying a TPF flap, followed by covering the area with a skin graft. [42,43] Steffen et al. supported renouncing methods using pocket technique and periauricular tissue flaps because of the inevitable cartilaginous distortion. [6,40] In addition, these methods cause additional trauma to the ear remnant and the surrounding tissue, jeopardizing their use for future secondary reconstruction. [6,7,9] 
