# SPORTS NUTRITION (L CIALDELLA KAM, SECTION EDITOR) Prevalence of Food Insecurity in the General College Population and Student-Athletes: a Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 247111476 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d79f28c978936a69a8701bd2e836bef54746839](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d79f28c978936a69a8701bd2e836bef54746839)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s8) Food Insecurity and Outcomes
(p8.0) The authors of the reviewed literature identified many relationships between FI and specific outcomes among college students. To begin, the outcome most notably unique among this group compared to the general population is academic performance. Higher rates of FI among college students were consistently associated with lower grade point average. There is evidence that dietary behaviors (e.g., eating breakfast) and quality (e.g., increased fruit and vegetable consumption) are related to better academic outcomes [57]. In this review, FI was related to dietary behaviors and quality such as increased frequency of skipping meals; lower fruit, vegetable, and fiber intake; and increased intake of  added sugars, processed foods, fast food, dairy, and calcium. Conversely lower FI was associated with higher rates of nutrition literacy, which has been shown to predict adherence to healthier dietary patterns [58]. In regard to FI and other health outcomes, college students experiencing FI were more likely to report poor overall health than students not experiencing FI. These health metrics included less frequent medical visits/exams, poor mental health, increased psychological stress, increased depression, poor sleep quality, disordered eating/eating disorders, increased obesity, less physical activity, increased tobacco and marijuana use, and higher rates of binge drinking. College students experiencing FI employed various coping strategies to meet their food needs such as more frequent attendance at events that offered free snacks and meals, increased use of food pantries, greater frequency of skipping meals, decreasing portion sizes, stretching the available food over a longer period of time, and purchasing low-cost, highly processed foods.

(p8.1) While it remains out of the scope of this paper to offer specific solutions to address FI on college campuses, strategies currently being employed include on-campus food pantries and food recovery from campus events directed to students.
## (s11) Limitations
(p11.0) The lack of published peer-reviewed studies on collegiate student-athletes prevents conclusions from being made on this population. Student-athlete resources vary widely across athletic division and location leading to variability in the limited data available. In the general college student studies, the validity of the assessment tools available has been questioned. Ames et al. used the 10-item AFSSM in their assessment of 478 students [7]. They concluded that this survey may lead to inaccurate results in college students due to the questions relating to household FS which may not be appropriate for the specific living situations of the college population. This survey tool was used in 24 of the reviewed studies (66% of total subjects). Self-selection bias could also influence the results as students who are FI may be more likely to participate in a study on this topic. Lastly, our convenience sample was primarily white and female and may not be indicative of other demographics.
