# Ramp Metering Strategies: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 249078269 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d93ca6ae37ad2e32036ce559f02a536325ef680](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d93ca6ae37ad2e32036ce559f02a536325ef680)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s0) RAMP METERING
(p0.0) Ramp Metering (RM) relies on a traffic light located at the onramp of a highway, which controls the inflow of vehicles onto the highway. Inflow is controlled by managing red and green phases of the traffic light through different strategies, such as fixed green times, one-car-per-green, two-cars-per-green, adaptive traffic conditions, etc.

(p0.1) When the demand at the on-ramp is greater than the allowed inflow of vehicles onto the highway, a queue forms at the onramp. The length of the queue must not be greater than the storage capacity of the on-ramp, otherwise queue spillback would disturb the surrounding network. When the metering rate is properly defined, the RM system ensures a reduction in the total travel time (travel time through and waiting time at on-ramps). Thus, the objective of RM is maintaining traffic flow on the highway under stable conditions, i.e., occupancy (ρ) below the critical value (ρcr) to avoid the occurrence of traffic breakdown.

(p0.2) RM can be used to maintain the capacity flow on the main stream and prevent blockages of upstream ramps, reducing the total time spent on the network by up to 50% (Papageorgiou and Kotsialos, 2002). In addition, RM can be used to enforce operationally desired traffic flow distribution, improve traffic safety and reduce emissions of pollutants to the environment (Ministerio de Transportes y Comunicaciones, 2018).
## (s9) Local
(p9.0) Kerner (2006) introduces an approach to congestion control labelled ANCONA, which is based on the fundamentals of three-phase traffic flow theory (free flow, synchronized flow, and wide moving jam). Considering that the spillback effect of queues could block not only the upstream off-ramp but also the upstream on-ramp, ANCONA applies spatial confinement of congestion and uses the relatively high speed and larger discharge rate of synchronized flow to prevent the upstream propagation of congestion and reduce the waiting time at the traffic light in the on-ramp lane. Thus, the principle of ANCONA is to locate congestion arising at the bottleneck. The author tested the strategy on a two-lane highway section with a downstream bottleneck created by an off-ramp and an upstream bottleneck created by an on-ramp. The on-ramp and off-ramp merging sections are 0,5 and 0,6 km long, respectively. Traffic data were collected via two sets of detectors on the main highway control road. Yasar et al. (2006) present the problem of the critical occupancy value, pointing out that if this value is lower than its actual value, the control law becomes overly conservative and leads to excessive waiting times at the on-ramps. On the other hand, if the value is set higher than the actual value, congestion on the freeway increases. To solve this problem, the authors developed C-MIXCROS and D-MIXCROS. These are two local feedback ramp metering strategies based on online estimates of critical occupancy. In the article, the authors use two methods proposed by Ozbay et al. (2006)  To avoid this, and given the location of the actual bottleneck downstream, PI-ALINEA uses an extended structure that allows the downstream occupancy measured in the merge area to be used. It is shown in Equation (2):
## (s10) Coordinated
(p10.0) Mainstream and on-ramp data are processed in the Data Processing module, the outputs of which are inputs to the Queue estimation module, the Critical occupancy estimation module, the Queue override module, and the ALINEA core module, where flow at the ramp exit ramp is calculated. The output of the Queue estimation module becomes input to the Queue control and Minimum queue control modules. At the same time, outputs of these two modules, along with outputs of the ALINEA Core and Queue Override modules become inputs to the Final Ramp Flow Specification module, whose output is finally the input to the Implementation module. The Fail-Safe module makes decisions when the measurement system fails, and can enable/disable turns signal control based on preset traffic conditions on the main flow. Yuan et al. (2009) conduct tests on HERO/RWS, a variant of the original HERO algorithm developed for and implemented at the Ramp Metering System in Netherlands, which seeks shifting congestion on motorways by an effective usage of upstream on-ramps storage space. HERO /RWS locally uses a variation of the demand-capacity algorithm, as it relies on highway flow and speed to calculate ramp flow. Model calibration is conducted based on three parameters (activation/deactivation parameters of HERO /RWS, critical speed, and flow of the freeway system), whereby robustness is tested by 12 simulation scenarios. Tests concluded that HERO /RWS cannot cope with traffic demand variations in congested networks, nor it is sensitive to speed changes or robust to flow variations. With respect to the ramp metering system, the authors conclude that upstream on-ramp coordination yields a less congestion, a higher mean speed, and lower travel time spent in the network. Hence, the authors note that coordination of the ramp metering system could be useful for closely spaced on-ramps with queues of unequal length. A stretch of the A10 ring road in Amsterdam was chosen for the simulation, which includes four consecutive on-ramps from the S105 to the Coen tunnel. The VISSIM micro simulator is used for model calibration and validation, by leveraging traffic data collected with double inductive loops during the evening peak period (15:30-18:00 h). Every on-ramp in the study is controlled by a ramp metering system. The bottleneck modelled took place downstream of the S101 on-ramp, reaching the S105 on-ramp upstream. This condition persisted throughout the whole simulation period.

(p10.1) Srivastava (2011) introduces the Stratified Zone Metering algorithm (SZM). The Minnesota Department of Transportation (MnDOT) uses this algorithm to control the level of congestion on highways, to study bottlenecks, and to understand the behavior of traffic breakdown and the response of traffic states to the metering patterns. The authors develop a methodology based on solving the differential equation in order to maintain traffic flow after intervening freeway mainlines. This analysis shows that the capacity of the bottleneck depends on the ratio between traffic flow at the mainline traffic and at the on-ramp bottleneck. Based on this finding, the author proposes a next generation Stratified Zone Metering algorithm (DSZM). This is a dynamic, zonedefinition-based algorithm focusing on density rather than traffic flow, which allows overcoming the randomness of the current version by exploiting the stability of occupancy values near capacity. The study focuses on a 12-mile section of Trunk Highway 169 northbound (TH -169 NB), which traverses the western Twin Cities metropolitan region beginning at the I-494 interchange and ending at 63rd Avenue North. The section includes 10 weaving sections, 4 High Occupancy Vehicles (HOV) bypass ramps, 24 entrance ramps (17 metered), and 25 exit ramps. The roadway was modeled using the AIMSUM microsimulation tool, based on traffic data from the evening peak period. Agarwal et al. (2015) propose a new method to perform coordinated ramp control. It is based on the relationship between freeway density just before the first merging, freeway density of the section between two consecutive ramps, and freeway density after the second merging. The method aims at keeping the aggregate traffic density on the freeway section equal to the critical density. The authors perform a ramp inflow rate control action upon occurrence of four different cases:

(p10.2) 1. When upstream and downstream densities are lower than half of the critical density ( ≤ 1 2 ⁄ ≤ 1 2 ⁄ ) 2. When upstream and downstream densities are higher than the critical density ( ≥ ≥ ). 3. The upstream density is lower than the critical density and the downstream density is higher than the critical density ( ≤ ≥ ). 4. The upstream density is higher than the critical density and the downstream density is lower than the critical density ( ≥ ≤ ).

(p10.3) Ramp data at the intersection of I-15 NB and Tropicana and at the intersection of I-15 NB and Flamingo in Las Vegas were collected on a Thursday from 6 a.m. to noon. The on-ramps are controlled using data from the freeway sensors. The proposed control law allows a very close approximation to the target density, both at the freeway section between the two ramps, and after the second ramp as well. Papageorgiou et al. (2007) highlight the importance of correctly estimating ALINEA parameters, pointing out that this strategy control variable consists of the on-ramp downstream occupancy (oout), while a critical factor to consider is the location in which it is measured. Also, UP-ALINEA is presented as a solution to overcome the need for sensors downstream of the on-ramp to measure oout. UP-ALINEA is able to use measurements of upstream occupancy (oin) to estimate the downstream occupancy (oout) required to apply the control strategy. The approach is based on the following equation:
## (s12) Proactive strategies
(p12.0) The control strategy is tested by simulating the A10 ring road in Amsterdam. It consists of four main links and 2 tunnels. The simulation is conducted with traffic data from the evening peak, and only considers the counterclockwise direction of the A10, comprising 21 on-ramps and 20 off-ramps. Papageorgiou et al. (2003) present some reasons for the theory-practice gap in the field of control networks. Among other, the authors highlight a bureaucratic and reactive administrative system which is iron-clad in doing things in conventional ways, conflicting interests between stakeholders, the complexity of advanced control systems, and the lack of knowledge of competent authorities. Moreover, the control loop problem is presented to explain how the efficiency of the network can be improved through an appropriate application of control strategies. From a practical standpoint, a field application for an on-ramp in the southern part of Boulevard Périphérique in Paris is used to show the advantages of ALINEA over demand-capacity control and occupancycapacity control strategies. Finally, a simulation of the network-wide application of optimal ramp metering on the A10 ring road in Amsterdam is used to demonstrate the performance of the proactive coordinated control AMOC.
