# materials Hemp and Its Derivatives as a Universal Industrial Raw Material (with Particular Emphasis on the Polymer Industry)-A Review

CorpusID: 247905479 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e32f81165fea3200700275de3d5a0c6253492728](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e32f81165fea3200700275de3d5a0c6253492728)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s3) Name of the Function Group Wavenumber [cm −1 ] Bibliographic
(p3.0) C-OH out-of-plane bending vibrations; C-C 557 [46] Stretch vibrations of the glucose ring; C-H stretching vibrations outside the plane of the aromatic ring 895 [22,23] -OH; -COO 900-1200 [47] CO-O-CO 1000-1100 [48] C-O stretching vibrations; deformation of the C-H aromatic plane 1030-1058 [49,50] The absorption band of hydroxyl compounds -OH 1100 [51,52]  Based on the knowledge of the structure of hemp fiber, its chemical and physical structure and properties, its possible application in various technical solutions is known. However, some applications require changing these properties. In order to modify them, in basic technological operations, these are mechanical modifications such as cutting or grinding. More advanced techniques that significantly change the properties, however, are based on chemical modifications such as alkalization, acetylation, esterification, silanization, acrylation, or through the use of carboxylic acids, anhydrides or solvent replacement. Each of the mentioned physical and chemical modifications causes a specific change in the properties of the hemp fiber and adjusts it to the most interactive use. This topic is explored more in-depth in the extensive work of Tanasa et al. [28].
## (s7) Saturated Fatty Acid
(p7.0) Other studies on cannabis samples by Francisco et al. showed the following chemical composition of the waxes obtained from the ethanol suspension [79]. These data are presented in Table 3 below.  As the research of the above scientists show, hemp waxes are rich not only in alkanes but also in monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, terpenoids, but also in cannabinoids. This suggests that apart from the plasticizing and lubricating properties, the cannabis wax esters have strong healing and antioxidant properties. These products play a multi-functional role in their applications. However, these substances still require in-depth study because of the limited knowledge about them.
## (s11) Agriculture and Energetic
(p11.0) Fiber hemp is a species of the annual hemp plant. These plants do not contain psychoactive substances; they are used in many industries, reaching a height of 1.5-3.5 m under favorable conditions. The main direction of the use of hemp in agriculture is the production of straw. As a result of processing the straw of mono-hemp fibrous hemp, we obtain 25-30% of the fiber and about 70% of the shives. Hemp is an interesting plant in terms of ecology and economy. Their cultivation does not require the use of plant protection products or pesticides, and hemp itself inhibits the development of weeds, repels pests, is resistant to diseases and requires only minerals contained in the soil. This has a positive effect on the environment as it contributes to the improvement of soil systems [80]. A suitable example is that these plants have a pile system root, which loosens and ventilates the soil and improves its water conditions, making it more beneficial for all plants that coexist with cannabis. This brings about positive effects, positively influencing the development of the economy, especially everything in agricultural countries. A favorable pro-ecological effect on the environment may, to some extent, reduce the need to increase expenditure on environmental protection and climate change. As indicated in the work ofŻuk-Gołaszewska et al., one hectare of hemp plants is capable of absorbing about 2.5 tons of carbon dioxide [80]. Agriculture is the main and basic source of food, but despite this, it is not an economically competitive sector of the economy compared to other industries. Hemp straw in agriculture is used as a source of fodder with very good nutritional parameters for farm animals, mainly cattle. However, apart from that, it is also used as highly efficient biomass in the processes of generating both thermal and electric energy, which was presented in Figure 4 below [81].

(p11.1) pests, is resistant to diseases and requires only minerals contained in the soil. This has a positive effect on the environment as it contributes to the improvement of soil systems [80]. A suitable example is that these plants have a pile system root, which loosens and ventilates the soil and improves its water conditions, making it more beneficial for all plants that coexist with cannabis. This brings about positive effects, positively influencing the development of the economy, especially everything in agricultural countries. A favorable pro-ecological effect on the environment may, to some extent, reduce the need to increase expenditure on environmental protection and climate change. As indicated in the work of Żuk-Gołaszewska et al., one hectare of hemp plants is capable of absorbing about 2.5 tons of carbon dioxide [80]. Agriculture is the main and basic source of food, but despite this, it is not an economically competitive sector of the economy compared to other industries. Hemp straw in agriculture is used as a source of fodder with very good nutritional parameters for farm animals, mainly cattle. However, apart from that, it is also used as highly efficient biomass in the processes of generating both thermal and electric energy, which was presented in Figure 4 below [81]. 
## (s13) Food Industry
(p13.0) One of the industries that use hemp is the food industry. Hemp food has been known for thousands of years and, at the same time, is a modern, fashionable and healthy food supplement containing valuable ingredients. The hemp seed based on which most hemp foods are prepared contains all of the amino acids and Omega 3, 6 and 9 fatty acids needed for the proper functioning of the human body, especially the brain, in appropriate proportions. About 35% of the seed content is easily digestible high-quality protein, but also contains dietary fiber to support the digestive system and proper digestion, as well as vitamins B and E. On the other hand, about 30% of the seed content is carbohydrates, providing energy for the body. Hemp seeds can be eaten raw, sprouted or powdered as flour. They are used for baking, as well as hemp milk made from them, similar to soy. About 27-38% of the seed weight can be extracted into hemp oil rich in unsaturated fatty acids, as Fike pointed out in his article [9]. The competition for hemp-based food products is the entire food market, especially organic food. Food products made on the basis of hemp have a positive health-promoting effect on our body. They affect cell regeneration, slow down the aging processes, inhibit the development of cancer cells and have a significant effect on immunity [9].
## (s16) Construction
(p16.0) Hemp is an extremely efficient and environmentally friendly building material. This is due to the fact that the increase in hemp biomass is two to four times greater than in forests managed on the same acreage. Hemp fiber is used to make furniture and decorations, partition plates are produced, thermal insulation of buildings is also carried out, or research is carried out on concrete blocks containing hemp fibers, characterized by low thermal conductivity and good acoustic barrier. From special varieties of hemp, it is easy to produce ecological bricks up to seven times stronger than concrete. Fiber hemp is also used to produce insulation material, building material for the construction of roofs, walls and floors. It is quite resistant to moisture, does not rot, is not flammable and is almost 100% recyclable. According to research by construction specialists, cellulose concrete made with hemp is resistant to fire and insects, is lighter than conventional building materials and has much better acoustic, thermal and insulating properties [86][87][88][89][90]. Seng et al. in their article, indicate that the thermal conductivity of hemp concrete, depending on the method, ranges from 0.103 to 0.112 W m −1 ·K −1 [88]. The use of hemp concrete reduces the cost of building a residential house thanks to the simplification of the structure and the use of cheaper raw materials. Other plant derivatives, such as hemp oil, can also be an important ingredient used in the manufacture of paints and varnishes, as it dries quickly and leaves a thin, flexible film, and the use of its subsidies in petrochemicals is eliminated.
## (s17) Automotive Industry
(p17.0) Hemp influenced the development of the automotive industry from the very beginning. They were used in the first cars to produce structural elements. The fibers of this plant were tested as a component in the production of car bodies by Henry Ford in 1941 and by Lotus Cars. Hemp was also used to create laminates for any type of construction. Researchers dealing with the subject of hemp-containing materials postulate that hemp-based materials are extremely durable and at the same time have a high biodegradability potential. Many specialists present hemp as a natural material that is stronger than that obtained from other sources of natural cellulose fibers such as coconut, bamboo or jute. The prospect of biomaterials that make up motor vehicles is promising due to the high cost of storing old cars and a strong impact on the natural environment. The calculation of the impact of the entire product life cycle is emphasized. Hemp fiber is used to make body parts, cockpits, seats and other interior elements. On the other hand, the obtained hemp oil can be successfully used as a pro-ecological component of paints and varnishes [91][92][93].
## (s25) Elastomers
(p25.0) Rubbers are another important material used by humans. Due to cross-linking, unfortunately, they are not recyclable, and their natural decomposition takes hundreds of years. For this reason, it is worth delving into and developing intensively more environmentally friendly rubber compounds. In this case, hemp materials can also help us. Previous studies indicate the use of hemp derivatives in mixtures based on natural rubber (NR) [120]. From the results obtained by Moonart et al., it follows that in order to obtain good adhesion between the fiber and the polymer matrix, they must be treated. In this case, it was proposed to prepare by treating the hemp fiber with alkali and then using a KMnO 4 solution and silane. Such modification resulted in an increase in the tensile strength of the fibers and a better interfacial connection of the materials [121,122]. Another study investigated NR vulcanizates with hemp fibers cross-linked with benzoyl peroxide. This arrangement exhibited increased hardness, modulus at 100% elongation, tear strength, tensile strength and elongation at break. This effect depended on the degree of fiber filling of the composite. Hemp fibers can be, in this case, a good replacement for synthetic or steel fibers due to their cheapness, biodegradability and good weight-to-strength ratio [123].
