# Flow-controlled ventilation -a new and promising method of ventilation presented with a review of the literature

CorpusID: 246700770 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/abc35f5c73fe30d409893d0f8dfef7f455c5edc6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/abc35f5c73fe30d409893d0f8dfef7f455c5edc6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Linearised expiration flow
(p4.0) computer-controlled resistors decelerating and linearising expiratory flow assessed in animal models provided insights into the respiratory system mechanics [20]. the working principle of these systems is based on partial occlusion of the ventilator's expiratory outlet that decelerates initial high expiratory flow to moderate flow through the expiration phase. in a porcine model with artificially induced lung injury it was shown to improve lung function and mechanics with attenuated lung damage compared with standard volume-controlled ventilation (vcv) [21]. Furthermore, in healthy lungs expiration with decelerated and linearised flow has been shown to improve lung aeration [22]. Similar results were obtained in clinical trials, where lung healthy patients with a bandaged thorax simulating restrictive lung disease reported more comfortable breathing with restricted expiration flow compared to breathing through a mouthpiece connected to a ventilator with positive end-expiratory pressure (PeeP) [23]. Also, this module was proven to be a safe and viable method in patients undergoing neurosurgical procedures, improving ventilation in dorsal areas and thus leading to more homogeneous regional ventilation [23].

(p4.1) Furthermore, the potentially deleterious effect of passive expiration was shown by the group of Kavanagh. they demonstrated in a rat model that an abrupt lung deflation after sustained inflation could cause acute lung injury [24].
## (s5) Flow-controlled ventilation: fully controlling the expiration flow
(p5.0) the possibility of being able to control the entire ventilation cycle and at the same time ventilate through a thin ventilation tube led to the logical need to apply this ventilation technique in an automated fashion. evA was further developed into the mechanical ventilation method: flow-controlled ventilation (Fcv), which is clinically available using an evone ventilator (ventinova Medical Bv, eindhoven, the Netherlands). this innovative method of ventilation was created by Dietmar enk.

(p5.1) the Fcv mode of the evone ventilator is used for full ventilation while controlling the flow throughout the whole ventilation cycle. this is established by generating a continuous flow into the patient's lungs, followed by a continuous negative flow, sucking gasses out of the lungs during expiration. Unlike previous methods of applied resistance during expiration, in this case the expiration is an active process. to efficiently control expiration flow, Fcv depends on a high-resistance breathing circuit, which is provided either by use of the ultrathin endotracheal cuffed tube tritube (ventinova Medical Bv, eindhoven, the Netherlands) or by connecting the conventional tube adapter to a conventional adult endotracheal tube. the Fcv ventilation cycle relies on accurate intratracheal pressure measurements and is governed by four operator settings, as illustrated in Figure 2: 1) end-expiratory pressure (eeP), 2) peak inspiratory pressure, 3) inspiration flow, 4) inspiration to expiration (i : e) ratio. thus, in contrast to conventional ventilation modes, the inspiratory tidal volumes and respiratory rate cannot be directly set by the operator, but are dependent on pressure settings, flows and respiratory system compliance. Similar to other devices, FiO 2 (fraction of inspired oxygen) can be set directly. Additionally, FIgure 1. Working mechanism of Ventrain. a) Oxygen inlet from high pressure source with flow modulator (1), oxygen flow is accelerated by the narrowing nozzle (2) and exits Ventrain (3), creating a sub-atmospheric pressure at port (4). This port is connected to a small bore lumen (e.g. transtracheal catheter, Tritube) inside the patient's airway. A bypass (5) is designed to let air in and will activate the device when this bypass is closed. B) Closing port (3) creates an insufflation via (4). c) Opening (3) creates an exhalation (Copyright: Ventinova Medical B.V.)
## (s7) Flow-controlled ventilation: ventilation through a thin endotracheal tube
(p7.0) Fcv can be applied using a tritube , a thin cuffed endotracheal tube ( Figure 4). With an outer diameter of only 4.4 mm, it offers advantages during earnose-throat (eNt) surgery. the first series of patient cases was published by Kristensen et al. [14]. During laryngeal surgery, the use of a tritube in combination with ventrain resulted in "unprecedented visibility of the intubated airways during oral, pharyngeal, laryngeal or tracheal procedures". in this series they also described two awake intubations in highly complex patients, which were later also done, somewhat modified, by others [27].
## (s8) Flow-controlled ventilation: a more efficient ventilation
(p8.0) the effective cO 2 elimination, increased ventilation efficiency and improved lung recruitment of Fcv over vcv have been demonstrated in several randomised clinical trials. During laryngeal surgery, Fcv led to better lung aeration and lung compliance (61 ± 10 mL cmH 2 O -1 in Fcv group vs. 46 ± 5 mL cmH 2 O -1 in vcv group, P < 0.001) [28]. Also in (morbidly) obese patients Fcv showed improved lung recruitment compared to vcv (P < 0.001) [31]. in two studies in lung healthy patients, Fcv resulted in more efficient ventilation with better cO 2 removal and one also showed better oxygenation (+9%, P < 0.001) [32,33].

(p8.1) these results are in line with previously performed preclinical studies. in lung healthy pigs, Fcv improved arterial oxygenation (+9%, P = 0.002), requiring a lower minute volume (-21%, P = 0.02)  for normoventilation [34]. computed tomography (ct) analysis showed this to be related to improved lung recruitment. the results were even more striking when Fcv was applied in an acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) pig model (46% improved oxygenation, P = 0.035; 26% lower minute volume, P < 0.001) [35], or when Fcv was individually optimised and compared to Pcv (24% improved oxygenation, P = 0.0097, 53% lower minute volume, P < 0.001) [36]. Also in these animals Fcv prevented atelectasis and improved ventilation, especially in dorsal lung parts. in addition, significantly less lung damage was measured in the Fcv ventilated animals in the lung disease: the alveolar wall thickness was smaller (7.8 ± 0.2 m vs. 5.5 ± 0.1 m; P < 0.001) and there was less cell infiltrate (32 ± 2 vs. 20 ± 2/field; P < 0.001) [35].
## (s9) Flow-controlled ventilation -lung damage limitation
(p9.0) As shown in animal studies, linearisation of expiratory flow has lung protective effects [21,35]. the constant and continuous flow during Fcv results in less shear stress compared to vcv and Pcv, thereby greatly reducing the amount of energy dissipation. the amount of energy generated during Fcv per inhalation and exhalation is just sufficient for ventilation of the patient. in other words, little energy is absorbed in the lungs, which could cause damage to the lung tissue. ventilation is thus possible with a significantly reduced risk of lung damage.

(p9.1) Barnes et al. published theoretical physical evidence that to minimise energy dissipation gas flows should be constant and continuous with an i : e ratio close to one. they calculated that Fcv ventilation leads to less energy dissipation than Pcv (-52%) and vcv (-32%) [4]. the area of the pressure-volume loop (Pv loop) represents the amount of energy dissipated. Unlike conventional ventilators, which calculate intratracheal pressures based on pressures measured on the ventilator side, evone actually measures pressures intratracheally. this makes it possible to measure energy dissipation (area of Pv loop) reliably, as done by Barnes and enk [37] in a patient. the measured energy dissipation turned out to be remarkably low (0.17 J L -1 ) and even equal to values reported for spontaneous respiration (0.2-0.7 J L -1 ).
## (s13) Lobectomy with one-lung ventilation
(p13.0) A 65-year-old woman underwent an elective video thoracoscopic lobectomy of the upper right lobe due to the malignant disease. Past medical history consisted of arterial hypertension, ischaemic heart disease, nephrolithiasis and nicotine addiction. Before the induction of general anaesthesia erector spinae plane block was performed with ropivacaine (Ropimol, Molteni, italy) and lidocaine (Lidocaine, Grindeks, Latvia), induction of general anaesthesia was obtained with propofol (Propofol, Fresenius, Germany), fentanyl (Fentanyl WZF, Polfa, Poland) and cis-atracurium (Nimbex, Aspen Pharma, South Africa), a Robertshaw double lumen endotracheal tube size 39G (Double lumen tube, teleflex, United Kingdom) was used to secure the airways, anaesthesia was maintained with a constant infusion of propofol and boluses of fentanyl and cisatracurium titrated to obtain adequate anaesthesia. Proper placement of the tube was confirmed with flexible bronchofibroscopy; initially conventional volume-controlled ventilation (vcv) was used, then when the need of left lung ventilation emerged, the evone ctA (conventional tube Adapter, ventinova Medical Bv, eindhoven, Netherlands) was connected to the left, bronchial lumen of the tube to allow initiation of flow-controlled ventilation. the initial optimally titrated parameters were set as follows: PeeP 5 cmH 2 O, P peak 16 cmH 2 O, i : e 1 : 1, inspiratory flow of 10 L min -1 , FiO 2 0.6; later, due to sufficient oxygenation FiO 2 was reduced to 0.4, but an increase of cO 2 level caused the need to elevate inspiratory flow to 12 L min -1 and P peak 18 cmH 2 O. No complications were noted. After surgery, the patient was reintubated with a single lumen tube and was moved to the recovery room. dIscussIon the above studies confirm the higher ventilation efficiency of Fcv, the better lung recruitment, the potential to limit lung damage and the benefits of a thin cuffed tube during laryngeal surgery.

(p13.1) the scientific evidence for the clinical benefits for the patient is unequivocal but still limited due to the relatively small number of patients included in clinical studies. Larger, randomised controlled trials are needed to better demonstrate the (potential) benefits of Fcv, as well as whether there are more limitations than described below. the current cOviD pandemic shines a new light on the strategies to manage (compromised) airways [38]. Also the incidence of laryngotracheal stenosis is expected to increase in relation to the frequent long term intubation of patients [39]. the value of the tritube during tracheal resection is being evaluated (trial NL7970 in Dutch clinical trial register). the tritube would allow the surgeons to perform tracheal resections while it is left in place and without the need for cross field intubations, which lead to patient risk and aerosol generation. Also during tracheotomy procedures in the icU aerosol reduction is key. A recent report described the performance of a tracheotomy procedure using a tube-in-tube technique (tritube through a large-bore endotracheal tube), enabling minimal production of airway aerosols and thus increasing the safety of personnel, in addition to providing easy surgical access [40]. Furthermore, in cases of severe stenosis, the tritube might prevent the need for ecMO during surgery, as described in a case of critical tracheal stenosis of 4 mm [41].

(p13.2) Relating to its ventilation effects, it is likely that Fcv prevents atelectasis not only in morbidly obese patients, as has been shown [31], but also in other patients with an increased risk of compression atelectasis (e.g. trendelenburg position, laparoscopy). in these patients, Fcv may lead to fewer episodes of hypercapnia or desaturation and less need for high ventilation pressures. Patients with reduced ventilation capacity (e.g. during one lung ventilation) may also be better ventilated and oxygenated during surgery, which has already been shown in pigs [42]. this is currently being investigated in patients undergoing one lung ventilation (Nct04534933 in clinicaltrial.gov and DRKS00022198 in German clinical trial register) Also, the improved lung recruitment by Fcv may lead to benefits in patients undergoing cardiac surgery involving a cardiopulmonary bypass. When switching back to ventilation, the lungs must be recruited. effects of Fcv are being investigated in two clinical trials (Nct04306757 in clinicaltrials.gov and DRKS00018956 in the German clinical trial register). these currently ongoing studies primarily focus on oxygenation during surgery and inflammation parameters. However, Fcv may also have implications for the patient's postoperative recovery, as intraoperative periods of desaturation, probably related to atelectasis, represent an important risk for the development of postoperative pulmonary complications [43].

(p13.3) Mechanical ventilation is a life-saving technology in acute respiratory failure. However, its use may lead to secondary damage of the lungs, specifically viLi. Several factors responsible for viLi have been described including mechanical energy dissipation within the lungs, atelectrauma and barotrauma. According to the existing evidence from animal and human studies, flow-controlled ventilation compared to conventional modes may provide at least equally efficient gas exchange and more homogeneous aeration of the lungs with decreased energy dissipation, and minimised risk of atelectrauma and barotrauma. this may make this technology a viable therapeutic option for patients developing ARDS during severe lung diseases such as SARS-cov-2. Growing demand for the new means of treatment of patients in a critical condition led to the launch of clinical trials (Nct04399317 and Nct04894214 as registered in clinicaltrials.gov). However, still, large randomised clinical trials are warranted to assess the clinical usefulness and demonstrate the improved outcomes of patients in the intensive care unit setting.

(p13.4) One of the non-standard applications of the device is the possibility to set the negative end-expiratory pressure (NeeP) with the maximum value of -10 mbar (-1 kPa). theoretically, the effect of NeeP can be used during life-threatening hypovolaemic shock to increase cardiac output by reducing intrathoracic pressure and increasing the pressure gradient, allowing an improved venous return to the heart. this theory has been confirmed by preclinical data; however, its clinical effect is yet to be seen [44,45].

(p13.5) Furthermore, Fcv has been used for preservation of donor lungs during ex vivo lung perfusion (evLP). Fcv led to improved oxygenation and alveolar recruitment compared with vcv, with a higher proportion of well-aerated and less atelectatic lung areas [46]. therefore, Fcv may be a potential strategy to prolong evLP over time.

(p13.6) Recently, it was hypothesised that minimization of the expiratory flow rate may be beneficial for both invasive and non-invasive mechanical ventilation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients. Some of the symptoms' severity is attributed to central airway collapse during exhalation, which can be limited with application of counter pressure. However, clinical application of these effects is yet to be seen [47].
## (s14) LImItatIons
(p14.0) One of the shortcomings of a small lumen tube is the risk of obstruction with excessive airway secretions or blood from the operating field. Patients with a difficult airway, in whom the intubation procedure may be traumatic and extend beyond the standard period, are especially susceptible to this risk. Meulemans et al. [30] recommend preoperative administration of 0.2 milligrams of glycopyrronium to reduce the secretion of mucus and prevent ventilation disturbance. this long-acting anticholinergic drug should be used with caution in the presence of diseases such as cardiac disorders, renal dysfunction, glaucoma or urinary retention. When faced with excessive secretions in the airway it is not possible to use a traditional suction catheter; however, with a deflated cuff the ventilation lumen can be used for suctioning, equivalent to a 12 ch catheter [15].

(p14.1) Another disadvantage arising from the cuffed small lumen tube is the risk of displacement from the trachea due to various reasons such as coughing, which might happen especially during emergence from anaesthesia. this situation may result in the need to switch to alternative methods of securing the airways and use of conventional ventilation modes which were reported in previous studies [14].
