# materials Hyaluronic Acid-Silver Nanocomposites and Their Biomedical Applications: A Review

CorpusID: 245571975 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8ca46861eae0a2acb5086a54f08655007f52aad5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8ca46861eae0a2acb5086a54f08655007f52aad5)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s2) Physicochemical Properties of HA/AgNPs Biopolymers
(p2.0) Considered in the article polymers were hydrophilic (based on the water contact angle which oscillates depending on the used material in range of almost 0° (for the top layer of polymers synthetized by Vale et al. [31] to 64,2° [29]) which is a favorable behavior in the case of wound dressing. Also, wettability and swelling properties were commonly measured, showing significant ability of water uptake [19,23,31] indicating usefulness of the materials in absorbing the exudation. The nanocomposites exhibited relatively high resistance to degradation mediated via enzymes (e.g., lysozyme [30]). Moreover, the polymers were unaffected by disintegration in physiological-like conditions [20], but in the case of one substance the degradation was quite high [19]. Quantity of the silver released from the biopolymer fluctuated in studies [20,21,28,33], but generally relied on the application of the polymer. It is worth to mention that one composite [28] can adapt the release of antibacterial ions in response to bacterial activity measured by hyaluronidase presence. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) results for these biocomposites were similar, showing low weight loss to the temperature of ~250 °C and further rapid decline of mass which stops at about ~400 °C [19,23,27,29]. The exact thermal degradation profile depends on the other substrates in the polymer structure but the share of HA in it is the most marked. Comparison of Young's modulus of assessed materials shows vide range of values [28,31,33], suggesting that stiffness of the biocomposites is predominantly dependent on the synthesis method and other substances forming polymer. Elongation at break of dis- Electrospinning is a process in which electric force is used to form fibres from polyelectrolytes. Biopolymers can be easily processed using this method, because it does not require aggressive conditions and is well-suited for macromolecules. In medicine, it is used in tissue engineering, drug delivery and to produce nanofibrous mats used as wound dressings with favourable properties [28].

(p2.1) Layer-by-layer (LbL) method allows creating thin polymeric films by a subsequent deposition of oppositely charged macromolecules. The number of layers strongly influences the mechanical features of the film, so they can be changed in a simple way by adjusting the time of the process. In the case of HA and Ag NPs, the two-component LbL composite is impossible to obtain due to negative charge of HA and no charge of Ag NPs, but the addition of positively charged polymer (e.g., chitosan) resulted in the formation of functional wound dressing [32].
## (s3) Physicochemical Properties of HA/AgNPs Biopolymers
(p3.0) Considered in the article polymers were hydrophilic (based on the water contact angle which oscillates depending on the used material in range of almost 0 • (for the top layer of polymers synthetized by Vale et al. [31] to 64,2 • [29]) which is a favorable behavior in the case of wound dressing. Also, wettability and swelling properties were commonly measured, showing significant ability of water uptake [19,23,31] indicating usefulness of the materials in absorbing the exudation. The nanocomposites exhibited relatively high resistance to degradation mediated via enzymes (e.g., lysozyme [30]). Moreover, the polymers were unaffected by disintegration in physiological-like conditions [20], but in the case of one substance the degradation was quite high [19]. Quantity of the silver released from the biopolymer fluctuated in studies [20,21,28,33], but generally relied on the application of the polymer. It is worth to mention that one composite [28] can adapt the release of antibacterial ions in response to bacterial activity measured by hyaluronidase presence. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) results for these biocomposites were similar, showing low weight loss to the temperature of~250 • C and further rapid decline of mass which stops at about~400 • C [19,23,27,29]. The exact thermal degradation profile depends on the other substrates in the polymer structure but the share of HA in it is the most marked. Comparison of Young's modulus of assessed materials shows vide range of values [28,31,33], suggesting that stiffness of the biocomposites is predominantly dependent on the synthesis method and other substances forming polymer. Elongation at break of discussed polymers is relatively low (e.g., about 3-4% for material proposed by Abdel-Mohsen et al. [27]. Despite the results of tensile testing indicating meagre mechanical properties, the HA/AgNPs biopolymers still might serve an important role concerning their potential medical application where this characteristic is not a significant drawback. Their combination with other materials in functional product could also solve this disadvantage.

(p3.1) Aforementioned substances manifest many physical properties favorable in designed applications. Biomaterial synthetized by Liyan et al. [33] achieved proportion of storage (elastic) modulus (G ) and loss (viscous) modulus (G ) characteristic for hydrogels (G > G ), which enables the possibility to freely form any shape-it is important in creation of perfectly fitted wound dressing. Design of biocomposite made of Pluronics blends, corn silk extract, HA and AgNPs, that has gelation temperature (measured as the point of temperature when G modulus becomes higher than G modulus) similar to physiological body temperature [27] is even more promising as such substance can be injected into wounded site and then creates fitted dressing. Indeed, the hydrogel exposed favorable for substances injected by needle viscosity behavior with shear thinning effect. Also, the bone filler biocomposite might be easily injected after suspension in polysaccharide solution [20].
## (s4) Mechanism of Action
(p4.0) In vitro studies revealed that hyaluronic acid beneficially controls cell migration and synthesis of intercellular substance. It improves cell migration speed, proliferation rate and an extracellular matrix production, emphasizing the significance of the cell microenvironment to wound healing process [27]. Depending on its molecular weight and presence of additional functional groups it can either stimulate or inhibit various metabolic pathways and processes in living organisms. HA stimulates the migration and proliferation of macrophages and smooth muscle cells and, hence, promotes a growth of atheroma. Moreover, it can boost tumour growth and metastasis by facilitating the infiltration of basal lamina and stimulation of angiogenesis [34].
## (s6) Cytotoxicity
(p6.0) Nanosilver is commonly used in many areas of the human everyday life, for instance, in textiles, deodorants, paints, packaging, and kitchen equipment. Such a wide use of silver evokes questions about its influence on human organism. In general, Ag ions are regarded to be cytocompatible at low concentrations. However, high doses of silver ions released in a short time may induce cytotoxicity [20].
## (s7) Cytotoxicity
(p7.0) Nanosilver is commonly used in many areas of the human everyday life, for instance, in textiles, deodorants, paints, packaging, and kitchen equipment. Such a wide use of silver evokes questions about its influence on human organism. In general, Ag ions are regarded to be cytocompatible at low concentrations. However, high doses of silver ions released in a short time may induce cytotoxicity [20].
## (s8) Examples of Usage
(p8.0) The hyaluronidase-triggered nanosilver release was investigated by Ran and coworkers [97], who obtained a photothermal nanocomposite of hyaluronic acid coated silver nanoparticles, which were next integrated within the graphene oxide. The composite presented low cytotoxicity to human cells and provided excellent antibacterial activity against S. aureus. The selectivity was explained by the ability of the bacteria to secret hyaluronidase, which degraded the hyaluronic acid coating, resulting in the release of the nanosilver. What is more, upon illumination with the near-infrared light, the temperature of the graphene oxide increased locally, which led to the high mortality of bacteria.
