# Female dietary patterns and outcomes of in vitro fertilization (IVF): a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 246002062 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/687c51328abda63bc7c3105864dac017a44a197d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/687c51328abda63bc7c3105864dac017a44a197d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Selection criteria
(p2.0) Inclusion criteria were based on the PICO framework (Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome) [39]. P: women undergoing IVF or IVF with intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). Weight loss potentially improves outcomes during IVF treatment among women who are overweight (body mass index > = 25 kg/m2) or diagnosed with polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) [40]; thus, we excluded studies restricted to women who are overweight or diagnosed with PCOS. I: dietary pattern with clearly delineated component food items. C: comparison group that differed in adherence to the dietary pattern. Early outcomes, such as embryo quality and yield, may not predict overall IVF treatment success [41][42][43]. Thus O: biochemical pregnancy (pregnancy diagnosed only by the detection of beta human chorionic gonadotrophin (βhCG) in serum or urine), clinical pregnancy (pregnancy diagnosed by ultrasonographic visualization of one or more gestational sacs or definitive clinical signs of pregnancy), or live birth (the birth of a live fetus after 22 completed weeks of gestational age) [44].
## (s7) Assessment of study quality
(p7.0) Nine studies underwent the initial quality assessment and two studies were omitted; one lacked sufficient information to make an assessment [46] and one contained a measure of association for clinical pregnancy that fell outside the confidence interval (OR 0.14, 95% CI: 0.3-0.7) [47]. Study authors could not be reached to correct this error [47] (Table 1). Seven studies were rated as "acceptable" quality and were included in the review. In included studies, potential selection bias and reliability of exposure assessment were the most common inadequately addressed items (items 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.12, Table 1).
## (s10) 'Profertility' diet
(p10.0) The 'profertility' diet was examined alongside the Med-Diet in Gaskins 2019. The 'profertility' diet is based on findings from the EARTH study and comprises higher intake of supplemental folic acid, vitamin B12, vitamin D, low-pesticide fruits and vegetables, whole grains, seafood, dairy, and soy foods; and lower intake of high pesticide fruits and vegetables [32,48] (Table 2). Higher adherence to the 'profertility' diet was positively associated with biochemical pregnancy, clinical pregnancy, and probability of live birth (probability of live birth as an adjusted proportion Q1 vs Q4 (95% CI) = 0.33 (0.26-0.40), 0.56 (0.47-0.64) (Gaskins, 2019) ( Table 4). Findings were largely attributed to intake of micronutrients and pesticide residues on fruits and vegetables, however an indirect approximated measure of pesticide intake was used to assess exposure [48]. The sample included 357 women participating in the EARTH study and the 
## (s11) A Dutch 'preconception' diet
(p11.0) In a study of 199 Dutch women undergoing IVF treatment, Twigt (2012) found a positive association between increasing adherence to a Dutch 'preconception' diet and ongoing pregnancy at 10 weeks (adjusted OR 1.65, 95% CI: 1.08-2.52) [53] ( Table 4). The Dutch 'preconception' diet is comprised of: high daily intake of whole grains, vegetables, and fruit; weekly intake of at least three servings of meat or meat replacers and one serving of fish; and use of monounsaturated or polyunsaturated oils [53] ( Table 2). The study occurred within the context of a preconception intervention in which women attending an outpatient OB/GYN clinic could opt into counseling to improve their lifestyle, including diet. The analytic population comprised women who opted into the intervention and subsequently underwent an IVF treatment.     
## (s12) Dietary patterns with largely null associations with IVF outcomes The aHEI-2010 diet and 'fertility diet'
(p12.0) The aHEI-2010 diet and 'Fertility Diet' were examined alongside the MedDiet and 'profertility' diet in Gaskins, 2019. Higher adherence to the aHEI-2010 diet or the 'Fertility Diet' was not appreciably associated with biochemical pregnancy, clinical pregnancy, or live birth  Table 4). The 'Fertility Diet' is comprised of higher intake of monounsaturated fatty acids to trans-fat, vegetable protein, high-fat dairy, iron, and multivitamins; lower intake of animal protein and low-fat dairy; and lower glycemic load. The aHEI-2010 diet is comprised of higher intake of vegetables (excluding potatoes), fruit, whole grains, nuts and legumes, long chain omega-3 fats, polyunsaturated fat, and alcohol; and lower intake of sugar-sweetened beverages, fruit juice, red and processed meat, trans-fat, and sodium [48] ( Table 2).
## (s14) 'Health-conscious low processed' dietary pattern
(p14.0) Vujkovik [54] examined a 'Mediterranean style' and 'health-conscious low processed' dietary pattern, within the same cohort of 161 couples. The 'health-conscious low processed' dietary pattern is defined as containing high intakes of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, fish, and legumes, but low intake of mayonnaise, snacks, and meat products ( Table 2). Contrary to findings for the 'Mediterranean style' dietary pattern, a couple's higher adherence to a 'health-conscious low processed' dietary pattern was associated with reduced odds of biochemical pregnancy (adjusted OR 0.8 (95% CI: 0.6-1.0) ( Table 4). Vujkovik [54] attributes the difference in findings to higher intake of linoleic acid, a component found in vegetable oil, and higher levels of vitamin B6 found in the serum and follicular fluid of women with higher adherence to a 'Mediterranean style' dietary pattern.
## (s15) Study characteristics likely leading to increased heterogeneity Study population and exclusion criteria
(p15.0) Studies were conducted in six countries: China, Japan, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands (n = 2), and U.S. (Supplement Table 2). Three studies excluded women based on underlying medical and/or reproductive conditions including; hypertension, endometriosis, or tubal factor infertility [49,51,54]. Two excluded older women (over 40 or 41) [49,52], two excluded women based on treatment protocol [49,52], and three studies contained a higher percentage of participants with male versus female factor infertility [49,53,54]. By exclusion criteria, one study each excluded women who did not undergo an ART treatment [48], did not undergo an embryo transfer [53], or became pregnant before treatment started [54].
## (s16) Dietary patterns and components
(p16.0) Across studies, the exposure under investigation (dietary pattern) was selected using two different methods (Supplemental Table 2). In two studies, an α-posteriori approach was utilized [51,54]. Results from participant questionnaires or FFQ were examined and the exposure was derived based on which dietary pattern best fit the data. In the remaining studies, investigators used a hypothesis driven α-priori approach. An exposure was chosen before dietary intake information was obtained and a FFQ or questionnaire appropriate for the respective pattern administered.

(p16.1) No two studies included the same dietary components in their definitions of the MedDiet ( Table 2). All MedDiet definitions included higher intake of seafood, legumes, fruits, and vegetables. Most included low consumption of meat [48][49][50]52] and low to moderate (versus no or high) intake of alcohol [48][49][50]54]. Definitions inconsistently included; whole grains, type of fats and oils, dairy, nuts, poultry, and potatoes ( Table 2).
## (s17) Time period of exposure assessment
(p17.0) All studies reporting the exposure window period asked participants about relatively recent dietary intake with exposure windows ranging from four weeks [54] to twelve months prior to exposure assessment [48][49][50]52] (Supplemental Table 2). In Sugawa (2018), participants reported their current dietary intake during the month leading up to oocyte retrieval, and in Twigt (2012) the exposure window is not stated. In two studies, women were asked whether they had changed their diet during the exposure window and were excluded if they had made a change [49,52]. In the remaining studies, diet change during the exposure window was not reported [48,50,51,53,54].
## (s18) Study end points and follow-up
(p18.0) Study length varied from one month [51] to ten years [48] (Supplemental Table 2). Participants were followed until the occurrence of at least one of the following events: biochemical pregnancy, clinical pregnancy, or live birth; completion of a maximum of six medical stimulation 'cycles' or treatment cessation [48], one oocyte retrieval and the transfer of resulting fresh and/or frozen embryos (only cycle with 'best' outcome included in analysis) [50], one oocyte retrieval and transfer of only the first fresh embryo(s) [49,51,53,54], or until study end date [52]. The maximum time period between the exposure assessment and reproductive outcome was not explicitly stated across studies, however likely ranged from weeks and months [48][49][50][51][52][53][54] to years [48,50], and in the case of Gaskins and colleagues (2019), potentially up to ten years.
## (s19) Outcome definitions
(p19.0) Outcomes were defined somewhat inconsistently (Supplemental Table 2). Four studies reported on biochemical pregnancy defined as a rise in serum βhCG 14-21 days after oocyte retrieval [48,49], urine test 15 days after oocyte retrieval [54], and undefined in one [52]. Six studies reported on clinical pregnancy confirmed by ultrasound at 6-10 weeks [48][49][50][51]53], and undefined in one study [52]. Three studies reported the outcome of live birth, which was defined as birth of a neonate after 24 weeks in two studies [48,49] and not defined in the third study [50].
## (s20) Study characteristics likely leading to methodological challenges Exposure assessment
(p20.0) All studies utilized questionnaires to assess exposure, with most utilizing a validated self-administered semiquantitative FFQ (number of items ranging from 6 to 131) [48,49,51,54] (Supplemental Table 2). No questionnaire was validated prospectively in a population of women experiencing infertility and/or undergoing IVF treatment. In all studies, for exposure classification, participants were grouped into categories of adherence (e.g., low, intermediate, high) to the dietary pattern under investigation in relation to other participants' adherence based on questionnaire responses. In all studies, exposure used for analyses and covariates were assessed once at baseline and not reassessed during the follow up period for changes. Studies including participants who utilized cryopreserved embryos or oocytes did not assess exposure at both the time of cryopreservation and the time of attempted use/transfer into a uterus [48,50].
## (s21) Timing of recruitment and exposure data collection
(p21.0) It is unclear if studies included baseline data on the duration of the current pregnancy attempt. A portion of participants in three studies had undergone at least one prior IVF treatment cycle during the current pregnancy attempt at the time of recruitment [48,50,54] while no participant had a previous IVF treatment in two studies [49,51] (Supplemental Table 2). Four studies collected information on participants' 'duration of infertility' at the time of baseline data collection [49,[52][53][54]. In the two studies in which a range of data was provided, participants had a mean duration of 3 years [49,52]. Six studies collected exposure data subsequent to initial consultation for infertility; three at treatment initiation [48,51,52], two at the time of oocyte retrieval [49,50] and one at the time of embryo transfer [54].
## (s22) Covariates collected for assessment of confounding
(p22.0) Female age and body mass index (BMI) were the only covariates controlled for in all studies (Supplemental Table  2). All but one study controlled for energy intake and smoking [52]. 'Duration of infertility' , previous use of ART, infertility diagnosis (male, female, unexplained), education, income, treatment protocol and use of ICSI, parity, physical activity, vitamin/supplement use, alcohol and caffeine intake, paternal covariates, and covariates related to mental health were inconsistently controlled for [48][49][50][51][52][53][54].
## (s24) Associations between dietary patterns and IVF outcomes
(p24.0) Nine different dietary patterns from seven observational studies were examined among participants. Higher adherence to the MedDiet, a Dutch 'preconception' diet, and a 'profertility' diet were associated with improvements in biochemical pregnancy, clinical pregnancy, or live birth in at least one study. Amongst studies of the MedDiet, findings were inconsistent and dose-response associations were only found in one study. Within the study, associations were modified by age and present only among women age < 35 and only for the outcomes of clinical pregnancy and live birth. Although examined in one relatively small population, increased adherence to a 'profertility' diet was associated with improvements in biochemical pregnancy, clinical pregnancy, and live birth. Likewise, higher adherence to a Dutch 'preconception diet' was associated with improvements in clinical pregnancy in a single small study. The aHEI-2010 diet, 'Fertility Diet' , 'health-conscious low processed' dietary pattern, 'vegetable and seafood' dietary pattern, 'Western' dietary pattern, and 'rice and miso soup' dietary pattern were not materially associated with improved IVF outcomes. Explanations for differences in findings across and within studies on the MedDiet put forth by study authors include the escalating and overshadowing influence of age on fertility [49], lack of accounting for dietary supplements [50], and insufficient statistical power [51]. Likewise, authors of studies investigating remaining dietary patterns hypothesize that differences may be attributed to intake of substances such as pesticides [48] and linoleic acid [54]. However, causative conclusions are difficult to draw due to the high degree of heterogeneity across studies and potential bias resulting from methodological issues which may mask true associations.
