# Coupled nitrogen transformation and carbon sink in the karst aquatic system: a review

CorpusID: 244887740 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/75452c49e728adb6173ff9b92604171fce588507](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/75452c49e728adb6173ff9b92604171fce588507)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s3) Excessive input of nitrogen (N) in karst water
(p3.0) Intensive agriculture and urbanization have led to the excessive input of N into the soil and further increased the amount of nitrate (NO 3 À ) in water (Xin et al. 2019), as well as changed the N cycle process in the aquatic ecosystem. Human activities have delivered 64 Tg N/yr to rivers and streams in the 20th century, which doubled that in the 19th century (34 Tg N/yr) (Beusen et al. 2016). It has been shown that the cycling of C and N in karst aquatic systems is closely related to each other, as coupled C-N cycling is involved in the transformation of DIC into dissolved organic carbon (DOC) . The increasing anthropogenic atmospheric CO 2 emissions result in a progressive increase in N limitation in plants. C sequestration and increased atmospheric CO 2 concentrations would lower terrestrial N availability and lead to decreases in N flux to the atmosphere and N deposition to aquatic ecosystems. As industrial and agricultural discharge drives a sharp increase in anthropogenic N emissions, the magnitude of N from this anthropogenic input will likely become large enough to sustain similar conditions of ecosystem N availability (McLauchlan et al. 2013). The elevated DIC concentrations in karst water may also enhance the aquatic photosynthetic uptake of DIC (Liu et al. 2010b and then may promote N translation. However, the interactions between N translation and CO 2 absorption in karst aquatic ecosystems have not been well depicted.
## (s6) The characteristic of carbonate weathering
(p6.0) The carbonate weathering is formulated as CaCO 3 þ CO 2 þ H 2 O ↔ HCO À 3 þ Ca 2þ and CaMg(CO 3 ) 2 þ 2CO 2 þ 2H 2 O ↔ 4HCO À 3 þ Ca 2þ þ Mg 2þ . CO 2 consumed during carbonates dissolution would finally be released to the atmosphere by the precipitation of carbonates in the oceans (Garrels 1983), and the kinetics of dissolution is much faster as compared to precipitation considering the ocean turnover time (timescales of ,3 ka). Therefore, carbonate weathering is critical in global CO 2 balances (Van Cappellen & Qiu 1997;Kump et al. 2000).

(p6.1) CO 2 was absorbed by raindrops formed in the atmosphere, and of which the concentration would further increase after precipitation and infiltration in the soil due to vegetation and microbial processes. Furthermore, the CO 2 in soil water could dissolve the bedrock underlying soil, composed of carbonate rock, during percolation of soil moisture in the karst area. Previous research found that the contribution of carbonates, e.g. HCO À 3 , to the total dissolved load in the lakes and rivers worldwide was up to 38% (Ferris et al. 1994).
## (s11) N cycle processes
(p11.0) In aquatic environments, N was composed by organic and inorganic N (Nie et al. 2018). The organic nitrogen is divided into dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) and particulate organic nitrogen (PON), depending on whether it can pass through a 0.2-μm filter ( Jørgensen 2009). DON includes a variety of organic molecules and compounds, ranging from small molecules like urea and amino acids, to peptides and proteins, while PON includes both dead OM and living organisms that are larger than 0.2 μm (Jørgensen 2009). The inorganic nitrogen in aquatic ecosystems includes dissolved N 2 gas, oxidized ions such as nitrate (NO 3 À ), nitrite (NO 2 À ), ammonium ion (NH 4 þ ), and ammonia gas (NH 3 ) (Howarth 2009). The most frequently detected mineral N fractions in water are NO 3 À and NH 4 þ , which are also the dominant components of N produced by human activities (Beusen et al. 2016).
## (s12) N cycle characteristics in karst area
(p12.0) Due to the unique hydrochemistry of karst water (such as high Ca 2þ content, high pH, and high DIC concentrations), the N cycle characteristics in karst areas are different from those in non-karst areas. In the perspective of the N cycle, the alkalinity and high DIC contents in karst areas can inhibit the heterotrophic denitrification and mineralization processes, which determine the karst aquatic environment as an N sink. During nitrification, the oxidation of every ammonium ion produces two protons worth of acidity and makes the environment more acidic (Howarth 2009). Therefore, the alkaline environment in karst water is beneficial to neutralizing the acid generated by nitrification and further promotes nitrification. However, the denitrification process is opposite to nitrification. Every nitrate ion consumed during denitrification consumes one proton of acidity, and thus, this process tends to raise the pH of the environment (Howarth 2009). Consequently, the inherent alkalinity of karst water will inhibit the denitrification reaction. Furthermore, the high DIC/N ratios in karst water can inhibit the gross mineralization because microbes immobilize rather than mineralize N to maintain the stoichiometric ratio of DIC/N in their biomass (Xin et al. 2019).
## (s14) Carbonate-related atmospheric CO 2 sinks
(p14.0) Two primary processes related to global sinks of atmospheric CO 2 are the transformation of CO 2 to HCO À 3 in water due to rock weathering (Li et al. 2011) and the assimilation of CO 2 by photosynthesis to organic C (Sabine et al. 2004;Zeebe & Caldeira 2008). There are three sources of HCO À 3 , including carbonate weathering by carbonic acid, carbonic weathering by sulfuric and/or nitric acids, and silicate weathering. Carbonates can consume more atmospheric and petrologic CO 2 because of their high solubility and high dissolution rate (Liu et al. 2010b), resulting in aquatic photosynthesis is the main process for CO 2 absorption in silicate terrains, the roles of both carbonate mineral weathering and aquatic photosynthesis, termed as coupled carbonate weathering, are significant in karst areas (Liu et al. 2018). In addition, Sun et al. (2021aSun et al. ( , 2021b also observed that the average contributions made by silicate weathering to the CO 2 sink in the Lijiang River basin ranged from only 2.3 to 14.8%, which indicated that carbonate weathering was the main source of HCO À 3 in this basin although carbonate rock area (3,832 km 2 ) is smaller than silicate rock area (5,482 km 2 ). DIC is mainly consumed by phototrophs in aquatic ecosystems such as rivers, lakes, and the oceans (Dean & Gorham 1998;Cassar et al. 2004;Tortell et al. 2008). During this process, DIC is transformed in the water to OC and pCO 2 is reduced, which results in the continuous uptake of atmospheric CO 2 (Liu et al. 2010b). The biological productivity of aquatic phototrophs has been found to be associated with the supply of DIC from rock weathering. For instance, the utilization of HCO À 3 by Oocystis solitaria Wittr in karst water was 4.6-fold higher than that in non-karst water (Liu et al. 2010a).

(p14.1) Previous researches concluded that the atmospheric CO 2 consumed by carbonate weathering was compensated by a CO 2 released from marine carbonate precipitation over a relatively short time. However, this conclusion neglected the large amount of atmospheric CO 2 uptake during aquatic photosynthesis (Liu et al. 2010b). Moreover, Liu et al. (2018) also observed that the increased DIC concentration controlled by carbonate weathering in the karst area might enhance aquatic photosynthesis, promoting the consumption of atmospheric carbon. Therefore, the amount of CO 2 absorbed by the C sink in the karst area was larger as compared to other areas.
## (s15) High carbon sink rate in carbonate area
(p15.0) As shown in Table 3, the range of carbon sink rate in carbonate area was 1.54-73 tC/km 2 /yr, while in silicate area the range of this value was 0.02-8.0 tC/km 2 /yr. The annual average C sequestration flux of limestone weathering in China was estimated to be 4.28-5.02 tC/km 2 /yr ). The C sinks produced by carbonate weathering and the 'biological C pump' in the Li River basin were 12.17 and 2.24 tC/km 2 /yr, respectively (Sun et al. 2021a(Sun et al. , 2021b. The average amount of CO 2 consumed by C sinks in karst basins around the world (8.5 tC/km 2 /yr) was about three times higher than that in non-karst basins (2.86 tC/km 2 /yr). In karst water, the C sink is enhanced by N translation, as the concentration of dissolved CO 2 was decreased dramatically (about 75%) due to the increase of NO 3 À in the Yangtze River . Therefore, in the karst basin, the transformation of C and N by aquatic phototrophs was coupled.
