# The Repair of Organizational Trust:An Investigation from Literature Review Study

CorpusID: 241842344 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/719eaa7f4a50795e6fb54396690dc56d056db000](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/719eaa7f4a50795e6fb54396690dc56d056db000)

Fields: Business, Psychology, Sociology

## (s3) Conceptualization and theoretical mechanisms of trust repair
(p3.0) The author first discussed the underlying theoretical frameworks that reinforce the repair of organizational trust. Dirks and colleagues describe three theoretical mechanisms to explain trust attribution, structural, and structural repair of trust . Bachmann et al. (2015) recently recommended six compatible repair strategies consolidative models that integrate the three proposed frameworks by Dirks and colleagues. The author has developed this current approach to inform and theorize trust repair approaches, with findings from chosen experiential research on the repair of trust in institutions and organizations.
## (s7) Accountability
(p7.0) The idea is based on the view to restore trust by sharing transparently related knowledge about and collaborating with members on the corporate decision-taking cycle (Bachmann et al., 2015). The focus is on organizational reporting and monitoring. The responsibilities, transparency, and disclosure mechanisms provide a foundation for trust and the literature on corporative governance and public administration.

(p7.1) This mechanism is widely used in corporate governance and public management literature that suggests that trust is built on principles of accountability, transparency, and disclosure (Child et al., 2004). This partnership was built for businesses with a negative reputation at the beginning, and for corporations with the right image, the form of disclosure self vs. a third individual did not impact customer interest.

(p7.2) While highlighting the importance of transparent government for public trust, empirical evidence of the relationship between transparency and trust between the government is incorrect and knowledgeable. Grimmelikhuijsen et al. (2013), for example, reported that the effect of accountability on government trust was low and often harmful. Grimmelikhuijsen et al. (2014) further found that only a minority of people with no direct awareness of the policy issue and weak predisposition to the government have a positive relationship between openness and citizen sense of confidence in the system. Such experimental results indicate that the connection between transparency and trust is far from clear or straightforward in structural and organizational environments and requires further empiric evaluation, and how such effects turn into a single trust solution setting.
