# Articular Cartilage Assessment Using Ultrashort Echo Time MRI: A Review

CorpusID: 249048040 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf59abfaf20d933a0f43101d6529054a54c2be84](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf59abfaf20d933a0f43101d6529054a54c2be84)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Articular cartilage is one of the most important components of the human knee joint, distributing compressive loads and enabling low-friction motion (1). Medical imaging is of critical role in cartilage assessment for screening and treatment purposes (2,3).

(p0.1) Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has long been a useful modality in the investigation of musculoskeletal (MSK) components, particularly in the case of evaluating articular cartilage in the human knee joint. Collagenous matrix is one of the primary components of cartilage, which has a higher structural order at the deeper layers of cartilage. Part of the water components in cartilage are tightly bound to the collagenous matrix (i.e., bound water). This bound water component typically has a much shorter T 2 relative to the free water component due to its limited mobility. Deeper layers of cartilage consist of more bound water because of the denser collagen structures in these regions. As a result, cartilage has a relatively short T 2 relaxation, especially when the collagen fiber orientates in parallel to the B 0 field due to the magic angle effect (4). In general, T 2 in tissues can be categorized into the four following groups: "super-short" (T 2 <0.1 ms), "ultrashort" (0.1<T 2 <1 ms), "short" (1<T 2 <10 ms), and "long" (T 2 >10 ms) (5). While conventional MRI is oftentimes able to provide accurate morphological assessment of many musculoskeletal tissues throughout the body with high spatial resolution, in the case of articular cartilage, conventional MRI techniques such as the fast spin echo (FSE) sequence are, in fact, incapable of capturing this tissue's short T 2 signals due to the MRI sequences' relatively long echo times (TEs) (>5 ms).
## (s1) BASIC UTE
(p1.0) Basic UTE, or UTE without any preparation pulses, has mainly been employed for morphological imaging of the articular cartilage. However, by using UTE images at varying echo times (TEs) or at varying repetition times (TRs) and flip angles (FAs), basic UTE has been used to measure cartilage T * 2 (39, 61) and cartilage T1 (4,29,31), respectively. Basic UTE can also be performed with different readout trajectories. Figure 2 illustrates three representative UTE pulse sequence diagrams. In UTE sequences, a short rectangular or half soft pulse is employed for signal excitation. Ramp sampling and fast transmit/receive switching strategy are utilized to minimize TE for the excited fid signals. Non-Cartesian k-space trajectories, such as radial and spiral, are the most commonly used spatial encoding patterns.
## (s4) INVERSION RECOVERY UTE (IR-UTE)
(p4.0) UTE MRI has been shown to be capable of visualizing the superficial and deep layers of articular cartilage. Deep layer cartilage and ZCC zones are of great interest to researchers because of their roles in the progression of OA; consequently, several inversion recovery (IR) preparation pulses have been proposed to be used in combination with UTE MRI for visualization and quantification of these clinically significant cartilage layers (12,68). Figure 9 compares clinical images (PD-weighted FSE in first column and T 2 -weighted FSE in second column) with UTE images (IR prepared fat saturated UTE (IR-FS-UTE) in the third and fourth columns and FS-UTE in last column).

(p4.1) In most IR-UTE techniques, an adiabatic full passage inversion pulse is used before the UTE acquisition to invert the longitudinal magnetization of water without incurring a B1 inhomogeneity penalty. Pure short T 2 water pool imaging depends on the optimized inversion time (TI) which is required to let the inverted long T2 magnetization reach the nulling status. UTE MRI acquisition after the nulling point results in short T 2 water visualization, which is dominant in the deep layer and ZCC of articular cartilage. Maximizing the short T 2 signal while simultaneously avoiding long T 2 signal contamination has been investigated by Ma et al. and Jang et al. (12,68) who have optimized several sequence parameters such as TI. Figure 10 shows the single-and bi-component analysis of IR-FS-UTE imaging of more superficial cartilage (blue box) and OCJ (red box) regions. As can be seen from these fitting curves, the bicomponent model performs much better than the singlecomponent model with regard to data fitting. The T * 2 relaxations for both the short and long T 2 components in the more superficial cartilage region are longer than those in the OCJ region. Higher short T 2 fraction is also found in the OCJ region. These results demonstrate that the collagen matrix is more densely distributed or there is more calcification existed in the OCJ region.

(p4.2) For deep cartilage and ZCC cartilage layer assessment, dual adiabatic IR-UTE (Dual-IR-UTE) has also been developed as a method that avoids fat signal contamination that may not be nulled by just a single adiabatic IR pulse (13,14). Dual-IR-UTE is  designed to employ two adiabatic IR pulses that invert and suppress long T 2 water and fat magnetizations at their respective frequencies.

(p4.3) By utilizing Dual-IR-UTE images at differing TEs, Dual-IR-UTE images with differing TRs, and spin locking-prepared Dual-IR-UTE acquisitions, the ZCC were able to be visualized and quantified (i.e., T * 2 , T 1 , and T 1r ) (13).
## (s7) CHEMICAL EXCHANGE SATURATION TRANSFER (CEST) UTE
(p7.0) The chemical exchange saturation transfer (CEST) phenomena occurs when water-soluble macromolecules with exchangeable protons (generally, the amide side of the chains in contrast agents typically injected into joints) become exposed to water or body fluid protons (76). Because CEST is assumed to occur more intensely in an acidic environment where there are more free protons available, it has been hypothesized that quantification of CEST can be used to detect pH changes in tissues, which themselves may be a sign of lactic acid accumulation and pain triggers. AcidoCEST-UTE has been introduced recently by Ma et al. as a potential technique for measuring extracellular PH in tissues with short T 2 values such as articular cartilage (50). The feasibility of the acidoCEST-UTE technique was investigated on a liquid phantom and ex vivo human cartilage phantoms doped with iodinated contrast agent in a 3T scanner. Among iodinated contrasts tested in liquid phantoms, iopamidol and iohexol were determined to be feasible for pH detection using AcidoCEST-UTE., with iohexol having the best performance in determine the tissue pH (50).
## (s9) UTE WITH FAT SUPPRESSION
(p9.0) Fat saturation techniques are regularly used to improve image contrast for better visualization of the target tissue. In a novel study, Ma et al. proposed a soft-hard composite RF pulse to suppress fat signals in UTE imaging for tissues with short T 2 (78). The soft pulse of this composite pulse has a narrow bandwidth, small negative flip angle, and is centered on the fat peak. The hard pulse is a short rectangular pulse and has a small positive flip angle. The outcome is fat magnetization that tips down and back with an identical flip angle, i.e., that returns to a state of equilibrium, so that only the excited water magnetization remains. Ma et al.'s feasibility study investigated the knees and tibias of respectively five and six healthy volunteers between the ages of 22 and 35 on a 3T scanner. For comparison, a conventional fat saturation (FatSat) model was used; for evaluation of the novel technique's efficiency, signal suppression ratio (SSR) was introduced. Higher SSR was consistent with better fat suppression or water attenuation induced by fat suppression. The soft-hard composite pulse approach resulted in much lower signal attenuation of water imaging than the conventional FatSat method on simulation studies, performed well for in vivo fat suppression, and produced better preservation of both long and short T 2 signals, significantly higher SSR specifically for short T 2 signals, and better contrast between water and fat. Jang et al. developed the ultrashort echo time cones double echo steady state (UTE-Cones-DESS) sequence for fast volumetric and high quality image contrast of MSK tissues (22). This technique was performed in the knee joints of both healthy volunteers and patients with osteoarthritis. To achieve a scan time of less than 5 minutes without compromising image quality, Jang et al. applied fat suppression using a novel, singlepoint Dixon (spDixon) approach (79). This high contrast morphological imaging method of short T 2 tissues, including the deep layers of cartilage, has the potential to assess musculoskeletal diseases.

(p9.1) Chen et al. investigated the effects of fat saturation on three quantitative UTE images including T * 2 , T 1r , and MT (59). These sequences were implemented with and without fat saturation on knee cartilage samples and whole cadaveric knee specimens at 3T. This investigation demonstrated strong correlations and agreement with some minor differences for all UTE biomarkers between the measurements with and without FatSat, confirming that fat suppression was effective in all three UTE sequences where FatSat was employed for whole joint quantification including cartilage.

(p9.2) Springer et al. aimed to visualize short T 2 tissues with optimal contrast and adequate suppression of signal from the surrounding fat by implementing a time-efficient 1:1 double pulse water-selective excitation (WE) into a 3D UTE sequence (WE-UTE) (80). In this study, they applied WE-UTE on the flexor tendons of the human hand and the PCLs of the knee in vivo at 3T and saw that these short T 2 tissues could be well demarcated with positive contrast compared to surrounding fat. Even for tissues with T 2 values of 1 ms, WE-UTE led to 79% of maximal signal yield of UTE without fat suppression and is assumed more efficient with regard to signal yield in comparison to UTE with FatSat. Hopefully, further developments in WE-UTE will lead to optimization of a technique that can quickly and effectively visualize short T 2 tissues like knee cartilage with positive and optimal contrast (80).
## (s10) DISCUSSION
(p10.0) The suite of currently available quantitative UTE techniques has significantly improved the state of articular cartilage assessment, particularly for regions of cartilage with significant short T 2 components such as the deep layer cartilage and calcified cartilage zone. This review first described the existing UTE sampling patterns, including radial, stack of spiral, and spiral, that have been utilized to study cartilage. In general, spiral sampling is more time-efficient than radial in covering the whole k-space because of its flexibility with regard to readout stretching. 3D sampling is a better choice for high-resolution cartilage imaging than 2D, especially for evaluation of the thin deep or calcified layers.

(p10.1) The review next systematically described the current state-ofthe-art UTE techniques for assessment of cartilage, including both morphological and quantitative imaging. Morphological UTE techniques, including UTE echo subtraction, fat saturated T1-weghted UTE, UTE-DESS, IR, and Dual-IR prepared UTE, have been developed for high contrast imaging of the deep and calcified layers of cartilage. Generally, IR-based UTE sequences can generate a greater short T2 contrast compared to other non-IR-based techniques but require a much longer scan time. Many quantitative UTE imaging techniques have been developed including UTE-T 1 , UTE-T * 2 , UTE-T 1r , UTE-MT, UTE-CEST, and UTE-QSM. The biomarkers created by these techniques have different specificities: UTE-T 1 is sensitive to the water content changes, UTE-T * 2 is sensitive to the collagen integrity and calcification, UTE-T 1r is sensitive to the proteoglycan changes, UTE-MT is sensitive to collagen content and integrity, UTE-CEST is sensitive to the pH changes, and UTE-QSM is sensitive to susceptibility changes and calcification. Many of these biomarkers, such as UTE-T 1r , UTE-MT and UTE-CEST, have been validated with both sample and patient studies in a number of promising studies. However, more comprehensive studies have yet to be performed that compare the performance of these biomarkers. We expect that more clinical trial studies could help answer the question.

(p10.2) The UTE biomarkers such as UTE-T 1r and T * 2 , are limited by orientation sensitivity to the magic angle (57,81,82). Orientation-based changes may exceed the changes caused by degeneration in the cartilage itself. A few of the recently developed UTE techniques, such as UTE-AdiabT 1r and UTE-MT modeling, have shown promise in overcoming this so-called magic angle effect (57,73,74), suggesting that they have the potential to provide more robust evaluation of the cartilage composition and structural quality. Quantitative UTE biomarkers of MTR and MMF also exhibit feasibility to recognize enzymatic collagen degradation (83). Moreover, AdiabT 1r and T 1 biomarkers have the capability to detect enzymatic proteoglycan (PG) loss in human knee cartilage (83).

(p10.3) There is only one study currently published in the literature that investigated the feasibility of simultaneous susceptibility mapping of the articular cartilage and cortical bone in knee (23). In this work, susceptibility variations were found in different layers of cartilage, which was in agreement with previous GRE-QSM studies (84,85).

(p10.4) Fat signals shift radially in non-Cartesian UTE imaging due to the off-resonance sampling of fat. This significantly affects the deep and calcified layer cartilage imaging since these regions are close to the marrow fat region. Thus, fat suppression is important to reduce the fat signal contamination for both morphological and quantitative imaging. The conventional fat saturation technique is still the most widely used fat suppression technique in UTE, but the fat saturation pulse attenuates the cartilage signal due to direct and indirect saturation, especially for the shorter T 2 layers. Newly developed fat saturation techniques such as the soft-hard water excitation pulse or single point Dixon method can avoid attenuating the cartilage signals while still performing effective fat suppression. Further studies to investigate the impact of quantitative UTE imaging for variable fat suppression techniques are highly valuable. In addition, field inhomogeneity can affect the effectiveness of fat suppression and generate off-resonance blurring. Furthermore, eddy currents can create an artificial tissue boundary, thus impacting the general brightness and contrast of UTE images. Therefore, accurate eddy correction is also critical for UTE imaging. Lastly, the integrity of high-resolution UTE imaging is of paramount importance for the accurate characterization of the thin structures of both the deep and calcified cartilage layers. Because the signal-to-noise ratio may be significantly reduced for high resolution imaging, a dedicated coil or deep learning-based denoise reconstruction should be applied to help improve the SNR performance of UTE imaging (32).

(p10.5) In addition to UTE MRI, a few other novel MRI techniques have been developed in recent years for qualitative and quantitative assessment of those tissues which have short T 2 values (86). For example, zero echo time (ZTE) MRI, which utilizes a short rectangular excitation pulse during the fully ramped up readout gradient followed by fast radial sampling, is related to the UTE approach. Compared to UTE, ZTE has a shorter readout duration and therefore less T * 2 contrast but also lacks flexibility in terms of ability to adjust either the field of view or flip angle. This makes each technique better suited for particular applications in the visualization of short T 2 tissues (87). Larson et al. performed a comparative study between UTE and ZTE MRI techniques at 7T in the knee, ankle, and brain to assess differences between these two methods (48). They chose to use 7T field strength in order to take advantage of the increased polarization and also to accentuate any pulse sequence differences due to B 0 and B 1 inhomogeneities. This study observed that the UTE and ZTE techniques both achieved similar SNR efficiencies and image contrasts for volumetric imaging, but that UTE was more flexible in terms of volume selection, image contrast, and quantitative assessment of the tissue, and at a disadvantage in terms of sensitivity to gradient fidelity and higher acoustic noise.
