# micromachines A Review of Sharp-Switching Band-Modulation Devices

CorpusID: 245165941 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3848635de2b67177c2d9b27b320aeefbffb23c1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3848635de2b67177c2d9b27b320aeefbffb23c1)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Physics

## (s4) Principle of Band-Modulation
(p4.0) Although the lateral PNPN structure looks like a floating-body thyristor, its operating principle is different, as it relies on band-modulation effects, rather than impact ionization (Section 3). The device is biased in forward mode with VA > 0. The electrostatic doping builds up three P-N junctions along the body; their energy barriers prevent the injection of holes from the anode and of electrons from the cathode into the body. The device stays in blocked mode, until the gate or anode voltage becomes large enough to Consider the FD-SOI device in Figure 2a that combines electrostatic and physical doping. The end contacts, N + cathode and P + anode, are formed by ion implantation or in situ doping. The undoped body is controlled by a partial front gate (V FG ) and by the ground-plane acting as a back gate (V BG ). Each gate can induce P*-type or N*-type electrostatic doping or just leave the gated and ungated regions fully depleted (I). The concentration of electrostatically-induced carriers declines from the voltage-controlled interface to the opposite interface. The thinner the body, the more homogeneous the vertical profile of the effective doping.

(p4.1) According to the polarities of the two regions, there are nine possible combinations of the electrostatically-doped body segments, corresponding to P-N diodes, PIN diodes, IMOS, TFET, and PNPN band-modulation transistors. This single structure, which is able to impersonate nine different devices, has received the name 'hocus-pocus diode' [12], in order to emphasize the magic of electrostatic doping.
## (s5) Principle of Band-Modulation
(p5.0) Although the lateral PNPN structure looks like a floating-body thyristor, its operating principle is different, as it relies on band-modulation effects, rather than impact ionization (Section 3). The device is biased in forward mode with V A > 0. The electrostatic doping builds up three P-N junctions along the body; their energy barriers prevent the injection of holes from the anode and of electrons from the cathode into the body. The device stays in blocked mode, until the gate or anode voltage becomes large enough to collapse the barriers and let a large cathode-anode current flow. Corresponding band diagrams and a detailed description are given in Section 3.1. The switching characteristics are extremely sharp and inspired the name Z 2 -FET, for Zerosubthreshold swing and Zero impact ionization [13]. The earlier variant with two top gates, as in Figure 2b, was named a field-effect diode (FED) [15,16].
## (s6) Device Variants
(p6.0) The architecture of the Z 2 -FET can be further enriched in several ways. Dual ground-planes ( Figure 3a): The ground-plane (GP-P) located underneath the ungated portion of the body is negatively biased and generates the necessary P* electrostatic doping. The sister ground-plane, located beneath the gated region, is positively biased and assists the front gate in forming a strong energy barrier [17]. This architecture eliminates the inconvenience of a single ground plane, which tends to counteract the front-gate action (Figure 2a). collapse the barriers and let a large cathode-anode current flow. Corresponding band diagrams and a detailed description are given in Section 3.1. The switching characteristics are extremely sharp and inspired the name Z 2 -FET, for Zero subthreshold swing and Zero impact ionization [13]. The earlier variant with two top gates, as in Figure 2b, was named a field-effect diode (FED) [15,16].
## (s7) Device Variants
(p7.0) The architecture of the Z 2 -FET can be further enriched in several ways. Dual ground-planes ( Figure 3a): The ground-plane (GP-P) located underneath the ungated portion of the body is negatively biased and generates the necessary P* electrostatic doping. The sister ground-plane, located beneath the gated region, is positively biased and assists the front gate in forming a strong energy barrier [17]. This architecture eliminates the inconvenience of a single ground plane, which tends to counteract the front-gate action (Figure 2a).  Physically-doped ungated section (Figure 3b): The idea here is to eliminate the back-gate action. Boron implantation replaces the P* electrostatic doping, without affecting the sharpness of the device characteristics [18]. This solution is well suited to FinFETs and nanowires, although it does sacrifice some of the reconfigurability. Z 3 -FET ( Figure 3c): This Zero top-gate variant has the partitioning of the body doping controlled by the twin ground-planes [19]. The omission of the gate stack enables operation at higher voltage, without dielectric reliability issues. Furthermore, the free surface can be used for superior detection of light, biochemical species, or radiation.
## (s8) Implementation in FD-SOI Technology
(p8.0) Band modulation devices have been designed and fabricated in 14 nm [20] and 28 nm [21] FD-SOI technologies. Both advanced nodes feature promising characteristics, with a slightly different process flow. For instance, in 28 nm FDSOI, the fabrication of a Z 2 -FET structure (Figure 4a) starts by delimiting the device surface using STI isolation. A 25-nm-thick BOX separates the undoped ultrathin silicon film (t Si = 7 nm with~10 16 cm −3 doping concentration) from a highly P-type doped ground plane (~10 18 cm −3 ), which prevents the deep depletion of the substrate and acts as a back-gate. In order to access the GP and control the well potential, the BOX is locally etched. The undoped Si film of the Z 2 -FET is partially covered by a single high-k/metal front-gate with a capacitance equivalent thickness (CET) of 3.7 nm, whereas the rest of the channel is ungated. Thinner dielectrics, down to CET = 1.1 nm, have been successfully tested at lower gate voltages. The gate stack formation starts with a thermally grown oxide interface (SiO 2 ), ensuring a good interface quality, clean of fixed charges. The interface SiO 2 layer (IL) is covered by a high-k hafnium dioxide layer (HfO 2 , 18 < k < 20), improving the current drive and reducing the gate leakage. It is connected via a mid-gap metal layer (TiN or AlTiN) to a low-resistance poly-Si electrode followed by gate patterning and offset spacer formation.

(p8.1) After completion of the second spacer, the anode and the cathode are implanted with boron and phosphorus (10 20 cm −3 ), respectively. An epitaxial layer (t epi = 15 nm) is grown on the whole structure, to reduce series resistance. A final step, before contact formation, consists in covering the ungated region with an oxide layer (RPO), preventing silicidation.

(p8.2) Unlike the 28 nm process, in 14 nm FD-SOI technology, the silicon film and the BOX are reduced down to 6 nm and 20 nm, respectively ( Figure 4b). The CET of the highk/metal gate is reduced to 3.4 nm and, for low-voltage operation, to~1 nm. A dual in situ doped (Si:CP/SiGeB) epitaxy exclusively covers the source and drain areas. Moreover, the anode and cathode contacts (sometimes called source and drain) take the form of trenches, permitting integration with a higher density of local interconnections between devices, without resorting to the first metal level. In order to study the impact of silicon film thickness, a variant with a thicker body was also fabricated (t Si = 12 nm, Figure 4c).  After completion of the second spacer, the anode and the cathode are implanted with boron and phosphorus (10 20 cm −3 ), respectively. An epitaxial layer (tepi = 15 nm) is grown on the whole structure, to reduce series resistance. A final step, before contact formation, consists in covering the ungated region with an oxide layer (RPO), preventing silicidation.
## (s10) Operation in DC Mode
(p10.0) The band-modulation effect gives rise to a sharp transition, from low to high current, in both output I A -V A and transfer I A -V FG characteristics. The I ON /I OFF ratio can exceed 8 decades. Figure 5a reproduces the typical hysteresis in I A -V A curves recorded by sweeping the anode voltage. The hysteresis results from an S-shaped characteristic that can be measured by setting the anode current with a current source (Figure 5b). For low V A , the barriers induced by the gates keep the Z 2 -FET in the OFF state. When V A reaches a turn-on value V ON , the positive feedback mechanism makes the injection barriers collapse, and the current abruptly attains the normal I ON value of a forward-biased PIN diode (ON state) [22]. The switching mechanism is related to the change in the minority carrier concentrations (holes in the gated N-region and electrons in the ungated P-region). In the hysteresis window, two different currents are measurable for the same value of V A ; they can be viewed as states '1' and '0' in a static memory (1T-SRAM) or in a dynamic memory (1T-DRAM), as discussed in Sections 5.1 and 5.2.

(p10.1) Micromachines 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 31 8 decades. Figure 5a reproduces the typical hysteresis in IA-VA curves recorded by sweeping the anode voltage. The hysteresis results from an S-shaped characteristic that can be measured by setting the anode current with a current source (Figure 5b). For low VA, the barriers induced by the gates keep the Z 2 -FET in the OFF state. When VA reaches a turn-on value VON, the positive feedback mechanism makes the injection barriers collapse, and the current abruptly attains the normal ION value of a forward-biased PIN diode (ON state) [22]. The switching mechanism is related to the change in the minority carrier concentrations (holes in the gated N-region and electrons in the ungated P-region). In the hysteresis window, two different currents are measurable for the same value of VA; they can be viewed as states '1' and '0' in a static memory (1T-SRAM) or in a dynamic memory (1T-DRAM), as discussed in Sections 5.1 and 5.2. In Figure 5a, the hysteresis window and the turn-on voltage are enhanced by reinforcing the barrier heights, especially via VFG,BG. For a reverse VA sweep, the device remains in the ION state until the point (VA ≈ 0.7 V) where it turns off. Two equilibrium states, '0' and '1', are shown in Figure 5a. The hysteresis can be achieved with VA and VFG of around 1 V, making the Z 2 -FET a promising device for low-power circuits and embedded memory. Regarding the transfer IA-VFG characteristics, the threshold voltage is tunable by the anode voltage and/or device dimensions.

(p10.2) Unlike the ultrathin FD-SOI transistors [23], the Z 2 -FET is free of supercoupling [24] and operates successfully, even in sub-10 nm thin films. Supercoupling is ineffective in Z 2 -FETs because the populations of electrons and holes are separated laterally (in the gated and ungated regions respectively), rather than vertically, as in ultrathin FD-SOI MOSFETs. In Figure 5a, the hysteresis window and the turn-on voltage are enhanced by reinforcing the barrier heights, especially via V FG,BG . For a reverse V A sweep, the device remains in the I ON state until the point (V A ≈ 0.7 V) where it turns off. Two equilibrium states, '0' and '1', are shown in Figure 5a. The hysteresis can be achieved with V A and V FG of around 1 V, making the Z 2 -FET a promising device for low-power circuits and embedded memory. Regarding the transfer I A -V FG characteristics, the threshold voltage is tunable by the anode voltage and/or device dimensions.

(p10.3) Unlike the ultrathin FD-SOI transistors [23], the Z 2 -FET is free of supercoupling [24] and operates successfully, even in sub-10 nm thin films. Supercoupling is ineffective in Z 2 -FETs because the populations of electrons and holes are separated laterally (in the gated and ungated regions respectively), rather than vertically, as in ultrathin FD-SOI MOSFETs.
## (s15) Band-Modulation Mechanism
(p15.0) The current-voltage characteristics of all band-modulation devices originate from the particular profile of the energy bands between the cathode and anode. At equilibrium (VA = 0, Figure 7a), the bands undulate along the body. The height of the energy barriers at the anode and cathode is set by the front-and back-gate voltages, respectively. This is what the designation 'band-modulation' is meant to capture.

(p15.1) A positive VA forward-biases both the P + -N* junction at the anode and the N + -P* junction at the cathode. It is the P*-N* electrostatic junction in-between that is reverse-biased and blocks the current flow. Any further increase in VA is absorbed by this junction; the energy barriers remain tall and prevent the release of electrons and holes from their reservoirs (Figure 7b). This process continues until, eventually, the maximum voltage sustainable by the central junction is reached. At this point, a small increase in VA (or a decrease in VFG) reduces marginally the anode energy barrier (≈VFG−VA), enabling a few holes to fly from the anode to the cathode. Since the positive charge of holes lowers the electron injection barrier at the cathode slightly, some electrons can escape and move to the anode. Their negative charge further erodes the injection barrier for holes. A higher hole current increases the electron current and vice versa. This positive feedback process triggers the abrupt collapse of the two injection barriers and the flattening of the energy bands ( Figure 7c); the device turns on suddenly for VA = VON, and the current increases by many orders of magnitude [26]. In the ION state, the high density of electron-hole plasma screens the gate-induced electric field and keeps the barriers flat. The Z 2 -FET behaves as a regular PIN diode, where the current increases with anode voltage, first exponentially and eventually reaching a quadratic dependence IA~VA 2 (due to the double injection mechanism). The ION current is largely independent of the voltage applied to the gate or to the ground-plane. The device cannot be turned off until the anode voltage becomes too low (VA = VOFF < VON) for sustaining the electron-hole plasma within the body. At that point, the energy barriers are rebuilt and the current falls sharply to zero.

(p15.2) The positive feedback effect is reminiscent of a thyristor. Nevertheless, the band-modulation devices are fundamentally different: (i) the doping is virtual, (ii) impact ionization does not play any role, (iii) the energy barriers are gate-controlled, and (iv) operation requires lower voltage (≈1 V) than a thyristor, leading to improved temperature stability.

(p15.3) In a Z 2 -FET, the front-gate voltage VFG controls the hole injection barrier height, the turn-on voltage VON and the hysteresis window (VON−VOFF). If the VFG is too low and unable to build a strong energy barrier at the anode, the device acts like a PIN diode with VON ≈ 0.3 V, much smaller than the typical turn-on voltage of a silicon diode (0.8 V). Once A positive V A forward-biases both the P + -N* junction at the anode and the N + -P* junction at the cathode. It is the P*-N* electrostatic junction in-between that is reversebiased and blocks the current flow. Any further increase in V A is absorbed by this junction; the energy barriers remain tall and prevent the release of electrons and holes from their reservoirs ( Figure 7b). This process continues until, eventually, the maximum voltage sustainable by the central junction is reached. At this point, a small increase in V A (or a decrease in V FG ) reduces marginally the anode energy barrier (≈V FG − V A ), enabling a few holes to fly from the anode to the cathode. Since the positive charge of holes lowers the electron injection barrier at the cathode slightly, some electrons can escape and move to the anode. Their negative charge further erodes the injection barrier for holes. A higher hole current increases the electron current and vice versa. This positive feedback process triggers the abrupt collapse of the two injection barriers and the flattening of the energy bands ( Figure 7c); the device turns on suddenly for V A = V ON , and the current increases by many orders of magnitude [26].

(p15.4) In the I ON state, the high density of electron-hole plasma screens the gate-induced electric field and keeps the barriers flat. The Z 2 -FET behaves as a regular PIN diode, where the current increases with anode voltage, first exponentially and eventually reaching a quadratic dependence I A~VA 2 (due to the double injection mechanism). The I ON current is largely independent of the voltage applied to the gate or to the ground-plane. The device cannot be turned off until the anode voltage becomes too low (V A = V OFF < V ON ) for sustaining the electron-hole plasma within the body. At that point, the energy barriers are rebuilt and the current falls sharply to zero.

(p15.5) The positive feedback effect is reminiscent of a thyristor. Nevertheless, the bandmodulation devices are fundamentally different: (i) the doping is virtual, (ii) impact ionization does not play any role, (iii) the energy barriers are gate-controlled, and (iv) operation requires lower voltage (≈1 V) than a thyristor, leading to improved temperature stability.

(p15.6) In a Z 2 -FET, the front-gate voltage V FG controls the hole injection barrier height, the turn-on voltage V ON and the hysteresis window (V ON −V OFF ). If the V FG is too low and unable to build a strong energy barrier at the anode, the device acts like a PIN diode with V ON ≈ 0.3 V, much smaller than the typical turn-on voltage of a silicon diode (0.8 V). Once the band modulation mechanism is restored, the turn-on voltage increases linearly with the gate voltage: V ON /V FG = 0.8 (see Figure 5a).
## (s25) Sharp-Switching Performance
(p25.0) The steady-state transfer characteristics IA(VFG) in Figure 5c demonstrate exceptionally sharp turn-on capability. The switching to IOFF is also abrupt, but more challenging because the energy barriers need to be reconstructed. The gate voltage required to turn off the Z 2 -FET is markedly higher than to turn it on. This hysteresis becomes larger as the anode voltage increases. Figure 14a shows that a small increase of 50 mV in VA (from 0.95 V to 1 V) requests a more than 1 V increase in VFG, to abruptly suppress the current. A too high anode voltage renders the gate unable to turn off the device. These problems can be avoided by using fast pulses on the gate [32]. 
## (s26) Sharp-Switching Performance
(p26.0) The steady-state transfer characteristics I A (V FG ) in Figure 5c demonstrate exceptionally sharp turn-on capability. The switching to I OFF is also abrupt, but more challenging because the energy barriers need to be reconstructed. The gate voltage required to turn off the Z 2 -FET is markedly higher than to turn it on. This hysteresis becomes larger as the anode voltage increases. Figure 14a shows that a small increase of 50 mV in V A (from 0.95 V to 1 V) requests a more than 1 V increase in V FG , to abruptly suppress the current. A too high anode voltage renders the gate unable to turn off the device. These problems can be avoided by using fast pulses on the gate [32].  Figure 14b shows the current variation in the time domain in response to gate pulses of 0.5 V amplitude. The device turns sharply from an IOFF to ION state as VFG is pulsed down. Then, pulsing the gate voltage up, turns the device off. A fast gate pulse, together with the absence of hysteresis, is essential for logic circuits. It is worth noting that during the rise time of the gate signal, the electron concentration cannot be adjusted promptly enough, and the hole barrier is temporarily taller than in DC mode. This explains why the gate voltage needed to block the device is much smaller in pulsed mode than in DC mode. As a result, a gate pulse of 0.5 V is only effective in switching the device back and forth.

(p26.1) Systematic measurements reveal the importance of the pulse time constants. It is the collapse of the hole injection barrier that makes the device turn on. The discharge current that sweeps away the electrons stored under the gate contributes to the feedback mechanism that suddenly collapses the barrier. This discharge current is obviously amplified for very short fall times of the pulse.

(p26.2) The device turn-off is less spontaneous and critically dependent on the rise time of the pulse. In Figure 14b, a relatively long pulse (>1 μs) is inefficient, as it tends to keep the device locked in conductive mode with high leakage-like current. Instead, a very short pulse (<50 ns) produces a perfect spike in current. Very fast rise times succeed in restoring tall energy barriers, before the anode and cathode can supply fresh holes and electrons. This means that switching the device off requires a pulse rise time shorter than the transit time of carriers between the terminals. Simulations predict successful operation in the pico-second range.

(p26.3) The effectiveness of the switch depends on the balance between the anode and front-gate voltages. Figure 15a shows a Z 2 -FET biased with 0.8 V on the anode. Ideal switching properties, without leakage, are measured when the upper level of the gate pulse is higher than 1.3 V. A lower gate voltage (VFG = 1.1 V) is insufficient to build strong energy barriers that would block the device; the minimum current in the OFF state is no longer zero, leading to unacceptable leakage. Increasing the anode voltage to ensure a higher ION (increasing VA by 0.2 V roughly doubles the current drive) makes the barrier reconstruction more difficult, leading to rising leakage currents. The solution is to concomitantly increase the gate pulse.  Figure 14b shows the current variation in the time domain in response to gate pulses of 0.5 V amplitude. The device turns sharply from an I OFF to I ON state as V FG is pulsed down. Then, pulsing the gate voltage up, turns the device off. A fast gate pulse, together with the absence of hysteresis, is essential for logic circuits. It is worth noting that during the rise time of the gate signal, the electron concentration cannot be adjusted promptly enough, and the hole barrier is temporarily taller than in DC mode. This explains why the gate voltage needed to block the device is much smaller in pulsed mode than in DC mode. As a result, a gate pulse of 0.5 V is only effective in switching the device back and forth.

(p26.4) Systematic measurements reveal the importance of the pulse time constants. It is the collapse of the hole injection barrier that makes the device turn on. The discharge current that sweeps away the electrons stored under the gate contributes to the feedback mechanism that suddenly collapses the barrier. This discharge current is obviously amplified for very short fall times of the pulse.

(p26.5) The device turn-off is less spontaneous and critically dependent on the rise time of the pulse. In Figure 14b, a relatively long pulse (>1 µs) is inefficient, as it tends to keep the device locked in conductive mode with high leakage-like current. Instead, a very short pulse (<50 ns) produces a perfect spike in current. Very fast rise times succeed in restoring tall energy barriers, before the anode and cathode can supply fresh holes and electrons. This means that switching the device off requires a pulse rise time shorter than the transit time of carriers between the terminals. Simulations predict successful operation in the pico-second range.

(p26.6) The effectiveness of the switch depends on the balance between the anode and frontgate voltages. Figure 15a shows a Z 2 -FET biased with 0.8 V on the anode. Ideal switching properties, without leakage, are measured when the upper level of the gate pulse is higher than 1.3 V. A lower gate voltage (V FG = 1.1 V) is insufficient to build strong energy barriers that would block the device; the minimum current in the OFF state is no longer zero, leading to unacceptable leakage. Increasing the anode voltage to ensure a higher I ON (increasing V A by 0.2 V roughly doubles the current drive) makes the barrier reconstruction more difficult, leading to rising leakage currents. The solution is to concomitantly increase the gate pulse. The fine-tuning of the ground-plane voltage offers yet another solution for the suppression of the leakage current. However, a too negative VBG counteracts the effort of the front-gate to set a strong hole-injection barrier at the anode, whereas a too positive VBG hampers the creation of an electron barrier at the cathode. Once again, the dual ground-plane variant (Figure 3a) shows improved performance [32]. It is the ground-plane located beneath the gated region that makes the difference. When VBG = 0 the leakage is high, but it decreases by orders of magnitude for VBG = +2 V (Figure 15b). This ground-plane can guarantee a strong barrier at the anode, even though the front-gate voltage is kept small (VFG = 0.5 V), suitable for low-voltage applications. Note that the ground-plane biasing does not impact the ION current. The ION/IOFF current ratio can exceed six orders of magnitude. The proper selection of anode, gate, and ground-plane voltages is even more crucial in short-body devices, where the energy barriers are narrower and, thus, more transparent. While ION current is improved, the IOFF leakage current tends to increase more quickly unless the gate voltages are increased.

(p26.7) In summary, the Z 2 -FET stands as a surprisingly solid contender in the arena of sharp-switching devices. Its main asset is its performance at very high frequencies: (i) sharp turn-off enabled by higher energy barriers in the pulsed mode, (ii) easy turn-on thanks to the gate discharge current, and (iii) short ION state duration, to save energy. A further aspect appealing for low-power applications is the devices capability to switch on and off at gate and drain voltages in the sub-1V range.
## (s28) Static Memory Cell: Operation as Capacitorless SRAM
(p28.0) The DC hysteresis observed when sweeping the Z 2 -FET anode voltage back and forth while monitoring the current suggests the possibility of using the Z 2 -FET as a single-transistor static RAM cell [26]. The static memory window, i.e., the valid anode voltages to operate the cell as an SRAM, is defined as the range between the DC current switching points VON and VOFF, see Figure 16. The high-current '1'-state is set by applying VA > VON, to overcome the injection barriers and forward-bias the cell. In contrast, the low-current '0'-state is programmed with a low anode voltage VA < VOFF; the barriers are rebuilt and block the current flow. In either case, after setting the '1'-or '0'-state, the anode bias must be maintained within the limits of the memory window, VOFF < VA < VON, to avoid flipping the memory state. The fine-tuning of the ground-plane voltage offers yet another solution for the suppression of the leakage current. However, a too negative V BG counteracts the effort of the front-gate to set a strong hole-injection barrier at the anode, whereas a too positive V BG hampers the creation of an electron barrier at the cathode. Once again, the dual groundplane variant (Figure 3a) shows improved performance [32]. It is the ground-plane located beneath the gated region that makes the difference. When V BG = 0 the leakage is high, but it decreases by orders of magnitude for V BG = +2 V (Figure 15b). This ground-plane can guarantee a strong barrier at the anode, even though the front-gate voltage is kept small (V FG = 0.5 V), suitable for low-voltage applications. Note that the ground-plane biasing does not impact the I ON current. The I ON /I OFF current ratio can exceed six orders of magnitude. The proper selection of anode, gate, and ground-plane voltages is even more crucial in short-body devices, where the energy barriers are narrower and, thus, more transparent. While I ON current is improved, the I OFF leakage current tends to increase more quickly unless the gate voltages are increased.

(p28.1) In summary, the Z 2 -FET stands as a surprisingly solid contender in the arena of sharpswitching devices. Its main asset is its performance at very high frequencies: (i) sharp turn-off enabled by higher energy barriers in the pulsed mode, (ii) easy turn-on thanks to the gate discharge current, and (iii) short I ON state duration, to save energy. A further aspect appealing for low-power applications is the devices capability to switch on and off at gate and drain voltages in the sub-1V range.
## (s30) Static Memory Cell: Operation as Capacitorless SRAM
(p30.0) The DC hysteresis observed when sweeping the Z 2 -FET anode voltage back and forth while monitoring the current suggests the possibility of using the Z 2 -FET as a singletransistor static RAM cell [26]. The static memory window, i.e., the valid anode voltages to operate the cell as an SRAM, is defined as the range between the DC current switching points V ON and V OFF , see Figure 16. The high-current '1'-state is set by applying V A > V ON , to overcome the injection barriers and forward-bias the cell. In contrast, the low-current '0'-state is programmed with a low anode voltage V A < V OFF ; the barriers are rebuilt and block the current flow. In either case, after setting the '1'-or '0'-state, the anode bias must be maintained within the limits of the memory window, V OFF < V A < V ON , to avoid flipping the memory state. The large hysteresis, with excellent stability during memory cycling, the ease of operation, with only the anode contact as a control terminal, and the unrivalled current margin between states would seem to make the Z 2 -FET cell a promising candidate for SRAM applications. The critical drawback is related to the power consumption in the '1'-state. Unlike the '0'-state, where the current is practically zero, the '1'-state is associated with a relatively high ION since the anode bias cannot be reduced below VOFF. Unless the Z 2 -FET is somehow combined with a current blocking device, the power consumption would be unsustainable in billion-cell SRAM chips.
## (s39) Impact Ionization MOSFET (I-MOS)
(p39.0) The Z 2 -FET in Figure 2a can also operate as a P-type I-MOS. The difference is twofold: (i) the I-MOS looks like a PIN diode, rather than a virtual thyristor, and (ii) it is biased in reverse mode. In Figure 23, the gate voltage is negative, the anode is grounded, and the cathode voltage is large and positive, so as to trigger impact ionization. The N-type version would have the gate located nearby to the cathode and the voltage polarities swapped (VFG > 0, VA < 0) [56]. The region of maximum sensitivity can be adjusted by modifying the length of the ungated region: long for small charge concentrations, or short for higher concentrations (Figure 22b). A complementary device, able to sense positive charges, can be designed by relocating the gate next to the cathode (right-hand scheme in Figure 22a). With V FG < 0, the NPNP configuration is preserved.
## (s43) TFET
(p43.0) A band-modulation device can also be operated in the TFET mode, without any structural changes; the device anatomy and gate voltage polarity are preserved, but the anode is reverse biased. Figure 24 again shows a hocus-pocus diode with a positive V FG > 0, a floating V BG (no back-gate voltage), and a variable anode voltage V A . The I A -V A characteristics are highly asymmetric, denoting fundamentally different operation mechanisms. When V A is positive, we obtain the sharp-switching feedback-based Z 2 -FET characteristic described earlier, with a nearly vertical transition from I ON to I OFF . On the other hand, the negative V A produces a TFET mode, where the I A is generated via band-to-band tunneling (BTBT) at the anode junction and flows between the heavily P + anode and the electrostatically doped electron-rich region under the front gate. The TFET mode of the band modulation device in Figure 24 has the merit of emphasizing the extreme reconfigurability of the band-modulation device, but the SS obtained experimentally is disappointing, as is the low ION. These drawbacks are common to all experimentally realized Si-based TFETs. While numerical simulations relying on ideally abrupt junctions (and favorable adjustable parameters in the interband tunneling transmission coefficients) have led to predictions of SS below the 60 mV/decade limit over a wide range of current densities, including practically relevant ION [60], the reality is rather different. Due to the large Si bandgap and relatively heavy tunneling masses, no all-silicon TFET has delivered an ION exceeding 1 μA/μm, while maintaining sharp SS over several decades of ID. Attempts to improve ION by moving to lower EG channel materials or by employing heterostructures, where the BTBT process would occur in a lower bandgap material (like Ge), while retaining CMOS compatibility have met with limited success [61,62]. The TFET mode of the band modulation device in Figure 24 has the merit of emphasizing the extreme reconfigurability of the band-modulation device, but the SS obtained experimentally is disappointing, as is the low I ON . These drawbacks are common to all experimentally realized Si-based TFETs. While numerical simulations relying on ideally abrupt junctions (and favorable adjustable parameters in the interband tunneling transmission coefficients) have led to predictions of SS below the 60 mV/decade limit over a wide range of current densities, including practically relevant I ON [60], the reality is rather different. Due to the large Si bandgap and relatively heavy tunneling masses, no all-silicon TFET has delivered an I ON exceeding 1 µA/µm, while maintaining sharp SS over several decades of I D . Attempts to improve I ON by moving to lower E G channel materials or by employing heterostructures, where the BTBT process would occur in a lower bandgap material (like Ge), while retaining CMOS compatibility have met with limited success [61,62].
## (s44) Esaki Diode
(p44.0) Esaki tunneling diodes [67] feature a negative differential resistance (NDR), attractive for fast-switching circuits [68] and high-frequency detectors and oscillators. The forward current is carried by the electrons tunneling from the conduction band on the N-side into the empty states of the valence band of the P-side. This mechanism is the reciprocal of the Zener effect.

(p44.1) BTBT occurs if the conduction and valence bands are properly aligned and the tunneling barrier is as thin as possible. These conditions imply the processing of a very sharp junction between heavily doped N and P regions, which is hard to achieve in ultrathin bodies. Another fundamental aspect that hampers tunneling in Si is the tunneling rate, exponentially higher in materials with lower bandgap E G and effective mass.

(p44.2) While physical doping with degenerate concentration and sharp junctions is hardly feasible in FD-SOI, electrostatic doping can offer an attractive substitution. The device is biased such as to emulate a virtual P-N diode with the junction located at the left corner of the gate. High voltages applied to the front and back gates induce adjacent populations of free electrons and holes, with concentrations above 10 19 cm −3 . Although the depletion region is depth-dependent, it does not exceed 5-10 nm length. To avoid damaging the gate dielectric, the anode is grounded and the cathode is negatively biased; the BOX being much thicker, it can sustain high electric field without reliability concerns.

(p44.3) Measured at low temperature, where the generation current at interfaces is massively attenuated, the electrostatic Esaki diode exhibits a clear NDR region (Figure 26) [69]. The initial current is due to band-to-band tunneling and increases with cathode voltage. A peak current is reached before the tunneling current decays (for |V K | > 0.88 V). Then, the regular diffusion current of the P-N diode takes over. The NDR peak-to-valley ratio attains 3.6, a record in our silicon world and close to the best values in Si-SiGe heterojunctions [68]. Interestingly, 2D numerical simulations indicate that BTBT occurs at the front and back interfaces, as well as diagonally between the heavily-doped layers of electrons at the film-BOX interface and holes at the front-gate interface. It is worth noting that for low gate voltage (|VFG| < 0.4 V), the concentration of holes P* on the anode side is too small to enable interband tunneling. On the other hand, at high VFG the tunneling current increases and gives rise to a plateau that replaces the NDR peak (for -2 < VFG < −1.6 V in Figure 26). This excess current originates from trap-assisted tunneling [69]. The electrons can tunnel either from the conduction band into empty deep traps located in the forbidden gap of the anode or from filled traps into the valence band of the cathode. Similarly, increasing the back-gate voltage is beneficial to tunneling, as long as the hole concentration set by the front gate is not affected. The solution, to avoid this undesirable coupling between the gates, is a virtual diode featuring twin ground-planes, as shown in Figure 3a. The P-type ground-plane must be located beneath the gated region and negatively biased to reinforce, rather than dilute, the P* electrostatic doping. This biasing scheme is important for keeping the junction between the two ground-planes reverse-biased and minimizing the leakage current.

(p44.4) These preliminary results emphasize the tremendous potential of electrostatic doping: an Esaki diode with a priori degenerate doping can actually be emulated in an undoped body using the front and back gates. Transferring this principle from FD-SOI to SiGe or pure Ge would certainly enhance the device performance.
## (s45) Conclusions
(p45.0) The band-modulation mechanism was discovered thanks to the advent of high-quality ultrathin silicon films in FD-SOI technology. Without an ultrathin body, the necessary voltage-controlled blocking barriers could not be maintained across the whole film thickness. Given an insufficiently tall barrier at one of the interfaces, the regular forward current of the PIN diode would undermine the positive feedback mechanism and the excellent sharp-switching capability.

(p45.1) We do not know of any other device that can challenge the Z 2 -FET for steep switching (1 mV/decade) at low voltage (<1 V). Ferroelectric or tunneling FETs are unlikely to ever achieve this level of performance. The simplicity of the integration scheme, fully transferable from FD-SOI to FinFETs and nanowire transistors, is a strong argument for further development. Another important merit of band-modulation devices is their It is worth noting that for low gate voltage (|V FG | < 0.4 V), the concentration of holes P* on the anode side is too small to enable interband tunneling. On the other hand, at high V FG the tunneling current increases and gives rise to a plateau that replaces the NDR peak (for -2 < V FG < −1.6 V in Figure 26). This excess current originates from trap-assisted tunneling [69]. The electrons can tunnel either from the conduction band into empty deep traps located in the forbidden gap of the anode or from filled traps into the valence band of the cathode. Similarly, increasing the back-gate voltage is beneficial to tunneling, as long as the hole concentration set by the front gate is not affected. The solution, to avoid this undesirable coupling between the gates, is a virtual diode featuring twin ground-planes, as shown in Figure 3a. The P-type ground-plane must be located beneath the gated region and negatively biased to reinforce, rather than dilute, the P* electrostatic doping. This biasing scheme is important for keeping the junction between the two ground-planes reverse-biased and minimizing the leakage current.

(p45.2) These preliminary results emphasize the tremendous potential of electrostatic doping: an Esaki diode with a priori degenerate doping can actually be emulated in an undoped body using the front and back gates. Transferring this principle from FD-SOI to SiGe or pure Ge would certainly enhance the device performance.
