# Risk Governance and Sustainability: A Scientometric Analysis and Literature Review

CorpusID: 242072444 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/25e0cf2e9165830a306ba8b667aa85c0b2ca040a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/25e0cf2e9165830a306ba8b667aa85c0b2ca040a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Political Science, Medicine

## (s1) Data and Method
(p1.0) To investigate historical developments in the research intersection of risk governance and sustainability, the relevant articles published in academic journals were searched in the Web of Science Core Collection. We searched for combinations of relevant keywords shown as follows: Topics = ("Sustainabilit* " and Risk Governance); Language = English; Subdatabases =SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI, CPCI-S, CPCI-SSH; Time span = all years.

(p1.1) Each article in the electronic databases that contains the key search words in either its title or abstract was included. We found 1156 published papers from 1998, until 6 July 2021, when the data were collected. Among the papers, 959 were research articles, followed by 107 proceeding papers and 90 review articles.

(p1.2) The scientometric techniques have been widely used in the domain of knowledge analysis, especially in review research [11]. In our research, the VOSviewer software was used to generate the collaboration networks, and to show the leading countries/regions and institutions in 'risk governance and sustainability (RGS)'. The keyword co-occurrence networks were also analyzed, and used to show the research hotspots and research groups of the RGS. VOSviewer was developed by Nees and Ludo [12] from the Centre for Science and Technology Studies (Leiden University), with more than 10 years development and update. It has become one of the most reliable and widely-used scientometrics tool in the global scientific communities. Figure 1 shows the distribution of the 1156 published papers in the risk governance and sustainability domain from the year 1998 to 2021. The first related paper was in 1998, which was presented at the Conference on Twice Humanity-Implications for Local and Global [13]. It discussed the direction of agricultural research in Africa to call for a sustainable solution under disadvantaged conditions. Since 2014, there was a rapid increase of research activities; crossing 100 articles per year in the year 2016 and subsequently crossing 200 articles per year in 2020 (with the most paper outputs of 212). The categorization of the 1156 papers in scientific disciplines can be provided by the Web of Science, which provides insights into how the target research domain situates in the entire body of scientific knowledge. Based on the analysis, the most frequently occurring scientific categories are "environmental sciences and studies" with 786 papers amounting to 68% of the total. The following categories are "sustainable science and technology" (264 papers), "management" (110 papers), "business" (97 papers), "economics" (71 papers) and others. The research area involved is quite diverse, not only covering engineering and natural sciences (e.g., geography, geosciences, medicine), but also humanities and social sciences. There is no surprise, considering the risk governance research and sustainability research do encompass a variety of issues.

(p1.3) To investigate historical developments in the research intersection of risk governance and sustainability, the relevant articles published in academic journals were searched in the Web of Science Core Collection. We searched for combinations of relevant keywords shown as follows: Topics = ("Sustainabilit* " and Risk Governance); Language = English; Subdatabases =SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI, CPCI-S, CPCI-SSH; Time span = all years.

(p1.4) Each article in the electronic databases that contains the key search words in either its title or abstract was included. We found 1156 published papers from 1998, until 6 July 2021, when the data were collected. Among the papers, 959 were research articles, followed by 107 proceeding papers and 90 review articles.

(p1.5) The scientometric techniques have been widely used in the domain of knowledge analysis, especially in review research [11]. In our research, the VOSviewer software was used to generate the collaboration networks, and to show the leading countries/regions and institutions in 'risk governance and sustainability (RGS)'. The keyword co-occurrence networks were also analyzed, and used to show the research hotspots and research groups of the RGS. VOSviewer was developed by Nees and Ludo [12] from the Centre for Science and Technology Studies (Leiden University), with more than 10 years development and update. It has become one of the most reliable and widely-used scientometrics tool in the global scientific communities. Figure 1 shows the distribution of the 1156 published papers in the risk governance and sustainability domain from the year 1998 to 2021. The first related paper was in 1998, which was presented at the Conference on Twice Humanity-Implications for Local and Global [13]. It discussed the direction of agricultural research in Africa to call for a sustainable solution under disadvantaged conditions. Since 2014, there was a rapid increase of research activities; crossing 100 articles per year in the year 2016 and subsequently crossing 200 articles per year in 2020 (with the most paper outputs of 212). The categorization of the 1156 papers in scientific disciplines can be provided by the Web of Science, which provides insights into how the target research domain situates in the entire body of scientific knowledge. Based on the analysis, the most frequently occurring scientific categories are "environmental sciences and studies" with 786 papers amounting to 68% of the total. The following categories are "sustainable science and technology" (264 papers), "management" (110 papers), "business" (97 papers), "economics" (71 papers) and others. The research area involved is quite diverse, not only covering engineering and natural sciences (e.g., geography, geosciences, medicine), but also humanities and social sciences. There is no surprise, considering the risk governance research and sustainability research do encompass a variety of issues.
## (s23) Data and Method
(p23.0) To investigate historical developments in the research intersection of risk governance and sustainability, the relevant articles published in academic journals were searched in the Web of Science Core Collection. We searched for combinations of relevant keywords shown as follows: Topics = ("Sustainabilit* " and Risk Governance); Language = English; Subdatabases =SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI, CPCI-S, CPCI-SSH; Time span = all years.

(p23.1) Each article in the electronic databases that contains the key search words in either its title or abstract was included. We found 1156 published papers from 1998, until 6 July 2021, when the data were collected. Among the papers, 959 were research articles, followed by 107 proceeding papers and 90 review articles.

(p23.2) The scientometric techniques have been widely used in the domain of knowledge analysis, especially in review research [11]. In our research, the VOSviewer software was used to generate the collaboration networks, and to show the leading countries/regions and institutions in 'risk governance and sustainability (RGS)'. The keyword co-occurrence networks were also analyzed, and used to show the research hotspots and research groups of the RGS. VOSviewer was developed by Nees and Ludo [12] from the Centre for Science and Technology Studies (Leiden University), with more than 10 years development and update. It has become one of the most reliable and widely-used scientometrics tool in the global scientific communities. Figure 1 shows the distribution of the 1156 published papers in the risk governance and sustainability domain from the year 1998 to 2021. The first related paper was in 1998, which was presented at the Conference on Twice Humanity-Implications for Local and Global [13]. It discussed the direction of agricultural research in Africa to call for a sustainable solution under disadvantaged conditions. Since 2014, there was a rapid increase of research activities; crossing 100 articles per year in the year 2016 and subsequently crossing 200 articles per year in 2020 (with the most paper outputs of 212). The categorization of the 1156 papers in scientific disciplines can be provided by the Web of Science, which provides insights into how the target research domain situates in the entire body of scientific knowledge. Based on the analysis, the most frequently occurring scientific categories are "environmental sciences and studies" with 786 papers amounting to 68% of the total. The following categories are "sustainable science and technology" (264 papers), "management" (110 papers), "business" (97 papers), "economics" (71 papers) and others. The research area involved is quite diverse, not only covering engineering and natural sciences (e.g., geography, geosciences, medicine), but also humanities and social sciences. There is no surprise, considering the risk governance research and sustainability research do encompass a variety of issues.

(p23.3) To investigate historical developments in the research intersection of risk governance and sustainability, the relevant articles published in academic journals were searched in the Web of Science Core Collection. We searched for combinations of relevant keywords shown as follows: Topics = ("Sustainabilit* " and Risk Governance); Language = English; Subdatabases =SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI, CPCI-S, CPCI-SSH; Time span = all years.

(p23.4) Each article in the electronic databases that contains the key search words in either its title or abstract was included. We found 1156 published papers from 1998, until 6 July 2021, when the data were collected. Among the papers, 959 were research articles, followed by 107 proceeding papers and 90 review articles.

(p23.5) The scientometric techniques have been widely used in the domain of knowledge analysis, especially in review research [11]. In our research, the VOSviewer software was used to generate the collaboration networks, and to show the leading countries/regions and institutions in 'risk governance and sustainability (RGS)'. The keyword co-occurrence networks were also analyzed, and used to show the research hotspots and research groups of the RGS. VOSviewer was developed by Nees and Ludo [12] from the Centre for Science and Technology Studies (Leiden University), with more than 10 years development and update. It has become one of the most reliable and widely-used scientometrics tool in the global scientific communities. Figure 1 shows the distribution of the 1156 published papers in the risk governance and sustainability domain from the year 1998 to 2021. The first related paper was in 1998, which was presented at the Conference on Twice Humanity-Implications for Local and Global [13]. It discussed the direction of agricultural research in Africa to call for a sustainable solution under disadvantaged conditions. Since 2014, there was a rapid increase of research activities; crossing 100 articles per year in the year 2016 and subsequently crossing 200 articles per year in 2020 (with the most paper outputs of 212). The categorization of the 1156 papers in scientific disciplines can be provided by the Web of Science, which provides insights into how the target research domain situates in the entire body of scientific knowledge. Based on the analysis, the most frequently occurring scientific categories are "environmental sciences and studies" with 786 papers amounting to 68% of the total. The following categories are "sustainable science and technology" (264 papers), "management" (110 papers), "business" (97 papers), "economics" (71 papers) and others. The research area involved is quite diverse, not only covering engineering and natural sciences (e.g., geography, geosciences, medicine), but also humanities and social sciences. There is no surprise, considering the risk governance research and sustainability research do encompass a variety of issues.
