# Continuous remote monitoring of COPD patients-justification and explanation of the requirements and a survey of the available technologies

CorpusID: 255314963 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/985586da6209d170ccfa02eb43e41a37bbae3540](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/985586da6209d170ccfa02eb43e41a37bbae3540)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) According to the World Health Organization (WHO) [1], chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is currently the fourth, and will soon become the third, most frequent cause of death worldwide. It is also a disabling disease and therefore associated with high costs for treating and managing patients.

(p0.1) At the same time, it is well known that remote patient monitoring can significantly reduce healthcare costs [2]. Such remote monitoring is very applicable to COPD patients, and there is evidence that it reduces costs [3] by at least 14% [4]. However, there are still no widely accepted remote monitoring services involving recently developed sensors that use available technologies efficiently. Currently, COPD patients' physiological parameters are not continuously monitored outside hospitals, except for research purposes. Symptoms are typically reported by the patients themselves using paperbased diaries.
## (s1) Oxygen levels and carbon dioxide retention in patients with COPD
(p1.0) CO 2 and O 2 are the gases exchanged between the blood and the inhaled air during respiration, with CO 2 diffusing approximately 20 times faster than O 2 . The exchange of gases is compromised in COPD because of the destroyed airways and lung tissue, which appears as the ventilation/perfusion ratio (V/Q) mismatch. As a consequence of respiratory failure, either only the PaO 2 is decreased, or both the PaO 2 and PaCO 2 are abnormal (low PaO 2 -hypoxemia, high PaCO 2hypercapnia).

(p1.1) The gold standard for obtained blood-gas partial pressures and saturations is the arterial blood gas test (ABG), which involves taking an arterial blood sample and is therefore invasive. Oxygen levels are routinely measured noninvasively by pulse oximetry, which provides continuous peripheral O 2 saturation (SpO 2 ). The SpO 2 is usually approximately equal to the arterial oxygen saturation (SaO 2 ) that is obtained by ABG (the typical difference is < 2% [31]). The SaO 2 and PaO 2 are directly related through the oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve (ODC), which is not fixed and can vary even for the same person, not only depending on the temperature, PaCO 2 , and pH but also depending on some pathological conditions [31]. On the other hand, PaCO 2 is routinely estimated noninvasively from the exhaled breath (end-tidal CO 2 pressure (PetCO 2 )).

(p1.2) The PetCO 2 , however, is not a reliable estimate of the PaCO 2 for COPD patients because of physiological reasons [32,33], and because the gas needs to be sampled directly at the patient's airways [34] which is practically hard to accomplish. Fortunately, novel research shows that it is possible to reliably estimate the PaCO 2 and even PaO 2 from transcutaneous monitoring [33,[35][36][37][38][39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46] (PtcCO 2 and PtcO 2 , respectively), which is not affected by the COPD specificities and is therefore reliable for COPD patients. In fact, PtcCO 2 has recently become the preferred method for estimating PaCO 2 in remote settings [32,33].

(p1.3) Oxygen is commonly administered to patients during LTOT, but more importantly in acute exacerbations, which saves lives by preventing severe hypoxemia. Oxygen therapy can, however, increase the PaCO 2 , as explained in the next paragraph. In fact, about a quarter of COPD patients with acute exacerbations are at risk of hypercapnia if they are given a high dose of oxygen [47].
## (s3) Physical activity in COPD
(p3.0) Regular physical activity (PA) is recommended for all patients with stable COPD [66]. Walking is generally accepted, but also stair-climbing, treadmill, or cycling exercises are beneficial. Pulmonary rehabilitation (supervised exercise) or a home exercise program can improve the lung's functional status.

(p3.1) PA in COPD patients decreases the risk of hospitalization [67], reduces the decline in lung function [67], but can also improve the general health status and decrease both disability and mortality [68,69].

(p3.2) PA is drastically reduced during and after hospitalization caused by exacerbation, but even patients with milder exacerbations, which do not require hospitalization, tend to stay indoors during the exacerbation period, which lowers PA levels [67]. It might take a number of weeks for patients to recover from exacerbation, during which time they lose muscle mass as a result of reduced activity.
## (s4) COPD exacerbations
(p4.0) BAn exacerbation of COPD is an acute event characterized by a worsening of the patient's respiratory symptoms that is beyond normal day-to-day variations and leads to a change in medication^ [66]. In plain language, patients cannot catch their breath. Such exacerbations are the major cause of COPD patients' hospitalization, but are also associated with deteriorations of the patients' health-related quality of life [71], contribute to a long-term decline in lung function [72], and have an independent negative impact on the patients' prognosis [73]. Additionally, mortality increases with the frequency of severe exacerbations, particularly if these require admission to a hospital [73].
## (s6) Transcutaneous O 2 and CO 2 monitoring
(p6.0) Various devices offer the possibility to simultaneously monitor the level of oxygenation and CO 2 , combining either SpO 2 with PtcCO 2 (e.g., SenTecTM, Therwil, Switzerland [37], and TCM ToscaTM, Radiometer, Neuilly Plaisance, France [77]), or transcutaneous PtcO 2 with PtcCO 2 (e.g., TCM Combi MTM, Radiometer, Neuilly Plaisance, France [77]).

(p6.1) Various devices offer the possibility to simultaneously monitor the level of oxygenation and CO 2 , combining either SpO 2 with PtcCO 2 (e.g., SenTecTM, Therwil, Switzerland [37], and TCM ToscaTM, Radiometer, Neuilly Plaisance, France [77]), or transcutaneous PtcO 2 with PtcCO 2 (e.g., TCM Combi MTM, Radiometer, Neuilly Plaisance, France [77]).
## (s7) Cardiac electrical activity (ECG) remote monitoring
(p7.0) Holter monitors are traditionally used for ECG acquisitions in remote settings, but they are being superseded by wireless bipotential patch devices [78][79][80], whose development has been intensive in recent years (a representative example, a Savvy patch ECG sensor, is shown in Fig. 2). The patch ECG (PECG) sensors are already established as patient friendly, well tolerated, unobtrusive, wire free, and with recording capabilities that span from weeks to months (much longer than standard Holter monitors), which is beneficial for detecting potentially malignant arrhythmias that take a longer time to detect. They provide good adhesion to the skin, and some of them even claim to be waterproof.

(p7.1) The Savvy monitor has been certified as a medical device according to the directive MDD 93/42/EEC, and standards EN 60601 and EN ISO 14971, and has recently  [81,82], with two self-adhesive disposable electrodes, a lithium coin battery, micro-processor, BT4 radio, and printed circuit board antenna (up). Savvy sensor, the final product (down) become available on the market, while the ZIO® XT Patch by iRhythm Technologies, Inc. and SEEQ™ MCT patch device by Medtronic, Inc. have already been extensively evaluated. The evaluations show evidence of an increased diagnostic lead in both adult and pediatric patients compared to Holters [79]. There are also other PECGs available on the market, and the number is expected to increase in the future [78][79][80].

(p7.2) Holter monitors are traditionally used for ECG acquisitions in remote settings, but they are being superseded by wireless bipotential patch devices [78][79][80], whose development has been intensive in recent years (a representative example, a Savvy patch ECG sensor, is shown in Fig. 2). The patch ECG (PECG) sensors are already established as patient friendly, well tolerated, unobtrusive, wire free, and with recording capabilities that span from weeks to months (much longer than standard Holter monitors), which is beneficial for detecting potentially malignant arrhythmias that take a longer time to detect. They provide good adhesion to the skin, and some of them even claim to be waterproof.

(p7.3) The Savvy monitor has been certified as a medical device according to the directive MDD 93/42/EEC, and standards EN 60601 and EN ISO 14971, and has recently  [81,82], with two self-adhesive disposable electrodes, a lithium coin battery, micro-processor, BT4 radio, and printed circuit board antenna (up). Savvy sensor, the final product (down) become available on the market, while the ZIO® XT Patch by iRhythm Technologies, Inc. and SEEQ™ MCT patch device by Medtronic, Inc. have already been extensively evaluated. The evaluations show evidence of an increased diagnostic lead in both adult and pediatric patients compared to Holters [79]. There are also other PECGs available on the market, and the number is expected to increase in the future [78][79][80].
## (s8) Respiratory rate
(p8.0) One of the signs of COPD exacerbation is a respiratory rate (RR) over 25/min (see Sect. 4.7). Furthermore, there is evidence that a change in RR has a strong predictive power for exacerbation [83,84].

(p8.1) The respiratory effort can be captured by an impedance pneumograph, stretch sensors, and flow thermography, which captures breathing from the temperature difference between the inhaled and exhaled air. The impedance pneumogram is the most common method used in hospitals [85]. Its basic principle is to inject current into the tissue by employing two drive electrodes placed on the chest and to measure the potential difference between the two points. The potential difference is related to the impedance of the tissue, which varies with respiration.
## (s10) Nutrition and weight monitoring
(p10.0) Both obesity and loss of body mass are commonly encountered with COPD [76]. Malnutrition is associated with respiratory muscle dysfunction and increased mortality. Therefore, nutritional intervention should occur if a large loss of body mass is detected. Nutritional interventions aimed at achieving an ideal body weight are also recommended. Highcarbohydrate diets and an extremely high caloric intake should be minimized to reduce the risk of excess CO 2 production [76]. Furthermore, obesity contributes to breathlessness in some individuals due to affected diaphragm mobility. On the other hand, weight loss is associated with a more severe impairment of the lung function [76].

(p10.1) Both obesity and loss of body mass are commonly encountered with COPD [76]. Malnutrition is associated with respiratory muscle dysfunction and increased mortality. Therefore, nutritional intervention should occur if a large loss of body mass is detected. Nutritional interventions aimed at achieving an ideal body weight are also recommended. Highcarbohydrate diets and an extremely high caloric intake should be minimized to reduce the risk of excess CO 2 production [76]. Furthermore, obesity contributes to breathlessness in some individuals due to affected diaphragm mobility. On the other hand, weight loss is associated with a more severe impairment of the lung function [76].
## (s11) Blood pressure measurement
(p11.0) The justification for measuring blood pressure comes from the fact that hypertension is a frequent comorbidity in COPD [66], but can also be caused by corticosteroid therapy. BBlood pressure^normally refers to the arterial pressure in the systemic circulation. There are also measurements of pressures in the venous system and pulmonary vessels, but these require a catheter and are therefore beyond the scope of this paper.
## (s12) Spirometry
(p12.0) Diagnostic spirometry measures the volumes of air inspired and expired by the lungs to assess a patient's lung function for the purposes of comparison with a patient population or with previous measurements from the same patient. The presence of airflow limitation is recognized by a reduction in the ratio FEV 1 /VC or the ratio FEV 1 /FVC, where VC (vital lung capacity) is the maximum amount of air expired from the fully inflated lung, FVC (forced vital capacity) is the forced amount of air a person can exhale after the maximum inspiratory effort, and FEV 1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 s) is the fraction of the FVC expired during the first second (see Fig. 3). The presence of a post-bronchodilator FEV 1 /FVC of less than 0.7 confirms the presence of COPD [66]. The FEV 1 /VC ratio is a relatively sensitive index of mild COPD. In moderate-tosevere cases of the disease, however, the severity of the airflow limitation is best assessed by the FEV 1 in relation to reference values (also known as predicted values) [91].

(p12.1) Spirometry is used mainly in the diagnosis of COPD, as well as in the assessment of its severity, progression, and prognosis, but it is not suitable for acute states. Patients with acute severe exacerbations of COPD can be too breathless to undertake spirometry testing, but in any case, conducting spirometry in acute situations is not very informative [66].
## (s17) Monitoring PaCO 2
(p17.0) Since oxygen therapy can increase PaCO 2 , as explained in Sect. 2.1, it is beneficial to monitor PaCO 2 not only during acute oxygenation therapy but also possibly during LTOT (especially during sleep [23]) (see Sect. 2.1). Mortality in acute exacerbations of COPD was reported to be associated even with an increase in chronic stable levels of PaCO 2 [51], which shows that it is also beneficial to regularly monitor stable (baseline) CO 2 levels.

(p17.1) The standard for obtaining PaCO 2 is ABG, which is an invasive procedure with risks, but also painful, time consuming, and discrete. Even though not perfectly following the PaCO 2 obtained by ABG, transcutaneous monitoring has its advantages: it is painless, noninvasive, and continuous, with almost no sleep disturbance, and possibly self-manageable. It is therefore possible to use PtcCO 2 , along with pulse oximetry, instead of ABG, for titrating any oxygen therapy. Moreover, since PtcCO 2 is continuous, the titration can be without delay.

(p17.2) PtcCO 2 is not measured routinely in remote settings due to the lack of inexpensive PtcCO 2 monitors. Even though it is likely that the prices of PtcCO 2 monitors will reduce over , an open question is how to compensate for the currently high prices. One possibility is for PtcCO 2 monitors to be used by medical personnel that periodically visit multiple COPD patients for the purpose of monitoring the baseline PaCO 2 regularly, and/or in the minutes after the onset of oxygen therapy. This entails a need for a new software system that will keep track of each patient's measurements and integrate them with electronic health records. Another possibility is for the same device to be shared between multiple patients for periodic use during 1 day and night. This would be enough to access how the PaCO 2 changes during the LTOT, which is particularly important during the night, as explained in Sect. 2.1.

(p17.3) One current weakness associated with transcutaneous measurements is the approximate 2-min lag time for the PaCO 2 changes to be reflected in the PtcCO 2 [105]. An open scientific question is could the changes in PaCO 2 be predicted to compensate for the lag?

(p17.4) It has been suggested that patients who are known to be at risk of hypercapnic respiratory failure should be given oxygen Balert cards^and should be instructed to show these cards to medical personnel [24,47]. The purpose of the cards is to warn medical personnel that the patients should be given controlled rather than high-concentration oxygen therapy and to adjust the therapy based on the previous ABG results stored on the card because hypercapnic respiratory failure can occur even if the targeted SaO 2 is below 88%. It is important to investigate how this digital alert card can be employed in a convenient form, like, for example, as a smartphone application, which could be accessible to medical personnel even if the patient is not capable of presenting the alert card on his/her own.

(p17.5) Since oxygen therapy can increase PaCO 2 , as explained in Sect. 2.1, it is beneficial to monitor PaCO 2 not only during acute oxygenation therapy but also possibly during LTOT (especially during sleep [23]) (see Sect. 2.1). Mortality in acute exacerbations of COPD was reported to be associated even with an increase in chronic stable levels of PaCO 2 [51], which shows that it is also beneficial to regularly monitor stable (baseline) CO 2 levels.

(p17.6) The standard for obtaining PaCO 2 is ABG, which is an invasive procedure with risks, but also painful, time consuming, and discrete. Even though not perfectly following the PaCO 2 obtained by ABG, transcutaneous monitoring has its advantages: it is painless, noninvasive, and continuous, with almost no sleep disturbance, and possibly self-manageable. It is therefore possible to use PtcCO 2 , along with pulse oximetry, instead of ABG, for titrating any oxygen therapy. Moreover, since PtcCO 2 is continuous, the titration can be without delay.

(p17.7) PtcCO 2 is not measured routinely in remote settings due to the lack of inexpensive PtcCO 2 monitors. Even though it is likely that the prices of PtcCO 2 monitors will reduce over , an open question is how to compensate for the currently high prices. One possibility is for PtcCO 2 monitors to be used by medical personnel that periodically visit multiple COPD patients for the purpose of monitoring the baseline PaCO 2 regularly, and/or in the minutes after the onset of oxygen therapy. This entails a need for a new software system that will keep track of each patient's measurements and integrate them with electronic health records. Another possibility is for the same device to be shared between multiple patients for periodic use during 1 day and night. This would be enough to access how the PaCO 2 changes during the LTOT, which is particularly important during the night, as explained in Sect. 2.1.

(p17.8) One current weakness associated with transcutaneous measurements is the approximate 2-min lag time for the PaCO 2 changes to be reflected in the PtcCO 2 [105]. An open scientific question is could the changes in PaCO 2 be predicted to compensate for the lag?

(p17.9) It has been suggested that patients who are known to be at risk of hypercapnic respiratory failure should be given oxygen Balert cards^and should be instructed to show these cards to medical personnel [24,47]. The purpose of the cards is to warn medical personnel that the patients should be given controlled rather than high-concentration oxygen therapy and to adjust the therapy based on the previous ABG results stored on the card because hypercapnic respiratory failure can occur even if the targeted SaO 2 is below 88%. It is important to investigate how this digital alert card can be employed in a convenient form, like, for example, as a smartphone application, which could be accessible to medical personnel even if the patient is not capable of presenting the alert card on his/her own.
## (s18) ECG, ECG-derived RR, and HR
(p18.0) Reports show that the primary cause of death for COPD patients is cardiac failure [64,65]. Myocardial infarction is the co-morbidity with the greatest potential for treatment and prevention to improve the prognosis of COPD patients [64]. In general, cardiovascular diseases are the most frequent and important diseases coexisting with COPD (see Sect. 2.2.) It is therefore of the greatest importance to continuously monitor cardiac electrical activity for patients at risk, and issue alarms when dangerous event are detected.

(p18.1) Recent developments in ECG technology have resulted in PECGs that possess convenient features for remote monitoring (see Sect. 3.2). They are small and wireless. Patients can place them on their own, freely sleep with them, and even take a shower.
## (s22) Monitoring medication application and adherence
(p22.0) An appropriate medicament therapy can reduce COPD symptoms, reduce the frequency and severity of exacerbations, and improve health status and exercise capacity, but Bexisting medications for COPD have not been shown conclusively to modify the long-term decline in lung function [ 66]. In particular, exacerbations are treated with bronchodilators, systemic corticosteroids, and antibiotics, and there are new drugs developed all the time [129]. The corticosteroids can cause hypertension, which calls for blood pressure measurements and ECG monitoring during corticosteroid therapy. Stopping regular medication, such as diuretics and/or bronchodilators, on the patient's own initiative might increase symptoms [7].

(p22.1) It has been suggested for more than 10 years now that remote monitoring should be used as the Bgold standard^for medication adherence measurements [130], but how to effectively monitor medication compliance and how to motivate patients to take their medicaments are challenges that still remain. PCD applications that provide reminders and feedback to patients could be useful as motivators. As for monitoring compliance, intelligent packaging for medicaments, equipped with electronics for collecting and transmitting the data about usage, can provide controlled access to medicaments in terms of keeping track of how many medicaments have been used and at which times. This enables monitoring of the adherence to the therapy, the evaluation of patterns of medicament use, and monitoring the dose-response relationship [130]. Obviously, smart packaging can be tricked into tracking adherence since it is not able to detect whether the pills are actually swallowed.

(p22.2) Perhaps the most impressive recent development in monitoring medication adherence, which cannot be easily tricked, is the Proteus Digital Health ingestible sensor that measures medication ingestion and adherence patterns in real time [131]. It is a system of a 1-mm digestible chip and a patch that picks up the signal from the chip and can also capture the HR [132]. Another example of recent developments that are particularly significant for COPD and asthma patients is AstraZeneca's inhaler device called Turbuhaler, which has recently been accompanied by a monitoring device to monitor the actuations of the inhaler [133].

(p22.3) A related problem is how to tailor medications to individual needs. According to the GOLD: BEach pharmacological treatment regime needs to be adapted to the patient (i.e., individualized), guided by the severity of the symptoms, the risk of exacerbations, comorbidities, drug availability, and the patient's response^ [66]. This can be at least partially achieved by using remote monitoring, for the purpose of titrating/ adjusting the treatment, or providing patients with personalized advice. For example, in stable COPD, an increase in FEV 1 following a therapeutic trial of corticosteroids for several days is often taken as an indication of regular use for these drugs [76].

(p22.4) An appropriate medicament therapy can reduce COPD symptoms, reduce the frequency and severity of exacerbations, and improve health status and exercise capacity, but Bexisting medications for COPD have not been shown conclusively to modify the long-term decline in lung function [ 66]. In particular, exacerbations are treated with bronchodilators, systemic corticosteroids, and antibiotics, and there are new drugs developed all the time [129]. The corticosteroids can cause hypertension, which calls for blood pressure measurements and ECG monitoring during corticosteroid therapy. Stopping regular medication, such as diuretics and/or bronchodilators, on the patient's own initiative might increase symptoms [7].

(p22.5) It has been suggested for more than 10 years now that remote monitoring should be used as the Bgold standard^for medication adherence measurements [130], but how to effectively monitor medication compliance and how to motivate patients to take their medicaments are challenges that still remain. PCD applications that provide reminders and feedback to patients could be useful as motivators. As for monitoring compliance, intelligent packaging for medicaments, equipped with electronics for collecting and transmitting the data about usage, can provide controlled access to medicaments in terms of keeping track of how many medicaments have been used and at which times. This enables monitoring of the adherence to the therapy, the evaluation of patterns of medicament use, and monitoring the dose-response relationship [130]. Obviously, smart packaging can be tricked into tracking adherence since it is not able to detect whether the pills are actually swallowed.

(p22.6) Perhaps the most impressive recent development in monitoring medication adherence, which cannot be easily tricked, is the Proteus Digital Health ingestible sensor that measures medication ingestion and adherence patterns in real time [131]. It is a system of a 1-mm digestible chip and a patch that picks up the signal from the chip and can also capture the HR [132]. Another example of recent developments that are particularly significant for COPD and asthma patients is AstraZeneca's inhaler device called Turbuhaler, which has recently been accompanied by a monitoring device to monitor the actuations of the inhaler [133].

(p22.7) A related problem is how to tailor medications to individual needs. According to the GOLD: BEach pharmacological treatment regime needs to be adapted to the patient (i.e., individualized), guided by the severity of the symptoms, the risk of exacerbations, comorbidities, drug availability, and the patient's response^ [66]. This can be at least partially achieved by using remote monitoring, for the purpose of titrating/ adjusting the treatment, or providing patients with personalized advice. For example, in stable COPD, an increase in FEV 1 following a therapeutic trial of corticosteroids for several days is often taken as an indication of regular use for these drugs [76].
## (s25) Assessment of severity and deciding between home or hospital treatment
(p25.0) The severity of an exacerbation is assessed crudely by tachypnoea, tachycardia, the use of accessory respiratory muscles, cyanosis, and evidence of respiratory muscle dysfunction or fatigue (e.g., uncoordinated ribcage motion or paradoxical movement of the abdominal wall during inspiration) [76]. If the severity of an exacerbation is in doubt, it should always be assessed in hospital. Referral to a hospital's emergency department is mandatory in the case of respiratory failure indicated by the increased use of accessory respiratory muscles, paradoxical movement of the abdominal wall during inspiration, and significant deterioration in mental status.
## (s27) Educational programs
(p27.0) Even though there are reports that educational programs for COPD patients can significantly reduce the utilization of healthcare services and improve health status [151], they have not been as actively promoted as much as programs for asthma patients [76]. Single-topic programs are available (e.g., smoking cessation, long-term oxygen therapy, rehabilitation), but there are insufficient integrated educational materials incorporating all the aspects of disease management [151].

(p27.1) Educational programs should improve people's knowledge about the disease process and its treatment and should also motivate patients to change behavior and lifestyle, with the goal of improving their quality of life [151].
## (s29) PaCO 2
(p29.0) The reference range for PaCO 2 is 4.6-6.1 kPa (34-46 mmHg) for a healthy adult of 18-38 years [47]. Values above 6.1 kPa are out of the normal range, but values up to 6.7 kPa can be accomplished by holding the breath.

(p29.1) The reference range for PaCO 2 is 4.6-6.1 kPa (34-46 mmHg) for a healthy adult of 18-38 years [47]. Values above 6.1 kPa are out of the normal range, but values up to 6.7 kPa can be accomplished by holding the breath.
## (s33) Spirometry output
(p33.0) The presence of a post-bronchodilator FEV 1 /FVC of less than 0.70 confirms the presence of COPD [66]. The severity of COPD can be categorized based on FEV 1 (percent of predicted): mild ≥ 70, moderate 50-69, severe < 50 [76], or according to GOLD: mild ≥ 80, moderate 50-79, severe 30-48, very severe < 30. For the complete list of reference values in spirometry, see [91].

(p33.1) The presence of a post-bronchodilator FEV 1 /FVC of less than 0.70 confirms the presence of COPD [66]. The severity of COPD can be categorized based on FEV 1 (percent of predicted): mild ≥ 70, moderate 50-69, severe < 50 [76], or according to GOLD: mild ≥ 80, moderate 50-79, severe 30-48, very severe < 30. For the complete list of reference values in spirometry, see [91].
## (s35) Conclusion and future development
(p35.0) The guideline for home treatment and management of mild COPD exacerbations, as specified by the European Respiratory Society [76], states that patients need to be reassessed every 48 h for worsening of symptoms, signs, and measurements. With the inclusion of continuous monitoring, this interval can be prolonged and the home treatment of exacerbations made more secure.

(p35.1) Two crucial improvements to the current remote-monitoring systems are enabling the continuous monitoring of the most important physiological parameters and enabling real-time decision support based on advanced classification algorithms, which are still to prove their clinical reliability. This will make it possible to detect life-threatening events in real time, consequently reducing mortality and hospitalization. Other expected consequences are an increase in the cost efficiency and an improvement of patients' compliance with the monitoring. Furthermore, continuous monitoring can provide new insights into the patients' states, like detecting transitions from a deteriorated to the normal state that happened without an intervention, and information about the durations of the exacerbations. Moreover, the decision support algorithms can rank features by their predictive power and even create new rules, consequently enriching clinical knowledge.

(p35.2) All the presented devices are already mature enough to be used for remote monitoring. Only in the case of transcutaneous measurements of O 2 and CO 2 , the high costs of the devices currently hinder them from being placed in a large proportion of COPD patients' homes. Still, as we discussed in Sect. 4.1, they could be efficiently and usefully applied by nurses visiting patients in their homes, and shared between multiple patients.

(p35.3) In the future, we can expect the design of the available devices to further improve in terms of lower power usage, the batteries will have higher capacities, enabling longer standalone periods for wireless sensors, and the electronics will improve, enabling further minimization. The level of user acceptance should be considered even during the design time, because tailoring the systems to target groups' specific needs, reduces technophobia, and consequently improves acceptance. At the signal-processing level, the obtained physiological signals are usually much more contaminated with noise and artifacts in the case of remote monitoring, with respect to those obtained in hospital settings. How to remove the artifacts and noise efficiently is still an open question, and algorithms are currently being developed for this purpose, which should run efficiently on sensors or PCDs. The possibility of having a lot of wireless sensors, either worn by the subjects or placed in subjects' environments, that can produce the data quickly (e.g. ECG, 1000 samples per second) also imposes specific challenges in the area of wireless networks, which should be able to communicate the data without significant losses, and handle the devices in a plug-and-play manner.

(p35.4) The sensitive nature of medical data imposes a need to ensure the privacy and security of the obtained measurements at all levels, from sensors to the cloud, and in all communication channels. This is still an open issue for which algorithms, frameworks, and standards are currently being developed.

(p35.5) With the future developments of all the necessary technology, we can expect remote monitoring systems for COPD, as well as for other diseases, to become integrated into the healthcare system, which will reduce costs and improve care. Additionally, remote monitoring enables the treatments and care to be tailored to each patient's needs based on their predicted response and individual risks, which is the core requirement of personalized medicine.

(p35.6) Roman Trobec received his PhD in electrical engineering from the University of Ljubljana in 1988. He has led several courses at the University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, and Faculty of Computer and Information Science, where he currently holds the position of associate professor. He was a visiting professor in the field of high-performance computing at the University of Salzburg, D e p a r t m e n t o f S c i e n t i f i c Computing. He was a member of the board of directors at the Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia, in the period 2003-2006 and is currently the head of the Parallel and Distributed Systems Laboratory. Prof. Trobec is one of the pioneers of patch ECG monitoring and multichannel electrocardiography, and a recognized inventor in biomedical engineering in general. In addition to biomedical engineering (biomedical data processing, electrocardiography, bio-electromagnetism, and cardiac electrophysiology), his research interests cover parallel and distributed computing, cloud computing, and networks.

(p35.7) Miroslav Krpan is a cardiologist at University Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia, and a PhD student at the School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia. He received his MD degree in 2000 from the School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia, and in 2001 from Ljubljana School of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia. He is a medicine specialist since 2008 and also a licensed subspecialist in cardiology since 2012. He received both degrees from the University of Zagreb. He was working at a cardiac intensive care unit from 2009 to 2013 and afterwards as a general cardiology consultant. The aim of his PhD project is individualized antithrombotic treatment in acute myocardial infarction. His scientific interests are cardiac emergencies and patient monitoring in acute settings. He has been involved in several studies dealing with individual treatment adjustments in cardiac emergencies.

(p35.8) Tomislav Kelava is an assistant professor at the Department of Physiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia. In 2010, he received his PhD degree in medical sciences in the field of physiology from the School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia. His scientific interests are focused on the role of immune mechanisms in liver physiology and the pathophysiology of acute liver failure induced by xenobiotics. He is the author of 19 journal papers.

(p35.9) The guideline for home treatment and management of mild COPD exacerbations, as specified by the European Respiratory Society [76], states that patients need to be reassessed every 48 h for worsening of symptoms, signs, and measurements. With the inclusion of continuous monitoring, this interval can be prolonged and the home treatment of exacerbations made more secure.

(p35.10) Two crucial improvements to the current remote-monitoring systems are enabling the continuous monitoring of the most important physiological parameters and enabling real-time decision support based on advanced classification algorithms, which are still to prove their clinical reliability. This will make it possible to detect life-threatening events in real time, consequently reducing mortality and hospitalization. Other expected consequences are an increase in the cost efficiency and an improvement of patients' compliance with the monitoring. Furthermore, continuous monitoring can provide new insights into the patients' states, like detecting transitions from a deteriorated to the normal state that happened without an intervention, and information about the durations of the exacerbations. Moreover, the decision support algorithms can rank features by their predictive power and even create new rules, consequently enriching clinical knowledge.

(p35.11) All the presented devices are already mature enough to be used for remote monitoring. Only in the case of transcutaneous measurements of O 2 and CO 2 , the high costs of the devices currently hinder them from being placed in a large proportion of COPD patients' homes. Still, as we discussed in Sect. 4.1, they could be efficiently and usefully applied by nurses visiting patients in their homes, and shared between multiple patients.

(p35.12) In the future, we can expect the design of the available devices to further improve in terms of lower power usage, the batteries will have higher capacities, enabling longer standalone periods for wireless sensors, and the electronics will improve, enabling further minimization. The level of user acceptance should be considered even during the design time, because tailoring the systems to target groups' specific needs, reduces technophobia, and consequently improves acceptance. At the signal-processing level, the obtained physiological signals are usually much more contaminated with noise and artifacts in the case of remote monitoring, with respect to those obtained in hospital settings. How to remove the artifacts and noise efficiently is still an open question, and algorithms are currently being developed for this purpose, which should run efficiently on sensors or PCDs. The possibility of having a lot of wireless sensors, either worn by the subjects or placed in subjects' environments, that can produce the data quickly (e.g. ECG, 1000 samples per second) also imposes specific challenges in the area of wireless networks, which should be able to communicate the data without significant losses, and handle the devices in a plug-and-play manner.

(p35.13) The sensitive nature of medical data imposes a need to ensure the privacy and security of the obtained measurements at all levels, from sensors to the cloud, and in all communication channels. This is still an open issue for which algorithms, frameworks, and standards are currently being developed.

(p35.14) With the future developments of all the necessary technology, we can expect remote monitoring systems for COPD, as well as for other diseases, to become integrated into the healthcare system, which will reduce costs and improve care. Additionally, remote monitoring enables the treatments and care to be tailored to each patient's needs based on their predicted response and individual risks, which is the core requirement of personalized medicine.

(p35.15) Roman Trobec received his PhD in electrical engineering from the University of Ljubljana in 1988. He has led several courses at the University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, and Faculty of Computer and Information Science, where he currently holds the position of associate professor. He was a visiting professor in the field of high-performance computing at the University of Salzburg, D e p a r t m e n t o f S c i e n t i f i c Computing. He was a member of the board of directors at the Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia, in the period 2003-2006 and is currently the head of the Parallel and Distributed Systems Laboratory. Prof. Trobec is one of the pioneers of patch ECG monitoring and multichannel electrocardiography, and a recognized inventor in biomedical engineering in general. In addition to biomedical engineering (biomedical data processing, electrocardiography, bio-electromagnetism, and cardiac electrophysiology), his research interests cover parallel and distributed computing, cloud computing, and networks.

(p35.16) Miroslav Krpan is a cardiologist at University Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia, and a PhD student at the School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia. He received his MD degree in 2000 from the School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia, and in 2001 from Ljubljana School of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia. He is a medicine specialist since 2008 and also a licensed subspecialist in cardiology since 2012. He received both degrees from the University of Zagreb. He was working at a cardiac intensive care unit from 2009 to 2013 and afterwards as a general cardiology consultant. The aim of his PhD project is individualized antithrombotic treatment in acute myocardial infarction. His scientific interests are cardiac emergencies and patient monitoring in acute settings. He has been involved in several studies dealing with individual treatment adjustments in cardiac emergencies.

(p35.17) Tomislav Kelava is an assistant professor at the Department of Physiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia. In 2010, he received his PhD degree in medical sciences in the field of physiology from the School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia. His scientific interests are focused on the role of immune mechanisms in liver physiology and the pathophysiology of acute liver failure induced by xenobiotics. He is the author of 19 journal papers.
## (s39) Introduction
(p39.0) According to the World Health Organization (WHO) [1], chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is currently the fourth, and will soon become the third, most frequent cause of death worldwide. It is also a disabling disease and therefore associated with high costs for treating and managing patients.

(p39.1) At the same time, it is well known that remote patient monitoring can significantly reduce healthcare costs [2]. Such remote monitoring is very applicable to COPD patients, and there is evidence that it reduces costs [3] by at least 14% [4]. However, there are still no widely accepted remote monitoring services involving recently developed sensors that use available technologies efficiently. Currently, COPD patients' physiological parameters are not continuously monitored outside hospitals, except for research purposes. Symptoms are typically reported by the patients themselves using paperbased diaries.
## (s40) Oxygen levels and carbon dioxide retention in patients with COPD
(p40.0) CO 2 and O 2 are the gases exchanged between the blood and the inhaled air during respiration, with CO 2 diffusing approximately 20 times faster than O 2 . The exchange of gases is compromised in COPD because of the destroyed airways and lung tissue, which appears as the ventilation/perfusion ratio (V/Q) mismatch. As a consequence of respiratory failure, either only the PaO 2 is decreased, or both the PaO 2 and PaCO 2 are abnormal (low PaO 2 -hypoxemia, high PaCO 2hypercapnia).

(p40.1) The gold standard for obtained blood-gas partial pressures and saturations is the arterial blood gas test (ABG), which involves taking an arterial blood sample and is therefore invasive. Oxygen levels are routinely measured noninvasively by pulse oximetry, which provides continuous peripheral O 2 saturation (SpO 2 ). The SpO 2 is usually approximately equal to the arterial oxygen saturation (SaO 2 ) that is obtained by ABG (the typical difference is < 2% [31]). The SaO 2 and PaO 2 are directly related through the oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve (ODC), which is not fixed and can vary even for the same person, not only depending on the temperature, PaCO 2 , and pH but also depending on some pathological conditions [31]. On the other hand, PaCO 2 is routinely estimated noninvasively from the exhaled breath (end-tidal CO 2 pressure (PetCO 2 )).

(p40.2) The PetCO 2 , however, is not a reliable estimate of the PaCO 2 for COPD patients because of physiological reasons [32,33], and because the gas needs to be sampled directly at the patient's airways [34] which is practically hard to accomplish. Fortunately, novel research shows that it is possible to reliably estimate the PaCO 2 and even PaO 2 from transcutaneous monitoring [33,[35][36][37][38][39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46] (PtcCO 2 and PtcO 2 , respectively), which is not affected by the COPD specificities and is therefore reliable for COPD patients. In fact, PtcCO 2 has recently become the preferred method for estimating PaCO 2 in remote settings [32,33].

(p40.3) Oxygen is commonly administered to patients during LTOT, but more importantly in acute exacerbations, which saves lives by preventing severe hypoxemia. Oxygen therapy can, however, increase the PaCO 2 , as explained in the next paragraph. In fact, about a quarter of COPD patients with acute exacerbations are at risk of hypercapnia if they are given a high dose of oxygen [47].
## (s42) Physical activity in COPD
(p42.0) Regular physical activity (PA) is recommended for all patients with stable COPD [66]. Walking is generally accepted, but also stair-climbing, treadmill, or cycling exercises are beneficial. Pulmonary rehabilitation (supervised exercise) or a home exercise program can improve the lung's functional status.

(p42.1) PA in COPD patients decreases the risk of hospitalization [67], reduces the decline in lung function [67], but can also improve the general health status and decrease both disability and mortality [68,69].

(p42.2) PA is drastically reduced during and after hospitalization caused by exacerbation, but even patients with milder exacerbations, which do not require hospitalization, tend to stay indoors during the exacerbation period, which lowers PA levels [67]. It might take a number of weeks for patients to recover from exacerbation, during which time they lose muscle mass as a result of reduced activity.
## (s43) COPD exacerbations
(p43.0) BAn exacerbation of COPD is an acute event characterized by a worsening of the patient's respiratory symptoms that is beyond normal day-to-day variations and leads to a change in medication^ [66]. In plain language, patients cannot catch their breath. Such exacerbations are the major cause of COPD patients' hospitalization, but are also associated with deteriorations of the patients' health-related quality of life [71], contribute to a long-term decline in lung function [72], and have an independent negative impact on the patients' prognosis [73]. Additionally, mortality increases with the frequency of severe exacerbations, particularly if these require admission to a hospital [73].
## (s45) Transcutaneous O 2 and CO 2 monitoring
(p45.0) Various devices offer the possibility to simultaneously monitor the level of oxygenation and CO 2 , combining either SpO 2 with PtcCO 2 (e.g., SenTecTM, Therwil, Switzerland [37], and TCM ToscaTM, Radiometer, Neuilly Plaisance, France [77]), or transcutaneous PtcO 2 with PtcCO 2 (e.g., TCM Combi MTM, Radiometer, Neuilly Plaisance, France [77]).

(p45.1) Various devices offer the possibility to simultaneously monitor the level of oxygenation and CO 2 , combining either SpO 2 with PtcCO 2 (e.g., SenTecTM, Therwil, Switzerland [37], and TCM ToscaTM, Radiometer, Neuilly Plaisance, France [77]), or transcutaneous PtcO 2 with PtcCO 2 (e.g., TCM Combi MTM, Radiometer, Neuilly Plaisance, France [77]).
## (s46) Cardiac electrical activity (ECG) remote monitoring
(p46.0) Holter monitors are traditionally used for ECG acquisitions in remote settings, but they are being superseded by wireless bipotential patch devices [78][79][80], whose development has been intensive in recent years (a representative example, a Savvy patch ECG sensor, is shown in Fig. 2). The patch ECG (PECG) sensors are already established as patient friendly, well tolerated, unobtrusive, wire free, and with recording capabilities that span from weeks to months (much longer than standard Holter monitors), which is beneficial for detecting potentially malignant arrhythmias that take a longer time to detect. They provide good adhesion to the skin, and some of them even claim to be waterproof.

(p46.1) The Savvy monitor has been certified as a medical device according to the directive MDD 93/42/EEC, and standards EN 60601 and EN ISO 14971, and has recently  [81,82], with two self-adhesive disposable electrodes, a lithium coin battery, micro-processor, BT4 radio, and printed circuit board antenna (up). Savvy sensor, the final product (down) become available on the market, while the ZIO® XT Patch by iRhythm Technologies, Inc. and SEEQ™ MCT patch device by Medtronic, Inc. have already been extensively evaluated. The evaluations show evidence of an increased diagnostic lead in both adult and pediatric patients compared to Holters [79]. There are also other PECGs available on the market, and the number is expected to increase in the future [78][79][80].

(p46.2) Holter monitors are traditionally used for ECG acquisitions in remote settings, but they are being superseded by wireless bipotential patch devices [78][79][80], whose development has been intensive in recent years (a representative example, a Savvy patch ECG sensor, is shown in Fig. 2). The patch ECG (PECG) sensors are already established as patient friendly, well tolerated, unobtrusive, wire free, and with recording capabilities that span from weeks to months (much longer than standard Holter monitors), which is beneficial for detecting potentially malignant arrhythmias that take a longer time to detect. They provide good adhesion to the skin, and some of them even claim to be waterproof.

(p46.3) The Savvy monitor has been certified as a medical device according to the directive MDD 93/42/EEC, and standards EN 60601 and EN ISO 14971, and has recently  [81,82], with two self-adhesive disposable electrodes, a lithium coin battery, micro-processor, BT4 radio, and printed circuit board antenna (up). Savvy sensor, the final product (down) become available on the market, while the ZIO® XT Patch by iRhythm Technologies, Inc. and SEEQ™ MCT patch device by Medtronic, Inc. have already been extensively evaluated. The evaluations show evidence of an increased diagnostic lead in both adult and pediatric patients compared to Holters [79]. There are also other PECGs available on the market, and the number is expected to increase in the future [78][79][80].
## (s47) Respiratory rate
(p47.0) One of the signs of COPD exacerbation is a respiratory rate (RR) over 25/min (see Sect. 4.7). Furthermore, there is evidence that a change in RR has a strong predictive power for exacerbation [83,84].

(p47.1) The respiratory effort can be captured by an impedance pneumograph, stretch sensors, and flow thermography, which captures breathing from the temperature difference between the inhaled and exhaled air. The impedance pneumogram is the most common method used in hospitals [85]. Its basic principle is to inject current into the tissue by employing two drive electrodes placed on the chest and to measure the potential difference between the two points. The potential difference is related to the impedance of the tissue, which varies with respiration.
## (s49) Nutrition and weight monitoring
(p49.0) Both obesity and loss of body mass are commonly encountered with COPD [76]. Malnutrition is associated with respiratory muscle dysfunction and increased mortality. Therefore, nutritional intervention should occur if a large loss of body mass is detected. Nutritional interventions aimed at achieving an ideal body weight are also recommended. Highcarbohydrate diets and an extremely high caloric intake should be minimized to reduce the risk of excess CO 2 production [76]. Furthermore, obesity contributes to breathlessness in some individuals due to affected diaphragm mobility. On the other hand, weight loss is associated with a more severe impairment of the lung function [76].

(p49.1) Both obesity and loss of body mass are commonly encountered with COPD [76]. Malnutrition is associated with respiratory muscle dysfunction and increased mortality. Therefore, nutritional intervention should occur if a large loss of body mass is detected. Nutritional interventions aimed at achieving an ideal body weight are also recommended. Highcarbohydrate diets and an extremely high caloric intake should be minimized to reduce the risk of excess CO 2 production [76]. Furthermore, obesity contributes to breathlessness in some individuals due to affected diaphragm mobility. On the other hand, weight loss is associated with a more severe impairment of the lung function [76].
## (s50) Blood pressure measurement
(p50.0) The justification for measuring blood pressure comes from the fact that hypertension is a frequent comorbidity in COPD [66], but can also be caused by corticosteroid therapy. BBlood pressure^normally refers to the arterial pressure in the systemic circulation. There are also measurements of pressures in the venous system and pulmonary vessels, but these require a catheter and are therefore beyond the scope of this paper.
## (s51) Spirometry
(p51.0) Diagnostic spirometry measures the volumes of air inspired and expired by the lungs to assess a patient's lung function for the purposes of comparison with a patient population or with previous measurements from the same patient. The presence of airflow limitation is recognized by a reduction in the ratio FEV 1 /VC or the ratio FEV 1 /FVC, where VC (vital lung capacity) is the maximum amount of air expired from the fully inflated lung, FVC (forced vital capacity) is the forced amount of air a person can exhale after the maximum inspiratory effort, and FEV 1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 s) is the fraction of the FVC expired during the first second (see Fig. 3). The presence of a post-bronchodilator FEV 1 /FVC of less than 0.7 confirms the presence of COPD [66]. The FEV 1 /VC ratio is a relatively sensitive index of mild COPD. In moderate-tosevere cases of the disease, however, the severity of the airflow limitation is best assessed by the FEV 1 in relation to reference values (also known as predicted values) [91].

(p51.1) Spirometry is used mainly in the diagnosis of COPD, as well as in the assessment of its severity, progression, and prognosis, but it is not suitable for acute states. Patients with acute severe exacerbations of COPD can be too breathless to undertake spirometry testing, but in any case, conducting spirometry in acute situations is not very informative [66].
## (s56) Monitoring PaCO 2
(p56.0) Since oxygen therapy can increase PaCO 2 , as explained in Sect. 2.1, it is beneficial to monitor PaCO 2 not only during acute oxygenation therapy but also possibly during LTOT (especially during sleep [23]) (see Sect. 2.1). Mortality in acute exacerbations of COPD was reported to be associated even with an increase in chronic stable levels of PaCO 2 [51], which shows that it is also beneficial to regularly monitor stable (baseline) CO 2 levels.

(p56.1) The standard for obtaining PaCO 2 is ABG, which is an invasive procedure with risks, but also painful, time consuming, and discrete. Even though not perfectly following the PaCO 2 obtained by ABG, transcutaneous monitoring has its advantages: it is painless, noninvasive, and continuous, with almost no sleep disturbance, and possibly self-manageable. It is therefore possible to use PtcCO 2 , along with pulse oximetry, instead of ABG, for titrating any oxygen therapy. Moreover, since PtcCO 2 is continuous, the titration can be without delay.

(p56.2) PtcCO 2 is not measured routinely in remote settings due to the lack of inexpensive PtcCO 2 monitors. Even though it is likely that the prices of PtcCO 2 monitors will reduce over , an open question is how to compensate for the currently high prices. One possibility is for PtcCO 2 monitors to be used by medical personnel that periodically visit multiple COPD patients for the purpose of monitoring the baseline PaCO 2 regularly, and/or in the minutes after the onset of oxygen therapy. This entails a need for a new software system that will keep track of each patient's measurements and integrate them with electronic health records. Another possibility is for the same device to be shared between multiple patients for periodic use during 1 day and night. This would be enough to access how the PaCO 2 changes during the LTOT, which is particularly important during the night, as explained in Sect. 2.1.

(p56.3) One current weakness associated with transcutaneous measurements is the approximate 2-min lag time for the PaCO 2 changes to be reflected in the PtcCO 2 [105]. An open scientific question is could the changes in PaCO 2 be predicted to compensate for the lag?

(p56.4) It has been suggested that patients who are known to be at risk of hypercapnic respiratory failure should be given oxygen Balert cards^and should be instructed to show these cards to medical personnel [24,47]. The purpose of the cards is to warn medical personnel that the patients should be given controlled rather than high-concentration oxygen therapy and to adjust the therapy based on the previous ABG results stored on the card because hypercapnic respiratory failure can occur even if the targeted SaO 2 is below 88%. It is important to investigate how this digital alert card can be employed in a convenient form, like, for example, as a smartphone application, which could be accessible to medical personnel even if the patient is not capable of presenting the alert card on his/her own.

(p56.5) Since oxygen therapy can increase PaCO 2 , as explained in Sect. 2.1, it is beneficial to monitor PaCO 2 not only during acute oxygenation therapy but also possibly during LTOT (especially during sleep [23]) (see Sect. 2.1). Mortality in acute exacerbations of COPD was reported to be associated even with an increase in chronic stable levels of PaCO 2 [51], which shows that it is also beneficial to regularly monitor stable (baseline) CO 2 levels.

(p56.6) The standard for obtaining PaCO 2 is ABG, which is an invasive procedure with risks, but also painful, time consuming, and discrete. Even though not perfectly following the PaCO 2 obtained by ABG, transcutaneous monitoring has its advantages: it is painless, noninvasive, and continuous, with almost no sleep disturbance, and possibly self-manageable. It is therefore possible to use PtcCO 2 , along with pulse oximetry, instead of ABG, for titrating any oxygen therapy. Moreover, since PtcCO 2 is continuous, the titration can be without delay.

(p56.7) PtcCO 2 is not measured routinely in remote settings due to the lack of inexpensive PtcCO 2 monitors. Even though it is likely that the prices of PtcCO 2 monitors will reduce over , an open question is how to compensate for the currently high prices. One possibility is for PtcCO 2 monitors to be used by medical personnel that periodically visit multiple COPD patients for the purpose of monitoring the baseline PaCO 2 regularly, and/or in the minutes after the onset of oxygen therapy. This entails a need for a new software system that will keep track of each patient's measurements and integrate them with electronic health records. Another possibility is for the same device to be shared between multiple patients for periodic use during 1 day and night. This would be enough to access how the PaCO 2 changes during the LTOT, which is particularly important during the night, as explained in Sect. 2.1.

(p56.8) One current weakness associated with transcutaneous measurements is the approximate 2-min lag time for the PaCO 2 changes to be reflected in the PtcCO 2 [105]. An open scientific question is could the changes in PaCO 2 be predicted to compensate for the lag?

(p56.9) It has been suggested that patients who are known to be at risk of hypercapnic respiratory failure should be given oxygen Balert cards^and should be instructed to show these cards to medical personnel [24,47]. The purpose of the cards is to warn medical personnel that the patients should be given controlled rather than high-concentration oxygen therapy and to adjust the therapy based on the previous ABG results stored on the card because hypercapnic respiratory failure can occur even if the targeted SaO 2 is below 88%. It is important to investigate how this digital alert card can be employed in a convenient form, like, for example, as a smartphone application, which could be accessible to medical personnel even if the patient is not capable of presenting the alert card on his/her own.
## (s57) ECG, ECG-derived RR, and HR
(p57.0) Reports show that the primary cause of death for COPD patients is cardiac failure [64,65]. Myocardial infarction is the co-morbidity with the greatest potential for treatment and prevention to improve the prognosis of COPD patients [64]. In general, cardiovascular diseases are the most frequent and important diseases coexisting with COPD (see Sect. 2.2.) It is therefore of the greatest importance to continuously monitor cardiac electrical activity for patients at risk, and issue alarms when dangerous event are detected.

(p57.1) Recent developments in ECG technology have resulted in PECGs that possess convenient features for remote monitoring (see Sect. 3.2). They are small and wireless. Patients can place them on their own, freely sleep with them, and even take a shower.
## (s61) Monitoring medication application and adherence
(p61.0) An appropriate medicament therapy can reduce COPD symptoms, reduce the frequency and severity of exacerbations, and improve health status and exercise capacity, but Bexisting medications for COPD have not been shown conclusively to modify the long-term decline in lung function [ 66]. In particular, exacerbations are treated with bronchodilators, systemic corticosteroids, and antibiotics, and there are new drugs developed all the time [129]. The corticosteroids can cause hypertension, which calls for blood pressure measurements and ECG monitoring during corticosteroid therapy. Stopping regular medication, such as diuretics and/or bronchodilators, on the patient's own initiative might increase symptoms [7].

(p61.1) It has been suggested for more than 10 years now that remote monitoring should be used as the Bgold standard^for medication adherence measurements [130], but how to effectively monitor medication compliance and how to motivate patients to take their medicaments are challenges that still remain. PCD applications that provide reminders and feedback to patients could be useful as motivators. As for monitoring compliance, intelligent packaging for medicaments, equipped with electronics for collecting and transmitting the data about usage, can provide controlled access to medicaments in terms of keeping track of how many medicaments have been used and at which times. This enables monitoring of the adherence to the therapy, the evaluation of patterns of medicament use, and monitoring the dose-response relationship [130]. Obviously, smart packaging can be tricked into tracking adherence since it is not able to detect whether the pills are actually swallowed.

(p61.2) Perhaps the most impressive recent development in monitoring medication adherence, which cannot be easily tricked, is the Proteus Digital Health ingestible sensor that measures medication ingestion and adherence patterns in real time [131]. It is a system of a 1-mm digestible chip and a patch that picks up the signal from the chip and can also capture the HR [132]. Another example of recent developments that are particularly significant for COPD and asthma patients is AstraZeneca's inhaler device called Turbuhaler, which has recently been accompanied by a monitoring device to monitor the actuations of the inhaler [133].

(p61.3) A related problem is how to tailor medications to individual needs. According to the GOLD: BEach pharmacological treatment regime needs to be adapted to the patient (i.e., individualized), guided by the severity of the symptoms, the risk of exacerbations, comorbidities, drug availability, and the patient's response^ [66]. This can be at least partially achieved by using remote monitoring, for the purpose of titrating/ adjusting the treatment, or providing patients with personalized advice. For example, in stable COPD, an increase in FEV 1 following a therapeutic trial of corticosteroids for several days is often taken as an indication of regular use for these drugs [76].

(p61.4) An appropriate medicament therapy can reduce COPD symptoms, reduce the frequency and severity of exacerbations, and improve health status and exercise capacity, but Bexisting medications for COPD have not been shown conclusively to modify the long-term decline in lung function [ 66]. In particular, exacerbations are treated with bronchodilators, systemic corticosteroids, and antibiotics, and there are new drugs developed all the time [129]. The corticosteroids can cause hypertension, which calls for blood pressure measurements and ECG monitoring during corticosteroid therapy. Stopping regular medication, such as diuretics and/or bronchodilators, on the patient's own initiative might increase symptoms [7].

(p61.5) It has been suggested for more than 10 years now that remote monitoring should be used as the Bgold standard^for medication adherence measurements [130], but how to effectively monitor medication compliance and how to motivate patients to take their medicaments are challenges that still remain. PCD applications that provide reminders and feedback to patients could be useful as motivators. As for monitoring compliance, intelligent packaging for medicaments, equipped with electronics for collecting and transmitting the data about usage, can provide controlled access to medicaments in terms of keeping track of how many medicaments have been used and at which times. This enables monitoring of the adherence to the therapy, the evaluation of patterns of medicament use, and monitoring the dose-response relationship [130]. Obviously, smart packaging can be tricked into tracking adherence since it is not able to detect whether the pills are actually swallowed.

(p61.6) Perhaps the most impressive recent development in monitoring medication adherence, which cannot be easily tricked, is the Proteus Digital Health ingestible sensor that measures medication ingestion and adherence patterns in real time [131]. It is a system of a 1-mm digestible chip and a patch that picks up the signal from the chip and can also capture the HR [132]. Another example of recent developments that are particularly significant for COPD and asthma patients is AstraZeneca's inhaler device called Turbuhaler, which has recently been accompanied by a monitoring device to monitor the actuations of the inhaler [133].

(p61.7) A related problem is how to tailor medications to individual needs. According to the GOLD: BEach pharmacological treatment regime needs to be adapted to the patient (i.e., individualized), guided by the severity of the symptoms, the risk of exacerbations, comorbidities, drug availability, and the patient's response^ [66]. This can be at least partially achieved by using remote monitoring, for the purpose of titrating/ adjusting the treatment, or providing patients with personalized advice. For example, in stable COPD, an increase in FEV 1 following a therapeutic trial of corticosteroids for several days is often taken as an indication of regular use for these drugs [76].
## (s64) Assessment of severity and deciding between home or hospital treatment
(p64.0) The severity of an exacerbation is assessed crudely by tachypnoea, tachycardia, the use of accessory respiratory muscles, cyanosis, and evidence of respiratory muscle dysfunction or fatigue (e.g., uncoordinated ribcage motion or paradoxical movement of the abdominal wall during inspiration) [76]. If the severity of an exacerbation is in doubt, it should always be assessed in hospital. Referral to a hospital's emergency department is mandatory in the case of respiratory failure indicated by the increased use of accessory respiratory muscles, paradoxical movement of the abdominal wall during inspiration, and significant deterioration in mental status.
## (s66) Educational programs
(p66.0) Even though there are reports that educational programs for COPD patients can significantly reduce the utilization of healthcare services and improve health status [151], they have not been as actively promoted as much as programs for asthma patients [76]. Single-topic programs are available (e.g., smoking cessation, long-term oxygen therapy, rehabilitation), but there are insufficient integrated educational materials incorporating all the aspects of disease management [151].

(p66.1) Educational programs should improve people's knowledge about the disease process and its treatment and should also motivate patients to change behavior and lifestyle, with the goal of improving their quality of life [151].
## (s68) PaCO 2
(p68.0) The reference range for PaCO 2 is 4.6-6.1 kPa (34-46 mmHg) for a healthy adult of 18-38 years [47]. Values above 6.1 kPa are out of the normal range, but values up to 6.7 kPa can be accomplished by holding the breath.

(p68.1) The reference range for PaCO 2 is 4.6-6.1 kPa (34-46 mmHg) for a healthy adult of 18-38 years [47]. Values above 6.1 kPa are out of the normal range, but values up to 6.7 kPa can be accomplished by holding the breath.
## (s72) Spirometry output
(p72.0) The presence of a post-bronchodilator FEV 1 /FVC of less than 0.70 confirms the presence of COPD [66]. The severity of COPD can be categorized based on FEV 1 (percent of predicted): mild ≥ 70, moderate 50-69, severe < 50 [76], or according to GOLD: mild ≥ 80, moderate 50-79, severe 30-48, very severe < 30. For the complete list of reference values in spirometry, see [91].

(p72.1) The presence of a post-bronchodilator FEV 1 /FVC of less than 0.70 confirms the presence of COPD [66]. The severity of COPD can be categorized based on FEV 1 (percent of predicted): mild ≥ 70, moderate 50-69, severe < 50 [76], or according to GOLD: mild ≥ 80, moderate 50-79, severe 30-48, very severe < 30. For the complete list of reference values in spirometry, see [91].
## (s74) Conclusion and future development
(p74.0) The guideline for home treatment and management of mild COPD exacerbations, as specified by the European Respiratory Society [76], states that patients need to be reassessed every 48 h for worsening of symptoms, signs, and measurements. With the inclusion of continuous monitoring, this interval can be prolonged and the home treatment of exacerbations made more secure.

(p74.1) Two crucial improvements to the current remote-monitoring systems are enabling the continuous monitoring of the most important physiological parameters and enabling real-time decision support based on advanced classification algorithms, which are still to prove their clinical reliability. This will make it possible to detect life-threatening events in real time, consequently reducing mortality and hospitalization. Other expected consequences are an increase in the cost efficiency and an improvement of patients' compliance with the monitoring. Furthermore, continuous monitoring can provide new insights into the patients' states, like detecting transitions from a deteriorated to the normal state that happened without an intervention, and information about the durations of the exacerbations. Moreover, the decision support algorithms can rank features by their predictive power and even create new rules, consequently enriching clinical knowledge.

(p74.2) All the presented devices are already mature enough to be used for remote monitoring. Only in the case of transcutaneous measurements of O 2 and CO 2 , the high costs of the devices currently hinder them from being placed in a large proportion of COPD patients' homes. Still, as we discussed in Sect. 4.1, they could be efficiently and usefully applied by nurses visiting patients in their homes, and shared between multiple patients.

(p74.3) In the future, we can expect the design of the available devices to further improve in terms of lower power usage, the batteries will have higher capacities, enabling longer standalone periods for wireless sensors, and the electronics will improve, enabling further minimization. The level of user acceptance should be considered even during the design time, because tailoring the systems to target groups' specific needs, reduces technophobia, and consequently improves acceptance. At the signal-processing level, the obtained physiological signals are usually much more contaminated with noise and artifacts in the case of remote monitoring, with respect to those obtained in hospital settings. How to remove the artifacts and noise efficiently is still an open question, and algorithms are currently being developed for this purpose, which should run efficiently on sensors or PCDs. The possibility of having a lot of wireless sensors, either worn by the subjects or placed in subjects' environments, that can produce the data quickly (e.g. ECG, 1000 samples per second) also imposes specific challenges in the area of wireless networks, which should be able to communicate the data without significant losses, and handle the devices in a plug-and-play manner.

(p74.4) The sensitive nature of medical data imposes a need to ensure the privacy and security of the obtained measurements at all levels, from sensors to the cloud, and in all communication channels. This is still an open issue for which algorithms, frameworks, and standards are currently being developed.

(p74.5) With the future developments of all the necessary technology, we can expect remote monitoring systems for COPD, as well as for other diseases, to become integrated into the healthcare system, which will reduce costs and improve care. Additionally, remote monitoring enables the treatments and care to be tailored to each patient's needs based on their predicted response and individual risks, which is the core requirement of personalized medicine.

(p74.6) Roman Trobec received his PhD in electrical engineering from the University of Ljubljana in 1988. He has led several courses at the University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, and Faculty of Computer and Information Science, where he currently holds the position of associate professor. He was a visiting professor in the field of high-performance computing at the University of Salzburg, D e p a r t m e n t o f S c i e n t i f i c Computing. He was a member of the board of directors at the Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia, in the period 2003-2006 and is currently the head of the Parallel and Distributed Systems Laboratory. Prof. Trobec is one of the pioneers of patch ECG monitoring and multichannel electrocardiography, and a recognized inventor in biomedical engineering in general. In addition to biomedical engineering (biomedical data processing, electrocardiography, bio-electromagnetism, and cardiac electrophysiology), his research interests cover parallel and distributed computing, cloud computing, and networks.

(p74.7) Miroslav Krpan is a cardiologist at University Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia, and a PhD student at the School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia. He received his MD degree in 2000 from the School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia, and in 2001 from Ljubljana School of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia. He is a medicine specialist since 2008 and also a licensed subspecialist in cardiology since 2012. He received both degrees from the University of Zagreb. He was working at a cardiac intensive care unit from 2009 to 2013 and afterwards as a general cardiology consultant. The aim of his PhD project is individualized antithrombotic treatment in acute myocardial infarction. His scientific interests are cardiac emergencies and patient monitoring in acute settings. He has been involved in several studies dealing with individual treatment adjustments in cardiac emergencies.

(p74.8) Tomislav Kelava is an assistant professor at the Department of Physiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia. In 2010, he received his PhD degree in medical sciences in the field of physiology from the School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia. His scientific interests are focused on the role of immune mechanisms in liver physiology and the pathophysiology of acute liver failure induced by xenobiotics. He is the author of 19 journal papers.

(p74.9) The guideline for home treatment and management of mild COPD exacerbations, as specified by the European Respiratory Society [76], states that patients need to be reassessed every 48 h for worsening of symptoms, signs, and measurements. With the inclusion of continuous monitoring, this interval can be prolonged and the home treatment of exacerbations made more secure.

(p74.10) Two crucial improvements to the current remote-monitoring systems are enabling the continuous monitoring of the most important physiological parameters and enabling real-time decision support based on advanced classification algorithms, which are still to prove their clinical reliability. This will make it possible to detect life-threatening events in real time, consequently reducing mortality and hospitalization. Other expected consequences are an increase in the cost efficiency and an improvement of patients' compliance with the monitoring. Furthermore, continuous monitoring can provide new insights into the patients' states, like detecting transitions from a deteriorated to the normal state that happened without an intervention, and information about the durations of the exacerbations. Moreover, the decision support algorithms can rank features by their predictive power and even create new rules, consequently enriching clinical knowledge.

(p74.11) All the presented devices are already mature enough to be used for remote monitoring. Only in the case of transcutaneous measurements of O 2 and CO 2 , the high costs of the devices currently hinder them from being placed in a large proportion of COPD patients' homes. Still, as we discussed in Sect. 4.1, they could be efficiently and usefully applied by nurses visiting patients in their homes, and shared between multiple patients.

(p74.12) In the future, we can expect the design of the available devices to further improve in terms of lower power usage, the batteries will have higher capacities, enabling longer standalone periods for wireless sensors, and the electronics will improve, enabling further minimization. The level of user acceptance should be considered even during the design time, because tailoring the systems to target groups' specific needs, reduces technophobia, and consequently improves acceptance. At the signal-processing level, the obtained physiological signals are usually much more contaminated with noise and artifacts in the case of remote monitoring, with respect to those obtained in hospital settings. How to remove the artifacts and noise efficiently is still an open question, and algorithms are currently being developed for this purpose, which should run efficiently on sensors or PCDs. The possibility of having a lot of wireless sensors, either worn by the subjects or placed in subjects' environments, that can produce the data quickly (e.g. ECG, 1000 samples per second) also imposes specific challenges in the area of wireless networks, which should be able to communicate the data without significant losses, and handle the devices in a plug-and-play manner.

(p74.13) The sensitive nature of medical data imposes a need to ensure the privacy and security of the obtained measurements at all levels, from sensors to the cloud, and in all communication channels. This is still an open issue for which algorithms, frameworks, and standards are currently being developed.

(p74.14) With the future developments of all the necessary technology, we can expect remote monitoring systems for COPD, as well as for other diseases, to become integrated into the healthcare system, which will reduce costs and improve care. Additionally, remote monitoring enables the treatments and care to be tailored to each patient's needs based on their predicted response and individual risks, which is the core requirement of personalized medicine.

(p74.15) Roman Trobec received his PhD in electrical engineering from the University of Ljubljana in 1988. He has led several courses at the University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, and Faculty of Computer and Information Science, where he currently holds the position of associate professor. He was a visiting professor in the field of high-performance computing at the University of Salzburg, D e p a r t m e n t o f S c i e n t i f i c Computing. He was a member of the board of directors at the Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia, in the period 2003-2006 and is currently the head of the Parallel and Distributed Systems Laboratory. Prof. Trobec is one of the pioneers of patch ECG monitoring and multichannel electrocardiography, and a recognized inventor in biomedical engineering in general. In addition to biomedical engineering (biomedical data processing, electrocardiography, bio-electromagnetism, and cardiac electrophysiology), his research interests cover parallel and distributed computing, cloud computing, and networks.

(p74.16) Miroslav Krpan is a cardiologist at University Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia, and a PhD student at the School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia. He received his MD degree in 2000 from the School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia, and in 2001 from Ljubljana School of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia. He is a medicine specialist since 2008 and also a licensed subspecialist in cardiology since 2012. He received both degrees from the University of Zagreb. He was working at a cardiac intensive care unit from 2009 to 2013 and afterwards as a general cardiology consultant. The aim of his PhD project is individualized antithrombotic treatment in acute myocardial infarction. His scientific interests are cardiac emergencies and patient monitoring in acute settings. He has been involved in several studies dealing with individual treatment adjustments in cardiac emergencies.

(p74.17) Tomislav Kelava is an assistant professor at the Department of Physiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia. In 2010, he received his PhD degree in medical sciences in the field of physiology from the School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia. His scientific interests are focused on the role of immune mechanisms in liver physiology and the pathophysiology of acute liver failure induced by xenobiotics. He is the author of 19 journal papers.
