# LOGISTIC REGRESSION WITH MISSING RESPONSES AND PREDICTORS: A REVIEW OF EXISTING APPROACHES AND A CASE STUDY

CorpusID: 256627454 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4b3677802748e6839bcf183cbed52bc4c1ee5ed7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4b3677802748e6839bcf183cbed52bc4c1ee5ed7)

Fields: Mathematics

## (s4) Complete Case Analysis
(p4.0) Complete case analysis is a widely used technique for handling missing outcomes. In this methodology, individuals who have missing values in any of the variables under analysis are discarded. This method is simple but generally inefficient, since it may lead a substantial reduction of the sample size. The fact that individuals are removed when a single variable is missing makes this worse. Additionally, when the missingness mechanism depends on the outcome variable Y , complete case analysis may lead to biased estimators [15].
## (s5) Inverse probability weighting
(p5.0) On [18] IPW is define as a method whose main objective is to eliminate bias, resorting to the reconstruction of the population by weighting the data of individuals with less probability of being observed. We review this idea in the scope of logistic regression with missing observations. Let (Y i , Z i ) a random vector of individuals, i ∈ {1, .., n}, where Y i is the response variable and Z i the vector of covariates.
## (s12) Results
(p12.0) The results for scenario S1 and sample sizes n = 230, n = 400 and n = 1000 are reported in Tables 1, 2 and 3, respectively. From these Tables it is seen that the bias, the variance and the MSE decrease as the sample size n increases, indicating the consistency of the methods. As expected, method C is the one reporting the smallest MSE. Among the realistic methods, MI and ML are the method that gives the best results. For n = 230, the ML present the best results to b 0 and b 1 and MI present the best results to b z and b 2 . For n = 400 and n = 1000 the ML present the best results for all estimators, except to b 2 , when MI is the best. The worst results are obtained with MI20, which provides the highest variance and therefore the highest MSE. Note that results of CC method and IPW1 exactly coincide; this is   because for S1 these methods are indeed the same. In this scenario S1, for any of the methods and sample sizes, bias has little influence on the MSE.

(p12.1) Similar results to those of S1 were obtained for scenarios S2 (Tables 4, 5 and 6), S3 (Tables 7, 8 and 9) and S4 (Tables 10, 11 and 12). In particular, the bias, the variance and the MSE decreased for a larger n, and the contribution of the bias to the MSE was negligible. The gold standard C provided the best results in all the cases.

(p12.2) In the second scenario S2 (20% balanced missing data) CC and IPW reported close results. Table 4 shows that, for n = 230, the second best method (the best method is C) to estimate b 0 and b 1 is ML, while for b z and b 2 the best results are provided by MI5, like in first scenario. From Tables 5 and 6 it is seen that the second best method is MI5, and the worst is IPW.   In scenario S3 (20% unbalanced missing data) the relative performance of the methods depends on the sample size. For n = 230, see Table 7, the best results correspond to ML; for n = 400, however, the best results correspond to MI5, except for the coefficient b z , where the best results correspond to IPW (Table 8). Finally, from Table 9 it is not possible to choose a method that uniformly dominates.

(p12.3) In the last scenario S4 (35% unbalanced missing data), the worst results are for IPW2. The method that gives the best results is MI5 or MI20. In Table 10, MI5 is the best method for all the parameters; however for n = 400, see table 11, the winner is MI20. In the case n = 1000, MI5 stands out as the best for almost all the targets, except for b 0 , where the method with the lowest MSE is MI20.  In general, it can be said that all the methods work consistently. Furthermore, the conclusions about the best method are very similar for the simulated scenarios. In scenario S1, the MI and ML methodology are the best, while in S4 methods MI5 or MI20 are the winners. On the other hand, scenarios S1 and S4 also present the same method as the Table 9: Bias, Variance and Mean Square Error (MSQ) to estimated coefficients for the logistic regression model provided by five different methods: complete case analysis (CC), inverse probability weighting (IPW), multiple imputation with 5 and 20 imputations (MI5, MI20), and maximum likelihood (ML) of scenario S3 (20% unbalanced missing data) from n=1000   Table 11: Bias, Variance and Mean Square Error (MSQ) to estimated coefficients for the logistic regression model provided by five different methods: complete case analysis (CC), inverse probability weighting (IPW), multiple imputation with 5 and 20 imputations (MI5, MI20), and maximum likelihood (ML) of scenario S4 (35% unbalanced missing data) from n=400  worst, MI20 and IPW2, respectively. In S2, the best method is MI5 when n ≥ 400; for n = 230, the best results are achieved by ML or MI5, depending on the parameter. In scenario S3, there is no clear winning method. From these results it can be concluded that, when the missing proportion is small and balanced, the best method is ML; and that, when the missing proportion is large and unbalanced, the best method is MI5.

(p12.4) The lack of definitive conclusions on the relative performance of the methods to handle missing data is aligned with the literature. Carpenter [18] are authoritative in stating that the CC methodology generally gives invalid results. In our study, the CC methodology was never presented as the best and not always as the one with the worst results. However complete case analysis is valid, that is, the method provides consistent estimators. In our simulation study the distribution of R does not depend on the outcome, and [15] highlights that this fact produces consistency of the CC estimators. On the other hand, our simulation results for IPW and CC methods are similar. This behavior is natural since, according to [15], "IPW results will not differ markedly from the complete records unless the covariates are MAR given the dependent variable". Although CC and IPW methods provide consistent estimators, if the sample size is not large enough (for example, n = 230) these estimators are clearly less efficient than the ML estimators and those obtained by the MI method. In scenarios S1, S2 and S3 with n = 230, ML provides the highest efficiency; however, in scenario S4 (large and unbalanced missing rate) MI is the best method.
