# Differential diagnosis of pulmonary sarcoidosis: a review

CorpusID: 258619536 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d642f999aee2c301c97b687e5ea6428b6afff1cc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d642f999aee2c301c97b687e5ea6428b6afff1cc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Sarcoidosis is challenging to diagnose given the broad range of presentations, many of which mimic other conditions (1). No single criterion providing a definite diagnosis of sarcoidosis with 100% accuracy is available. Current guidelines indicate that the diagnosis of sarcoidosis should rely on three criteria, two positive (compatible presentation and evidence of noncaseating granulomas) and one negative (exclusion of all alternative diagnoses whose presentation and/or histopathology are similar) (1, 2). However, not all patients who meet these three criteria have sarcoidosis. The easiest criterion to assess is probably the presence of noncaseating granulomas, which can be sampled using highly efficient tools such as endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration, transbronchial lung and bronchial biopsy, and biopsy of peripheral lesions (e.g., involving the skin or peripheral lymph nodes) (3). In contrast, assessing compatibility of the presentation and ruling out alternative diagnoses can be laborious. These two criteria must be evaluated concomitantly, since the presentation governs the likelihood of each alternative diagnosis. Determining whether the presentation is compatible with sarcoidosis relies heavily on expertise in the field of sarcoidosis. However, the diverse and nonspecific initial manifestations of sarcoidosis often lead patients to visit general practitioners or emergency physicians, who have limited experience with the disease. This point probably explains the often long diagnostic delays, which may exceed 6 months, and the need for several physician visits before the diagnosis is established (4).

(p0.1) Several recent articles provide useful information for diagnosing sarcoidosis. Development of the American Thoracic Society (ATS) diagnostic guidelines involved using a Delphi methodology to classify several manifestations as indicating a highly probable or probable diagnosis of sarcoidosis, based on the World Association of Sarcoidosis and Other Granulomatosis (WASOG) Sarcoidosis Organ Assessment Instrument (1,5). Moreover, two Sarcoidosis Diagnostic Scores, with and without biopsy data, respectively, have been validated in confirmation cohorts, in the USA (6) and in a multicontinental study (7). The main strength of these studies is assessment of the scores under real-life conditions, with both sarcoidosis and a panel of alternative diseases mimicking sarcoidosis, to address both presentation compatibility and differential diagnoses.

(p0.2) This review focuses on the differential diagnosis of pulmonary sarcoidosis. Our aim was to provide practical diagnostic help to physicians who have limited experience with sarcoidosis. The first section presents useful diagnostic tools (epidemiology, clinical presentation, thoracic imaging, pathology, and microbiology) and provides examples of imaging and pathology findings. In the second section, we describe specific settings in which alternative diagnoses must be considered and discuss the best tools for differentiating these diagnoses from sarcoidosis.
## (s8) Unilateral or asymmetrical hilar lymphadenopathy, or mediastinal lymphadenopathy without hilar lymphadenopathy
(p8.0) Asymmetric or unilateral hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy occurs in less than 5% of patients with sarcoidosis overall (24) but is more common after 50 years of age ( Figure 1B) (24).
## (s11) Micronodular parenchymal pattern
(p11.0) Figures 2A-H illustrates this pattern. The typical radiographic manifestation of parenchymal lung involvement by sarcoidosis consists in diffuse micronodules predominating in the upper and middle parts of the lungs (16).

(p11.1) By chest CT, perilymphatic micronodules are the most common abnormality in pulmonary sarcoidosis (77% of cases) (30). These opacities predominate in the upper and middle lungs (68%). Clusters of micronodules and nodules are often visible around the peripheral bronchovascular bundles (Figure 2A) (30). The micronodules may be so profuse as to make their distribution difficult to assess. However, micronodule predominance along the fissures suggests a perilymphatic distribution ( Figure 2B). At the level of the secondary pulmonary lobules, the interlobular septa are thickened or nodular and the centrilobular interstitium is thickened (31). In a study of pulmonary sarcoidosis, 15 of the 25 patients had nodular lesions 1 to 5 mm in diameter (32). These nodules predominated along the bronchovascular bundles in 17 patients and, to a lesser extent, in the subpleural regions in 19 patients and along the interlobular septa, with a beaded appearance. Thickening of the interlobular septa was seen in 10 patients. The nodule contours were irregular in 17 patients.
## (s14) Cysts and other cavities
(p14.0) True primary pulmonary sarcoid cavitation, in which the walls of the cavities are formed by characteristic noncaseating lesions, has been reported in 2.2% of patients with sarcoidosis (47). However, even in patients with sarcoidosis, cavitation is more often due to necrotizing pyogenic, mycobacterial, mycotic, or parasitic infections ( Figure 4E) (25).

(p14.1) Other interstitial lung diseases can cause cavities. Thus, thinwalled cystic air-filled spaces can develop in lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia ( Figure 4F) and thick-walled cavities in granulomatosis with polyangiitis ( Figure 4G). Figures 3, 4 show the chest CT features of pulmonary fibrosis.
## (s16) Progressive massive fibrosis
(p16.0) Progressive massive fibrosis often manifests as mass-like lesions, usually in a bilateral upper-lobe distribution, not only in sarcoidosis (Figures 3J,K) but also in silicosis dusts ( Figure 3L), coal miner's pneumoconiosis with heavy exposure to inorganic dusts, and granulomatous talcosis (48,49). Background nodular opacities are associated with pneumoconiosis, with or without emphysematous destruction adjacent to the massive fibrosis (48).
## (s17) Irregular septal thickening and irregular linear opacities from hilum to subpleural lung
(p17.0) A common chest CT finding in sarcoidosis is interlobular septal thickening, which is often irregular or associated with marked distortion of the lung structures (49). Linear opacities extending from the hilum to the lung periphery, with distortion, are also common in sarcoidosis ( Figure 4A) and are much rarer in nonspecific interstitial pneumonia ( Figure 4B).

(p17.1) Several signs of fibrosis strongly suggest sarcoidosis. In a study of 27 patients with sarcoidosis, nine patients exhibited varying degrees of parenchymal distortion consistent with fibrosis (50) and in another, lobular distortion was a feature in 13 of 25 patients with sarcoidosis (32).
## (s19) Pulmonary hypertension
(p19.0) In pulmonary hypertension, signs of lobular distortion ( Figure 4I), fibrosing mediastinitis, and pulmonary-artery compression by lymph nodes ( Figure 4H) help to suggest sarcoidosis as the cause (51). When these signs are absent and the disease is recognized very late, it may be extremely difficult to eliminate other causes of pulmonary hypertension such as histoplasmosis or nongranulomatous diseases, notably interstitial lung disease-associated connective vascular diseases (52).
## (s22) Pathological features in the alternative diseases
(p22.0) Epithelioid granulomas develop in many infectious and non-infectious diseases (62-66). For example, the granulomas in chronic beryllium disease closely resemble sarcoid granulomas ( Figure 5D). Inorganic agents (e.g., aluminum) can be identified by polarized light examination (Figures 5E,F) or special methods (67). The pathologist must consider all the lung diseases in which the organization of macrophages and macrophage-derived cells, with variable numbers of lymphocytes, resembles that seen in sarcoidosis. A granulomatous reaction per se is not specific of sarcoidosis, as shown in Table 2, and may be an immunological and inflammatory response to factors such as bacteria (e.g., Mycobacterium tuberculosis ( Figures 5G,J) (72). Exposure to organic airborne agents can cause hypersensitivity pneumonitis characterized by poorly formed granulomas that are often difficult to identify (65). In addition, granulomas develop in various systemic diseases including common variable immune deficiency, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, Sjögren's syndrome, and Crohn's disease. Figure 5O illustrates the various granuloma patterns, with the characteristics and extent of necrosis, and lists the methods for identifying causative agents (e.g., special stains and polarized light examination). These distinctive features are summarized in Table 2.
## (s29) When is the differential diagnosis most difficult?
(p29.0) Sarcoidosis is particularly difficult to diagnose in patients with rare and atypical radiological presentations such as unilateral hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy, necrotic lymphadenopathy, predominantly bronchiolar micronodular infiltration or miliary, lung cavitations, or pleural effusion. These presentations should suggest tuberculosis, particularly in endemic regions (section 3.1.1.). The absence of caseating granulomas does not rule out tuberculosis (103). In all patients, including those with imaging-study findings typical for sarcoidosis, mycobacteria should be sought in biopsy specimens and, if performed, by BAL.
## (s30) How to definitively rule out tuberculosis
(p30.0) Tuberculosis is easily ruled out when the following criteria are combined: country with a low incidence of tuberculosis, no contact with tuberculosis patients, radiological findings typical for sarcoidosis (section 3.1.3.), absence of clinical or imaging-study findings suggestive of tuberculosis, and negative microbiological tests on respiratory samples (sputum, BAL fluid) or tissue specimens (obtained by endobronchial ultrasound or other methods and examined using specific stains and microbiological techniques, section 3.1.5.1.).

(p30.1) However, in countries where tuberculosis is endemic (e.g., India), tuberculosis is more difficult to definitively rule out at presentation, as shown by a recent study of the Sarcoidosis Diagnostic Scores (7). Sarcoidosis often produces misleading constitutional symptoms such as fever, weight loss, and fatigue (104). In a study of patients with sarcoidosis in India, the lymph nodes appeared necrotic or nonhomogeneous by chest CT in 5.9% of cases, and necrotizing granulomas were found in tissue samples in 13.5% of cases (104). Stronger arguments for sarcoidosis are tuberculin anergy (71.9% of cases), typical isolated bilateral lymphadenopathy, and absence of necrosis by CT and/or histopathology. In tuberculosis-endemic countries, the proportion of presentations mimicking sarcoidosis is, as everywhere else, low but the high absolute number of tuberculosis cases increases the risk of confusion with sarcoidosis, particularly as microbiological studies for M. tuberculosis, including PCR tests, can produce false-negative results (105). Moreover, the tuberculin skin test and interferon-γ release assay can be negative despite confirmed tuberculosis, notably in elderly patients or when the peripheral lymphocyte count is low (106)(107)(108). In doubtful cases, the initiation of tuberculosis treatment is often wise, as the diagnosis of sarcoidosis may be confirmed only by the clinical course during tuberculosis treatment, which usually differs between tuberculosis and sarcoidosis.

(p30.2) Interestingly, in one study, the risk of developing sarcoidosis was significantly increased in patients with tuberculosis, particularly involving extrapulmonary sites (109). Moreover, the two diseases may co-exist at presentation. In this situation, only the accumulation of evidence over time can clarify the diagnosis.
## (s36) Occupational and environmental diseases 3.2.2.1. Chronic beryllium disease
(p36.0) Chronic beryllium disease can develop in individuals who are exposed to beryllium, usually at the workplace, and develop sensitization to this metal (118,119). The features of the pulmonary granulomatous disease caused by beryllium closely match those of pulmonary sarcoidosis.
## (s37) When is the differential diagnosis most difficult?
(p37.0) The circumstances of the diagnosis vary widely. Chronic beryllium disease is readily diagnosed when the manifestations are detected during routine workplace monitoring of workers exposed to beryllium. However, individuals may be unaware of the exposure. Unless a systematic and detailed occupational history is obtained, sarcoidosis is often erroneously diagnosed at first, given the similarities in radiological, serum angiotensin-converting enzyme assay, BAL, and histopathology findings (120,121). Moreover, the tuberculin test is often negative in chronic beryllium disease. Interestingly, gene expression patterns in peripheral-blood mononuclear cells were not different between patients with chronic beryllium disease and sarcoidosis (122). The only reported differences are rare extrapulmonary manifestations and rare voluminous hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy in chronic beryllium disease (118). In one study, among 84 patients with potential beryllium exposure and suspected or diagnosed sarcoidosis, 34 were diagnosed as having chronic beryllium disease instead, based on a positive beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test (120). Of these 34 patients, 28 had first been diagnosed with sarcoidosis, the median time between the two diagnoses being 3 [0.  years.
## (s38) How to definitively rule out chronic beryllium disease
(p38.0) Differentiating chronic beryllium disease from sarcoidosis relies chiefly on two investigations: first, a systematic and detailed occupational history including questions about possible occupational beryllium exposure should be obtained in every patient with suspected pulmonary sarcoidosis and, second, a beryllium hypersensitivity test is mandatory in all patients with a history of beryllium exposure, even in the distant past.

(p38.1) Occupational beryllium exposure may occur during primary beryllium and beryllium-alloy production; in dental laboratories; in nuclear power plants; during nuclear weapon manufacturing; and during aerospace or ceramic manufacturing (119). Beryllium exposure has also been reported in security guards, accountants, exposed workers' spouses, and people living near berylliumproduction facilities. Exposure may be demonstrated unexpectedly, as shown recently in workers who inhaled concrete dusts containing high beryllium concentrations (123).

(p38.2) Beryllium hypersensitivity can be demonstrated by performing a beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test. The result is abnormal when the lymphocyte count is greater than 15%. Two or more abnormal results on blood, one abnormal and one borderline result on blood, or one positive result on BAL fluid confirms beryllium hypersensitivity (119). In clinical practice, the absence of an occupational history of beryllium exposure combined with two negative beryllium lymphocyte proliferation tests on blood rule out chronic beryllium disease.
## (s40) Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
(p40.0) Hypersensitivity pneumonitis, notably in its nonfibrotic form, is caused by exposure to airborne environmental or occupational antigens and can share features with sarcoidosis. However, differentiation from sarcoidosis is generally easy, as shown by a study of the Sarcoidosis Diagnostic Scores (7). The onset may be acute, subacute, or insidious, and recurrent episodes may develop. Crackles are common and squawks may be heard. Although many patients have constitutional symptoms including weight loss, the disease is limited to the lungs, without extrapulmonary organ involvement. At least 40% of patients have either exposure to or serum IgG against an environmental or occupational inciting agent (e.g., avian antigens, bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, isocyanates). The imaging findings typically differ from those in sarcoidosis (section 3.1.3.) (76,126). Although BAL fluid lymphocytosis occurs in both hypersensitivity pneumonitis and sarcoidosis, a relative lymphocyte count above 50% has been reported in half the patients with the former versus almost none with the latter (80). In BAL fluid, the total cell count, percentages of neutrophils and eosinophils, and percentage of mast cells -this last having the greatest discriminating power -tend to be higher in hypersensitivity pneumonitis than in sarcoidosis, whereas the CD4/ CD8 T-cell ratio tends to be above normal in sarcoidosis and below normal in hypersensitivity pneumonitis (80,127). Combining the history with blood-test, imaging-study, and BAL findings usually suffices to differentiate hypersensitivity pneumonitis from sarcoidosis. The granulomas found in transbronchial lung-biopsy specimens in hypersensitivity pneumonitis are typically small and poorly formed and tend to predominate in the peribronchiolar interstitium (section 3.1.3.). This finding combined with those of the above-listed investigations is highly discriminating.
## (s41) Hot-tub lung
(p41.0) Hot-tub lung is an infrequent interstitial lung disease secondary to the inhalation of aerosolized hot-tub water containing nontuberculous mycobacteria (M. avium or Mycobacterium phocaicum) (128). Chest CT findings may closely resemble those in hypersensitivity pneumonitis, with diffuse ground-glass opacities and mosaic attenuation. However, the lung biopsy shows different features consisting in nonnecrotizing and mostly well-formed granulomas in a bronchocentric distribution. Differentiation from sarcoidosis is easy even in the absence of a lung biopsy, based on (i) use of a hot tub, (ii) the very different CT images, and (iii) the recovery of nontuberculous mycobacteria from respiratory specimens.
## (s42) Granulomatous talcosis
(p42.0) Pulmonary granulomatous talcosis can produce radiological abnormalities resembling those seen in sarcoidosis (section 3.1.3.) (39). A history of inhaled or intravenous drug abuse suggests the diagnosis. Confirmation is provided by lung biopsy, which shows small diffuse granulomas at the level of the terminal or respiratory bronchioles, with birefringent bodies within giant cells by polarized light microscopy (129). These lesions are more similar to foreign-body granulomas than to sarcoid granulomas.
## (s45) Sarcoid-like reaction to anticancer drugs
(p45.0) Some of the most recent anticancer drugs including immunotherapeutic agents and targeted therapies have been incriminated in the development of granulomas. The recent WHO pharmacovigilance report recognizes PD-1, CTLA4 (103 cases), and BRAF and MEK inhibitors (37 cases) as causes of sarcoid-like granulomatosis (130).
## (s48) Intravesical BCG therapy for bladder cancer
(p48.0) Intravesical BCG therapy for bladder cancer can cause systemic granulomatosis (157, 158). Granulomatous pneumonitis, sometimes with systemic involvement, has been reported in 0.7%-0.9% of patients (159,160). The pathogenesis of BCG-related granulomatous pneumonitis is debated but may involve a hypersensitivity reaction to disseminated BCG (158).
## (s50) Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) for HIV infection
(p50.0) A sarcoidosis-like disease can develop in HIV-positive patients who have responded to antiretroviral therapy by a rise in CD4 T-cell counts and a fall in viral loads. In 10 retrospectively identified HIV-positive patients with a newly diagnosed, sarcoidosis-like disease, the chest CT findings resembled those produced by sarcoidosis in HIV-negative patients: they consisted of lymphadenopathy, nodules, thickened interlobular septa, focal consolidation, reticular opacities, ground-glass opacities, and cyst-like or other cavities (161). In HIV-positive patients receiving HAART, sarcoidosis-like manifestations may indicate true sarcoidosis related to restoration of the immune system.
## (s51) Other drug-induced pulmonary granulomatous diseases
(p51.0) The monoclonal antibodies rituximab, omalizumab, ustekinumab, vedolizumab, and natalizumab are suspected causes of pulmonary granulomatosis (130,162,163). Mesalamine has been suggested to induce pulmonary granuloma formation when used to treat Crohn's disease.
## (s53) Pulmonary manifestations in adults with chronic granulomatous disease
(p53.0) Chronic granulomatous disease is a rare inherited primary immunodeficiency caused by a mutation in the NADPH oxidase gene. The respiratory manifestations are major complications. The diagnosis is usually made in early childhood upon the evaluation of recurrent infections. The pulmonary infections are often chronic and may be asymptomatic, notably when caused by Aspergillus fumigatus. A biopsy of persistent pulmonary nodules or consolidations is often required and frequently shows noncaseating granulomas. Radiological presentations mimicking sarcoidosis are very rare (165,166). The repeated infections starting at a very young age combined with the radiological presentation usually make sarcoidosis very improbable.
## (s54) Genetic diseases
(p54.0) Blau syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder due to NOD2 mutations, of which over 15 have been identified (167,168). Familial cases are present in 40% of patients. The onset is usually at 3-4 years of age (15). Most patients have the typical triad of skin involvement, symmetrical polyarthritis, and uveitis. Lung involvement has been reported in a single patient, who had ground-glass opacities in the middle and lower lobes (169). The diagnosis is based on the presentation and results of genetic testing for NOD2 mutations. Thus, Blau syndrome is easily differentiated from sarcoidosis (170).
## (s56) Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(p56.0) This disease typically manifests as necrotizing granulomatous inflammation of the ears, nose, and upper and lower respiratory tracts and as necrotizing vasculitis involving the small-to medium-sized vessels, often with glomerulonephritis (171).

(p56.1) The differential diagnosis with sarcoidosis is rarely difficult unless the lung is the only site involved, with condensations or noncavitated nodular lesions. However, differences with sarcoidosis include the absence of co-existing perilymphatic micronodular lesions and of lymphadenopathy (46). A positive assay for antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies directed to proteinase 3 (PR3-ANCA) is highly specific but only 60% sensitive. In doubtful cases, a lung biopsy, performed surgically to ensure the collection of sufficient material, may be indicated. The typical histological pattern is a triad of vasculitis, necrosis, and granulomatous inflammation, which may co-exist with organizing pneumonia or alveolar hemorrhage.
## (s57) Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(p57.0) Lung granulomas can develop in eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, producing a radiological presentation very similar to that seen in granulomatosis with polyangiitis. However, differentiation with sarcoidosis is readily achieved based on the history of asthma (often severe), marked blood eosinophilia, serum C-reactive protein elevation, and positive assays for perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies.

(p57.1) Frontiers in Medicine 19 frontiersin.org 3.2.6.3. Necrotizing sarcoid granulomatosis "Necrotizing sarcoid granulomatosis" is still a provisional diagnostic term, given the uncertainty about whether it represents necrotizing angiitis with a sarcoid reaction or true sarcoidosis with a distinctive pathological pattern (172). The epidemiology and presentation are very similar to those of sarcoidosis. However, thoracic lymphadenopathy occurs in only 33% of patients. The only clear difference lies in the pathological findings. However, a possible source of bias is that the lung specimens are often obtained surgically and are therefore larger than for sarcoidosis. The prevailing view at present is that necrotizing sarcoid granulomatosis is a form of sarcoidosis (172).

(p57.2) 3.2.6.4. Interstitial lung disease associated with Sjögren's syndrome Interstitial lung disease, sometimes with granulomatous pulmonary lesions, may develop in patients with sicca due to Sjögren's syndrome. Very infrequently, this condition may require differentiation from sarcoidosis with pulmonary fibrosis producing linear opacities extending from the hilum to the subpleural area (173). However, the pathological features of granulomatous lesions in Sjögren's syndrome differ markedly from those of sarcoid granulomas (section 3.1.4.).
## (s58) Crohn's disease
(p58.0) Noninfectious pulmonary involvement has rarely been studied in patients with Crohn's disease. The first diagnosis to consider is an adverse drug reaction, for instance to mesalamine or a TNF-a antagonist (174). In practice, Crohn's disease is never per se the cause of pulmonary granulomatosis. At the trachea, in contrast, macroscopic abnormalities can be visible by endoscopy, a finding never observed in sarcoidosis (175). Crohn's disease and sarcoidosis may co-exist (176).
## (s60) Conclusion
(p60.0) Alternative diagnoses must be ruled out before a diagnosis of sarcoidosis can be given. To this end, a rigorous diagnostic strategy must be applied. First, epidemiological factors must be clarified, including local infectious diseases, regions of travel, occupational and environmental exposures, drug abuse, exposure to medications, and family history. A detailed medical history and thorough physical examination are also crucial, as they may, for instance, suggest an immunodeficiency or identify extrapulmonary abnormalities that may be characteristic of specific diseases. Chest CT is very helpful, particularly when read by a highly experienced radiologist who can characterize the findings as typical or atypical for sarcoidosis and for the alternative diagnoses. All other investigations are guided by this information. A study reported nearly three decades ago used Bayes' theorem to diagnose chronic interstitial lung diseases based only on clinical and radiological findings (184). High confidence (greater than 95% probability) in a final correct diagnosis of sarcoidosis was obtained in 80% and 78% of patients in the training and validation sets, respectively. The improvements in CT acquisition and interpretation achieved since this study was done would probably result in even better performance. Another important message is the need to obtain typical granulomas for confirming diagnosis in most of the patients to avoid misdiagnosis with some alternative diseases shown to have a confusing presentation, particularly lymphoproliferative disorders. Eventually, using scores like the Sarcoidosis Diagnosis Scores Clinical and Biopsy can be very helpful to assess sarcoidosis diagnosis before and after granuloma evidence. 
