# Homogenizing Responses to Different Survey Questions on the Same Topic: Proposal of a Scale Homogenization Method Using a Reference Distribution

CorpusID: 255001988 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf40554629a2508aa229c63a7a767618699c41b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf40554629a2508aa229c63a7a767618699c41b1)

Fields: Sociology

## (s9) Early Scale Homogenization Methods
(p9.0) The Linear Stretch Method is the simplest of all SHM and seems to have been used first by Hull (1922). Other applications can be found in studies on happiness that were performed in Australia and Western Germany in the 1980s (Veenhoven 1993). The study conducted by Jones and Thurstone (1955) and the work done by Lodge (1981) are illustrative of the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method. Both this method and Linear Stretch have been used in the WDH since 1990, Linear Stretch to a range from 0 to 10 for numerical scales with at least seven steps and Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value for verbal response scales.

(p9.1) The Linear Stretch Method is the simplest of all SHM and seems to have been used first by Hull (1922). Other applications can be found in studies on happiness that were performed in Australia and Western Germany in the 1980s (Veenhoven 1993). The study conducted by Jones and Thurstone (1955) and the work done by Lodge (1981) are illustrative of the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method. Both this method and Linear Stretch have been used in the WDH since 1990, Linear Stretch to a range from 0 to 10 for numerical scales with at least seven steps and Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value for verbal response scales.
## (s12) Later Scale Homogenization Method Using Semantic Judgement of Word Value in Context (SHM-SJC)
(p12.0) The weaknesses of these early transformation methods also appeared when the transformed scores were compared to average ratings on 0-10 numerical scales in the same country in the same year (Kalmijn et al. 2011). These weaknesses instigated two further innovations.

(p12.1) The weaknesses of these early transformation methods also appeared when the transformed scores were compared to average ratings on 0-10 numerical scales in the same country in the same year (Kalmijn et al. 2011). These weaknesses instigated two further innovations.
## (s15) Difference with Early Methods for Scale Transformation
(p15.0) The approach to scale transformation used in the Happiness Scale Interval Study differs essentially from that used in the Linear Stretch Method and the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method, as the response options in the primary scale are not considered to be discrete points, but to be intervals each representing a part of the continuum from 0 to 10 where the perception of happiness can be found. This complies with the view of Kalmijn (2010), who considers happiness to be a latent continuous variable that underlies the survey questions being studied. Moreover, in the Happiness Scale Interval Study each response option is judged in the context for the other response options of the scale and this approach is illustrative of the Semantic Judgment of Word Value in Context Method.

(p15.1) The approach to scale transformation used in the Happiness Scale Interval Study differs essentially from that used in the Linear Stretch Method and the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method, as the response options in the primary scale are not considered to be discrete points, but to be intervals each representing a part of the continuum from 0 to 10 where the perception of happiness can be found. This complies with the view of Kalmijn (2010), who considers happiness to be a latent continuous variable that underlies the survey questions being studied. Moreover, in the Happiness Scale Interval Study each response option is judged in the context for the other response options of the scale and this approach is illustrative of the Semantic Judgment of Word Value in Context Method.
## (s16) Empirical Illustration
(p16.0) To illustrate how the three methods are used we selected two survey items fielded in the Netherlands. The first was taken from a survey named Permanent Onderzoek Leefsituatie 2 (POLS) of Statistics Netherlands and the second from the Eurobarometer. The POLS-item has an asymmetric response scale with five options. The Eurobarometer item has a symmetric response scale without a neutral midpoint and four options. The items are summarized in Table 2 which also includes the frequency distributions for this data for 2008.

(p16.1) The labels of the response options will not be interpreted in the same way by all respondents. Some people may consider the labels of all the response options of the POLS scale to be positively formulated, whereas others may interpret the two options at the lower part of this scale as negative expressions of satisfaction with life. Some people may believe one cannot be less satisfied than 'not at all satisfied' and will consider this option to be the null point of the Eurobarometer scale, while others may believe things can be worse and assign an interval of positive length to this option. Interpretation of semantic intervals will vary from person to person for all kinds of reasons such as personality, cultural context or the context of the scale (Hazelrigg and Hardy 2000). As a consequence, in the Happiness Scale Interval Study items are assessed by a group of judges. This results in a report of the average value and the variance for each boundary between two response options. This implies that the results should be considered as representative for the population and are not applicable for subgroups with specific characteristics.

(p16.2) The two items presented in Table 2 together comprise six response options, three of which are included in both items. The transformation of the response scales of the items to a scale from 0 to 10 according to each of the three transformation methods is depicted in Fig. 2.

(p16.3) From Fig. 2 it can be seen that in the Linear Stretch Method the extremes of both primary scales are pinned to 0 and 10 and that all the other response options are equally spaced in between. When the Linear Stretch Method is applied the response option ''fairly satisfied'' of the 5-point scale is assigned the transformed value 2.5, whereas this option for the 4-point scale gets a transformed value of 6.7. This large difference between the values 2.5 and 6.7 is elucidatory for the fact that the wordings of the response options are neglected when Linear Stretch is applied.

(p16.4) If the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method is applied the results are entirely different. The value of a label such as ''fairly satisfied'' is fixed in this method and equal to 6.5 according to the Dutch experts, however, from Fig. 2 it can also be revealed that the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method treats each response option as isolated from the other options and thus does not take into account the context of the scale.

(p16.5) As can be seen in the Semantic Judgement of Word Value in Context Method the assumption of equal distances between response options is abandoned and the idea is promoted that a fixed value applies to a label of a response option, irrespective of the labeling of the other options. If we consider the response option ''fairly satisfied'' once more, we can see that this option is assigned the interval 3.6-5.3 for the 5-point scale, with a mid interval value equal to 4.5 and a length of 1.7. For the 4-point scale the interval for this option ranges from 5.3 to 7.9, with a mid interval value of 6.6 and a length of 2.6.

(p16.6) At the start of the Happiness Scale Interval Study, the Frequency Approach was applied to the Semantic Judgement of Word Value in Context Method results and used to estimate a mean and a standard deviation, analogues to how this is done in the Linear Stretch Method and the Semantic Judgement Fixed Word Value Method. A comparison of the results obtained using these three SHM is shown in Table 3.

(p16.7) The survey items from POLS and the Eurobarometer address more or less the same topic and mainly differ in the response scales. The results for each item are assumed to be representative for the Dutch population and therefore one would expect that given that a transformation method is applied, the transformed means for 2008 would be equal. This is clearly not the case. The difference of 2.3 between the transformed means of 5.9 and 8.2 based on the Linear Stretch Method is most striking. The calculation of a transformed sample mean based on mid interval values still treats happiness as a discretely distributed variable, just as the two older methods. This does not do justice to Kalmijn's view that happiness is a latent continuous variable of nature. To deal with this Kalmijn introduced the Continuum Approach as an appropriate alternative for calculating a sample mean on a continuum from 0 to 10 (Kalmijn 2010). He proposed the beta distribution as an appropriate distribution for this approach in relation to the measurement of happiness, which is defined by two positive shape parameters, a and b and can expressed using the complete beta function.
## (s54) Early Scale Homogenization Methods
(p54.0) The Linear Stretch Method is the simplest of all SHM and seems to have been used first by Hull (1922). Other applications can be found in studies on happiness that were performed in Australia and Western Germany in the 1980s (Veenhoven 1993). The study conducted by Jones and Thurstone (1955) and the work done by Lodge (1981) are illustrative of the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method. Both this method and Linear Stretch have been used in the WDH since 1990, Linear Stretch to a range from 0 to 10 for numerical scales with at least seven steps and Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value for verbal response scales.

(p54.1) The Linear Stretch Method is the simplest of all SHM and seems to have been used first by Hull (1922). Other applications can be found in studies on happiness that were performed in Australia and Western Germany in the 1980s (Veenhoven 1993). The study conducted by Jones and Thurstone (1955) and the work done by Lodge (1981) are illustrative of the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method. Both this method and Linear Stretch have been used in the WDH since 1990, Linear Stretch to a range from 0 to 10 for numerical scales with at least seven steps and Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value for verbal response scales.
## (s57) Later Scale Homogenization Method Using Semantic Judgement of Word Value in Context (SHM-SJC)
(p57.0) The weaknesses of these early transformation methods also appeared when the transformed scores were compared to average ratings on 0-10 numerical scales in the same country in the same year (Kalmijn et al. 2011). These weaknesses instigated two further innovations.

(p57.1) The weaknesses of these early transformation methods also appeared when the transformed scores were compared to average ratings on 0-10 numerical scales in the same country in the same year (Kalmijn et al. 2011). These weaknesses instigated two further innovations.
## (s60) Difference with Early Methods for Scale Transformation
(p60.0) The approach to scale transformation used in the Happiness Scale Interval Study differs essentially from that used in the Linear Stretch Method and the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method, as the response options in the primary scale are not considered to be discrete points, but to be intervals each representing a part of the continuum from 0 to 10 where the perception of happiness can be found. This complies with the view of Kalmijn (2010), who considers happiness to be a latent continuous variable that underlies the survey questions being studied. Moreover, in the Happiness Scale Interval Study each response option is judged in the context for the other response options of the scale and this approach is illustrative of the Semantic Judgment of Word Value in Context Method.

(p60.1) The approach to scale transformation used in the Happiness Scale Interval Study differs essentially from that used in the Linear Stretch Method and the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method, as the response options in the primary scale are not considered to be discrete points, but to be intervals each representing a part of the continuum from 0 to 10 where the perception of happiness can be found. This complies with the view of Kalmijn (2010), who considers happiness to be a latent continuous variable that underlies the survey questions being studied. Moreover, in the Happiness Scale Interval Study each response option is judged in the context for the other response options of the scale and this approach is illustrative of the Semantic Judgment of Word Value in Context Method.
## (s61) Empirical Illustration
(p61.0) To illustrate how the three methods are used we selected two survey items fielded in the Netherlands. The first was taken from a survey named Permanent Onderzoek Leefsituatie 2 (POLS) of Statistics Netherlands and the second from the Eurobarometer. The POLS-item has an asymmetric response scale with five options. The Eurobarometer item has a symmetric response scale without a neutral midpoint and four options. The items are summarized in Table 2 which also includes the frequency distributions for this data for 2008.

(p61.1) The labels of the response options will not be interpreted in the same way by all respondents. Some people may consider the labels of all the response options of the POLS scale to be positively formulated, whereas others may interpret the two options at the lower part of this scale as negative expressions of satisfaction with life. Some people may believe one cannot be less satisfied than 'not at all satisfied' and will consider this option to be the null point of the Eurobarometer scale, while others may believe things can be worse and assign an interval of positive length to this option. Interpretation of semantic intervals will vary from person to person for all kinds of reasons such as personality, cultural context or the context of the scale (Hazelrigg and Hardy 2000). As a consequence, in the Happiness Scale Interval Study items are assessed by a group of judges. This results in a report of the average value and the variance for each boundary between two response options. This implies that the results should be considered as representative for the population and are not applicable for subgroups with specific characteristics.

(p61.2) The two items presented in Table 2 together comprise six response options, three of which are included in both items. The transformation of the response scales of the items to a scale from 0 to 10 according to each of the three transformation methods is depicted in Fig. 2.

(p61.3) From Fig. 2 it can be seen that in the Linear Stretch Method the extremes of both primary scales are pinned to 0 and 10 and that all the other response options are equally spaced in between. When the Linear Stretch Method is applied the response option ''fairly satisfied'' of the 5-point scale is assigned the transformed value 2.5, whereas this option for the 4-point scale gets a transformed value of 6.7. This large difference between the values 2.5 and 6.7 is elucidatory for the fact that the wordings of the response options are neglected when Linear Stretch is applied.

(p61.4) If the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method is applied the results are entirely different. The value of a label such as ''fairly satisfied'' is fixed in this method and equal to 6.5 according to the Dutch experts, however, from Fig. 2 it can also be revealed that the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method treats each response option as isolated from the other options and thus does not take into account the context of the scale.

(p61.5) As can be seen in the Semantic Judgement of Word Value in Context Method the assumption of equal distances between response options is abandoned and the idea is promoted that a fixed value applies to a label of a response option, irrespective of the labeling of the other options. If we consider the response option ''fairly satisfied'' once more, we can see that this option is assigned the interval 3.6-5.3 for the 5-point scale, with a mid interval value equal to 4.5 and a length of 1.7. For the 4-point scale the interval for this option ranges from 5.3 to 7.9, with a mid interval value of 6.6 and a length of 2.6.

(p61.6) At the start of the Happiness Scale Interval Study, the Frequency Approach was applied to the Semantic Judgement of Word Value in Context Method results and used to estimate a mean and a standard deviation, analogues to how this is done in the Linear Stretch Method and the Semantic Judgement Fixed Word Value Method. A comparison of the results obtained using these three SHM is shown in Table 3.

(p61.7) The survey items from POLS and the Eurobarometer address more or less the same topic and mainly differ in the response scales. The results for each item are assumed to be representative for the Dutch population and therefore one would expect that given that a transformation method is applied, the transformed means for 2008 would be equal. This is clearly not the case. The difference of 2.3 between the transformed means of 5.9 and 8.2 based on the Linear Stretch Method is most striking. The calculation of a transformed sample mean based on mid interval values still treats happiness as a discretely distributed variable, just as the two older methods. This does not do justice to Kalmijn's view that happiness is a latent continuous variable of nature. To deal with this Kalmijn introduced the Continuum Approach as an appropriate alternative for calculating a sample mean on a continuum from 0 to 10 (Kalmijn 2010). He proposed the beta distribution as an appropriate distribution for this approach in relation to the measurement of happiness, which is defined by two positive shape parameters, a and b and can expressed using the complete beta function.
