# A Review of Deep Learning CT Reconstruction: Concepts, Limitations, and Promise in Clinical Practice

CorpusID: 251108432 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44459cb6071816427d618fe7a4c1196556303670](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44459cb6071816427d618fe7a4c1196556303670)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Turning raw CT projection data into volumetric maps (i.e., images) of patient attenuation has undergone multiple changes from the beginnings of CT in the 1970s [1,2]. One way to understand the differences between CT reconstruction methods is by what assumptions they make. The first two methods used for CT image reconstruction were algebraic reconstruction (ART) and FBP. Both methods make no assumptions about the absolute value of attenuation of a patient, nor on the frequency content of the patient. In layman's terms, these methods are incapable of recognizing a relatively ''flat'' portion of patient anatomy (e.g., a urine-filled bladder) and preferentially reducing noise in this ''flat'' region. Similarly, ART and FBP cannot recognize regions which should not undergo noise reduction and thereby possibly degrade spatial resolution over patient anatomy with high frequency content (e.g., the inner ear bony anatomy). While ART was used on the first commercial CT scanner, it was quickly replaced by FBP as reconstruction computer hardware and software improved. As of today, FBP is still a standard option available on all CT scanners.

(p0.1) In response to the increasing fear of ionizing radiation due to scientifically debatable applications of the BIER VII report to CT radiation [3,4] and tissue effects from inappropriately performed brain perfusion exams [5,6], CT manufacturers developed commercial iterative reconstruction (IR) methods in 2009. IR methods assuaged fears over radiation because they offset the noise increases usually This article is part of the Topical collection on Computed Tomography.

(p0.2) & Timothy P. Szczykutowicz tszczykutowicz@uwhealth.org encountered when lowering radiation dose. Today, all major manufacturers and many 3rd-party companies have IR offerings. IR makes assumptions on the imaging object's signal level and content. In layman's terms, IR methods can identify the regions of an image which likely are smooth (i.e., a urine-filled bladder) and apply noise reduction processing to those specific regions. Unfortunately, noise reduction is commonly accompanied by spatial resolution degradation and changes to image noise texture. IR methods are therefore capable of identifying regions of high spatial frequency content (i.e., the inner ear bony anatomy) and minimizing the application of any spatial resolution degradation (i.e., noise reduction processes) to those regions. This ability to selectively reconstruct different regions within an image makes IR algorithms powerful noise-reducing methods, but their behavior is highly dependent on CT ionizing radiation dose [7], object size [8], object contrast level [7], and background patient anatomical noise [9]. Furthermore, the noise reduction methods used by the majority of IR algorithms results in suboptimal image texture, often referred to as ''plastic'' or ''blotchy'' in the literature [8,[10][11][12][13]. See Fig. 1 for an example of such an objectionable image noise texture.

(p0.3) More advanced forms of IR methods are often referred to as ''model-based,'' albeit while their performance has been shown to be superior to IR methods for some image quality facets [14], they also suffer from nonlinearities in their performance and noise texture issues [8,[15][16][17].

(p0.4) The latest advancement in the field of CT reconstruction is the focus of this article. Deep learning (DL) approaches also make assumptions about the patient, albeit their assumptions have nothing to do with how or where to apply denoising or edge preservation. DL methods assume the patient is similar in size, attenuation, and frequency content to the data used to train the DL model. If this assumption is valid, then the DL method should produce an image similar to the data used to train the DL model (Table 1).
## (s2) Issues with Iterative and Model-Based Reconstruction
(p2.0) Iterative (IR) and model-based reconstruction (MBR) algorithms reduce image noise using nonlinear mathematical functions against variable signal intensities within a defined region of interest [19]. The assumptions described in the previous section are performed mathematically using a regularization term. Regularization terms in IR or MBR frameworks are needed to reduce noise and stabilize the solution during iterative noise reduction or image reconstruction. This stabilization essentially limits the space of possible solutions to solutions that match certain assumptions about the object to be reconstructed [29]. As discussed in the introduction, they accomplish noise reduction by assuming that ''flat'' regions of the patient can be smoothed thereby reducing noise which introduces nonlinearities into the reconstruction process. The degree of ''flatness'' involves estimating local image value changes (i.e., gradients in CT number) which inherently depend on contrast level and noise magnitude, making IR and MBR method performance depend on contrast level and noise/dose level [7][8][9][15][16][17]. We can intuitively understand that as dose level decreases noise increases. Increased noise makes it more difficult for the IR and MBR methods to identify uniform versus non-uniform regions; hence, their performance changes for the worse at lower dose levels. Another byproduct of the noise reduction methods employed by IR and MBR methods is that their noise textures tend to peak at lower spatial frequencies (i.e., leftward shift in the noise power spectrum (NPS)), a phenomenon not observed with FBP. The leftward shift in NPS visually translates to an artificially ''cartoony'' on ''plastic'' appearing noise texture which is displeasing characteristic for some radiologists as shown in Fig. 1. These methods assume there will be regions of the patient with low spatial frequency content over which aggressive noise reduction may be applied. This assumption means the noise reduction is higher in uniform regions relative to highly textured regions. This assumption means these methods are then nonlinear with object contrast, object background texture, and dose level Deep learning based The methods assume the scan data share feature characteristics with the data used to train the model. These methods assume one desires the output of the reconstruction to match the data used to train the model. Therefore, images reconstructed using DL will have image quality characteristics matching those of the training data

(p2.1) The nonlinear behavior of IR and MBR with respect to noise texture is a primary reason why these reconstruction methods exhibit contrast-dependent spatial resolution [26]. Contrast-dependent spatial resolution means that a lesion's spatial resolution is a function of its contrast with neighboring background tissue [30]. For many low-attenuation diagnostic tasks scanned at clinical doses (e.g., low-attenuation hypovascular metastases), contrast-dependent spatial resolution is not deleterious to a radiologist's diagnostic accuracy [31]. However, overaggressive dose reductions have shown to be detrimental to the diagnostic accuracy of low-contrast lesion detection tasks [32][33][34]. This effect has been studied in numerous phantom-based and human observer models [32,33,35]. Most recent literature shows that IR allows for only modest reductions (e.g., * 25%) in radiation dose to preserve low-contrast lesion detection accuracy.

(p2.2) In addition to noise texture changes when IR and MBR methods are applied, the spatial resolution may also change relative to FBP. Several studies have demonstrated the dose/noise and contrast-level dependencies of IR and MBR algorithms. For the majority of IR and MBR methods to date, their performance is better at high-contrast levels and higher doses. This unfortunately is exactly the opposite behavior that is clinically desired. This was demonstrated by Baker et al. who used a liver phantom with lesions decreasing in size and contrast, imaged at decreasing radiation dose, and reconstructed with a variety of IR strengths/techniques [31]. The Baker et al. study showed that at low radiation doses, small low-contrast objects can be invisible regardless of reconstruction technique. Multiple other phantom studies demonstrated similar findings, and these were confirmed in prospective human studies [31,32,36,37]. For example, Pooler et al. showed that very aggressive dose reduction (70% range) led to decreased diagnostic accuracy and confidence in identifying and characterizing metastatic liver lesions regardless of image reconstruction algorithm used [33]. A review of this literature was conducted by Mileto et al. who concluded ''Radiologists need to be aware that use of IR can result in a decline of spatial resolution for low-contrast structures and degradation of low-contrast detectability when radiation dose reductions exceed approximately 25%'' [35]. We can intuitively understand the degradation of spatial resolution with lower contrast levels as being due to IR and MBR methods being better able to identify higher contrast edges relative to lower contrast edges. Since IR and MBR methods seek to actively preserve edges by not filtering orthogonally to the edge gradients, the higher the edge contrast, the more likely that edge is to receive less noise reduction (i.e., spatial resolution blurring) and therefore a preserved edge detail.
## (s3) Introduction to Deep Learning CT Image Reconstruction
(p3.0) The known shortcomings of iterative reconstruction discussed above have motivated alternative methods for noise reduction in CT. This section will introduce artificial intelligence (AI)-based methods, built with the goal of preserving the noise reduction features of IR and MBR methods, and mitigating the negative image texture, and nonlinear spatial resolution properties of IR and MBR methods.

(p3.1) While progress was being made in IR for CT, there were parallel efforts which have improved the power AI and its application to an ever-growing set of practical problems. AI most commonly uses neural networks that crudely model the neurons within the brain and the synaptic connections of these neurons [38]. Machine learning (ML) algorithms are a subset of artificial intelligence wherein the algorithm developer must specify a set of features to be included as part of the learning process. Deep learning (DL) offers a framework wherein the algorithm can learn the features throughout the training process. Specifically, one type of deep learning employs convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
## (s4) Technical Review of Deep Learning Performance
(p4.0) DLR promises to be fast and produce high-quality images (i.e., lower noise and higher spatial resolution) at lower doses [45]. As with previous generations of nonlinear reconstruction algorithms, the performance of DLR is not adequately quantified using classical image quality metrics such as noise, contrast-to-noise ratio, and signal-to-noise ratio. More advanced metrics such as the noise power spectrum (NPS), the task-based modulation transfer function, and model observer metrics are required [46]. Further, subjective image quality has been essential for characterizing the preferences of radiologists. However, this laborintensive assessment is now routinely automated with model observer studies and more recently artificial intelligence models have also been proposed toward this goal [47].
## (s5) Clinical Review of Deep Learning Performance
(p5.0) The majority of published clinical studies assess DLR algorithm performance with subjective image quality scores (IQ) typically assigned by radiologists and contrastto-noise measurements [54][55][56][57]. For instance, Bernard et al. assessed the performance of AiCE against IR (AIDR 3D) in a CT angiography acute stroke imaging protocol [55]. They concluded that a 40% reduced radiation dose resulted in a 50% increase in IQ scores. Although timely IQ study results are encouraging, their generalizability to diagnostic accuracy is limited. A CT imaging practice should be cautious in reducing exam doses when employing DRL solely based on IQ superiority alone.
## (s6) Conclusion
(p6.0) In summary, the space of CT image reconstruction using deep learning is an active area of research and productization. This chapter outlined the predecessors to DLR (i.e., FBP, IR, and MBR) and reviewed some of the currently available DLR commercial solutions. We expect more solutions to follow. At the time of this writing, Philips has a press release that states they now have AI-enabled image reconstruction on their Incisive platform. Siemens has a product released for MR called ''deep resolve,'' but nothing at the time of this writing for CT. Other facets of image quality like artifact mitigation and spatial resolution   Table 2). They are being developed, however, as shown in Figs. 7 and 8. The future of CT image reconstruction seems bright considering the positive comparisons of DLR to FBP, IR, and MBR made in this chapter. The first photon counting CT scanner release in 2021 [64] will likely also open new avenues for DLR and remains an exciting future prospect for DLR.
