# An Overview of Various Additive Manufacturing Technologies and Materials for Electrochemical Energy Conversion Applications

CorpusID: 253349735 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af41ffe09a6e8f1873ddcdb5c0fa4bff3d56d3a8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af41ffe09a6e8f1873ddcdb5c0fa4bff3d56d3a8)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s4) Direct Laser Metal Deposition Method.
(p4.0) Another important metallic AM method is the DLMD method. In DLMD method, or powder-directed energy deposition (PDED), account for three main parts: a 4 or 5 axis robotic arm, a powder injection feedstock, and a focused laser used as a heat source. 124 Although the laser is commonly used, electron beam, plasma, or electric arc can be also used as heat sources. 163,164 In Figure 14, the schematic illustration of the DLMD method can be seen.
## (s5) Coating Applications for Metal-Based 3D Printed
(p5.0) Electrodes. In electrochemical applications, it is necessary to improve the electrochemical properties and increase the corrosion resistance of the electrodes obtained by metalbased 3D printing methods because during the electrochemical reactions, especially in OER, highly corrosive media has contact with the electrode surface. For example, oxidation reactions occur on the anode side of PEM water electrolyzers and causes high overpotentials for the cells. 170 To overcome this highly oxidative media, a coating process should be done by high catalytic and corrosion resistance materials. The coatings of the 3D printed electrodes prepared by metal-based powders are given in Table 5.

(p5.1) According to Table 5, the SLM method is the most common method in the 3D printing process. Low raw material costs and easy application to any geometry may be the reason for the widespread use of SS. In the literature, the electrodeposition method, which is a relatively easier method compared to other methods, has been preferred for the coating process. Metals such as Ni, Pt, and Ti are selected as coating materials due to their higher catalytic activity and corrosion resistance. As given in Table 3, the application field of 3D printers and metal-based electrodes have a wide range in electrochemical energy conversion systems.  
