# Liver transplantation as a treatment for Wilson's disease with neurological presentation: a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 256286472 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/42e098a736189c8a539e963cecbbb0d0a707dcae](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/42e098a736189c8a539e963cecbbb0d0a707dcae)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Results
(p3.0) In total, 354 records were retrieved: 352 from PubMed searches and 2 for the detailed review of the reference lists [16,18] (Fig. 1). Following duplicate removal, 198 publications remained. The title, abstracts and full texts were then screened for relevance, removing another 150 records. Finally, 48 full-text articles of LT in 302 WD patients with neurological symptoms were included in the analysis. No prospective studies were identified, and there were 24 retrospective studies on patients with WD treated with LT; 23 of them were additional analyses of neurological symptoms in WD patients undergoing LT due to liver failure and only 1 was an analysis of neurological symptoms after LT in WD patients transplanted due to neurological deterioration (Table 1). There were 24 case reports and case series describing the WD patients with neurological presentation who had LT (Supplementary Table 1). The methodology for assessing neurological symptoms differed, also the brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data of these patients were of different quality. Moreover, different neurological scales were used, making it impossible to perform metaanalyses of the reviewed studies.

(p3.1) The cumulative survival rate in studies was 90.4% at the end of follow-up of all included studies. Most studies, case series and case reports reported favorable effects, with major improvement or complete neurological recovery in 215 WD cases (71.2%). In 21 cases (6.9%), there was no difference in neurological status before and after LT. There were 29 deaths (9.6%), 24 cases of de novo neurological deterioration (7.9%; mostly related to immunosuppressive treatment after LT), and 13 cases (4.3%) were lost to follow-up. There was a clear trend toward better results of LT in more recent studies compared with older studies, with older studies suggesting worse outcome in WD patients with neurological presentations [50], which was not confirmed in newer publications (Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1). For example, 1 3  Lankarani et al. [65] reported improvement of neurological symptoms in almost 67% of transplanted WD patients. Out of 24 cases and series reports of 32 WD patients, 25 (78%) independent WD patients showed substantial improvement in neurological status and dependence within 4 weeks to 10 years after LT. In four cases (12.5%), there was slight neurological improvement; however, patients were dependent. There was also one deterioration [61] and two deaths [31,49]. In one of those patients, the patient showed neurological improvement, but then the patient died due to aneurysm rupture [31].

(p3.2) Taking into account the progress in transplantation during the time (surgery techniques as well as immunosuppression and global patient healthcare), we additionally analyzed cases according to when LT was performed: 15 patients underwent LT up to 2000 and 17 had LT after 2000. In the pre-2020 group, we found three cases of slight neurological improvement (patients remained functionally dependent) [31,32,60] and one case of neurological deterioration (1/15) [61]. There were no neurological deteriorations described in the group transplanted after 2000. Analyzing deaths after LT, one case was reported before 2000 [31] and one after [49].
## (s5) Limitations
(p5.0) Our literature review has some limitations. Firstly, all 48 papers were retrospective. All studies used various endpoints and methods for their evaluation. Only more recent studies used neurological WD scales (UWDRS) [64] or WD scales developed by Medici et al. [50]. In older studies, only neurological symptoms were described. Further, the studied groups were not homogenous; most of the patients from registries were transplanted due to hepatic indications (mild neurological symptoms), while others, such as the Poujois et al., study and most case reports, were transplanted due to severe neurological deficits. Apart from a few case reports, only Poujois et al. [64] used brain MRI scales for quantitative assessment of the brain. Also, in most of the articles, there was a lack of hepatic assessment according to detailed scales that are useful for LT qualification, such as Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) or Nazer score, which would be helpful to verify the hepatological indications for LT in neurological patients.

(p5.1) Regarding analyzing the impact of LT on neurological WD symptoms, some of the reported neurological (or neuropsychological/psychiatric) improvements could be due to resolution of hepatic encephalopathy (even subclinically in the case of neuropsychological functioning). Further, we have mentioned, but not analyzed, psychiatric improvement after LT, due to too little data [76,77]. However, due to the high frequency and clinical significance of psychiatric and cognitive disturbances in WD, this issue should be analyzed separately.
## (s6) Conclusions
(p6.0) Currently available data encourage the use of this treatment option, especially in severe neurological patients not responding to anti-copper treatment; however, it is still uncertain which patients with neurological impairment benefit most from LT and when is the optimal timing for LT [77].

(p6.1) Further studies conducted on large cohorts, using neurological and radiological scales as well as potential biomarkers of neurological injury, are needed to establish the role of LT in the treatment of WD with neurological symptoms.

(p6.2) Currently available data encourage the use of this treatment option, especially in severe neurological patients not responding to anti-copper treatment; however, it is still uncertain which patients with neurological impairment benefit most from LT and when is the optimal timing for LT [77].

(p6.3) Further studies conducted on large cohorts, using neurological and radiological scales as well as potential biomarkers of neurological injury, are needed to establish the role of LT in the treatment of WD with neurological symptoms.
## (s14) Results
(p14.0) In total, 354 records were retrieved: 352 from PubMed searches and 2 for the detailed review of the reference lists [16,18] (Fig. 1). Following duplicate removal, 198 publications remained. The title, abstracts and full texts were then screened for relevance, removing another 150 records. Finally, 48 full-text articles of LT in 302 WD patients with neurological symptoms were included in the analysis. No prospective studies were identified, and there were 24 retrospective studies on patients with WD treated with LT; 23 of them were additional analyses of neurological symptoms in WD patients undergoing LT due to liver failure and only 1 was an analysis of neurological symptoms after LT in WD patients transplanted due to neurological deterioration (Table 1). There were 24 case reports and case series describing the WD patients with neurological presentation who had LT (Supplementary Table 1). The methodology for assessing neurological symptoms differed, also the brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data of these patients were of different quality. Moreover, different neurological scales were used, making it impossible to perform metaanalyses of the reviewed studies.

(p14.1) The cumulative survival rate in studies was 90.4% at the end of follow-up of all included studies. Most studies, case series and case reports reported favorable effects, with major improvement or complete neurological recovery in 215 WD cases (71.2%). In 21 cases (6.9%), there was no difference in neurological status before and after LT. There were 29 deaths (9.6%), 24 cases of de novo neurological deterioration (7.9%; mostly related to immunosuppressive treatment after LT), and 13 cases (4.3%) were lost to follow-up. There was a clear trend toward better results of LT in more recent studies compared with older studies, with older studies suggesting worse outcome in WD patients with neurological presentations [50], which was not confirmed in newer publications (Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1). For example, 1 3  Lankarani et al. [65] reported improvement of neurological symptoms in almost 67% of transplanted WD patients. Out of 24 cases and series reports of 32 WD patients, 25 (78%) independent WD patients showed substantial improvement in neurological status and dependence within 4 weeks to 10 years after LT. In four cases (12.5%), there was slight neurological improvement; however, patients were dependent. There was also one deterioration [61] and two deaths [31,49]. In one of those patients, the patient showed neurological improvement, but then the patient died due to aneurysm rupture [31].

(p14.2) Taking into account the progress in transplantation during the time (surgery techniques as well as immunosuppression and global patient healthcare), we additionally analyzed cases according to when LT was performed: 15 patients underwent LT up to 2000 and 17 had LT after 2000. In the pre-2020 group, we found three cases of slight neurological improvement (patients remained functionally dependent) [31,32,60] and one case of neurological deterioration (1/15) [61]. There were no neurological deteriorations described in the group transplanted after 2000. Analyzing deaths after LT, one case was reported before 2000 [31] and one after [49].
## (s16) Limitations
(p16.0) Our literature review has some limitations. Firstly, all 48 papers were retrospective. All studies used various endpoints and methods for their evaluation. Only more recent studies used neurological WD scales (UWDRS) [64] or WD scales developed by Medici et al. [50]. In older studies, only neurological symptoms were described. Further, the studied groups were not homogenous; most of the patients from registries were transplanted due to hepatic indications (mild neurological symptoms), while others, such as the Poujois et al., study and most case reports, were transplanted due to severe neurological deficits. Apart from a few case reports, only Poujois et al. [64] used brain MRI scales for quantitative assessment of the brain. Also, in most of the articles, there was a lack of hepatic assessment according to detailed scales that are useful for LT qualification, such as Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) or Nazer score, which would be helpful to verify the hepatological indications for LT in neurological patients.

(p16.1) Regarding analyzing the impact of LT on neurological WD symptoms, some of the reported neurological (or neuropsychological/psychiatric) improvements could be due to resolution of hepatic encephalopathy (even subclinically in the case of neuropsychological functioning). Further, we have mentioned, but not analyzed, psychiatric improvement after LT, due to too little data [76,77]. However, due to the high frequency and clinical significance of psychiatric and cognitive disturbances in WD, this issue should be analyzed separately.
## (s17) Conclusions
(p17.0) Currently available data encourage the use of this treatment option, especially in severe neurological patients not responding to anti-copper treatment; however, it is still uncertain which patients with neurological impairment benefit most from LT and when is the optimal timing for LT [77].

(p17.1) Further studies conducted on large cohorts, using neurological and radiological scales as well as potential biomarkers of neurological injury, are needed to establish the role of LT in the treatment of WD with neurological symptoms.

(p17.2) Currently available data encourage the use of this treatment option, especially in severe neurological patients not responding to anti-copper treatment; however, it is still uncertain which patients with neurological impairment benefit most from LT and when is the optimal timing for LT [77].

(p17.3) Further studies conducted on large cohorts, using neurological and radiological scales as well as potential biomarkers of neurological injury, are needed to establish the role of LT in the treatment of WD with neurological symptoms.
