# Attachment-Based Parenting Interventions and Evidence of Changes in Toddler Attachment Patterns: An Overview

CorpusID: 251671305 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/260f5661e7984afe125752791b1e46ca4573c66b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/260f5661e7984afe125752791b1e46ca4573c66b)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s8) Intervention Overview
(p8.0) Attachment and Biobehavioral Catch-Up (ABC) (Bernard et al., 2012;Dozier & Bernard, 2017;Dozier et al., 2009) is a manualized, in-home intervention comprising approximately 10, 1-h sessions for families of children ages 6 to 24 months. The program aims to increase parental nurturance in response to child distress, to increase parental sensitivity and positive regard, and to decrease frightening and intrusive parental behavior. During each session, caregivers practice new skills in conjunction with "in-the-moment" therapist coaching focusing on describing child and caregiver behaviors, labeling intervention targets used, and highlighting outcomes. Sessions are carried out in the family home, and so other family members are also encouraged to join in. An adapted version of ABC for toddlers aged 24-48 months has also been described (ABC-Toddler; ABC-T) (Lind et al., 2017), emphasizing supporting children's developing emotion regulation abilities through availability and co-regulation when toddlers are overwhelmed by their feelings. In ABC-T, caregivers are coached to remain calm, validate their toddlers' feelings, and identify past experiences in their own lives that may be contributing to their reactions to their children's feelings.

(p8.1) ABC facilitator training is provided through the University of Delaware (University of Delaware, 2017). Training involves a 2-day training course, followed by 12 months of supervision (2 supervision meetings per week).
## (s12) Evidence Base
(p12.0) Two studies have examined attachment outcomes following COS-I, both of which also included children aged older than 24 months (Hoffman et al., 2006;Huber et al., 2015). In the earliest study, Hoffman et al. (2006) assessed infant attachment (using the SSP) in a sample of 65 caregiver-child dyads recruited from Head Start programs (child age range = 11-58, M = 32.0, SD = 12.6 months), pre-and post-COS-I. Of the 65 caregivers, most were mothers (86%) and the others were foster carers (6%), fathers (6%), and grandparents (2%). Results showed that the rate of secure attachment improved from 20% at pre-treatment to 54% at post-treatment, and showed decreases in the combined rates of disorganized-controlling attachment and insecureother attachment from 60% at pre-treatment to 25% at posttreatment. These results suggest that the program is associated with significant attachment changes for many families, but the lack of a control group means that results should be interpreted with caution. In a subsequent Australian study, Huber et al. (2015) employed an open-trial design to investigate changes in attachment security (assessed using the SSP) following the COS-I intervention delivered to a sample of 83 carers including biological parents (88%), foster/ adoptive parents (6%), and kinship carers (6%) (child age 1 3 range = 13-88, M = 47.80, SD = 17.48 months). Results showed no significant differences from pre-to post-treatment in the percentages of children classified as secure or disorganized. The authors noted, however, that at the post-treatment assessment, participating children showed significantly more secure attachment behaviors and fewer disorganized attachment behaviors than they had done at the pre-treatment assessment. Due to a large attrition rate (44% drop outs/missing post-treatment data) the authors re-analyzed the data using an intention-to-treat design, but results were unchanged. As was the case for the Hoffman et al. (2006) study, the lack of a control group in this study was a significant limitation.

(p12.1) Attachment outcomes following a number of the adapted versions of COS have been tested. Cassidy et al. (2010) investigated attachment outcomes of the COS Perinatal Protocol in a sample of 20 mothers and infants as part of a larger intervention project in which the COS Perinatal was employed as part of a 15-month residential treatment program for pregnant women with histories of substance abuse who had been convicted of non-violent crimes (Cassidy et al., 2010). Results showed that at post-treatment, participating children demonstrated rates of attachment security and organization (assessed using the SSP) comparable to those of children from low-risk samples. However, the 20 study participants represented only 55% of the original sample, while treatment completers and non-completers were found to be comparable on a number of demographic and psychological variables, the study completers were on average, more educated. The other major study limitation was the fact that there was no control group. In 2011, Cassidy et al. (2011) employed an RCT to compared outcomes of COS-HV4 versus a psycho-educational control intervention in a sample of 220 mother-child dyads (enrolled in the study when infants were 1 month of age). There was a high level of participant retention (94%) and results showed that highly irritable infants in the treatment group showed significant improvements in attachment security (assessed using the SSP). The study was conducted with an economically stressed sample of mothers with irritable infants, so an important future research direction would to be replicate results in other populations. While one RCT has examined attachment outcomes in a pre-school age sample following COS-P (Cassidy et al., 2017), no studies have investigated attachment outcomes following the COS-P intervention in children aged 12-24 months.
## (s15) Evidence Base
(p15.0) In an early study, Lieberman et al. (1991) studied 93 mother-child dyads (child age range = 11-14 months) all of whom were recent Mexican immigrants and of low socioeconomic status. At study entry, the SSP was administered; children classified as insecurely attached were then randomly assigned to CPP (insecure CPP) or a non-treated control group (insecure controls), and securely attached children formed a second non-treated control group (secure controls). When children were followed up one year later (with an 18% attrition rate; rate did not differ between the experimental groups), children in the insecure CPP group showed less avoidance, resistance, and anger, and more partnership with their mothers compared to insecure controls. There were no significant differences between children in the insecure CPP group and secure controls. There were also no AQS security score differences between the insecure CPP and the insecure control groups.
## (s19) Evidence Base
(p19.0) There is evidence of positive changes in infant attachment following STEEP delivered to parents in the first postpartum year (Heinicke et al., 1999) and one study has investigated attachment outcomes when STEEP was extended through the second year of the child's life. In this German study, Suess et al. (2016) used a quasi-experimental design to compare attachment outcomes for 78 mother-child dyads who received STEEP compared to 29 dyads who received standard German welfare system services. Results showed that at the end of the intervention (child age 24 months), the odds of the child being classified using the SSP as insecure or disorganized were no different in the STEEP than the control group. The STEEP group did, however, show lower scores on the continuous 9-point disorganization rating scale of the SSP, when controlling for risk exposure. At this same time point, there was no significant difference between groups in terms of child attachment security as assessed using the AQS, but the authors reported that the effect was in the expected direction, with a medium effect size. Results of this study were limited by the quasi-experimental design, and the high rates of participant drop out/missing data (49.5% in the STEEP group and 51.7% in the control group).
## (s21) Intervention Overview
(p21.0) Established in 1994, EHS is a national early intervention program in the United States for low-income families from pregnancy through child age 3 years (Raikes & Love, 2002). Services provided under the EHS umbrella are accessed during home visits and/or at schools or childcare centers, and include parenting education, case management, community support, health advocacy, and child development interventions. Sessions occur twice per month for 90 min, and a child receives about 1,380 h of services through center-based programming. Broadly, EHS programs aim to enhance child development (e.g., early socio-emotional, cognitive, and language skills), health and safety, social support, financial wellbeing, and stress management for these at-risk families. Strengthening caregiver-child relationships is also a goal, and this is addressed through a focus on interpreting and sensitively responding to child needs, encouraging positive play interactions, and educating caregivers on child development (Roggman et al., 2009).
## (s24) Intervention Overview
(p24.0) Watch, Wait, and Wonder (WWW; Muir, 1992) is a psychodynamic approach to infant-caregiver psychotherapy delivered in 50-min weekly sessions for 8-20 weeks. The goals of WWW are to increase sensitive and responsive caregiving while addressing intergenerational attachment representations (Cohen et al., 1999). WWW differs from other psychodynamic caregiver-child therapies because it is infant-led; caregivers spend the first 30 min of each session interacting with their infants while letting the infant take the lead-with the aims of increasing caregiver insight and awareness into the child's needs, and gaining the benefits of play therapy (Cohen et al., 1999;Muir, 1992). The final 20-min of therapy sessions involve a conversation between the therapist and caregiver about the observations and feelings that the caregiver had during the infant-led play interaction (Muir, 1992).

(p24.1) The program developers provide training in the WWW model (Watch Wait & Wonder, 2022). Training involves a 3-day experientially-based introductory workshop, followed 6-12 months later by an advanced consultation workshop or ongoing weekly or biweekly online sessions, both of which use a group case supervision process. Cohen et al. (1999) employed a RCT with a clinical sample of 67 mother-child dyads aged 10-30 months, randomly allocating them to receive WWW or psychodynamic psychotherapy (PPT). At the post-treatment assessment, 7 of the 34 of children in the WWW group (20.6%) had shifted from an insecure to secure attachment classification (using the SSP), compared to 1 of the 32 (3%) in the PPT group. Similarly, of the 34 children in the WWW group, 5 (14.7%) shifted to A or C, compared to 3 of the 32 (3%) in the PPT group. The authors reported that overall, children in the WWW group were significantly more likely to shift to a secure or organized attachment category (WWW 35.2%; PPT 12.5%) but they urged caution in interpretation of results as the 1 3 changes were modest. In a subsequent study in which 87% of the same sample was followed up six months after the completion of treatment, Cohen et al. (2002) showed that while children from the WWW treatment group maintained their improvements in attachment security, there were no significant differences between them and the children in the PPT group with respect to attachment security, suggesting that both interventions brought about improvements but that the changes happened at different points. One of the major limitations of the study was the lack of a non-treated control group.
## (s27) Intervention Overview
(p27.0) The UCLA Family Development Project is a manualized, relationship-based home-visiting intervention delivered by mental health professionals from late pregnancy through to the end of the child's second year (Heinicke et al., 1999). Home visits take place on a weekly basis until the child's first birthday, and then every second week in the child's second year. Mother-infant groups are also made available to families throughout the program, and follow-up contact is provided to families in children's third and fourth years. The primary goal of the UCLA Family Development Project is to provide mothers with a positive, trusting relationship experience with a home visitor. These relationships help mothers feel understood and supported, so they can work on problems. Continuity of care and shared pleasure in the child are key elements of the program (Heinicke et al., 2001).
## (s28) Evidence Base
(p28.0) One RCT has examined attachment outcomes following the UCLA Family Development Project. In this study, Heinicke et al. (1999) evaluated attachment outcomes for 64 atrisk mothers recruited during pregnancy, 31 of whom were allocated to receive the UCLA Family Development Project intervention and 33 of whom were allocated to receive a control intervention (standard pediatric follow-up). Study retention was high (> 90%), and results showed that in the UCLA Family Development Project group, more than 3 times as many children showed a secure as opposed to insecure attachment classification, measured using the SSP when children with 14 months old. In contrast, the rates of secure versus insecure attachment in the control condition were virtually identical. They also found that disorganized attachment coupled with avoidance as a secondary classification was more common among the children in the control condition than it was for children in the intervention condition.
## (s30) Intervention Overview
(p30.0) Right from the Start (RFTS; Niccols, 2008) is a group-based intervention that aims to enhance parental sensitivity and attachment security by improving parents' understanding of attachment and the impact of parent and child temperament on parent-child interactions, and improving parents' ability to correctly interpret child cues. RFTS is delivered by infant development specialists in weekly 2-h group sessions over an 8-week period. The sessions involve the presentation of video clips of confederate parents making exaggerated errors in common parent-child interaction situations, which are then discussed in both small (4-6 parents) and large (12-40 parents) groups. Parents practice skills in structured homework assignments between sessions and then discuss and support one another with home practice during the weekly sessions.
## (s39) Intervention Overview
(p39.0) Lyons-Ruth et al. (1990) described a home-visitation program for families with infants at high social risk due to maternal depression, poverty, and caretaking inadequacy. The intervention comprised weekly sessions over a period of 9-18 months. The intervention goals were to (1) provide the parent with an experience of a trusting reliable relationship, (2) enhance the family's ability to access resources to meet basic needs, (3) to promote positive and developmentally appropriate parent-infant interactions, and to encourage the parent's role as an emotional source for the child, and (4) to decrease social isolation. -Ruth et al. (1990) examined the effectiveness of the home-visiting intervention by comparing outcomes for a group of 31 mother-child dyads that received the home-visiting intervention (representing 89% of the original group of mothers who agreed to participate; child age M = 4.7 months), a control group of at-risk infants (n = 10), and a community group matched on social risk profile and paternal characteristics (n = 35). When child attachment was assessed at 18 months using the SSP, results showed that infants who had received the intervention had significantly lower rates of attachment insecurity and disorganization compared to the control group. Of the infants with depressed mothers, those who were untreated demonstrated more than twice the rate of insecure-disorganized behavior compared to the infants of depressed mothers in the intervention group. Results of the study are promising, but the study was limited by the non-randomized design.
## (s44) Intervention Overview
(p44.0) Minding the Baby is an attachment-based, home-visitation intervention designed to improve health, developmental, and relationship outcomes in at-risk young families who are having their first child (Slade et al., 2020). The program involves weekly home visits by a nurse and social worker throughout pregnancy and the child's first year, followed by biweekly home visits for the child's second year. During the home visits, the nurse and social worker provide the family with information on their child's development, parent-child attachment, and parenting. Home visitors also attend to the basic needs of the family by supplying food, diapers, etc. The nurse provides the family with guidance on health, nutrition, and reproductive care. The social worker supports the family with approaches to addressing mental health concerns including complex trauma, depression, and anxiety. Training in the Minding the Baby intervention is provided through Yale University (Yale University, 2022). Slade et al. (2020) recruited 156 primiparous pregnant women and randomly allocated them to Minding the Baby (n = 77) or a control condition (perinatal and postnatal treatment as usual; n = 96). When the mother-child dyads were assessed mid-way through the intervention, at the age of 12 to 14 months (76% retention rate), children whose mothers received Minding the Baby were significantly more likely to be securely attached (as assessed using the SSP) and less likely to be disorganized than children in the control group. The results of this study are positive, but there were a high number of women who declined the intervention when invited (n = 101), and this is likely to have produced a biased sample. While the Minding the Baby intervention was delivered until the children were 24 months, at which point the researchers examined a range of other relevant outcome variables (parental reflective functioning, affective caregiving, and maternal mental health), infant attachment outcomes were only assessed at 12-14 months. This prevents any conclusions about the impact of Minding the Baby on attachment outcomes, when it is delivered throughout the child's second year of life.
## (s50) Results of Previous Meta-analyses
(p50.0) To date, there have been eight published meta-analyses of studies reporting attachment outcomes following attachment-based interventions for young children, and all of these have included, but were not limited to, toddlers (Bakermans-Kranenburg et al., 2003, 2005Facompré et al., 2018;Letourneau et al., 2015;Van Ijzendoorn et al., 1995;Wright & Edginton, 2016;Wright et al., 2015Wright et al., , 2017. In the earliest of these studies, van Ijzendoorn and colleagues (1995) reviewed 16 studies investigating attachment-based interventions targeting maternal sensitivity and attachment security in infants. These authors conducted a meta-analysis of data from 12 studies. Results showed an effect size of d = 0.17 for improving the child-caregiver attachment relationship and suggested that shorter-term interventions and those with narrow foci (e.g., physical contact with infant) were more effective at improving attachment than longer-term interventions with broader foci (e.g., wraparound services). Bakermans-Kranenburg et al. (2003) investigated 70 studies examining interventions aimed at enhancing attachment security among children younger than 54 months. Results showed aggregate effect sizes of d = 0.20 for improvement in infant attachment security. In addition, this meta-analysis provided evidence showing interventions which were brief (i.e., < 17 sessions), had a behavioral focus, and were conducted after the child was 6 months old, were associated with the greatest improvements in attachment security. Two years later, this same research group completed a meta-analysis of 15 studies reporting results of interventions aimed at preventing disorganized attachment styles (Bakermans-Kranenburg et al., 2005). Results again showed that the most successful interventions targeted children at least 6 months of age and focused mainly on increasing caregiver sensitivity as opposed to providing broader support or changing caregivers' internal representations of attachment. Further, this meta-analysis indicated that interventions were more effective in samples with higher rates of attachment disorganization and in samples of "at-risk" children (e.g., irritable, premature) as opposed to those with "at-risk" caregivers (e.g., poor, socially isolated). Letourneau et al. (2015) conducted a narrative systematic review and meta-analysis to examine the effectiveness of interventions targeting improvement of the caregiver-child attachment relationship in children young than 36 months by promoting maternal sensitivity and reflective functioning. Their sample included 10 studies, 7 of which were included in the meta-analysis. Results showed that most of the reviewed interventions led to significantly greater increases in attachment security compared to control conditions, with interventions targeting both maternal sensitivity and reflective functioning showing the greatest effects. Furthermore, the meta-analysis revealed that the overall effect size was significant and large (d = 1.53).

(p50.1) Wright and colleagues conducted a series of three reviews examining the evidence for attachment-based parenting interventions for children with severe behavior problems. In an initial study, Wright et al. (2015) showed greater effectiveness for treatments that targeted caregiver sensitivity and those that intervened in at-risk populations. Next, Wright and Edginton (2016) reviewed studies employing RCT designs and validated measures of attachment. Results showed greater improvements in attachment security and organization for intervention than control groups, but results between studies varied widely. Finally, Wright et al. (2017) reviewed attachment-based parenting interventions targeting children demonstrating or at-risk of developing disorganized attachment styles. The analysis led the authors to conclude that treatments aimed at improving caregiver sensitivity were most successful at decreasing disorganization but that few high-quality studies in this area existed. Overall, analyses revealed a medium effect size for decreases in disorganization across studies (d = 0.38).

(p50.2) Most recently, Facompré et al. (2018) conducted a metaanalysis to assess the effectiveness of interventions designed to prevent disorganized attachment in at-risk children. Their sample included 16 studies, all of which were (1) conducted between January 1989 and August 2016, (2) included a control condition, and (3) reported post-intervention rates of disorganized and organized attachment assessed using the SSP. Of the 16 studies, all but one was conducted with children aged less than 24 months at the start of the intervention. Results indicated that overall, compared to control conditions, interventions increased the rates of organized attachment (d = 0.35). Moderation analysis identified three indicators that were associated with the most optimal attachment outcomes, namely studies published after 2005 versus studies published before 2005, studies with maltreated versus non-maltreated samples, and studies with older versus younger children. In contrast to the results reported by Bakermans-Kranenburg et al. (2005), there were no statistically significant differences between the effectiveness of programs that focused on increasing parental sensitivity and programs that aimed to increase representations or support, however, the largest effect size was observed for programs that focused on maternal sensitivity (d = 0.51).
## (s51) Discussion
(p51.0) This review paper provides a narrative summary of available attachment-informed interventions for caregivers and toddlers (aged 12-24 months), an overview of evidence showing the ability of these interventions to bring changes in child attachment patterns, and a description of 1 3 the available meta-analysis examining the ability of parenting interventions to change infant attachment patterns.

(p51.1) Overall, the programs with the strongest evidence base for changes in parent-child attachment when delivered in the early toddler years were CPP and ABC. The CPP intervention is supported by four separate RCTs and one follow-up study, including studies conducted by research teams who were uninvolved in the original development of the intervention (Cicchetti et al., 1999Stronach et al., 2013;Toth et al., 2006). CPP was developed for high-risk parent-child dyads, so it is encouraging to see positive changes in attachment in high-risk samples. It must be noted, however, that of all the programs reviewed, CPP has one of the longest treatment durations and therefore is likely to be one of the most resourceintensive interventions. ABC was shown in two separate RCTs to be associated with positive child attachment outcomes (Bernard et al., 2012;Dozier et al., 2009), with 1 of these studies including a 9-year post-intervention followup (Zajac et al., 2020). These gains are impressive and encouraging given that ABC is a relatively brief intervention (10 weeks).

(p51.2) There was also evidence suggesting that various other interventions are also associated with positive attachment outcomes in toddlers (COS-HV4, STEEP, EHS, WWW, UCLA Family Development Project, Moss's Home-Visiting Intervention, Lyons-Ruth's Home-Visiting Intervention, Minding the Baby). However, while evidence for the great majority of these interventions came from RCTs, in most cases, evidence came from just one study, conducted by the program developers. It must also be noted that with the exception of two RCT studies (Dozier et al., 2009;Lieberman et al., 1991), attachment outcomes for the intervention and control group were assessed post-treatment only, rather than at both pre-and post-intervention. This means that individual changes in attachment over time were not examined, making it difficult to know whether the groups differed at baseline. For some interventions (e.g., COS-I, COS perinatal), available evidence about the interventions' effect on attachment was positive but limited by the fact that it came from open-trial studies rather than RCTs. Future studies utilizing RCT designs should be conducted to test outcomes of these intervention programs further.
