# Clinical Ethics Support for Healthcare Personnel: An Integrative Literature Review

CorpusID: 254503754 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3986633ee71503b81c9cf8a8e80c7ae07f7c8131](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3986633ee71503b81c9cf8a8e80c7ae07f7c8131)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Clinical ethics consultation
(p5.0) Theoretical paper To describe clinical ethics consultation and their expertise concerning the right moral answer Clinical ethics consultation is substantive, which requires a kind of training that other professions undergo, but that is not normatively binding. Opponents of CEC and moral expertise may essentially be objecting to the idea of people who profess to have the right answer in moral situations, because: (1) they hold that there is no such objectively verifiable thing, and (2) this society respects and protects autonomous moral decision-making more highly than correct moral decision-making. CECs are the only, or indeed the most desirable model for the provision of ethics support and guidance in clinical practice Provision of clinical ethics support may include consideration of individual cases, or debate on the ethical issues they raise; the education of health professionals on such issues; and ethical input into trust policy and guidance. It is accepted that these functions require the identification and analysis of ethical problems within a legal framework, if criticisms of lack of 'due process' are to be addressed.

(p5.1) Since ethical support may be provided by individuals, small groups or committees, the core competencies identified are to be considered as ''collective'' in their application to a particular committee or group. and principlism To analyze two methodologies: the ''dilemmatic'' and the ''problematic'' It is easier to reason than to deliberate. Deliberation is a difficult task and it requires many conditions, such as: lack of external constraints, good will, capacity to give reasons, respect for others when they disagree, an ability to listen, disposition to influence and to be influenced by arguments, and a desire to understand, cooperate and collaborate. This is the framework of a true deliberation process. Deliberation rests not on ''decision'' but on ''commitment.'' Within this framework, almost all existing bioethical methods can be useful to some extent. Molewijk et al. (2008a). Teaching ethics in the clinic. The theory and practice of moral case deliberation. (d) to present the implementation process The results showed that the moral case deliberations, the role of the ethics facilitator, and the train-the-facilitator program were regarded as useful and were evaluated as (very) positive. Healthcare professionals reported that they improved their moral competencies.

(p5.2) They have developed skills to reflect on their work, and to create an atmosphere of dialogue instead of discussion and debate. Molewijk et al. (2008b). Implementing moral case deliberation in Dutch healthcare-Improving moral competency for professionals and quality of care. with an emotion is finding the right middle ground between being overwhelmed and remaining untouched. Moral case deliberation can provide tools for dealing with emotions in clinical practice. This is not just a matter of rationally determining a balance. One has to be able to act in line with the right middle, and embody the appropriate attitude. Dealing with emotions is a matter of virtue and character. To test the assumption that enhanced ethical competence would help to decrease reported moral distress, a prospective controlled study was set up Ethical competence is a key factor in preventing or reducing moral distress. The results show that generally, there were differences in levels of moral distress between pharmacies and hospital departments. Ethics rounds may be seen as opportunities for ethical discourse, where participants jointly explore their own personal sets of values and seek to balance these with professional value sets. The ethics rounds method was also developed to strengthen the organizations' ethical dimension. Svantesson et al. (2008 relief. Negative experiences were associated with a sense of unconcern and alienation, as well as frustration with the lack of solutions and a sense of resignation that change is not possible. In assisting healthcare professionals to learn a way through ethical problems in patient care, a balance should be found between ethical analyses, conflict resolution and problem solving. the primary healthcare workers feel, how important healthcare workers in primary care think it is to better deal with these challenges and what kind of ethics support they want The majority of primary healthcare workers in this study reported that they experience ethical challenges in their work. These challenges were closely related to professional and organizational circumstances, with the lack of resources, e.g., lack of staff and competence being the most prominent. The findings showed that the healthcare workers' values clash with what they see themselves doing in their practice, such as hiding medication in food, tying patients to the chair or using force to clean the patient. These are the issues that are given less attention than, e.g., ethical challenges related to end of life. Magelssen et al. (2016). Ethics support in community care makes a difference for practice. Norway.

(p5.3) Theoretical paper To describe clinical ethics consultation and their expertise concerning the right moral answer Clinical ethics consultation is substantive, which requires a kind of training that other professions undergo, but that is not normatively binding. Opponents of CEC and moral expertise may essentially be objecting to the idea of people who profess to have the right answer in moral situations, because: (1) they hold that there is no such objectively verifiable thing, and (2) this society respects and protects autonomous moral decision-making more highly than correct moral decision-making. CECs are the only, or indeed the most desirable model for the provision of ethics support and guidance in clinical practice Provision of clinical ethics support may include consideration of individual cases, or debate on the ethical issues they raise; the education of health professionals on such issues; and ethical input into trust policy and guidance. It is accepted that these functions require the identification and analysis of ethical problems within a legal framework, if criticisms of lack of 'due process' are to be addressed.

(p5.4) Since ethical support may be provided by individuals, small groups or committees, the core competencies identified are to be considered as ''collective'' in their application to a particular committee or group. and principlism To analyze two methodologies: the ''dilemmatic'' and the ''problematic'' It is easier to reason than to deliberate. Deliberation is a difficult task and it requires many conditions, such as: lack of external constraints, good will, capacity to give reasons, respect for others when they disagree, an ability to listen, disposition to influence and to be influenced by arguments, and a desire to understand, cooperate and collaborate. This is the framework of a true deliberation process. Deliberation rests not on ''decision'' but on ''commitment.'' Within this framework, almost all existing bioethical methods can be useful to some extent. Molewijk et al. (2008a). Teaching ethics in the clinic. The theory and practice of moral case deliberation. (d) to present the implementation process The results showed that the moral case deliberations, the role of the ethics facilitator, and the train-the-facilitator program were regarded as useful and were evaluated as (very) positive. Healthcare professionals reported that they improved their moral competencies.

(p5.5) They have developed skills to reflect on their work, and to create an atmosphere of dialogue instead of discussion and debate. Molewijk et al. (2008b). Implementing moral case deliberation in Dutch healthcare-Improving moral competency for professionals and quality of care. with an emotion is finding the right middle ground between being overwhelmed and remaining untouched. Moral case deliberation can provide tools for dealing with emotions in clinical practice. This is not just a matter of rationally determining a balance. One has to be able to act in line with the right middle, and embody the appropriate attitude. Dealing with emotions is a matter of virtue and character. To test the assumption that enhanced ethical competence would help to decrease reported moral distress, a prospective controlled study was set up Ethical competence is a key factor in preventing or reducing moral distress. The results show that generally, there were differences in levels of moral distress between pharmacies and hospital departments. Ethics rounds may be seen as opportunities for ethical discourse, where participants jointly explore their own personal sets of values and seek to balance these with professional value sets. The ethics rounds method was also developed to strengthen the organizations' ethical dimension. Svantesson et al. (2008 relief. Negative experiences were associated with a sense of unconcern and alienation, as well as frustration with the lack of solutions and a sense of resignation that change is not possible. In assisting healthcare professionals to learn a way through ethical problems in patient care, a balance should be found between ethical analyses, conflict resolution and problem solving. the primary healthcare workers feel, how important healthcare workers in primary care think it is to better deal with these challenges and what kind of ethics support they want The majority of primary healthcare workers in this study reported that they experience ethical challenges in their work. These challenges were closely related to professional and organizational circumstances, with the lack of resources, e.g., lack of staff and competence being the most prominent. The findings showed that the healthcare workers' values clash with what they see themselves doing in their practice, such as hiding medication in food, tying patients to the chair or using force to clean the patient. These are the issues that are given less attention than, e.g., ethical challenges related to end of life. Magelssen et al. (2016). Ethics support in community care makes a difference for practice. Norway.
## (s6) Nursing Ethics
(p6.0) Ethics support Quantitative, online questionnaires n = 2. Responses in total n = 354 To study outcomes of ethics activities and examine which factors promote or inhibit significance and sustainability of activities The participants of this study found the ethics project to be highly significant for their daily professional practice. Outcomes include better handling of ethical challenges, better employee cooperation, better service quality, and better relations with patients and next of kin. Factors associated with sustainability and/or significance of the activities were sufficient support from stakeholders, sufficient available time, and ethics facilitators having sufficient knowledge and skills in ethics and access to supervision. The facilitators who are responsible for the activities must receive sufficient follow-up and training in ethics deliberation methods and relevant topics in health care ethics. how it is interwoven with practice A threefold account of the relationship between theory and practice based on narrative and hermeneutical approaches were discussed. The relationship between theory and practice took the form of a ''hermeneutic circle.'' Using theories to interpret experiences makes theoretical concepts clearer. It indicates our basic attitudes to our daily work by summarizing: (1) that we acknowledge our dependencies and responsibilities within the social sphere, and (2) that we believe that all human identities are constructed by means of narratives as (3) we perceive human beings as story-telling agents. In addition, (4) we emphasized our focus on fostering mutual understanding; (5) we acknowledge that understanding is mediated by language, words and concepts; and (6) we opt for taking personal and professional experiences seriously, making them accessible in dialogues, and learn from each other in changing perspectives. Schildmann et al. (2013) (Sandelowski et al. 2006), such as different approaches to CES.

(p6.1) Ethics support Quantitative, online questionnaires n = 2. Responses in total n = 354 To study outcomes of ethics activities and examine which factors promote or inhibit significance and sustainability of activities The participants of this study found the ethics project to be highly significant for their daily professional practice. Outcomes include better handling of ethical challenges, better employee cooperation, better service quality, and better relations with patients and next of kin. Factors associated with sustainability and/or significance of the activities were sufficient support from stakeholders, sufficient available time, and ethics facilitators having sufficient knowledge and skills in ethics and access to supervision. The facilitators who are responsible for the activities must receive sufficient follow-up and training in ethics deliberation methods and relevant topics in health care ethics. how it is interwoven with practice A threefold account of the relationship between theory and practice based on narrative and hermeneutical approaches were discussed. The relationship between theory and practice took the form of a ''hermeneutic circle.'' Using theories to interpret experiences makes theoretical concepts clearer. It indicates our basic attitudes to our daily work by summarizing: (1) that we acknowledge our dependencies and responsibilities within the social sphere, and (2) that we believe that all human identities are constructed by means of narratives as (3) we perceive human beings as story-telling agents. In addition, (4) we emphasized our focus on fostering mutual understanding; (5) we acknowledge that understanding is mediated by language, words and concepts; and (6) we opt for taking personal and professional experiences seriously, making them accessible in dialogues, and learn from each other in changing perspectives. Schildmann et al. (2013) (Sandelowski et al. 2006), such as different approaches to CES.
## (s9) Clinical Ethics Committees
(p9.0) A clinical ethics committee is typically a standing committee which functions as an independent institution or authority to provide a formal mechanism for dealing with ethical issues in clinical settings (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Aulisio and Arnold 2008). Generally, the members of clinical ethics committees have various professional backgrounds such as: bioethicists/ethics consultants, clergy, social workers, lawyers, nurses, physicians, psychologists, therapists and community representatives (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Schick and Guo 2001). The goals and responsibilities of the clinical ethics committee are to protect the rights, safety and well-being of the patient in the health care setting or human subjects in research projects (Borovecki et al. 2010;Gaudine et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2011). In addition, they are to identify and analyze ethical issues in clinical practice (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2001), promote training and education of health personnel, and provide guidance upon request (Caminiti et al. 2011). They commonly respond to requests to address ethical issues related to ongoing as well as retrospective patient cases; identify ethical needs within clinical settings; support healthcare personnel, patients and next-of-kin (Førde and Pedersen 2011), find agreements and make decisions; and review research protocols (Fukuyama et al. 2008;Gaudine et al. 2010). Clinical ethics committees are involved in responding to ethical issues, such as informed consent to treatment (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011). Sometimes they provide decision-making support (Pedersen et al. 2009) in end-of-life situations or the continuation of life support (Slowther et al. 2004b). Clinical ethics committees can also provide education, seminars, workshops and training in ethics for hospital employees (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011;Pedersen et al. 2009). They can review research protocols (except in the United States, where separate committees deal with this process), provide ethical input into hospital policies (Pedersen et al. 2009) and create guidelines (Slowther et al. 2001). Additionally, they can give an ''expert'' opinion regarding issues, such as the provision of treatment against a patient's will and the disclosure of medical information against a patient's wishes when it might be deemed necessary (Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees promote an ethical dimension to health care and generate possibilities for improvement in care quality (Caminiti et al. 2011;Czarkowski et al. 2015).

(p9.1) There is no formal legal or regulatory governing framework for clinical ethics committees, which is in contrast to research ethics committees worldwide (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2004b;Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees vary in function, structure and goals worldwide, but there are some commonalities in terms of the provision of advice (Slowther et al. 2001) and recommendations concerning the best course of action or discussions that lead to a good decisionmaking process (Schick and Guo 2001;Slowther et al. 2004b). Some committees themselves assume the responsibility to develop and improve guidelines and policies regarding prospective ethical challenges in clinical practice, and others are mandated by the health care institutions to do so (Aulisio and Arnold 2008;Slowther et al. 2001). Clinical ethics committees seem to have formal authority and legitimacy (without generalizing) to provide advice and recommendations concerning ethical issues arising in healthcare institutions (Slowther et al. 2004b).

(p9.2) A clinical ethics committee is typically a standing committee which functions as an independent institution or authority to provide a formal mechanism for dealing with ethical issues in clinical settings (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Aulisio and Arnold 2008). Generally, the members of clinical ethics committees have various professional backgrounds such as: bioethicists/ethics consultants, clergy, social workers, lawyers, nurses, physicians, psychologists, therapists and community representatives (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Schick and Guo 2001). The goals and responsibilities of the clinical ethics committee are to protect the rights, safety and well-being of the patient in the health care setting or human subjects in research projects (Borovecki et al. 2010;Gaudine et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2011). In addition, they are to identify and analyze ethical issues in clinical practice (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2001), promote training and education of health personnel, and provide guidance upon request (Caminiti et al. 2011). They commonly respond to requests to address ethical issues related to ongoing as well as retrospective patient cases; identify ethical needs within clinical settings; support healthcare personnel, patients and next-of-kin (Førde and Pedersen 2011), find agreements and make decisions; and review research protocols (Fukuyama et al. 2008;Gaudine et al. 2010). Clinical ethics committees are involved in responding to ethical issues, such as informed consent to treatment (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011). Sometimes they provide decision-making support (Pedersen et al. 2009) in end-of-life situations or the continuation of life support (Slowther et al. 2004b). Clinical ethics committees can also provide education, seminars, workshops and training in ethics for hospital employees (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011;Pedersen et al. 2009). They can review research protocols (except in the United States, where separate committees deal with this process), provide ethical input into hospital policies (Pedersen et al. 2009) and create guidelines (Slowther et al. 2001). Additionally, they can give an ''expert'' opinion regarding issues, such as the provision of treatment against a patient's will and the disclosure of medical information against a patient's wishes when it might be deemed necessary (Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees promote an ethical dimension to health care and generate possibilities for improvement in care quality (Caminiti et al. 2011;Czarkowski et al. 2015).

(p9.3) There is no formal legal or regulatory governing framework for clinical ethics committees, which is in contrast to research ethics committees worldwide (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2004b;Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees vary in function, structure and goals worldwide, but there are some commonalities in terms of the provision of advice (Slowther et al. 2001) and recommendations concerning the best course of action or discussions that lead to a good decisionmaking process (Schick and Guo 2001;Slowther et al. 2004b). Some committees themselves assume the responsibility to develop and improve guidelines and policies regarding prospective ethical challenges in clinical practice, and others are mandated by the health care institutions to do so (Aulisio and Arnold 2008;Slowther et al. 2001). Clinical ethics committees seem to have formal authority and legitimacy (without generalizing) to provide advice and recommendations concerning ethical issues arising in healthcare institutions (Slowther et al. 2004b).
## (s13) Strengths and Limitations
(p13.0) A strength of this study is that the conclusions are based on literature that allowed an analysis of the established clinical ethics support approaches worldwide. In this integrative review, both qualitative and quantitative studies as well as theoretical papers were included. An integrated review allows the inclusion of several methodologies and can take into account a broader range of studies to develop a more comprehensive understanding of a phenomenon (Whittemore and Knafl 2005). Another strength is that we have searched data systematically with Mesh terms as well as manually. There are limitations as well. It was difficult to decide which articles to exclude since there are no real definitions as to what clinical ethics consultation really is. We included articles that described a clinical ethics support approach empirically, or theoretical papers that discussed an established approach. It was difficult to decide where to draw the line between approaches aimed only at supporting healthcare personnel with ethically difficult situations and approaches that support healthcare personnel as well as patients and next-of-kin. For example, some clinical ethics committees do support the patients and their next-of-kin, while other clinical ethics committees do not involve patients and next-of-kin in their annual meetings or when considering different situations. Even though there are similarities in the ''top-down'' perspective of the clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees, it does not mean they are similar worldwide. Clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees in different countries can differ in their role and function as well. In addition, in this review we considered only English-language papers and it is possible that other methods of ethics support have been developed in other language cultures. Future studies need to focus on defining and characterizing what clinical ethics support actually is, how it should function and if it should function differently in different countries; and if so, what are the possible reasons since many of the ethical issues are similar globally. Lastly, an additional interesting avenue for future research would be to perform a large-scale study of what types of ethical support practitioners are receiving, if they are satisfied with it and their perceptions regarding any effects on patient outcomes.

(p13.1) A strength of this study is that the conclusions are based on literature that allowed an analysis of the established clinical ethics support approaches worldwide. In this integrative review, both qualitative and quantitative studies as well as theoretical papers were included. An integrated review allows the inclusion of several methodologies and can take into account a broader range of studies to develop a more comprehensive understanding of a phenomenon (Whittemore and Knafl 2005). Another strength is that we have searched data systematically with Mesh terms as well as manually. There are limitations as well. It was difficult to decide which articles to exclude since there are no real definitions as to what clinical ethics consultation really is. We included articles that described a clinical ethics support approach empirically, or theoretical papers that discussed an established approach. It was difficult to decide where to draw the line between approaches aimed only at supporting healthcare personnel with ethically difficult situations and approaches that support healthcare personnel as well as patients and next-of-kin. For example, some clinical ethics committees do support the patients and their next-of-kin, while other clinical ethics committees do not involve patients and next-of-kin in their annual meetings or when considering different situations. Even though there are similarities in the ''top-down'' perspective of the clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees, it does not mean they are similar worldwide. Clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees in different countries can differ in their role and function as well. In addition, in this review we considered only English-language papers and it is possible that other methods of ethics support have been developed in other language cultures. Future studies need to focus on defining and characterizing what clinical ethics support actually is, how it should function and if it should function differently in different countries; and if so, what are the possible reasons since many of the ethical issues are similar globally. Lastly, an additional interesting avenue for future research would be to perform a large-scale study of what types of ethical support practitioners are receiving, if they are satisfied with it and their perceptions regarding any effects on patient outcomes.
## (s27) Clinical ethics consultation
(p27.0) Theoretical paper To describe clinical ethics consultation and their expertise concerning the right moral answer Clinical ethics consultation is substantive, which requires a kind of training that other professions undergo, but that is not normatively binding. Opponents of CEC and moral expertise may essentially be objecting to the idea of people who profess to have the right answer in moral situations, because: (1) they hold that there is no such objectively verifiable thing, and (2) this society respects and protects autonomous moral decision-making more highly than correct moral decision-making. CECs are the only, or indeed the most desirable model for the provision of ethics support and guidance in clinical practice Provision of clinical ethics support may include consideration of individual cases, or debate on the ethical issues they raise; the education of health professionals on such issues; and ethical input into trust policy and guidance. It is accepted that these functions require the identification and analysis of ethical problems within a legal framework, if criticisms of lack of 'due process' are to be addressed.

(p27.1) Since ethical support may be provided by individuals, small groups or committees, the core competencies identified are to be considered as ''collective'' in their application to a particular committee or group. and principlism To analyze two methodologies: the ''dilemmatic'' and the ''problematic'' It is easier to reason than to deliberate. Deliberation is a difficult task and it requires many conditions, such as: lack of external constraints, good will, capacity to give reasons, respect for others when they disagree, an ability to listen, disposition to influence and to be influenced by arguments, and a desire to understand, cooperate and collaborate. This is the framework of a true deliberation process. Deliberation rests not on ''decision'' but on ''commitment.'' Within this framework, almost all existing bioethical methods can be useful to some extent. Molewijk et al. (2008a). Teaching ethics in the clinic. The theory and practice of moral case deliberation. (d) to present the implementation process The results showed that the moral case deliberations, the role of the ethics facilitator, and the train-the-facilitator program were regarded as useful and were evaluated as (very) positive. Healthcare professionals reported that they improved their moral competencies.

(p27.2) They have developed skills to reflect on their work, and to create an atmosphere of dialogue instead of discussion and debate. Molewijk et al. (2008b). Implementing moral case deliberation in Dutch healthcare-Improving moral competency for professionals and quality of care. with an emotion is finding the right middle ground between being overwhelmed and remaining untouched. Moral case deliberation can provide tools for dealing with emotions in clinical practice. This is not just a matter of rationally determining a balance. One has to be able to act in line with the right middle, and embody the appropriate attitude. Dealing with emotions is a matter of virtue and character. To test the assumption that enhanced ethical competence would help to decrease reported moral distress, a prospective controlled study was set up Ethical competence is a key factor in preventing or reducing moral distress. The results show that generally, there were differences in levels of moral distress between pharmacies and hospital departments. Ethics rounds may be seen as opportunities for ethical discourse, where participants jointly explore their own personal sets of values and seek to balance these with professional value sets. The ethics rounds method was also developed to strengthen the organizations' ethical dimension. Svantesson et al. (2008 relief. Negative experiences were associated with a sense of unconcern and alienation, as well as frustration with the lack of solutions and a sense of resignation that change is not possible. In assisting healthcare professionals to learn a way through ethical problems in patient care, a balance should be found between ethical analyses, conflict resolution and problem solving. the primary healthcare workers feel, how important healthcare workers in primary care think it is to better deal with these challenges and what kind of ethics support they want The majority of primary healthcare workers in this study reported that they experience ethical challenges in their work. These challenges were closely related to professional and organizational circumstances, with the lack of resources, e.g., lack of staff and competence being the most prominent. The findings showed that the healthcare workers' values clash with what they see themselves doing in their practice, such as hiding medication in food, tying patients to the chair or using force to clean the patient. These are the issues that are given less attention than, e.g., ethical challenges related to end of life. Magelssen et al. (2016). Ethics support in community care makes a difference for practice. Norway.

(p27.3) Theoretical paper To describe clinical ethics consultation and their expertise concerning the right moral answer Clinical ethics consultation is substantive, which requires a kind of training that other professions undergo, but that is not normatively binding. Opponents of CEC and moral expertise may essentially be objecting to the idea of people who profess to have the right answer in moral situations, because: (1) they hold that there is no such objectively verifiable thing, and (2) this society respects and protects autonomous moral decision-making more highly than correct moral decision-making. CECs are the only, or indeed the most desirable model for the provision of ethics support and guidance in clinical practice Provision of clinical ethics support may include consideration of individual cases, or debate on the ethical issues they raise; the education of health professionals on such issues; and ethical input into trust policy and guidance. It is accepted that these functions require the identification and analysis of ethical problems within a legal framework, if criticisms of lack of 'due process' are to be addressed.

(p27.4) Since ethical support may be provided by individuals, small groups or committees, the core competencies identified are to be considered as ''collective'' in their application to a particular committee or group. and principlism To analyze two methodologies: the ''dilemmatic'' and the ''problematic'' It is easier to reason than to deliberate. Deliberation is a difficult task and it requires many conditions, such as: lack of external constraints, good will, capacity to give reasons, respect for others when they disagree, an ability to listen, disposition to influence and to be influenced by arguments, and a desire to understand, cooperate and collaborate. This is the framework of a true deliberation process. Deliberation rests not on ''decision'' but on ''commitment.'' Within this framework, almost all existing bioethical methods can be useful to some extent. Molewijk et al. (2008a). Teaching ethics in the clinic. The theory and practice of moral case deliberation. (d) to present the implementation process The results showed that the moral case deliberations, the role of the ethics facilitator, and the train-the-facilitator program were regarded as useful and were evaluated as (very) positive. Healthcare professionals reported that they improved their moral competencies.

(p27.5) They have developed skills to reflect on their work, and to create an atmosphere of dialogue instead of discussion and debate. Molewijk et al. (2008b). Implementing moral case deliberation in Dutch healthcare-Improving moral competency for professionals and quality of care. with an emotion is finding the right middle ground between being overwhelmed and remaining untouched. Moral case deliberation can provide tools for dealing with emotions in clinical practice. This is not just a matter of rationally determining a balance. One has to be able to act in line with the right middle, and embody the appropriate attitude. Dealing with emotions is a matter of virtue and character. To test the assumption that enhanced ethical competence would help to decrease reported moral distress, a prospective controlled study was set up Ethical competence is a key factor in preventing or reducing moral distress. The results show that generally, there were differences in levels of moral distress between pharmacies and hospital departments. Ethics rounds may be seen as opportunities for ethical discourse, where participants jointly explore their own personal sets of values and seek to balance these with professional value sets. The ethics rounds method was also developed to strengthen the organizations' ethical dimension. Svantesson et al. (2008 relief. Negative experiences were associated with a sense of unconcern and alienation, as well as frustration with the lack of solutions and a sense of resignation that change is not possible. In assisting healthcare professionals to learn a way through ethical problems in patient care, a balance should be found between ethical analyses, conflict resolution and problem solving. the primary healthcare workers feel, how important healthcare workers in primary care think it is to better deal with these challenges and what kind of ethics support they want The majority of primary healthcare workers in this study reported that they experience ethical challenges in their work. These challenges were closely related to professional and organizational circumstances, with the lack of resources, e.g., lack of staff and competence being the most prominent. The findings showed that the healthcare workers' values clash with what they see themselves doing in their practice, such as hiding medication in food, tying patients to the chair or using force to clean the patient. These are the issues that are given less attention than, e.g., ethical challenges related to end of life. Magelssen et al. (2016). Ethics support in community care makes a difference for practice. Norway.
## (s28) Nursing Ethics
(p28.0) Ethics support Quantitative, online questionnaires n = 2. Responses in total n = 354 To study outcomes of ethics activities and examine which factors promote or inhibit significance and sustainability of activities The participants of this study found the ethics project to be highly significant for their daily professional practice. Outcomes include better handling of ethical challenges, better employee cooperation, better service quality, and better relations with patients and next of kin. Factors associated with sustainability and/or significance of the activities were sufficient support from stakeholders, sufficient available time, and ethics facilitators having sufficient knowledge and skills in ethics and access to supervision. The facilitators who are responsible for the activities must receive sufficient follow-up and training in ethics deliberation methods and relevant topics in health care ethics. how it is interwoven with practice A threefold account of the relationship between theory and practice based on narrative and hermeneutical approaches were discussed. The relationship between theory and practice took the form of a ''hermeneutic circle.'' Using theories to interpret experiences makes theoretical concepts clearer. It indicates our basic attitudes to our daily work by summarizing: (1) that we acknowledge our dependencies and responsibilities within the social sphere, and (2) that we believe that all human identities are constructed by means of narratives as (3) we perceive human beings as story-telling agents. In addition, (4) we emphasized our focus on fostering mutual understanding; (5) we acknowledge that understanding is mediated by language, words and concepts; and (6) we opt for taking personal and professional experiences seriously, making them accessible in dialogues, and learn from each other in changing perspectives. Schildmann et al. (2013) (Sandelowski et al. 2006), such as different approaches to CES.

(p28.1) Ethics support Quantitative, online questionnaires n = 2. Responses in total n = 354 To study outcomes of ethics activities and examine which factors promote or inhibit significance and sustainability of activities The participants of this study found the ethics project to be highly significant for their daily professional practice. Outcomes include better handling of ethical challenges, better employee cooperation, better service quality, and better relations with patients and next of kin. Factors associated with sustainability and/or significance of the activities were sufficient support from stakeholders, sufficient available time, and ethics facilitators having sufficient knowledge and skills in ethics and access to supervision. The facilitators who are responsible for the activities must receive sufficient follow-up and training in ethics deliberation methods and relevant topics in health care ethics. how it is interwoven with practice A threefold account of the relationship between theory and practice based on narrative and hermeneutical approaches were discussed. The relationship between theory and practice took the form of a ''hermeneutic circle.'' Using theories to interpret experiences makes theoretical concepts clearer. It indicates our basic attitudes to our daily work by summarizing: (1) that we acknowledge our dependencies and responsibilities within the social sphere, and (2) that we believe that all human identities are constructed by means of narratives as (3) we perceive human beings as story-telling agents. In addition, (4) we emphasized our focus on fostering mutual understanding; (5) we acknowledge that understanding is mediated by language, words and concepts; and (6) we opt for taking personal and professional experiences seriously, making them accessible in dialogues, and learn from each other in changing perspectives. Schildmann et al. (2013) (Sandelowski et al. 2006), such as different approaches to CES.
## (s31) Clinical Ethics Committees
(p31.0) A clinical ethics committee is typically a standing committee which functions as an independent institution or authority to provide a formal mechanism for dealing with ethical issues in clinical settings (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Aulisio and Arnold 2008). Generally, the members of clinical ethics committees have various professional backgrounds such as: bioethicists/ethics consultants, clergy, social workers, lawyers, nurses, physicians, psychologists, therapists and community representatives (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Schick and Guo 2001). The goals and responsibilities of the clinical ethics committee are to protect the rights, safety and well-being of the patient in the health care setting or human subjects in research projects (Borovecki et al. 2010;Gaudine et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2011). In addition, they are to identify and analyze ethical issues in clinical practice (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2001), promote training and education of health personnel, and provide guidance upon request (Caminiti et al. 2011). They commonly respond to requests to address ethical issues related to ongoing as well as retrospective patient cases; identify ethical needs within clinical settings; support healthcare personnel, patients and next-of-kin (Førde and Pedersen 2011), find agreements and make decisions; and review research protocols (Fukuyama et al. 2008;Gaudine et al. 2010). Clinical ethics committees are involved in responding to ethical issues, such as informed consent to treatment (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011). Sometimes they provide decision-making support (Pedersen et al. 2009) in end-of-life situations or the continuation of life support (Slowther et al. 2004b). Clinical ethics committees can also provide education, seminars, workshops and training in ethics for hospital employees (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011;Pedersen et al. 2009). They can review research protocols (except in the United States, where separate committees deal with this process), provide ethical input into hospital policies (Pedersen et al. 2009) and create guidelines (Slowther et al. 2001). Additionally, they can give an ''expert'' opinion regarding issues, such as the provision of treatment against a patient's will and the disclosure of medical information against a patient's wishes when it might be deemed necessary (Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees promote an ethical dimension to health care and generate possibilities for improvement in care quality (Caminiti et al. 2011;Czarkowski et al. 2015).

(p31.1) There is no formal legal or regulatory governing framework for clinical ethics committees, which is in contrast to research ethics committees worldwide (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2004b;Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees vary in function, structure and goals worldwide, but there are some commonalities in terms of the provision of advice (Slowther et al. 2001) and recommendations concerning the best course of action or discussions that lead to a good decisionmaking process (Schick and Guo 2001;Slowther et al. 2004b). Some committees themselves assume the responsibility to develop and improve guidelines and policies regarding prospective ethical challenges in clinical practice, and others are mandated by the health care institutions to do so (Aulisio and Arnold 2008;Slowther et al. 2001). Clinical ethics committees seem to have formal authority and legitimacy (without generalizing) to provide advice and recommendations concerning ethical issues arising in healthcare institutions (Slowther et al. 2004b).

(p31.2) A clinical ethics committee is typically a standing committee which functions as an independent institution or authority to provide a formal mechanism for dealing with ethical issues in clinical settings (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Aulisio and Arnold 2008). Generally, the members of clinical ethics committees have various professional backgrounds such as: bioethicists/ethics consultants, clergy, social workers, lawyers, nurses, physicians, psychologists, therapists and community representatives (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Schick and Guo 2001). The goals and responsibilities of the clinical ethics committee are to protect the rights, safety and well-being of the patient in the health care setting or human subjects in research projects (Borovecki et al. 2010;Gaudine et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2011). In addition, they are to identify and analyze ethical issues in clinical practice (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2001), promote training and education of health personnel, and provide guidance upon request (Caminiti et al. 2011). They commonly respond to requests to address ethical issues related to ongoing as well as retrospective patient cases; identify ethical needs within clinical settings; support healthcare personnel, patients and next-of-kin (Førde and Pedersen 2011), find agreements and make decisions; and review research protocols (Fukuyama et al. 2008;Gaudine et al. 2010). Clinical ethics committees are involved in responding to ethical issues, such as informed consent to treatment (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011). Sometimes they provide decision-making support (Pedersen et al. 2009) in end-of-life situations or the continuation of life support (Slowther et al. 2004b). Clinical ethics committees can also provide education, seminars, workshops and training in ethics for hospital employees (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011;Pedersen et al. 2009). They can review research protocols (except in the United States, where separate committees deal with this process), provide ethical input into hospital policies (Pedersen et al. 2009) and create guidelines (Slowther et al. 2001). Additionally, they can give an ''expert'' opinion regarding issues, such as the provision of treatment against a patient's will and the disclosure of medical information against a patient's wishes when it might be deemed necessary (Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees promote an ethical dimension to health care and generate possibilities for improvement in care quality (Caminiti et al. 2011;Czarkowski et al. 2015).

(p31.3) There is no formal legal or regulatory governing framework for clinical ethics committees, which is in contrast to research ethics committees worldwide (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2004b;Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees vary in function, structure and goals worldwide, but there are some commonalities in terms of the provision of advice (Slowther et al. 2001) and recommendations concerning the best course of action or discussions that lead to a good decisionmaking process (Schick and Guo 2001;Slowther et al. 2004b). Some committees themselves assume the responsibility to develop and improve guidelines and policies regarding prospective ethical challenges in clinical practice, and others are mandated by the health care institutions to do so (Aulisio and Arnold 2008;Slowther et al. 2001). Clinical ethics committees seem to have formal authority and legitimacy (without generalizing) to provide advice and recommendations concerning ethical issues arising in healthcare institutions (Slowther et al. 2004b).
## (s35) Strengths and Limitations
(p35.0) A strength of this study is that the conclusions are based on literature that allowed an analysis of the established clinical ethics support approaches worldwide. In this integrative review, both qualitative and quantitative studies as well as theoretical papers were included. An integrated review allows the inclusion of several methodologies and can take into account a broader range of studies to develop a more comprehensive understanding of a phenomenon (Whittemore and Knafl 2005). Another strength is that we have searched data systematically with Mesh terms as well as manually. There are limitations as well. It was difficult to decide which articles to exclude since there are no real definitions as to what clinical ethics consultation really is. We included articles that described a clinical ethics support approach empirically, or theoretical papers that discussed an established approach. It was difficult to decide where to draw the line between approaches aimed only at supporting healthcare personnel with ethically difficult situations and approaches that support healthcare personnel as well as patients and next-of-kin. For example, some clinical ethics committees do support the patients and their next-of-kin, while other clinical ethics committees do not involve patients and next-of-kin in their annual meetings or when considering different situations. Even though there are similarities in the ''top-down'' perspective of the clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees, it does not mean they are similar worldwide. Clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees in different countries can differ in their role and function as well. In addition, in this review we considered only English-language papers and it is possible that other methods of ethics support have been developed in other language cultures. Future studies need to focus on defining and characterizing what clinical ethics support actually is, how it should function and if it should function differently in different countries; and if so, what are the possible reasons since many of the ethical issues are similar globally. Lastly, an additional interesting avenue for future research would be to perform a large-scale study of what types of ethical support practitioners are receiving, if they are satisfied with it and their perceptions regarding any effects on patient outcomes.

(p35.1) A strength of this study is that the conclusions are based on literature that allowed an analysis of the established clinical ethics support approaches worldwide. In this integrative review, both qualitative and quantitative studies as well as theoretical papers were included. An integrated review allows the inclusion of several methodologies and can take into account a broader range of studies to develop a more comprehensive understanding of a phenomenon (Whittemore and Knafl 2005). Another strength is that we have searched data systematically with Mesh terms as well as manually. There are limitations as well. It was difficult to decide which articles to exclude since there are no real definitions as to what clinical ethics consultation really is. We included articles that described a clinical ethics support approach empirically, or theoretical papers that discussed an established approach. It was difficult to decide where to draw the line between approaches aimed only at supporting healthcare personnel with ethically difficult situations and approaches that support healthcare personnel as well as patients and next-of-kin. For example, some clinical ethics committees do support the patients and their next-of-kin, while other clinical ethics committees do not involve patients and next-of-kin in their annual meetings or when considering different situations. Even though there are similarities in the ''top-down'' perspective of the clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees, it does not mean they are similar worldwide. Clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees in different countries can differ in their role and function as well. In addition, in this review we considered only English-language papers and it is possible that other methods of ethics support have been developed in other language cultures. Future studies need to focus on defining and characterizing what clinical ethics support actually is, how it should function and if it should function differently in different countries; and if so, what are the possible reasons since many of the ethical issues are similar globally. Lastly, an additional interesting avenue for future research would be to perform a large-scale study of what types of ethical support practitioners are receiving, if they are satisfied with it and their perceptions regarding any effects on patient outcomes.
