# Klinische Studien zu COVID-19 -die ersten zwei Jahre in Deutschland und darüber hinaus nutzten die Plattform COVID-evidence.org einschließlich der Registereinträge von ClinicalTrials.gov und der WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform sowie Publikationen der Living Overview of Evidence Plattform für COVID-19 (L-OVE)

CorpusID: 252546188 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/025345539f2b776685c76c8b8d3e6fca464fdbb0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/025345539f2b776685c76c8b8d3e6fca464fdbb0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) The early days
(p2.0) It did not take long until the first RCTs for COVID-19 have been planned and registered. There were 11 RCTs registered (all Chinese) in the first 30 days after the World Health Organization (WHO) China Country Office was notified of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause on December 31, 2019. Five hundred and sixteen RCTs were planned or registered in the first 100 days, until April 9, 2020 [5]. They aimed to include over 350,000 participants worldwide. The early RCTs were predominantly small (median sample size 144; interquartile range [IQR] 70-334) and had a remarkable focus on some highly dominating treatments combined with a very wide spectrum of intervention types.

(p2.1) Almost all trials explored treatments (89%; 457 of 516), and most where pharmaceutical (91%; 468 of 516). The two most frequently investigated pharmacological classes were antivirals (e.g., lopinavir/ritonavir) and antimalarials (e.g., hydroxychloroquine).
## (s3) After one year
(p3.0) Throughout the first year of the pandemic, the number of trials steadily increased [6]. After the initial dominance of trials conducted in Asia (mostly China), the number of trials registered in the rest of the world increased rapidly as the pandemic spread through March 2020. There were 2,814 registered randomized trials worldwide as of February 16, 2021. Most were still small with only 18% planning to recruit >500 participants and only 3% planning to recruit >5000 participants. A small proportion of 6% of trials linked to registry entries provided published results, allowing to inform decisions promptly. While this is indeed a small proportion -it does represent a remarkable absolute number of 171 trials with results published as of February 16, 2021 [6].
## (s10) Discussion
(p10.0) After two years of the pandemic, over 4,000 randomized trials have been registered to evaluate interventions to prevent or treat COVID-19. Unfortunately, most trials remained small and resulted in a limited number of publications. Very early in the pandemic, it became clear that there was a lack of timely coordination and structured efforts to knowledge generation -there was, with few exceptions, no integration of clinical trial research in the pandemic response. Remarkably, the development of new therapies was largely preceded by the assessment of repurposing drugs established for other diseases, such as the antimalarial hydroxychlorquine. The same question on hydroxychloroquine was investigated again and again, a rarely seen chaos-like redundancy without comprehensible justification [6]. It also became clear that the large and ambitious research effort would be accompanied by a huge waste of resources [35]. Germany played almost no role as a location for the clinical trials in the early response to the pandemic, being involved in only 2% of all over 500 clinical trials initiated in the first 100 days. Randomized assessments to find the most efficient nonpharmaceutical strategies to prevent COVID-19 was unfortunately not part of the early days response.

(p10.1) With steadily increasing number of trials over the first year, the number of trials with published results grew. Despite being only a small fraction of the over 2,800 trials initiated, there were still 171 trials sucessfully initiated, conducted and published within more or less one year -this is remarkable nevertheless.
## (s21) The early days
(p21.0) It did not take long until the first RCTs for COVID-19 have been planned and registered. There were 11 RCTs registered (all Chinese) in the first 30 days after the World Health Organization (WHO) China Country Office was notified of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause on December 31, 2019. Five hundred and sixteen RCTs were planned or registered in the first 100 days, until April 9, 2020 [5]. They aimed to include over 350,000 participants worldwide. The early RCTs were predominantly small (median sample size 144; interquartile range [IQR] 70-334) and had a remarkable focus on some highly dominating treatments combined with a very wide spectrum of intervention types.

(p21.1) Almost all trials explored treatments (89%; 457 of 516), and most where pharmaceutical (91%; 468 of 516). The two most frequently investigated pharmacological classes were antivirals (e.g., lopinavir/ritonavir) and antimalarials (e.g., hydroxychloroquine).
## (s22) After one year
(p22.0) Throughout the first year of the pandemic, the number of trials steadily increased [6]. After the initial dominance of trials conducted in Asia (mostly China), the number of trials registered in the rest of the world increased rapidly as the pandemic spread through March 2020. There were 2,814 registered randomized trials worldwide as of February 16, 2021. Most were still small with only 18% planning to recruit >500 participants and only 3% planning to recruit >5000 participants. A small proportion of 6% of trials linked to registry entries provided published results, allowing to inform decisions promptly. While this is indeed a small proportion -it does represent a remarkable absolute number of 171 trials with results published as of February 16, 2021 [6].
## (s29) Discussion
(p29.0) After two years of the pandemic, over 4,000 randomized trials have been registered to evaluate interventions to prevent or treat COVID-19. Unfortunately, most trials remained small and resulted in a limited number of publications. Very early in the pandemic, it became clear that there was a lack of timely coordination and structured efforts to knowledge generation -there was, with few exceptions, no integration of clinical trial research in the pandemic response. Remarkably, the development of new therapies was largely preceded by the assessment of repurposing drugs established for other diseases, such as the antimalarial hydroxychlorquine. The same question on hydroxychloroquine was investigated again and again, a rarely seen chaos-like redundancy without comprehensible justification [6]. It also became clear that the large and ambitious research effort would be accompanied by a huge waste of resources [35]. Germany played almost no role as a location for the clinical trials in the early response to the pandemic, being involved in only 2% of all over 500 clinical trials initiated in the first 100 days. Randomized assessments to find the most efficient nonpharmaceutical strategies to prevent COVID-19 was unfortunately not part of the early days response.

(p29.1) With steadily increasing number of trials over the first year, the number of trials with published results grew. Despite being only a small fraction of the over 2,800 trials initiated, there were still 171 trials sucessfully initiated, conducted and published within more or less one year -this is remarkable nevertheless.
## (s40) The early days
(p40.0) It did not take long until the first RCTs for COVID-19 have been planned and registered. There were 11 RCTs registered (all Chinese) in the first 30 days after the World Health Organization (WHO) China Country Office was notified of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause on December 31, 2019. Five hundred and sixteen RCTs were planned or registered in the first 100 days, until April 9, 2020 [5]. They aimed to include over 350,000 participants worldwide. The early RCTs were predominantly small (median sample size 144; interquartile range [IQR] 70-334) and had a remarkable focus on some highly dominating treatments combined with a very wide spectrum of intervention types.

(p40.1) Almost all trials explored treatments (89%; 457 of 516), and most where pharmaceutical (91%; 468 of 516). The two most frequently investigated pharmacological classes were antivirals (e.g., lopinavir/ritonavir) and antimalarials (e.g., hydroxychloroquine).
## (s41) After one year
(p41.0) Throughout the first year of the pandemic, the number of trials steadily increased [6]. After the initial dominance of trials conducted in Asia (mostly China), the number of trials registered in the rest of the world increased rapidly as the pandemic spread through March 2020. There were 2,814 registered randomized trials worldwide as of February 16, 2021. Most were still small with only 18% planning to recruit >500 participants and only 3% planning to recruit >5000 participants. A small proportion of 6% of trials linked to registry entries provided published results, allowing to inform decisions promptly. While this is indeed a small proportion -it does represent a remarkable absolute number of 171 trials with results published as of February 16, 2021 [6].
## (s48) Discussion
(p48.0) After two years of the pandemic, over 4,000 randomized trials have been registered to evaluate interventions to prevent or treat COVID-19. Unfortunately, most trials remained small and resulted in a limited number of publications. Very early in the pandemic, it became clear that there was a lack of timely coordination and structured efforts to knowledge generation -there was, with few exceptions, no integration of clinical trial research in the pandemic response. Remarkably, the development of new therapies was largely preceded by the assessment of repurposing drugs established for other diseases, such as the antimalarial hydroxychlorquine. The same question on hydroxychloroquine was investigated again and again, a rarely seen chaos-like redundancy without comprehensible justification [6]. It also became clear that the large and ambitious research effort would be accompanied by a huge waste of resources [35]. Germany played almost no role as a location for the clinical trials in the early response to the pandemic, being involved in only 2% of all over 500 clinical trials initiated in the first 100 days. Randomized assessments to find the most efficient nonpharmaceutical strategies to prevent COVID-19 was unfortunately not part of the early days response.

(p48.1) With steadily increasing number of trials over the first year, the number of trials with published results grew. Despite being only a small fraction of the over 2,800 trials initiated, there were still 171 trials sucessfully initiated, conducted and published within more or less one year -this is remarkable nevertheless.
## (s59) The early days
(p59.0) It did not take long until the first RCTs for COVID-19 have been planned and registered. There were 11 RCTs registered (all Chinese) in the first 30 days after the World Health Organization (WHO) China Country Office was notified of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause on December 31, 2019. Five hundred and sixteen RCTs were planned or registered in the first 100 days, until April 9, 2020 [5]. They aimed to include over 350,000 participants worldwide. The early RCTs were predominantly small (median sample size 144; interquartile range [IQR] 70-334) and had a remarkable focus on some highly dominating treatments combined with a very wide spectrum of intervention types.

(p59.1) Almost all trials explored treatments (89%; 457 of 516), and most where pharmaceutical (91%; 468 of 516). The two most frequently investigated pharmacological classes were antivirals (e.g., lopinavir/ritonavir) and antimalarials (e.g., hydroxychloroquine).
## (s60) After one year
(p60.0) Throughout the first year of the pandemic, the number of trials steadily increased [6]. After the initial dominance of trials conducted in Asia (mostly China), the number of trials registered in the rest of the world increased rapidly as the pandemic spread through March 2020. There were 2,814 registered randomized trials worldwide as of February 16, 2021. Most were still small with only 18% planning to recruit >500 participants and only 3% planning to recruit >5000 participants. A small proportion of 6% of trials linked to registry entries provided published results, allowing to inform decisions promptly. While this is indeed a small proportion -it does represent a remarkable absolute number of 171 trials with results published as of February 16, 2021 [6].
## (s67) Discussion
(p67.0) After two years of the pandemic, over 4,000 randomized trials have been registered to evaluate interventions to prevent or treat COVID-19. Unfortunately, most trials remained small and resulted in a limited number of publications. Very early in the pandemic, it became clear that there was a lack of timely coordination and structured efforts to knowledge generation -there was, with few exceptions, no integration of clinical trial research in the pandemic response. Remarkably, the development of new therapies was largely preceded by the assessment of repurposing drugs established for other diseases, such as the antimalarial hydroxychlorquine. The same question on hydroxychloroquine was investigated again and again, a rarely seen chaos-like redundancy without comprehensible justification [6]. It also became clear that the large and ambitious research effort would be accompanied by a huge waste of resources [35]. Germany played almost no role as a location for the clinical trials in the early response to the pandemic, being involved in only 2% of all over 500 clinical trials initiated in the first 100 days. Randomized assessments to find the most efficient nonpharmaceutical strategies to prevent COVID-19 was unfortunately not part of the early days response.

(p67.1) With steadily increasing number of trials over the first year, the number of trials with published results grew. Despite being only a small fraction of the over 2,800 trials initiated, there were still 171 trials sucessfully initiated, conducted and published within more or less one year -this is remarkable nevertheless.
## (s78) The early days
(p78.0) It did not take long until the first RCTs for COVID-19 have been planned and registered. There were 11 RCTs registered (all Chinese) in the first 30 days after the World Health Organization (WHO) China Country Office was notified of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause on December 31, 2019. Five hundred and sixteen RCTs were planned or registered in the first 100 days, until April 9, 2020 [5]. They aimed to include over 350,000 participants worldwide. The early RCTs were predominantly small (median sample size 144; interquartile range [IQR] 70-334) and had a remarkable focus on some highly dominating treatments combined with a very wide spectrum of intervention types.

(p78.1) Almost all trials explored treatments (89%; 457 of 516), and most where pharmaceutical (91%; 468 of 516). The two most frequently investigated pharmacological classes were antivirals (e.g., lopinavir/ritonavir) and antimalarials (e.g., hydroxychloroquine).
## (s79) After one year
(p79.0) Throughout the first year of the pandemic, the number of trials steadily increased [6]. After the initial dominance of trials conducted in Asia (mostly China), the number of trials registered in the rest of the world increased rapidly as the pandemic spread through March 2020. There were 2,814 registered randomized trials worldwide as of February 16, 2021. Most were still small with only 18% planning to recruit >500 participants and only 3% planning to recruit >5000 participants. A small proportion of 6% of trials linked to registry entries provided published results, allowing to inform decisions promptly. While this is indeed a small proportion -it does represent a remarkable absolute number of 171 trials with results published as of February 16, 2021 [6].
## (s86) Discussion
(p86.0) After two years of the pandemic, over 4,000 randomized trials have been registered to evaluate interventions to prevent or treat COVID-19. Unfortunately, most trials remained small and resulted in a limited number of publications. Very early in the pandemic, it became clear that there was a lack of timely coordination and structured efforts to knowledge generation -there was, with few exceptions, no integration of clinical trial research in the pandemic response. Remarkably, the development of new therapies was largely preceded by the assessment of repurposing drugs established for other diseases, such as the antimalarial hydroxychlorquine. The same question on hydroxychloroquine was investigated again and again, a rarely seen chaos-like redundancy without comprehensible justification [6]. It also became clear that the large and ambitious research effort would be accompanied by a huge waste of resources [35]. Germany played almost no role as a location for the clinical trials in the early response to the pandemic, being involved in only 2% of all over 500 clinical trials initiated in the first 100 days. Randomized assessments to find the most efficient nonpharmaceutical strategies to prevent COVID-19 was unfortunately not part of the early days response.

(p86.1) With steadily increasing number of trials over the first year, the number of trials with published results grew. Despite being only a small fraction of the over 2,800 trials initiated, there were still 171 trials sucessfully initiated, conducted and published within more or less one year -this is remarkable nevertheless.
