# From the Contents An overview on CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated paraneoplastic neurological syndromes

CorpusID: 258798939 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2d831ee79544240a219d02cc8cc45b068607a7ae](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2d831ee79544240a219d02cc8cc45b068607a7ae)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) CV2/collapsin response mediator protein 5 (CRMP5) antibody-associated paraneoplastic neurological syndrome (PNS) is a relatively common type of PNS. It is not a direct invasion of tissues or organs by the tumor but a distant effect of the tumor. Its pathogenesis is immune-mediated, and specific neuronal antibodies can often be detected in patients (Graus et al., 2021). The CV2/CRMP5 antibody is a kind of neuronal intracellular antigen antibody and a well-characterized onconeural antibody (Graus et al., 2004;Grativvol et al., 2018). According to the 2004 PNS diagnostic criteria, the presence of this antibody can lead to a PNS diagnosis, regardless of the presence of a tumor (Graus et al., 2004), and the 2021 update of the PNS diagnostic criteria reclassified it as a high-risk antibody (Graus et al., 2021). It is currently considered that the CV2/CRMP5 antibody is not pathogenic, and Review CRMP5 binds to itself, CRMP2-4 (not CRMP1), and dihydropyrimidinase, forming hetero-multimeric structures (Fukada et al., 2000). The N-terminal sequences of CRMP isoforms are very similar and carry consensus sequences for phosphorylation sites, including tyrosine kinase, protein kinase A, protein kinase C, and casein kinase II phosphorylation sites (Fukada et al., 2000). A study showed that serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) from CRMP5 antibodypositive patients bound to the N-terminal epitope of recombinant CRMP5, but not to human-derived CRMP2/CRMP3, suggesting that the N-terminal epitope of CRMP5 is unique (Yu et al., 2001). The C-terminal region of humanderived CRMP5 is more conserved than the N-terminal region, suggesting that the C-terminal region has a specific role (Fukada et al., 2000). Besides, CRMP5 plays an important role in neuronal migration, axon guidance, dendrite growth, and synapse formation by interacting with neuronal cytoskeleton-associated proteins MAP2 and β III-microtubulin (Jeanne et al., 2021). CRMP5 is located only in the cytoplasm under physiological conditions; it is highly expressed in the nervous system during developmental stages and significantly less in adulthood (Bretin et al., 2005). CRMP5 is widely distributed in various regions, including the developing cerebral cortex, hippocampus, cerebellum, thalamus, retina, optic nerve, olfactory epithelium (Yu et al., 2001;Cross et al., 2003) as well as the spinal cord (Fukada et al., 2000), sensory neurons, axons of peripheral nerves, Schwann cells, and some tumors (Camdessanché et al., 2012;Brot et al., 2013). CRMP5 mRNA expression can also be detected in neurons of the cortex, amygdala, brainstem, and cerebellum (Bretin et al., 2005). The wide distribution of CRMP5 at multiple sites may be the anatomical and physiological basis for the diversity of clinical manifestations of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS.

(p0.1) The CV2/CRMP5 antibody is a neuronal intracellular antigen antibody. Most researchers believe that this type of antibody is not directly pathogenic, in essence. Rather, they participate in the production of antigen-specific CD8 + T lymphocytes which cause neuronal damage and rapid and widespread cell death (Berzero and Psimaras, 2018). The pathogenic process may be as follows (Figure 1): the tumor cells undergo apoptosis after being attacked by the immune system, resulting in antigen exposure; antigen-presenting cells present antigens, and then naive lymphocytes are activated into cytotoxic CD8 + T cells and CD4 + T helper cells respectively; B lymphocytes differentiate into plasma cells and produce antibodies against the exposed antigens; plasma cells, CD4 + T helper cells, and cytotoxic CD8 + T cells cross the bloodbrain barrier, and CD8 + T cells attack neurons that express the same antigen as the tumor cells, causing a broad immune response (Darnell and Posner, 2003). This is a hypothetical mechanism for CV2/CRMP5 antibody associated PNS, and some studies have also observed T lymphocyte infiltration in patients with positive CV2/CRMP5 antibody (Cross et al., 2003;Muehlschlegel et al., 2005). (1) The immune system attacks tumor cells, inducing apoptosis and resulting in antigen exposure; (2) antigen-presenting cells swallow the antigen and travel to local lymph nodes, naive lymphocytes are activated into cytotoxic T cells and CD4 + helper T cells, respectively, and B lymphocytes differentiate into plasma cells to produce CV2/CRMP5 antibodies; (3) plasma cells, CD4 + helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells cross the blood-brain barrier and cytotoxic T cells attack neurons that express the same antigen as the tumor cells. CRMP5: collapsin response mediator protein 5.
## (s2) Limbic encephalitis
(p2.0) Autoimmune LE is a group of inflammatory lesions of limbic structures that cause medial temporal lobe symptoms. It classically presents with the subacute onset of short-term memory deficits, seizures, or psychiatric symptoms (Budhram et al., 2019). CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated LE is a relatively rare disease (Ibrahim Ismail et al., 2020) that often manifests as dementia, subacute progressive near-memory loss, sleep disturbance (insomnia/somnolence), mental and behavioral abnormalities (depression, paranoia, irritability, restlessness, upset, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder) (Li et al., 2018;Ibrahim Ismail et al., 2020;Tolkovsky et al., 2021), autonomic dysfunction (dysuria, difficulty defecating, profuse sweating) (Yan et al., 2020;Tolkovsky et al., 2021), and atrial tachycardia (Jia et al., 2020). Some patients experience seizures (Dubey et al., 2018), and a study described a patient without seizures having bitemporal epileptiform discharges appearing on an electroencephalogram (Ibrahim Ismail et al., 2020), which should be distinguished from other types of autoimmune epilepsy. Compared with Hu/ANNA-1 antibody-associated LE, CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated LE is less likely to develop into isolated or typical LE, and its brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) features are rarely confined to the medial temporal lobe (Tüzün and Dalmau, 2007).
## (s3) Chorea
(p3.0) In some patients with immune-related chorea (a rare form of hyperkinetic movement disorder), onconeural antibodies can be detected. Immunemediated chorea subtypes associated with cancer are called paraneoplastic chorea and are possibly caused by the distal effect of an underlying tumor on the basal ganglia (Ha et al., 2019). They account for approximately 1.2% of PNS cases, and 64% of patients with paraneoplastic chorea detect CV2/CRMP5 antibodies (Vigliani et al., 2011). One study found that patients with CV2/ CRMP5 antibody-related chorea had a mean age of onset of 69 years (Vernino et al., 2002), and typically had subacute generalized chorea, manifesting as involuntary, irregular, and symmetrical choreiform movements of the limbs or head and face. This disease can also manifest as orolingual facial dyskinesia, dystonia, and stereotyped movements, more obvious in the hands and feet. When it involves the neck, face, and perioral area, it leads to hyperkinetic dysarthria. Chorea can be bilateral or unilateral, appearing during the day and disappearing during sleep (Vigliani et al., 2011;Graus and Dalmau, 2012;Lim, 2017;Vaswani et al., 2020). However, the cause of extrapyramidal symptoms in patients with CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS is unclear. Compared with non-paraneoplastic chorea, paraneoplastic chorea is more common in males, has an older age of onset, has more severe chorea-like symptoms, may coexist with other central and peripheral nervous system symptoms, and may be associated with weight loss, often without oculomotor abnormalities (O'Toole et al., 2013;Lim, 2017). The most common antibody in paraneoplastic chorea is the CV2/CRMP5 antibody, although the Hu/ANNA-1, LGI1, CASPR2, GAD65, and NMDAR antibodies can also be detected. Around 35% of patients with IgLON5 antibody disease manifested with chorea, and the two (CV2/CRMP5 antibody-related chorea and IgLON5 antibody disease) need to be differentiated (Kyle et al., 2022;Sturchio et al., 2022).
## (s4) Ocular manifestations
(p4.0) CV2/CRMP5 antibodies can be detected in some patients with optic neuritis, retinitis, and uveitis of unknown origin (Bataller and Dalmau, 2004). One study showed that 7% of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS cases manifested only as ocular manifestations in the initial stages of the disease, without other neurological manifestations (Yu et al., 2001). Optic neuritis cases present with sudden bilateral visual loss, optic disc edema, and visual field defects, usually associated with encephalomyelitis. Retinitis symptoms include painless visual loss, photosensitivity, peripheral scotomas, and ringlike scotomas (Bataller and Dalmau, 2004). Uveitis may manifest as loss of vision, blurred vision, and flashing sensation. Scholars found that 69% of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated optic neuritis cases were associated with retinitis and vitreous inflammation, with an age of onset of 52-74 years, and often presented with subacute painless vision loss in both eyes, optic disc edema, defect of visual field (enlarged blind spots, arcuate and altitudinal defects, paracentral scotomata, and constriction of the visual field) (Cross et al., 2003), oculomotor disturbances (central nystagmus and diplopia), uveitis and iritis (Cohen et al., 2020), and also opsoclonus (Yu et al., 2001). MRI examination does not reveal optic nerve enhancement, and optic disc edema can be observed by fundoscopy, but rarely alone (Cohen et al., 2020). Immunotherapy improves visual function in 50% of patients and a minority of patients without immunotherapy developed optic nerve atrophy during the follow-up (Cohen et al., 2020). Improvement in visual acuity may be associated with the regression of optic disc swelling (Pulido et al., 2008). Besides CV2/CRMP5 antibodies, optic neuritis is more commonly associated with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein and aquaporin 4 antibodies. Therefore, the detection of various autoimmune antibodies such as CV2/ CRMP5 is recommended for unexplained subacute painless vision loss, optic disc edema, retinitis, and vitreous inflammation (Cross et al., 2003;Cohen et al., 2020).
## (s5) Review
(p5.0) Cerebellar ataxia CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated CA accounts for 2% of paraneoplastic CA cases (Rogemond and Honnorat, 2000), and about 26% of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-positive patients present with CA (Narayan et al., 2020). CA mainly manifests as vertigo, limb and gait ataxia, dysarthria, and nystagmus (Saloustros et al., 2010;Aliprandi et al., 2015)-of which 25-50% cases are gaze-evoked nystagmus or down beating nystagmus-and rarely presents as isolated vertigo (Narayan et al., 2020). In most cases, ataxia precedes the underlying tumor, and the brain MRI examination is initially normal or shows mild meningeal or cortical enhancement, and may show diffuse cerebellar atrophy later, which may indicate a poor response to immunotherapy (Narayan et al., 2020) .
## (s7) Peripheral neuropathy
(p7.0) Approximately one-third of PNS cases present with peripheral neuropathy (Giometto et al., 2010). Additionally, CV2/CRMP5, Hu/ANNA-1, and other onconeural antibodies can be detected in about one-third of PNS-associated peripheral neuropathy cases (Voltz, 2002). Peripheral neuropathies associated with CV2/CRMP5 antibodies are mostly mixed axonal and demyelinating peripheral neuropathies Honnorat et al., 2009). Besides, 54% of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated neuropathy cases present with painful axonal asymmetric polyradiculoneuropathy (Dubey et al., 2018), with predominant sensory or sensorimotor involvement (less commonly pure motor involvement, which mainly affects the distal extremities), sensory disturbance involving all the modalities of sensation, and depressed or absent tendon reflexes . When pure sensory involvement is present, it is subacute and progresses rapidly, commonly in the upper limbs, with early loss of nociception followed by moderate to severe pain requiring pain relief medication, namely opioid analgesics in 39% of cases (Dubey et al., 2018). When mixed sensorimotor involvement is present, sensory symptoms are predominant, lower limbs are more commonly and severely involved than upper limbs, and pain is relatively uncommon . The CV2/ CRMP5 antibody can coexist with the VGCC, PCA-2/MAP1B, amphiphysin, and SOX1/AGNA antibodies in this group of patients, and the coexisting antibodies do not affect the location of peripheral neuropathy or the development of pain (Dubey et al., 2018). In addition, peripheral neuropathy associated with the CV2/CRMP5 antibody can involve cranial nerves other than the optic nerve and manifest as facial numbness (Maramattom, 2013), loss of taste (Wu et al., 2019), and loss of olfaction (Maramattom, 2013).
## (s8) Other symptoms
(p8.0) The other symptoms of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS are mostly derived from case reports and include: (1) Myasthenic syndrome, such as the Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), which may be accompanied by other antibodies. It manifests as progressive symmetrical fluctuating proximal muscle weakness (Li et al., 2018). In a few patients, CV2/CRMP5 antibodies are just an immunological accompaniment reflecting the presence of cancer, whereas the LEMS is caused by concurrent pathogenic antibodies. Another example is myasthenia gravis, a generalized or oculomotor pattern combined with thymoma (Monstad et al., 2009). (2) Opsoclonus-myoclonus ataxia syndrome, causing ocular myoclonus, myoclonus, and ataxia (Nakajima et al., 2018; Popławska-Domaszewicz et al., 2018); (3) Parkinsonism, which often manifests as slow movement, festination, masked face, increased muscle tone, postural balance disorders, involuntary limb tremors, static tremor (Tada et al., 2016;Wu et al., 2019), and lead-pipe rigidity (Vakrakou et al., 2020). When combined with rapidly progressive autonomic dysfunction, it can easily be misdiagnosed as multiple system atrophy (Song et al., 2021). (4) Brainstem encephalitis, which causes salivation, somnolence, dysphagia, bilateral vocal cord paralysis (Tolkovsky et al., 2021), dysarthria (Tada et al., 2016;Nakajima et al., 2018), non-fluent speech (Wu et al., 2019), and central hypoventilation.

(p8.1) (5) Motor neuron disease, which provokes signs and symptoms of upper and lower motor neuron injury and visible muscle atrophy without sensory abnormalities, and is easily misdiagnosed as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Tolkovsky et al., 2021). (6) Devic syndrome, a myelopathy accompanied by optic neuritis (Cross et al., 2003;Ducray et al., 2007). (7) Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction, which is characterized by symptoms of mechanical intestinal obstruction rather than mechanical bowel obstruction and is associated with autonomic neuropathy (Yan et al., 2020).
## (s9) Oncological associations
(p9.0) The CV2/CRMP5 antibody is now known as a high-risk antibody, and its presence indicates a potential tumor (Graus et al., 2021). About 90% of CV2/ CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS cases are accompanied by tumors (Yu et al., 2001;Budhram et al., 2019), with SCLC and thymoma being the most common (Honnorat et al., 2009). A study on Hu/ANNA-1 and CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS found that malignant thymoma was only found in CV2/CRMP5 antibody-positive patients, and patients with thymoma were younger and more likely to develop myasthenia gravis (Honnorat et al., 2009) and to have higher antibody titers (Ibrahim Ismail et al., 2020) than those with SCLC. CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS can also accompany breast cancer (Antoine et al., 1993;Wu et al., 2019), lymphoma (Jia et al., 2020), renal carcinoma (Dubey et al., 2018), colon cancer (Popławska-Domaszewicz et al., 2018), testicular tumor, uterine sarcoma , prostate cancer (Aliprandi et al., 2015), undifferentiated carcinoma (Antoine et al., 1993), thyroid cancer (Cross et al., 2003), squamous cell carcinoma of tongue (Saloustros et al., 2010), and adenocarcinoma of the lung (Yap et al., 2021). Some patients have both breast and lung cancer (Jarius et al., 2012). A rare case reported that biopsies revealed a solitary lymph node involvement associated with SCLC in a patient who was both CV2/CRMP5 antibody-positive and Hu/ANNA-1 antibody-positive (Khan and Warriach, 2020). Although some studies have also found that 22% of patients with CV2/CRMP5 antibodyassociated PNS do not have tumors (Rogemond and Honnorat, 2000), the possibility of occult malignancy cannot be ruled out as the majority of these patients have the neurological symptoms before the tumor is detected (Dubey et al., 2018). Moreover, some tumors can be eliminated by the immune response during the disease, preventing their detection (Graus et al., 2004).
## (s16) PET/computed tomography
(p16.0) There are case reports of patients with CV2/CRMP5 antibody-related chorea that showed bilateral caudate nucleus hyperintensity on T2WI and hypometabolism in the corresponding region on 18 F-FDG PET/computed tomography (CT) (Vernino et al., 2002;Vigliani et al., 2011;Dericioglu et al., 2018). Another CV2/CRMP5 antibody-positive patient showed autonomic dysfunction and Parkinson's disease without brain stem or cerebellar atrophy on brain MRI and symmetrical hypometabolism in the bilateral frontoparietal lobes on 18 F-FDG PET/CT scans (Song et al., 2021). Overall, in patients with PNS, 18 F-FDG PET/CT is more sensitive to potential abnormalities and has a higher abnormality detection rate than MRI in the early course of the disease (Masangkay et al., 2014). Moreover, 18 F-FDG PET/CT scans are important for the early diagnosis of malignancy and can show hypermetabolism at sites where CT or MRI are inefficient (Grativvol et al., 2018;Opalińska et al., 2022).
## (s17) Neuropathological studies
(p17.0) Regarding the pathology of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS, perivascular and parenchymal T lymphocyte infiltration, neuronal loss, gliosis (Muehlschlegel et al., 2005; Figure 4), microglial activation, and rare microglial nodules formed by focal microglial hyperplasia (Cross et al., 2003) are seen in the brain and spinal cord. Cerebellar cortex atrophy and Purkinje cell decrease can be seen in the lesions that are restricted to the cerebellum (Vernino et al., 2002). One case study showed that the lymphocytic infiltrate within the parenchyma consisted exclusively of CD8 + T lymphocytes, whereas the perivascular infiltrate contained both B and T lymphocytes (CD4-and CD8reactive; Muehlschlegel et al., 2005).
## (s19) EEG
(p19.0) EEG is non-specific and may reveal epileptic waves involving the temporal lobe, with focal or global activity (Ibrahim Ismail et al., 2020). Besides, persistent spikes and slow waves may occur during sleep (Hu et al., 2015).
## (s20) Electromyography
(p20.0) Patients with peripheral neuropathy often have severe axonal damage, mild demyelination, and slowed nerve conduction velocity. Attention should be paid to the presence of LEMS when the amplitudes of the compound motor action potential decrease Honnorat et al., 2009).
## (s21) Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis
(p21.0) The diagnostic criteria for PNS were established in 2004 and updated in 2021. Therefore, the diagnosis of PNS is well documented. Antibody detection is of great value in the diagnosis of PNS. Moreover, different antibodies correspond to different types of PNS, which have different clinical characteristics. Summarizing their unique clinical characteristics can help identify and diagnose antibody-negative PNS, especially when multiple antibodies coexist, and help discern whether one of them is a pathogenic antibody or only an immune concomitant antibody reflecting the presence of cancer. In  conclusion, documenting the unique clinical characteristics corresponding to different types of antibodies is crucial to improving the accuracy of clinical diagnosis and precision of treatment. Based on this, we summarized and condensed the clinical features of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS based on the available literature as follows: The diagnosis of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS is based on: (1) the presence of a clinical syndrome as described above, (2) the presence of CV2/CRMP5 antibodies in the serum or CSF, and (3) reasonable exclusion of alternative causes, including those causing CV2/CRPM5 antibody production (i.e., LEMS). According to the diagnostic criteria for PNS updated in 2021, CV2/ CRMP5 antibody-positive patients can be diagnosed with definite/probable/ possible PNS based on the PNS-Care score. The diagnostic level of "probable" or "possible" may change with the follow-up time (> or < 2 years, found tumor/not found) (Graus et al., 2021). Overall, the different manifestations of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS need to be differentiated from other diseases ( Table 2).
## (s22) Treatment
(p22.0) The treatments of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS include immunotherapy, detection and treatment of tumors, and symptomatic treatment. Immunotherapy agents include glucocorticoids, intravenous immunoglobulin, plasma exchange, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab (Grativvol et al., 2018). Patients with myelopathy receiving ICIs should stop ICIs and be treated with corticosteroids (Kunchok et al., 2020;Wang et al., 2021). Although most available evidence suggests that intracellular antibody-associated PNS, including CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS, respond poorly to immunotherapy and that immunotherapy may not improve neurological symptoms, early and aggressive immunotherapy is still recommended (Rosenfeld and Dalmau, 2013). CV2/CRMP5 antibodyassociated PNS is highly associated with tumors, and early detection and removal of the tumor is the best option by far. In some cases, neurological deficits improve with anti-tumor therapy (Vernino et al., 2002;Grativvol et al., 2018). In addition, symptomatic and supportive treatment can be given depending on the symptoms of each patient.
## (s23) Prognosis
(p23.0) The prognosis of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS depends on multiple factors, such as the severity of neurological damage at the time of diagnosis, whether the tumor is detected, the stage of the tumor, whether the tumor treatment is effective, and whether early immunotherapy is administered.

(p23.1) Overall, intracellular antibody-associated PNS, including CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS, poorly responds to immunotherapy and antitumor therapy, leading to a poor prognosis (Dericioglu et al., 2018). The majority (71%) of CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS patients exhibited worsening neuropathy impairment scores during treatment (Dubey et al., 2018). However, patients with CV2/CRMP5 antibody-associated PNS had a longer mean survival time and better prognosis than patients with Hu/ANNA-1 antibody-associated PNS, independent of tumor type (Honnorat et al., 2009). In patients with identified malignancies, rapid and aggressive tumor treatment may improve outcomes (Narayan et al., 2020). Finally, neurological adverse effects resulting from the application of ICIs may lead to irreversible or fatal outcomes if not treated in a timely and appropriate manner (Wang et al., 2018).
