# International Journal of Molecular Sciences Review Confinement Effects in Well-Defined Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs) for Selective CO 2 Hydrogenation: A Review

CorpusID: 257118654 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54d8358f1a3f12f2b122bc77a75004e8e573ca68](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54d8358f1a3f12f2b122bc77a75004e8e573ca68)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s1) Confined Synthesis and Confinement Effects of MOFs as Host Materials
(p1.0) MOFs represent a frontier in advanced host materials for CO2 hydrogenation due to their tunable properties including: (1) semi-rigid and highly porous structures, (2) high physical and chemical host stability, (3) strong interaction for the stable dispersion of active species, and (4) solid Lewis or Brønsted acid characteristic. These properties provide an opportunity to synthesize stable and active catalysts using MOFs as host materials in CO2 hydrogenation. In this section, various synthetic strategies for MOF-confined molecular complexes, single atoms, NPs, or even micro-scale oxides were systematically summarized, including a one-pot synthetic approach (active sites confined in MOF cavities or channels), post-synthetic modification (active sites interacting with functional cavities or channels), and a two-step synthetic approach (active species surrounded by MOF membranes). For further details regarding the synthesis and characterization of various MOFs, the readers are referred to previous reviews and literature cited herein [62,63]. Moreover, the corresponding catalytic performance affected by confinement effects are detailed, indicating that rational designs of the structures of MOFs and active sites are essential in the valorization of CO2. 
## (s2) Confined Synthesis and Confinement Effects of MOFs as Host Materials
(p2.0) MOFs represent a frontier in advanced host materials for CO 2 hydrogenation due to their tunable properties including: (1) semi-rigid and highly porous structures, (2) high physical and chemical host stability, (3) strong interaction for the stable dispersion of active species, and (4) solid Lewis or Brønsted acid characteristic. These properties provide an opportunity to synthesize stable and active catalysts using MOFs as host materials in CO 2 hydrogenation. In this section, various synthetic strategies for MOF-confined molecular complexes, single atoms, NPs, or even micro-scale oxides were systematically summarized, including a one-pot synthetic approach (active sites confined in MOF cavities or channels), post-synthetic modification (active sites interacting with functional cavities or channels), and a two-step synthetic approach (active species surrounded by MOF membranes). For further details regarding the synthesis and characterization of various MOFs, the readers are referred to previous reviews and literature cited herein [62,63]. Moreover, the corresponding catalytic performance affected by confinement effects are detailed, indicating that rational designs of the structures of MOFs and active sites are essential in the valorization of CO 2 .
## (s3) Molecular Complex Encapsulation in MOFs
(p3.0) Compared with heterogeneous CO 2 hydrogenation conducted at higher temperature and pressure conditions (e.g., >200 • C and >3 MPa), homogenous molecular complexes can work at mild conditions (e.g., <150 • C) [64]. The well-defined structures of molecular complexes facilitated the interpretation of reaction mechanisms at the molecular level, which promotes the optimization of catalyst design. A remaining challenge for applying molecular complexes is their immobilization to fabricate stable and recyclable catalysts for practical applications. The porosity and highly ordered structure of MOFs enable their potential as ideal host materials to improve the accessibility of catalytic sites, which also makes molecular complexes recyclable and productive.

(p3.1) The pioneering studies by Yoshio and coworkers demonstrated that homogeneous ruthenium-phosphine catalysts could selectively catalyze CO 2 hydrogenation to formic acid at low temperatures [65]. Moreover, homogeneous molecular complexes containing n-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) or phosphorus-nitrogen-phosphorus (PNP) pincer-type ligands could facilitate CO 2 hydrogenation due to the strong electron-donating ability, where the Ru PNP-pincer catalyst could deliver a turnover frequency (TOF) value of 1,100,000 h −1 at 65 • C and 4 MPa (H 2 /CO 2 (v/v) = 3:1) [66][67][68][69][70]. However, the challenges including catalysts and products separation and recyclability hindered their industrial applications. Accordingly, the heterogenization of molecular complexes is an effective pathway, which could integrate the distinctive activity of homogeneous catalysts with the advantages of heterogeneous catalysts [71,72]. MOFs are the potential candidates to host molecular complexes. For example, Wu et al. reported various heterogeneous Ru-based molecular complexes immobilized on an azolium-based MOF via post-synthetic metalation which were examined for CO 2 hydrogenation toward formic acid, as shown in Figure 2. The examined Ru molecular complexes included RuCl 3 , [RuCp*Cl 2 ] 2 (Cp* = pentamethylcyclopentadienyl), and [Ru(C 6 Me 6 )Cl 2 ] 2 (C 6 Me 6 = hexamethylbenzene); the corresponding hybrid catalysts were named Ru x -NHC-MOF (x = 1, 2, 3). The surface areas and total pore volumes of the three as-prepared catalysts decreased due to the occupancy in the MOF pores ( Figure 2b). The as-obtained Ru 3 -NHC-MOF catalyst exhibited the highest activity due to the stronger electron-donating ability of the C 6 Me 6 ligand in the [Ru(C 6 Me 6 )Cl 2 ] 2 complex. Specifically, values of the turnover number (TON) up to 3803 were obtained at 120 • C under a total pressure of 8 MPa (H 2 /CO 2 (v/v) = 1) for 2 h in the presence of K 2 CO 3 as the base in N, N-Dimethylformamide (DMF) solvent. The strong polarity of the DMF solvent also facilitated the insertion of CO 2 into the Ru−H bond, which is the rate-determining step (RDS) for CO 2 hydrogenation [73]. 
## (s4) Molecular Complex Encapsulation in MOFs
(p4.0) Compared with heterogeneous CO2 hydrogenation conducted at higher temperature and pressure conditions (e.g., >200 °C and >3 MPa), homogenous molecular complexes can work at mild conditions (e.g., <150 °C) [64]. The well-defined structures of molecular complexes facilitated the interpretation of reaction mechanisms at the molecular level, which promotes the optimization of catalyst design. A remaining challenge for applying molecular complexes is their immobilization to fabricate stable and recyclable catalysts for practical applications. The porosity and highly ordered structure of MOFs enable their potential as ideal host materials to improve the accessibility of catalytic sites, which also makes molecular complexes recyclable and productive.

(p4.1) The pioneering studies by Yoshio and coworkers demonstrated that homogeneous ruthenium-phosphine catalysts could selectively catalyze CO2 hydrogenation to formic acid at low temperatures [65]. Moreover, homogeneous molecular complexes containing n-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) or phosphorus-nitrogen-phosphorus (PNP) pincer-type ligands could facilitate CO2 hydrogenation due to the strong electron-donating ability, where the Ru PNP-pincer catalyst could deliver a turnover frequency (TOF) value of 1,100,000 h −1 at 65 °C and 4 MPa (H2/CO2 (v/v) = 3:1) [66][67][68][69][70]. However, the challenges including catalysts and products separation and recyclability hindered their industrial applications. Accordingly, the heterogenization of molecular complexes is an effective pathway, which could integrate the distinctive activity of homogeneous catalysts with the advantages of heterogeneous catalysts [71,72]. MOFs are the potential candidates to host molecular complexes.   Host (MOF)-guest (molecular complexes) composites have already demonstrated their advantages in CO 2 hydrogenation. However, the successful synthesis of hostguest composites is limited, and they can only be prepared via de novo synthesis and post-synthetic modification [49,74,75], where the size of molecular complexes should be smaller than the pore of MOFs. Recently, the Tsung group developed a post-synthetic approach to synthesize host-guest composites, where guest molecular complexes were larger (e.g., 3-4 times) than the aperture size of the MOF host but could also be encapsulated into MOFs via aperture-opening events [50]. Guest molecular complexes were encapsulated effectively due to the short-lived "open" states of the pores formed upon linker dissociation, which circumvented the disadvantages of previous strategies including tedious synthetic processes and poor encapsulation efficiency. The aperture-opening process occurred even in the robust MOF, which was significantly affected by the identity of the selected solvent, as shown in Figure 3. A Zr-based MOF consisting of a cubic framework of cationic Zr 6 O 4 (OH) 4 nodes and 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate linkers (BDC) was selected as the host material, named UiO-66. The (tBuPNP)Ru(CO)HCl (tBuPNP = 2,6-bis((ditert-butyl-phosphino)methyl)pyridine) was successfully encapsulated into UiO-66 (named [Ru]@UiO-66) by exposing UiO-66 to methanol solvent containing (tBuPNP)Ru(CO)HCl at 55 • C for 5 days in Figure 3. [Ru]@UiO-66 exhibited a comparable TON of ca. 280,000 with that of homogeneous molecular catalysts for CO 2 hydrogenation to formic acid in DMF at 27 • C and 1.5 MPa (H 2 /CO 2 (v/v) = 4:1). Interestingly, the recyclability and stability of the encapsulated composites were much better than those of homogeneous ones, where the activity of [Ru]@UiO-66 was maintained after five successive cycles. The homogeneous composite lost more than half of its original activity in the second cycle, which was likely due to the biomolecular deactivation [48]. their advantages in CO2 hydrogenation. However, the successful synthesis of host-guest composites is limited, and they can only be prepared via de novo synthesis and post-synthetic modification [49,74,75], where the size of molecular complexes should be smaller than the pore of MOFs. Recently, the Tsung group developed a post-synthetic approach to synthesize host-guest composites, where guest molecular complexes were larger (e.g., 3-4 times) than the aperture size of the MOF host but could also be encapsulated into MOFs via aperture-opening events [50]. Guest molecular complexes were encapsulated effectively due to the short-lived "open" states of the pores formed upon linker dissociation, which circumvented the disadvantages of previous strategies including tedious synthetic processes and poor encapsulation efficiency. The aperture-opening process occurred even in the robust MOF, which was significantly affected by the identity of the selected solvent, as shown in Figure 3. A Zr-based MOF consisting of a cubic framework of cationic Zr6O4(OH)4 nodes and 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate linkers (BDC) was selected as the host material, named UiO-66. The (tBuPNP)Ru(CO)HCl (tBuPNP = 2,6-bis((di-tert-butyl-phosphino)methyl)pyridine) was successfully encapsulated into UiO-66 (named [Ru]@UiO-66) by exposing UiO-66 to methanol solvent containing (tBuPNP)Ru(CO)HCl at 55 °C for 5 days in Figure 3.
## (s9) Active Species Confined in MOF Membrane
(p9.0) The active species of CO2 hydrogenation are not only encapsulated in monocrystal MOFs, but also confined by the MOF membrane. The combination of guest species and different types of MOF active sites (e.g., metal nodes, functional organic linkers) makes MOFs promising multifunctional materials for synergistic catalysis [47]. For example, the ZnZrOx/SAPO-34 composite was able to selectively catalyze CO2 hydrogenation to paraffin. Jiang et al. shifted the product distributions from paraffins to olefins via the introduction of the UiO-66 membrane as a coating layer on the SAPO-34 surface. It was demonstrated that the stable UiO-n membrane passivated the excessive Brønsted acid sites of SAPO-34, suppressing the hydrogenation of olefins to paraffins. Meanwhile, the uniform UiO-66 membrane had no effect on the diffusion step during CO2 hydrogenation, where (c) Formation of unsaturated Zr sites that can accept CO 2 and hydrogen spillover from Cu surfaces. Reproduced with permission [145]. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.
## (s11) Confined Synthesis and Confinement Effects for MOF-Derived Materials
(p11.0) MOFs have been explored as potential templates or precursors to prepare highly dispersed NPs via thermal decomposition due to their unique structure and textural prop-erties [57,[155][156][157]. Carbon-encapsulated NPs derived from MOFs as emerging catalysts received tremendous research efforts [158][159][160]. The framework of MOFs could protect the active site aggregation to generate highly dispersed NPs during high-temperature pyrolysis. Moreover, the confinement effects induced by the encapsulation carbon layer provide robust microenvironments for CO 2 hydrogenation, which could tune the binding energy of key intermediates and affect the adsorption of CO 2 and transportation of products. In this section, we will simply highlight some important merits of the encapsulated metal nanoparticles for CO 2 hydrogenation, including modification of local reaction environment, electronic transfer, and interfacial catalysis to enhance catalytic performance.
## (s12) Conclusions and Outlook
(p12.0) Different from zeolite with fixed tetrahedral Si/Al coordination and pore sizes (<1 nm) [201], the uniform and tunable cavities and tailorable composite make MOFs especially attractive for heterogeneous catalysis. The confinement effects in MOFs or MOF-derived materials involving immobilization, size of active sites, encapsulation, and synergy effect significantly perturb the catalytic performance of CO 2 hydrogenation. In this review, the microstructural optimization and engineering of MOF-based catalysts for CO 2 hydrogenation were systematically summarized. The MOFs or MOF-derived catalysts can be simply divided into three categories: (1) molecular complexes, atomic or nanosized active species are confined into cavities or channels of MOFs via one-pot synthesis or post-synthetic modification; (2) active species are surrounded by MOFs or MOF membranes by epitaxial growth; (3) active sites are embedded in carbon or oxide layers derived from MOFs. The most important merits of the heterogenized molecular complexes are their dramatically enhanced recyclability and stability. The advantages of the confined NPs are the cage or channel stabilization and modification of the local reaction microenvironment. The composites derived from MOFs exhibited strong electronic transfer effects and increased interface catalysis between active sites and the encapsulating layers.

(p12.1) Despite all the progress achieved by researchers, many problems remain unsolved. For example, the precise synthesis with desired spatial distribution, loading, and size of active species in MOFs represent the biggest challenges in this field; the hydrothermal stability of host MOFs under reaction conditions is still limited; most products are CO, CH 4 , and CH 3 OH, but the high-value-added chemicals or fuels produced from CO 2 hydrogenation are limited; and the enhancement interpretation of confinement effects at the molecular level is less than well understood.
