# Graphical Abstract A survey of the European Open Science Cloud services for ex- panding the capacity and capabilities of multidisciplinary scientific applications

CorpusID: 253523047 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/885a2eae0359c6f76235dd73b4222a1dbb527e05](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/885a2eae0359c6f76235dd73b4222a1dbb527e05)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s6) Gaps and Bottlenecks analysis
(p6.0) Before starting the integration of the thematic services in EOSC, we have performed a deep analysis with each one of them to properly identify in advance the needs and requirements to increase the capacity, performance, reliability and/or functionality of the services. Thus, every thematic service has made an analysis of the technical services used for managing the users, computing and data. Table 1 shows a summary of the limitations, lacks and needs identified by the Thematic services of the project.

(p6.1) In a preliminary analysis of the results, several technical commonalities and differences have been identified. All thematic services share the importance of using a robust AAI compatible with the ones used by the target institutions. With respect to resource management, all services have the interest of dynamically provisioning processing resources, most of the cases on demand. However, thematic services have different needs: from a dynamic dedicated cloud backend to an elastic cluster that shrinks or grows according to the workload, and even need to access external High-Performance Computing (HPC) and High Throughput Computing resources for massive Batch jobs execution. Regarding job Management, most thematic services use batch queues (like SLURM [26] Batch queues or Galaxy [27]), which could be extended to support containerised jobs. The usage of Kubernetes to orchestrate microservices and job queues of containers is also considered.

(p6.2) The most challenging part is the management of data. Thematic services have identified important issues on transferring and accessing large volumes of data and require smart caching, advanced data transferring and massive persistent data storage. There are two main approaches to cope with storage, from deploying their own datastore, e.g. DATAVERSE [28] instance; to the integration of external Data Infrastructures, like EGI DataHub [29] and EUDAT [30]. Moreover, services need to ensure the compliance to the FAIR principles to facilitate the access, cataloging and reusage of the data Thematic Service
## (s22) Elastic infrastructures
(p22.0) For cloud applications with varying load the static infrastructures might end up with resource waste. In order to adapt to the dynamic demand for computing capacity, the MSWSS service uses Elastic Cloud Computing Cluster (EC3) tool [40] to create an elastic virtual cluster on top of the EOSC computing resources. EC3 CLI tool provides a set of pre-defined templates which can be combined and customised. It also allows to define custom templates with integrated Ansible scripts. This is used to create a template with strengthened security settings and additional configuration commands specific for the MSWSS service.   Figure 7 shows the architecture of the MSWSS service with the interaction of the service operator and users. The users interact with the service using Galaxy portal where they can manage their data and submit jobs to the elastic virtual cluster for processing. The output data are stored in within MSWSS service and can be downloaded for post-processing tasks.

(p22.1) For cloud applications with varying load the static infrastructures might end up with resource waste. In order to adapt to the dynamic demand for computing capacity, the MSWSS service uses Elastic Cloud Computing Cluster (EC3) tool [40] to create an elastic virtual cluster on top of the EOSC computing resources. EC3 CLI tool provides a set of pre-defined templates which can be combined and customised. It also allows to define custom templates with integrated Ansible scripts. This is used to create a template with strengthened security settings and additional configuration commands specific for the MSWSS service.   Figure 7 shows the architecture of the MSWSS service with the interaction of the service operator and users. The users interact with the service using Galaxy portal where they can manage their data and submit jobs to the elastic virtual cluster for processing. The output data are stored in within MSWSS service and can be downloaded for post-processing tasks.
## (s23) EOSC Cloud IaaS
(p23.0) The service operator deploys the service using EC3 tool using the customised template. Once the MSWSS service is deployed the CLUES service monitors SLURM batch system and deploys new virtual worker nodes as needed and automatically re-configures the batch system. The deployment and configuration of worker nodes is performed using the Infrastructure Manager (IM) [51] service. To speed-up the deployment process the worker nodes are instantiated from a snapshot of fully deployed worker node (golden image). This allows to decrease the start-up time from 21 to 5 minutes. It also helps to solve the issue with pending security updates with respect to the vanilla image and potential need to reboot the worker node for the updates to be applied properly. The golden image is maintained by the service operator in up-to-date state. The security is important also for the communication inside the virtual cluster. OpenVPN system is used to create secure connections inside the cluster and protect the data transfers. It also allows to span the virtual cluster over the resources from different Cloud providers.

(p23.1) The service operator deploys the service using EC3 tool using the customised template. Once the MSWSS service is deployed the CLUES service monitors SLURM batch system and deploys new virtual worker nodes as needed and automatically re-configures the batch system. The deployment and configuration of worker nodes is performed using the Infrastructure Manager (IM) [51] service. To speed-up the deployment process the worker nodes are instantiated from a snapshot of fully deployed worker node (golden image). This allows to decrease the start-up time from 21 to 5 minutes. It also helps to solve the issue with pending security updates with respect to the vanilla image and potential need to reboot the worker node for the updates to be applied properly. The golden image is maintained by the service operator in up-to-date state. The security is important also for the communication inside the virtual cluster. OpenVPN system is used to create secure connections inside the cluster and protect the data transfers. It also allows to span the virtual cluster over the resources from different Cloud providers.
## (s47) Gaps and Bottlenecks analysis
(p47.0) Before starting the integration of the thematic services in EOSC, we have performed a deep analysis with each one of them to properly identify in advance the needs and requirements to increase the capacity, performance, reliability and/or functionality of the services. Thus, every thematic service has made an analysis of the technical services used for managing the users, computing and data. Table 1 shows a summary of the limitations, lacks and needs identified by the Thematic services of the project.

(p47.1) In a preliminary analysis of the results, several technical commonalities and differences have been identified. All thematic services share the importance of using a robust AAI compatible with the ones used by the target institutions. With respect to resource management, all services have the interest of dynamically provisioning processing resources, most of the cases on demand. However, thematic services have different needs: from a dynamic dedicated cloud backend to an elastic cluster that shrinks or grows according to the workload, and even need to access external High-Performance Computing (HPC) and High Throughput Computing resources for massive Batch jobs execution. Regarding job Management, most thematic services use batch queues (like SLURM [26] Batch queues or Galaxy [27]), which could be extended to support containerised jobs. The usage of Kubernetes to orchestrate microservices and job queues of containers is also considered.

(p47.2) The most challenging part is the management of data. Thematic services have identified important issues on transferring and accessing large volumes of data and require smart caching, advanced data transferring and massive persistent data storage. There are two main approaches to cope with storage, from deploying their own datastore, e.g. DATAVERSE [28] instance; to the integration of external Data Infrastructures, like EGI DataHub [29] and EUDAT [30]. Moreover, services need to ensure the compliance to the FAIR principles to facilitate the access, cataloging and reusage of the data Thematic Service
## (s63) Elastic infrastructures
(p63.0) For cloud applications with varying load the static infrastructures might end up with resource waste. In order to adapt to the dynamic demand for computing capacity, the MSWSS service uses Elastic Cloud Computing Cluster (EC3) tool [40] to create an elastic virtual cluster on top of the EOSC computing resources. EC3 CLI tool provides a set of pre-defined templates which can be combined and customised. It also allows to define custom templates with integrated Ansible scripts. This is used to create a template with strengthened security settings and additional configuration commands specific for the MSWSS service.   Figure 7 shows the architecture of the MSWSS service with the interaction of the service operator and users. The users interact with the service using Galaxy portal where they can manage their data and submit jobs to the elastic virtual cluster for processing. The output data are stored in within MSWSS service and can be downloaded for post-processing tasks.

(p63.1) For cloud applications with varying load the static infrastructures might end up with resource waste. In order to adapt to the dynamic demand for computing capacity, the MSWSS service uses Elastic Cloud Computing Cluster (EC3) tool [40] to create an elastic virtual cluster on top of the EOSC computing resources. EC3 CLI tool provides a set of pre-defined templates which can be combined and customised. It also allows to define custom templates with integrated Ansible scripts. This is used to create a template with strengthened security settings and additional configuration commands specific for the MSWSS service.   Figure 7 shows the architecture of the MSWSS service with the interaction of the service operator and users. The users interact with the service using Galaxy portal where they can manage their data and submit jobs to the elastic virtual cluster for processing. The output data are stored in within MSWSS service and can be downloaded for post-processing tasks.
## (s64) EOSC Cloud IaaS
(p64.0) The service operator deploys the service using EC3 tool using the customised template. Once the MSWSS service is deployed the CLUES service monitors SLURM batch system and deploys new virtual worker nodes as needed and automatically re-configures the batch system. The deployment and configuration of worker nodes is performed using the Infrastructure Manager (IM) [51] service. To speed-up the deployment process the worker nodes are instantiated from a snapshot of fully deployed worker node (golden image). This allows to decrease the start-up time from 21 to 5 minutes. It also helps to solve the issue with pending security updates with respect to the vanilla image and potential need to reboot the worker node for the updates to be applied properly. The golden image is maintained by the service operator in up-to-date state. The security is important also for the communication inside the virtual cluster. OpenVPN system is used to create secure connections inside the cluster and protect the data transfers. It also allows to span the virtual cluster over the resources from different Cloud providers.

(p64.1) The service operator deploys the service using EC3 tool using the customised template. Once the MSWSS service is deployed the CLUES service monitors SLURM batch system and deploys new virtual worker nodes as needed and automatically re-configures the batch system. The deployment and configuration of worker nodes is performed using the Infrastructure Manager (IM) [51] service. To speed-up the deployment process the worker nodes are instantiated from a snapshot of fully deployed worker node (golden image). This allows to decrease the start-up time from 21 to 5 minutes. It also helps to solve the issue with pending security updates with respect to the vanilla image and potential need to reboot the worker node for the updates to be applied properly. The golden image is maintained by the service operator in up-to-date state. The security is important also for the communication inside the virtual cluster. OpenVPN system is used to create secure connections inside the cluster and protect the data transfers. It also allows to span the virtual cluster over the resources from different Cloud providers.
