# Nanotechnology in agriculture: a review of genotoxic studies of nanopesticides in animal cells

CorpusID: 258375307 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c6060610198e8755ae9f6a507fda6f17a94405b3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c6060610198e8755ae9f6a507fda6f17a94405b3)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s7) Genotoxicity of nanopesticides
(p7.0) One problem with the current toxicological classification of pesticides is that most studies look for immediate or acute toxicity, dropping aside long-term or chronic damage, including genotoxicity (Bolognesi 2003). This last point is crucial because they can induce teratogenic problems, reproductive alterations, neurodegenerative disorders (like Parkinson's and Alzheimer's), and cancer (Costellos et al. 2009;Dosonmu et al. 2007).
## (s9) Metallic nanopesticides
(p9.0) TiO 2 is an insoluble compound, stable at high temperatures, cataloged with low toxicity, and inert at a physiological level (Iavicoli et al. 2011). However, in 2006, IARC (Shi et al. 2013) classified it as possibly carcinogenic in humans (Group 2B) because it has been observed to induce different toxicological effects in several organs and tissues. In the nervous system, it also can induce reactive oxygen species as well as inflammation and apoptosis in mice Shin et al. 2010); the internalization of the particles in the cell facilitates all of this. However, Rossi et al. (2010) mentioned that the evaluation of health risks cannot be solely based on pure nanoparticles; it is essential to consider modifying the nanoparticle's characteristics.
