# Ethical issues and practical barriers in internet-based suicide prevention research: a review and investigator survey

CorpusID: 255832595 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/93b6c1e5211b014f70bd8836988ad83bc2c3a081](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/93b6c1e5211b014f70bd8836988ad83bc2c3a081)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s2) Study design
(p2.0) This was a mixed-methods study involving two phases. In Phase One, studies of internet-based interventions for suicide prevention were identified via a systematic literature search and their reported safety measures were examined. In Phase Two, lead and senior authors of all studies identified during Phase One were invited to participate in an online survey. Following Andriessen and colleagues [14,15], researchers who participated in the survey will be referred to hereafter as "respondents"; "participants" will refer to the participants of their studies.

(p2.1) This was a mixed-methods study involving two phases. In Phase One, studies of internet-based interventions for suicide prevention were identified via a systematic literature search and their reported safety measures were examined. In Phase Two, lead and senior authors of all studies identified during Phase One were invited to participate in an online survey. Following Andriessen and colleagues [14,15], researchers who participated in the survey will be referred to hereafter as "respondents"; "participants" will refer to the participants of their studies.
## (s6) Data analysis
(p6.0) For the quantitative data obtained from the literature review and survey, frequencies and percentages were calculated using SPSS. Qualitative data drawn from Phase 2 of the study were analysed using thematic analysis, following the steps set out by Braun and Clarke [33]. The lead author read and re-read the qualitative survey responses to immerse herself in the data. A theoretical semantic approach was used to analyse the data, seeking the answers to four broad questions: 1) What are the ethical and practical issues associated with this research area?; 2) What steps have respondents taken to address these issues?; 3) What impact did this have on the research?; 4) What general recommendations do respondents have for researchers in this area (including what they would do differently in future)? A systematic process to code the data was undertaken, with roughly 10 % of the data independently coded by a second author to ensure the validity of codes developed. The codes were then grouped into themes that captured their shared meaning; themes were discussed to ensure they accurately reflected the data. Data are reported according to the Consensual Qualitative Research Method [34], using the labels "few" (rare support; endorsed by 10-20% of respondents), "some" (variant support; endorsed by 21-50%); "many" (typical support; endorsed by 51-90%), or "most" (general support; endorsed by 91-100%).

(p6.1) For the quantitative data obtained from the literature review and survey, frequencies and percentages were calculated using SPSS. Qualitative data drawn from Phase 2 of the study were analysed using thematic analysis, following the steps set out by Braun and Clarke [33]. The lead author read and re-read the qualitative survey responses to immerse herself in the data. A theoretical semantic approach was used to analyse the data, seeking the answers to four broad questions: 1) What are the ethical and practical issues associated with this research area?; 2) What steps have respondents taken to address these issues?; 3) What impact did this have on the research?; 4) What general recommendations do respondents have for researchers in this area (including what they would do differently in future)? A systematic process to code the data was undertaken, with roughly 10 % of the data independently coded by a second author to ensure the validity of codes developed. The codes were then grouped into themes that captured their shared meaning; themes were discussed to ensure they accurately reflected the data. Data are reported according to the Consensual Qualitative Research Method [34], using the labels "few" (rare support; endorsed by 10-20% of respondents), "some" (variant support; endorsed by 21-50%); "many" (typical support; endorsed by 51-90%), or "most" (general support; endorsed by 91-100%).
## (s25) Study design
(p25.0) This was a mixed-methods study involving two phases. In Phase One, studies of internet-based interventions for suicide prevention were identified via a systematic literature search and their reported safety measures were examined. In Phase Two, lead and senior authors of all studies identified during Phase One were invited to participate in an online survey. Following Andriessen and colleagues [14,15], researchers who participated in the survey will be referred to hereafter as "respondents"; "participants" will refer to the participants of their studies.

(p25.1) This was a mixed-methods study involving two phases. In Phase One, studies of internet-based interventions for suicide prevention were identified via a systematic literature search and their reported safety measures were examined. In Phase Two, lead and senior authors of all studies identified during Phase One were invited to participate in an online survey. Following Andriessen and colleagues [14,15], researchers who participated in the survey will be referred to hereafter as "respondents"; "participants" will refer to the participants of their studies.
## (s29) Data analysis
(p29.0) For the quantitative data obtained from the literature review and survey, frequencies and percentages were calculated using SPSS. Qualitative data drawn from Phase 2 of the study were analysed using thematic analysis, following the steps set out by Braun and Clarke [33]. The lead author read and re-read the qualitative survey responses to immerse herself in the data. A theoretical semantic approach was used to analyse the data, seeking the answers to four broad questions: 1) What are the ethical and practical issues associated with this research area?; 2) What steps have respondents taken to address these issues?; 3) What impact did this have on the research?; 4) What general recommendations do respondents have for researchers in this area (including what they would do differently in future)? A systematic process to code the data was undertaken, with roughly 10 % of the data independently coded by a second author to ensure the validity of codes developed. The codes were then grouped into themes that captured their shared meaning; themes were discussed to ensure they accurately reflected the data. Data are reported according to the Consensual Qualitative Research Method [34], using the labels "few" (rare support; endorsed by 10-20% of respondents), "some" (variant support; endorsed by 21-50%); "many" (typical support; endorsed by 51-90%), or "most" (general support; endorsed by 91-100%).

(p29.1) For the quantitative data obtained from the literature review and survey, frequencies and percentages were calculated using SPSS. Qualitative data drawn from Phase 2 of the study were analysed using thematic analysis, following the steps set out by Braun and Clarke [33]. The lead author read and re-read the qualitative survey responses to immerse herself in the data. A theoretical semantic approach was used to analyse the data, seeking the answers to four broad questions: 1) What are the ethical and practical issues associated with this research area?; 2) What steps have respondents taken to address these issues?; 3) What impact did this have on the research?; 4) What general recommendations do respondents have for researchers in this area (including what they would do differently in future)? A systematic process to code the data was undertaken, with roughly 10 % of the data independently coded by a second author to ensure the validity of codes developed. The codes were then grouped into themes that captured their shared meaning; themes were discussed to ensure they accurately reflected the data. Data are reported according to the Consensual Qualitative Research Method [34], using the labels "few" (rare support; endorsed by 10-20% of respondents), "some" (variant support; endorsed by 21-50%); "many" (typical support; endorsed by 51-90%), or "most" (general support; endorsed by 91-100%).
