# Multimodal Learning for Multi-Omics: A Survey

CorpusID: 254096119 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ebf69dfc9306f3c0f0dbb2bd6916b81f953d872a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ebf69dfc9306f3c0f0dbb2bd6916b81f953d872a)

Fields: Medicine, Mathematics, Computer Science, Biology

## (s1) Multi-Omics Data
(p1.0) Multi-omics data are derived from different sources: molecular omics data, radiomics, and phenomics. Molecular omics data are the traditional dimension of multi-omics data, which aim to analyze the molecular biology of human diseases and consist of genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, epigenomics, microbiomics, and exposomics. Radiomics, on the other hand, studies medical images collected from medical imaging technologies. 29 Phenomics is another valuable dimension of multi-omics data that comprises clinical and biochemical data of individuals. 30 Each source of omics data has been separately studied to answer biomedical questions. While different sources of information are complementary and contribute to the discovery of unique aspects of diseases, the fusion of multiple omics modalities has widely been done in existing research. Therefore, introducing each modality of omics data and their potential applications in solving biomedical tasks helps researchers consider all omics modalities in the long run. 18,31   an overview of multiple modalities of omics data and their applications applied to biomedical studies. Besides, the multiple omics data and their fusion for various tasks are visually presented in Figure 1.
## (s5) Microbiomics
(p5.0) The analysis of molecules involved in the structure and function of microbial communities in the human body is investigated in microbiomics to diagnose human diseases. complex structures that produce proteins for the development and maintenance of the human body. As a result, studying various constituents of genes helps diagnose, treat, and cure life-threatening human diseases such as cancers.

(p5.1) The rapid development of DNA sequencing into next-generation sequencing (NGS) has generated diverse molecular data named omics. 31,49 It has enabled bioinformaticians to analyze molecular omics, which offers a biological strategy for combining genomics with transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and epigenomics. Consequently, this integration provides knowledge about gene expression, gene activation, and protein levels, which play a vital role in responding to several biological tasks, including disease diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, prevention, and biomarker identification.

(p5.2) The complete set of genetic information for human development and growth is found in the genome and expressed by ribonucleic acid (RNA). The main aim of genomics is the study of the genome for extracting information from genes to determine variations in DNA sequences that can give rise to human diseases. The influence of diseases on the function of cells or living organisms is examined by transcriptomics through gene expression. In other words, transcriptomics identifies modifications in RNA, which is a decisive factor in the occurrence of diseases. Proteomics, on the other side, investigates the set of proteins produced in an organism, system, or biological setting to complement gained information from genomics. This type of omics data is generated by a key analytical technology called mass spectrometry (MS). 50 Metabolomics presents a fingerprint of the physiology of the cells by studying chemical processes involving cellular metabolites and their interactions to detect metabolic diseases and discover biomarkers. Epigenomics examines the modifications in gene function regulation without altering the DNA sequences. The availability of epigenomics can highlight a way to integrate gene expression changes and environmental cues that reveal complementary information in human disease detection. Another factor in shaping human diseases is microbiomes which consist of bacteria, archaea, fungi, algae, and protists. Microbiomics or microbiome science is an emerging area that investigates communities of particular microbial, known as microbiota, to identify microbes and viruses that result in disease. Beyond genetic, environmental exposures also play a decisive factor in several human diseases, such as skin disorders. Exposomics is the study of measuring the total environmental exposures during the individual's life to explore the harmful effects of exposures on health and understand the complicated interaction between genetic and environmental factors.
## (s6) Non-molecular omics data
(p6.0) With the progress in medical imaging technologies and the discovery of the importance of clinical data, complementary sources of omics data, called radiomics and phenomics, have emerged to add meaningful knowledge in solving biological problems.

(p6.1) In precision medicine, radiomics aims to extract quantitative features from medical images and analyze them to enable decision-making systems for a more accurate diagnosis. 53 The workflow of radiomics starts with acquiring image data generated in different modalities, such as computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and digital histopathology. When images have been collected, segmentation is typically carried out to find essential regions of images to simplify their representation. After that, the feature extraction process is executed to produce different feature types, such as histograms and shape-based features. The valuable features are then combined into specific matrices through mathematical algorithms. Finally, the outcome assessment is made based on machine learning models. 54 A critical step in the described workflow is access to the standardized image datasets. One of the big projects in collecting and organizing medical images of cancer is The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA), which facilitates easy and public access to images related to common cancers (e.g., lung cancer). 55 On the other hand, phenomics systematically measures the full set of qualitative and quantitative phenomes, including physical and biochemical traits. Phenomics examines the effect of an individual's environment and lifestyle on their genome-wide scale to assess the risk of diseases. 56 Phenomics includes electronic health record (EHR)-based phenotyping, the study of extracting information from EHRs to discover clinical characteristics of individuals that can improve our understanding of human health. 57 The genotype-phenotype relationship is an integrative point of view of genetic and phenotypic levels, which causes a unique understanding of complex human diseases. 30 
## (s9) Imbalance problem
(p9.0) Another frequent problem with multi-omics data is the imbalance problem, which can be seen at the class or feature level. Class imbalance naturally occurs in multiomics data when disease-specific classes are rare and comprise a small proportion of samples compared to other classes. This imbalance gives rise to the machine learning model's bias toward the majority classes, and the danger of overfitting increases. 89,90 Over and under-sampling 91-93 and cost-sensitive learning 94 are the most widely used machine learning techniques for balancing datasets.

(p9.1) Feature imbalance, on the other hand, refers to the different distribution of feature dimensionality within each omics data. One omics may have only hundreds of features, while another may contain thousands. As a result, the learning model is more likely to pay more attention to omics with a larger number of features, leading to a learning imbalance. 13,95 To deal with this problem, various strategies have been introduced, ranging from dimensionality reduction (see Section 3.1 for details) to late fusion (see Section 4.2 for details).
## (s12) Noisiness
(p12.0) Complex workflows for generating large-scale omics data have produced noisy multiomics data, which can arise as mislabeled samples or misvalued features. 114,115 Sample mislabeling is a well-known problem in healthcare research, and these noisy datasets can misguide the learning algorithms to find misleading patterns. Therefore, some necessary steps should be taken to rectify the errors. Mislabeled sample correction by matching methods has been used in several research works. 114,[116][117][118] Since there are unreliable samples in multi-omics data, unsupervised and selfsupervised methods may perform better than supervised methods, as reviewed in some papers. 71,[119][120][121] Misvalued features, on the other hand, can occur due to measurement errors or biological deviations. 13 Consequently, extracting meaningful information from multi-omics data is a challenging task that needs to be addressed appropriately. One technique to address this problem uses regulatory network strategies (e.g., RNA-protein interaction networks) to reduce noise based on interactions between biological datasets. 122 Some other efforts have been made to solve this problem in the literature. 123,124
## (s13) Multi-Omics Fusion Strategies
(p13.0) Multi-omics data fusion integrates information from multiple omics modalities to capture intra-omics and cross-omics interactions for a deeper insight into biological processes and better decision-making. It can leverage the interactions and supplementary information among omics data to provide richer knowledge compared to single omics learning. 125 Researchers have proposed a growing number of methods to fuse multi-omics data. We categorize all developed methods as shown in Figure  3 and discuss them in the following subsections.  
## (s15) Early fusion
(p15.0) The early fusion approach directly concatenates each omics dataset to construct a single extensive dataset containing all features before being fed to learning algorithms. 128 Methods based on this approach benefit from cross-modality learning, which refers to learning by involving information obtained from multiple modalities. The development of this strategy is simple, and the final joint dataset can be used as the input for numerous classical machine learning algorithms such as artificial neural networks (ANNs), 129 support vector machines (SVMs), 130 decision trees (DTs), 131 random forests (RFs), 132 and k-nearest neighbors (k-NN). 133 Training only one single algorithm in early fusion leads to a more straightforward pipeline for implementing this approach. 2 Despite the simplicity of early fusion, the newly generated single dataset has a higher dimensionality for a relatively smaller number of patients. This problem makes the model's training difficult, decreases the performance, and increases the computational time. 134 Since there is a noticeable difference in feature dimensionality in multi-omics data, another drawback of early fusion is the model's tendency to learn more from the omics with a larger number of features. 135 Employing dimensionality reduction techniques as a pre-processing step can reduce the adverse effects of these challenges by keeping a small number of discriminating features 23,26,[136][137][138] (see Section 3.1 for details).
## (s16) Mixed fusion
(p16.0) In the mixed fusion approach, each original omics dataset is separately transformed into a new intermediate representation, after which they are merged to produce the final representation. At this stage, machine learning algorithms can be employed in the joint representation of multi-omics data. 13 Since the intermediate representations have a lower dimensionality, future analysis can be done more efficiently. Furthermore, using independent representations in the first step makes it possible to address the heterogeneity of multiple modalities. 134 Transformation, factorization, and joint feature selection are three categories of mixed fusion to be discussed in the following subsections.

(p16.1) Transformation. The goal of transformation-based methods is to project each unimodal dataset into a new subspace and combine these generated subspaces before building a learning model. These methods can integrate a different range of omics modalities for diagnostic tasks. 131 Strategies for generating the new subspace can be divided into four categories, kernel-based, graph-based, neural network-based, and probabilistic model-based fusions.
## (s20) Datasets description
(p20.0) In this section, we briefly review important multi-omics datasets such as TCGA, 21,195,196 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), [197][198][199] and the Human Protein Atlas (HPA). 200 TCGA was initiated by the effort between the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the Center for Cancer Genomics Research Institute (NHGRI) with the aim of collecting, molecularly characterizing, and analyzing many cancers in 2006. This initiative has processed more than 20,000 patients to represent 33 cancer types and provided over 2.5 petabytes of data from different modalities, including genomics, epigenomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics. According to Google Scholar metrics, TCGA has been cited over 38,500 times as of July 2022, demonstrating the project's popularity among researchers. Another initiative is the KEGG program, conducted at Kyoto University as part of the Human Genome Program in 1995. The program's objective is to assign sets of genes in the genome with higher-order functional information that can help the biological interpretation of genomic information. KEGG has analyzed different omics types, including genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and other types. As another example, HPA collects transcriptomics and proteomics data for human tissue expression profiles. Table 4 lists other studies that focus on providing multi-omics data to enable the development of multi-omics fusion workflows.
## (s22) Discussion and Future Directions
(p22.0) Multimodal learning for multi-omics has become increasingly attractive in biomedical studies, especially with the availability and easy access to multiple omics modalities. 252 Multi-omics analysis offers growing opportunities for answering key biological questions by providing deep views on the underlying mechanisms of diseases. Therefore, extensive methods have been proposed to analyze the multiple biomedical data sources. The community needs to be aware of the recent methodologies for mitigating multi-omics data challenges, analytical methods, open-source software, and benchmark datasets to conduct comprehensive and reproducible experiments. Several recent attempts have been made to survey the field of multi-omics from different points of view, as summarized in Table 1. However, as shown in Table 1, a comprehensive review is still needed to provide an organized overview of current data challenges, introduce a more structured taxonomy of multi-omics approaches to cover recent works, present well-known and widely used datasets in the field with the available platforms to access them, and collect active software for analyzing multi-omics data. In this study, we have made efforts to address these needs, and the following interesting points deserve attention to progress in the research toward a better future.
