# Journal of Physics: Energy OPEN ACCESS A review of chemical looping reforming technologies for hydrogen production: recent advances and future challenges

CorpusID: 257593391 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f583fed9a93a895a8ded4ab2802a7373a71789aa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f583fed9a93a895a8ded4ab2802a7373a71789aa)

Fields: Engineering, Chemistry, Environmental Science, Physics

## (s3) CLR of methane
(p3.0) Methane is the main component of natural gas and unconventional gas, and methane reforming is a high-efficiency and low-energy approach to methane utilization to satisfy the global demand for energy (Yin et al 2022). The CLR is similar to chemical looping combustion, but instead of full combustion of methane to generate water, CO 2 and heat, the methane is partially oxidized by an oxygen carrier to prepare high-quality syngas, which is suitable for high-value-added downstream chemical products (Adanez et al 2012). Therefore, the concept of CLR targets the production of H 2 + CO by partially oxidizing methane in the fuel reactor by the lattice oxygen of a solid oxygen carrier while the oxygen-depleted material is re-oxidized in an air reactor (Sun et al 2022). The heat generated from the redox reactions is used for the endothermic steam/dry reforming (DRM) of methane to produce H 2 + CO . The CLR consists of two reactors, most commonly fixed beds, moving beds and fluidized beds. To choose the right reactor configuration, several factors such as target heat/mass transfer rates, reaction kinetics, and the desired extent of reduction of the oxygen carriers should be considered (Sun et al 2020). Depending on the ratio of oxygen to fuel and the nature of the oxygen carrier, the following reactions can occur during a methane reforming process that can affect the reactor design and syngas selectivity targets (Sun et al 2020).
## (s6) Recent advances in oxygen carriers for CLR
(p6.0) The solid oxygen carrier materials that are used in chemical looping technologies to transfer oxygen from the air to the fuel have a key role in the success of the process for the production of hydrogen (Hu et al 2021b). In this regard, extensive research has been made toward the development of optimum oxygen carrier materials with improved properties which will be discussed in this section. The oxygen carriers can be divided into two main categories including synthetic materials and natural minerals. Although natural minerals are cheap, their reactivity is usually lower than synthetic oxygen carriers (Adanez et al 2012). Metal oxides of Fe, Ni, Co and Mn with inert support such as TiO 2 , Al 2 O 3 and SiO 2 are the most studied synthetic oxygen carriers in the literature which possess their individual advantages and weaknesses. As chemical looping processes are often operate at high temperatures in industrial application, it is critical to select a suitable oxygen carrier based on its thermal stability to avoid material sintering. The melting temperature of several different transition-state metals and their corresponding oxides have been listed in table 3. In addition, the maximum oxygen transport capacity of oxygen carriers was also given in this table. Oxygen carriers with a low circulation rate are suitable from design simplicity and less circulation power point of view. However, it should be high enough to transport sufficient oxygen for complete fuel oxidation as well as to transport the desired heat in case of an endothermic reaction in the fuel reactor .

(p6.1) To ensure the oxygen carriers have desirable qualities, an understanding of the reaction mechanism and morphological changes during the reaction are needed. The various competing factors such as resistance to toxicity, easy scalability, complete fuel conversion to CO and H 2 , environmental aspects, low cost, availability, high attrition resistance, high conversion rate, and stability under repeated oxidation/reduction, high oxygen-carrying capacity and good heat-carrying capacity should take into account before selection of an appropriate oxygen carrier (Sun et al 2020). However, it is not easy to find a metal oxide that could meet all the above factors. In this regard, supporting materials such as MgAl 2 O 4 , ZrO 2 , SiO 2 , TiO 2 and Al 2 O 3 can be added to metal oxides to improve attrition resistance and mechanical strength. Furthermore, depending on which preparation method is used for oxygen carriers, their properties can change. There are several methods to prepare oxygen carriers including spray pyrolysis, sol-gel, spray drying, pelletizing by extrusion, precipitation, mechanical mixing, impregnation, hydrothermal synthesis, dissolution, freeze granulation, deposition precipitation, co-precipitation and citric acid method ( 

(p6.2) The solid oxygen carrier materials that are used in chemical looping technologies to transfer oxygen from the air to the fuel have a key role in the success of the process for the production of hydrogen (Hu et al 2021b). In this regard, extensive research has been made toward the development of optimum oxygen carrier materials with improved properties which will be discussed in this section. The oxygen carriers can be divided into two main categories including synthetic materials and natural minerals. Although natural minerals are cheap, their reactivity is usually lower than synthetic oxygen carriers (Adanez et al 2012). Metal oxides of Fe, Ni, Co and Mn with inert support such as TiO 2 , Al 2 O 3 and SiO 2 are the most studied synthetic oxygen carriers in the literature which possess their individual advantages and weaknesses. As chemical looping processes are often operate at high temperatures in industrial application, it is critical to select a suitable oxygen carrier based on its thermal stability to avoid material sintering. The melting temperature of several different transition-state metals and their corresponding oxides have been listed in table 3. In addition, the maximum oxygen transport capacity of oxygen carriers was also given in this table. Oxygen carriers with a low circulation rate are suitable from design simplicity and less circulation power point of view. However, it should be high enough to transport sufficient oxygen for complete fuel oxidation as well as to transport the desired heat in case of an endothermic reaction in the fuel reactor .

(p6.3) To ensure the oxygen carriers have desirable qualities, an understanding of the reaction mechanism and morphological changes during the reaction are needed. The various competing factors such as resistance to toxicity, easy scalability, complete fuel conversion to CO and H 2 , environmental aspects, low cost, availability, high attrition resistance, high conversion rate, and stability under repeated oxidation/reduction, high oxygen-carrying capacity and good heat-carrying capacity should take into account before selection of an appropriate oxygen carrier (Sun et al 2020). However, it is not easy to find a metal oxide that could meet all the above factors. In this regard, supporting materials such as MgAl 2 O 4 , ZrO 2 , SiO 2 , TiO 2 and Al 2 O 3 can be added to metal oxides to improve attrition resistance and mechanical strength. Furthermore, depending on which preparation method is used for oxygen carriers, their properties can change. There are several methods to prepare oxygen carriers including spray pyrolysis, sol-gel, spray drying, pelletizing by extrusion, precipitation, mechanical mixing, impregnation, hydrothermal synthesis, dissolution, freeze granulation, deposition precipitation, co-precipitation and citric acid method ( 
## (s7) Ni-based oxygen carriers
(p7.0) Using nickel-based oxygen carriers for chemical looping concepts has attracted considerable attention from many researchers due to their low cost, high catalytic activity, outstanding oxygen transfer capacity (0.21 g O 2 /g NiO) and great thermal stability (Roslan et al 2020). The excellent catalytic activity of Ni has been associated with its remarkable ability for breaking the C-C bonds. Ni-based oxygen carriers were the first materials employed for demonstrating the viability of chemical looping as a carbon capture technology. The presence of nickel helps to promote the water-gas shift reaction, leading to an increase in hydrogen production. Nevertheless, they suffer from several limitations such as toxicity and coke formation on the catalyst surface, leading to blockage of nickel active sites and deactivation. A comparison between the reactivity of NiO, Mn 2 O 3 , Fe 2 O 3 and CuO metal oxides showed that the reactivity of NiO with methane is the highest while Fe 2 O 3 offer the lowest reactivity followed by CuO (Zafar et al 2005). In addition, NiO/SiO 2 exhibit the highest selectivity toward hydrogen production compared to others. The reason for the low reaction rate of CuO/SiO 2 is the decomposition of CuO to Cu 2 O during the inert period following the oxidation, which means that less oxygen is available for the oxidation of the fuel. It was reported that the implementation of CO 2 sorption in CLR can increase the purity of hydrogen by more than 90% and decrease the operating temperature, resulting in an improvement in the stability of the Ni. The performance of Ni-based material depends significantly on metal supports that are used in catalyst preparation. It was shown that a high activity can be determined using MgAl 2 O 4 as metal support. Metal supports of SiO 2 and Al 2 O 3 are better candidates in terms of high temperature stability (Nieva et al 2014).

(p7.1) In CLR processes, material deactivation caused by carbon deposition is one of the main issues. The several techniques such as using dry impregnation method to prepare catalyst, the addition of a small amount of alkali metals (K, Mg, Ca), type of support and the addition of a small amount of steam to the reactor were proposed in the literature to reduce carbon deposition on the material surface (Elias et al 2013). For example, it was found that ceria-supported catalyst exhibits the lower carbon deposition compared to MgO, TiO 2 . Ceria establishes a better interaction with the Ni active phase, which causes a higher metal dispersion and inherently available surface area.

(p7.2) Tavanarad et al (2021) employed 15 wt% Ni supported on Al 2 O 3 with 3 wt% promoters such as MgO, CaO, SrO, and BaO in the glycerol reforming. Figure 6 shows glycerol conversion of Ni catalysts at a temperature range from 600 to 750 • C with and without promoters. As can be seen from the figure, all promoters increased the glycerol conversion and among them, SrO exhibited the highest glycerol conversion. The authors explained that this improvement could be related to the adsorption of CO 2 on the catalysts and the smaller crystallite sizes of the promoted catalysts. Furthermore, higher glycerol conversion on the promoted catalysts can be attributed to the enhanced basic properties of the catalysts. The addition of alkaline earth metal oxide promoters improves the adsorption of CO 2 on the catalysts and inhibits the Boudouard reaction, and suppresses the coke formation. The temperature showed a significant effect on glycerol conversion as it increases when temperature increases from 600 to 750 • C due to endothermic nature of the reaction.   

(p7.3) Using nickel-based oxygen carriers for chemical looping concepts has attracted considerable attention from many researchers due to their low cost, high catalytic activity, outstanding oxygen transfer capacity (0.21 g O 2 /g NiO) and great thermal stability (Roslan et al 2020). The excellent catalytic activity of Ni has been associated with its remarkable ability for breaking the C-C bonds. Ni-based oxygen carriers were the first materials employed for demonstrating the viability of chemical looping as a carbon capture technology. The presence of nickel helps to promote the water-gas shift reaction, leading to an increase in hydrogen production. Nevertheless, they suffer from several limitations such as toxicity and coke formation on the catalyst surface, leading to blockage of nickel active sites and deactivation. A comparison between the reactivity of NiO, Mn 2 O 3 , Fe 2 O 3 and CuO metal oxides showed that the reactivity of NiO with methane is the highest while Fe 2 O 3 offer the lowest reactivity followed by CuO (Zafar et al 2005). In addition, NiO/SiO 2 exhibit the highest selectivity toward hydrogen production compared to others. The reason for the low reaction rate of CuO/SiO 2 is the decomposition of CuO to Cu 2 O during the inert period following the oxidation, which means that less oxygen is available for the oxidation of the fuel. It was reported that the implementation of CO 2 sorption in CLR can increase the purity of hydrogen by more than 90% and decrease the operating temperature, resulting in an improvement in the stability of the Ni. The performance of Ni-based material depends significantly on metal supports that are used in catalyst preparation. It was shown that a high activity can be determined using MgAl 2 O 4 as metal support. Metal supports of SiO 2 and Al 2 O 3 are better candidates in terms of high temperature stability (Nieva et al 2014).

(p7.4) In CLR processes, material deactivation caused by carbon deposition is one of the main issues. The several techniques such as using dry impregnation method to prepare catalyst, the addition of a small amount of alkali metals (K, Mg, Ca), type of support and the addition of a small amount of steam to the reactor were proposed in the literature to reduce carbon deposition on the material surface (Elias et al 2013). For example, it was found that ceria-supported catalyst exhibits the lower carbon deposition compared to MgO, TiO 2 . Ceria establishes a better interaction with the Ni active phase, which causes a higher metal dispersion and inherently available surface area.

(p7.5) Tavanarad et al (2021) employed 15 wt% Ni supported on Al 2 O 3 with 3 wt% promoters such as MgO, CaO, SrO, and BaO in the glycerol reforming. Figure 6 shows glycerol conversion of Ni catalysts at a temperature range from 600 to 750 • C with and without promoters. As can be seen from the figure, all promoters increased the glycerol conversion and among them, SrO exhibited the highest glycerol conversion. The authors explained that this improvement could be related to the adsorption of CO 2 on the catalysts and the smaller crystallite sizes of the promoted catalysts. Furthermore, higher glycerol conversion on the promoted catalysts can be attributed to the enhanced basic properties of the catalysts. The addition of alkaline earth metal oxide promoters improves the adsorption of CO 2 on the catalysts and inhibits the Boudouard reaction, and suppresses the coke formation. The temperature showed a significant effect on glycerol conversion as it increases when temperature increases from 600 to 750 • C due to endothermic nature of the reaction.   
## (s8) Fe-based oxygen carriers
(p8.0) The environment friendliness, low price and good redox properties make iron-based oxygen carriers an attractive candidate for the chemical looping process (Lu et al 2021). Furthermore, iron-based materials exhibit high melting points, and high mechanical strength and have no tendency for carbon formation or sulphide/sulphate formation. Although they offer acceptable reactivity for hydrogen and carbon monoxide, they have weak reactivity for methane (Yu et al 2019). Similar to other oxygen carriers, iron-based materials also have a few drawbacks including low oxygen transport capacity and the complexity of heat management due to their endothermic nature (Li et al 2019b). Moreover, ash compositions could react with an iron oxygen carrier which results in sintering and agglomeration (Bao et al 2014). Generally, iron-based oxygen carriers are composed of primary iron oxide for lattice oxygen storage and ceramic support for improved redox stability and activity. Evolution of iron oxide during reforming and reduction was given in figure 7. During the reduction step, Fe 2 O 3 is reduced by gaseous fuel in order to desorb oxygen for CO 2 formation and obtain adequate active sites for catalytic DRM of methane. In the DRM step, CH 4 and CO 2 gases are fed and the catalyst reaction of DRM and POM occur on the active site for syngas production along with oxygen migration. Iron-based oxygen carriers exhibit the maximum capacity for oxygen adsorption and the highest resistance against sintering compared to Co, Cu and Mn-based oxygen carriers. The optimum temperature of cobalt, magnesium, copper and iron metal oxides supported on alumina are 1298 K, 1073 K, 1303 K and 1173 K, respectively (Forutan et al 2015). Lu et al (2021) studied the behavior of magnetite with Fe 3 O 4 in reforming of methane and observed that the temperature rise is beneficial to the reduction of iron oxide in the fuel reactor. Guerrero-Caballero et al (2019) performed a comparative study on several ceria-based oxygen carriers such as Ni, Co and Fe in reforming of methane. It was found that at a temperature around 873 K, Co/CeO 2 shows promising results while Fe-based oxygen carrier exhibits better performance at higher temperatures. Therefore, iron-based material might be a better candidate than nickel in terms of toxicity and environmental reasons. Solunke and Veser (2010) claimed that iron metal oxide is the best option from a melting point, cost, toxicity and reduction cycle point of view. The deactivation of iron oxide over multiple redox cycles is one of their limitations which leads to a decrease in CO selectivity. Moreover, the formation of CO 2 during the reduction of Fe 2 O 3 to Fe 3 O 4 leads to a decrease in CO selectivity and the productivity of value-added fuels generated. The combination Fe and Ce has been suggested by several researchers due to positive effect of the addition of Ce (García-García and Metcalfe 2021). It was reported that Fe-Ce mixed oxides produce pure hydrogen and high-quality syngas due to a strong interaction between CeO 2 and Fe 2 O 3 species which greatly enhances the mobility of oxygen in the Ce-Fe and improves the oxygen vacancies through the formation of CeFeO 3 phases. Furthermore, the addition of CeO 2 to Fe oxide leads to higher hydrogen and CO yields due to synergetic interaction between both cerium and iron oxides and the formation of a peruskite type oxide. Therefore, by controlling the amount of metal oxide in the mixture, product selectivity can be adjusted.

(p8.1) The environment friendliness, low price and good redox properties make iron-based oxygen carriers an attractive candidate for the chemical looping process (Lu et al 2021). Furthermore, iron-based materials exhibit high melting points, and high mechanical strength and have no tendency for carbon formation or sulphide/sulphate formation. Although they offer acceptable reactivity for hydrogen and carbon monoxide, they have weak reactivity for methane (Yu et al 2019). Similar to other oxygen carriers, iron-based materials also have a few drawbacks including low oxygen transport capacity and the complexity of heat management due to their endothermic nature (Li et al 2019b). Moreover, ash compositions could react with an iron oxygen carrier which results in sintering and agglomeration (Bao et al 2014). Generally, iron-based oxygen carriers are composed of primary iron oxide for lattice oxygen storage and ceramic support for improved redox stability and activity. Evolution of iron oxide during reforming and reduction was given in figure 7. During the reduction step, Fe 2 O 3 is reduced by gaseous fuel in order to desorb oxygen for CO 2 formation and obtain adequate active sites for catalytic DRM of methane. In the DRM step, CH 4 and CO 2 gases are fed and the catalyst reaction of DRM and POM occur on the active site for syngas production along with oxygen migration. Iron-based oxygen carriers exhibit the maximum capacity for oxygen adsorption and the highest resistance against sintering compared to Co, Cu and Mn-based oxygen carriers. The optimum temperature of cobalt, magnesium, copper and iron metal oxides supported on alumina are 1298 K, 1073 K, 1303 K and 1173 K, respectively (Forutan et al 2015). Lu et al (2021) studied the behavior of magnetite with Fe 3 O 4 in reforming of methane and observed that the temperature rise is beneficial to the reduction of iron oxide in the fuel reactor. Guerrero-Caballero et al (2019) performed a comparative study on several ceria-based oxygen carriers such as Ni, Co and Fe in reforming of methane. It was found that at a temperature around 873 K, Co/CeO 2 shows promising results while Fe-based oxygen carrier exhibits better performance at higher temperatures. Therefore, iron-based material might be a better candidate than nickel in terms of toxicity and environmental reasons. Solunke and Veser (2010) claimed that iron metal oxide is the best option from a melting point, cost, toxicity and reduction cycle point of view. The deactivation of iron oxide over multiple redox cycles is one of their limitations which leads to a decrease in CO selectivity. Moreover, the formation of CO 2 during the reduction of Fe 2 O 3 to Fe 3 O 4 leads to a decrease in CO selectivity and the productivity of value-added fuels generated. The combination Fe and Ce has been suggested by several researchers due to positive effect of the addition of Ce (García-García and Metcalfe 2021). It was reported that Fe-Ce mixed oxides produce pure hydrogen and high-quality syngas due to a strong interaction between CeO 2 and Fe 2 O 3 species which greatly enhances the mobility of oxygen in the Ce-Fe and improves the oxygen vacancies through the formation of CeFeO 3 phases. Furthermore, the addition of CeO 2 to Fe oxide leads to higher hydrogen and CO yields due to synergetic interaction between both cerium and iron oxides and the formation of a peruskite type oxide. Therefore, by controlling the amount of metal oxide in the mixture, product selectivity can be adjusted.
## (s9) Cu-based oxygen carriers
(p9.0) Cu-based oxygen carriers with attractive properties have been widely studied in the literature. Great oxygen transport capacity, low toxicity, high reactivity in both reduction and oxidation cycles as well as moderate cost make Cu-based materials one of the most known oxygen carriers in chemical looping processes (Abad et al 2007). One of the interesting advantages of this type of material is that reduction and oxidation reactions are exothermic which results in no heat supply energy requirement in the reduction reactor. Furthermore, sulphurous impurities in the fuel do not significantly affect the properties of Cu oxygen carriers (Forero et al 2010). However, the main issue with Cu-based material is their relatively low melting point which results in agglomeration problems.

(p9.1) Agglomeration of oxygen carriers usually occurs when particles of oxygen carriers adhere to one another and form clusters which results in a reduction in material stability and reaction rate. To make Cu-based material a more attractive oxygen carrier, it is essential to improve its performance at high temperatures. This can be achieved using different preparation methods and addition inert supports.
## (s10) Ce-based oxygen carriers
(p10.0) In the DRM of methane process, good resistance to coke is critical for catalysts and favorable from an economic point of view. Ceria-based catalysts exhibit high resistance to coke formation and have unique redox properties. Thanks to its great redox capacity, ceria is the most interesting oxide in the chemical looping POM (Li et al 2019a). Furthermore, CeO 2 is very attractive in chemical looping due to the formation of Ce 3+ sites and CeO 2 oxygen vacancies, which improves the performance of various reactions. Jang et al (2014) used ZrO 2 as support for CeO 2 and indicated an improvement in temperature stability, redox performance and oxygen storage capacity. The production of syngas and hydrogen on CeO 2 -ZrO 2 was found to be about twice that of pure CeO 2 and not race of carbon deposition was observed. Zheng et al (2017) used LaFeO 3 -supported CeO 2 as an oxygen carrier and their results revealed that the presence of CeO 2 improves the resistance toward carbon deposition formation, and this allows the oxygen carrier own high available oxygen storage capacity. As shown in figure 8, pure LaFeO 3 exhibits H 2 /CO ratio of around 2.4 in the produced syngas while CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 showed H 2 /CO ratio near 2 meaning the formation of carbon deposition in CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 is avoided. Since the stoichiometric reaction of a CH 4 molecule with oxygen should yield a H 2 /CO ratio of 2.0, ratios higher than 2 indicates the decomposition of CH 4 which would result in the formation of carbon deposition. Furthermore, CO selectivity for LaFeO 3 and 10%CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 materials was also reported to be about 90% during the 30 redox cycles at 800 • C. Syngas yield for 10%CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 (9.72 mmol g −1 ) was found to be much higher than that over the pure LaFeO 3 (5.86 mmol g −1 ) and it is very stable during the redox testing.

(p10.1) In the DRM of methane process, good resistance to coke is critical for catalysts and favorable from an economic point of view. Ceria-based catalysts exhibit high resistance to coke formation and have unique redox properties. Thanks to its great redox capacity, ceria is the most interesting oxide in the chemical looping POM (Li et al 2019a). Furthermore, CeO 2 is very attractive in chemical looping due to the formation of Ce 3+ sites and CeO 2 oxygen vacancies, which improves the performance of various reactions. Jang et al (2014) used ZrO 2 as support for CeO 2 and indicated an improvement in temperature stability, redox performance and oxygen storage capacity. The production of syngas and hydrogen on CeO 2 -ZrO 2 was found to be about twice that of pure CeO 2 and not race of carbon deposition was observed. Zheng et al (2017) used LaFeO 3 -supported CeO 2 as an oxygen carrier and their results revealed that the presence of CeO 2 improves the resistance toward carbon deposition formation, and this allows the oxygen carrier own high available oxygen storage capacity. As shown in figure 8, pure LaFeO 3 exhibits H 2 /CO ratio of around 2.4 in the produced syngas while CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 showed H 2 /CO ratio near 2 meaning the formation of carbon deposition in CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 is avoided. Since the stoichiometric reaction of a CH 4 molecule with oxygen should yield a H 2 /CO ratio of 2.0, ratios higher than 2 indicates the decomposition of CH 4 which would result in the formation of carbon deposition. Furthermore, CO selectivity for LaFeO 3 and 10%CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 materials was also reported to be about 90% during the 30 redox cycles at 800 • C. Syngas yield for 10%CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 (9.72 mmol g −1 ) was found to be much higher than that over the pure LaFeO 3 (5.86 mmol g −1 ) and it is very stable during the redox testing.
## (s12) Co-based oxygen carries
(p12.0) In general, Co has a few oxidation states such as Co 3 O 4 , CoO and Co during the redox operation. At a temperature higher than 1173 K, Co 3 O 4 is unstable and easily convert into CoO. Among the possible metal oxides for chemical looping technology, cobalt shows the highest oxygen transport capability (Hossain and de Lasa 2008). Therefore, Co-based material might be better choice from an oxygen transport capacity point of view. High melting temperature and fast reactivity are other advantages of this type of material. However, their drawbacks include negative health effects and high cost which limits their application in large-scale operations . The existing literature pertaining to the production of syngas from chemical looping technologies over Co-based material remains scarce.

(p12.1) DRM of methane was studied using CeO 2 -supported Co catalyst in a fixed bed reactor by Ayodele et al (2016). Their results revealed that 20 wt% Co/80 wt% CeO 2 has the potential to be used for production of CO-rich hydrogen which is favorable for the production of other value-added chemicals. Li et al (2018a) examined Co catalyst with MgAl support for low-temperature methane reforming and observed that the Co catalyst shows high coke resistance and stable activity due to its lower activity for CH 4 dissociation/decomposition and its stronger metal-support interaction. Guo et al (2020) studied the role of Co in chemical looping using iron oxide as an oxygen carrier at a temperature ranging from 600 to 800 • C. As can be seen in figure 9, the methane conversion increased by around 300% for Co-doped iron oxide compared to pure iron oxide oxygen carriers. Furthermore, Co-doping-induced oxygen vacancy significantly reduces energy barriers of CH 4 reforming on the surface of iron oxide oxygen carriers, leading to reactivity enhancement. 

(p12.2) In general, Co has a few oxidation states such as Co 3 O 4 , CoO and Co during the redox operation. At a temperature higher than 1173 K, Co 3 O 4 is unstable and easily convert into CoO. Among the possible metal oxides for chemical looping technology, cobalt shows the highest oxygen transport capability (Hossain and de Lasa 2008). Therefore, Co-based material might be better choice from an oxygen transport capacity point of view. High melting temperature and fast reactivity are other advantages of this type of material. However, their drawbacks include negative health effects and high cost which limits their application in large-scale operations . The existing literature pertaining to the production of syngas from chemical looping technologies over Co-based material remains scarce.

(p12.3) DRM of methane was studied using CeO 2 -supported Co catalyst in a fixed bed reactor by Ayodele et al (2016). Their results revealed that 20 wt% Co/80 wt% CeO 2 has the potential to be used for production of CO-rich hydrogen which is favorable for the production of other value-added chemicals. Li et al (2018a) examined Co catalyst with MgAl support for low-temperature methane reforming and observed that the Co catalyst shows high coke resistance and stable activity due to its lower activity for CH 4 dissociation/decomposition and its stronger metal-support interaction. Guo et al (2020) studied the role of Co in chemical looping using iron oxide as an oxygen carrier at a temperature ranging from 600 to 800 • C. As can be seen in figure 9, the methane conversion increased by around 300% for Co-doped iron oxide compared to pure iron oxide oxygen carriers. Furthermore, Co-doping-induced oxygen vacancy significantly reduces energy barriers of CH 4 reforming on the surface of iron oxide oxygen carriers, leading to reactivity enhancement. 
## (s15) Thermodynamic analysis
(p15.0) The reduction of metal oxides at different temperatures is important to screen suitable oxygen carrier candidates and operational conditions in CLR. The selection of metal oxides can be made based on a modified Ellingham diagram, where the standard Gibbs free energy change variations with the temperature as shown in figure 12 . A minimization of total Gibbs free energy is a suitable approach to determine the equilibrium compositions of any reacting system. It can be observed that Mn is more easily oxidized compared to Fe and it is thermodynamically favorable for Mn to be oxidized by O 2 to MnO in temperatures up to 1600 • C (de Vos et al 2020a). The complete sequence in order of easiness of oxidation for all transition metals suitable for chemical looping can be ordered as follow Mn > Fe > Co > Ni > Cu. Metals that are more difficult to be oxidized compared to Cu are not suitable for chemical looping since they are not regenerable by air. The metals that are easier to be oxidized compared to Mn become too difficult to reduce with fuel.

(p15.1) Furthermore, the trend from Mn to Cu shows the suitability of the metal/metal oxide pairs for certain chemical looping technologies. While Fe/FeO is more viable for syngas generation by CLR, the transformation between CuO and Cu is utilized much more frequently for chemical looping combustion. As the Gibbs free energy for the oxidation of this Cu/CuO pair is almost zero, it is even eligible for chemical looping with oxygen uncoupling (de Vos et al 2020a). Wang et al (2009) performed the thermodynamics study of glycerol reforming for syngas and H 2 generation. Through the Gibbs free energy minimization method, the optimum conditions were obtained at CO 2 /glycerol ratios of 0-1 with reaction temperatures higher than 702 • C. Reaction at high pressure and CO 2 loading also gives a negative impact on the H 2 and syngas yields. Shah et al (2021) analyzed reforming of methane using Ca 2 Fe 2 O 5 as an oxygen carrier and showed that the change in Gibbs free energy for partial oxidation is much more negative in comparison to that of complete oxidation reaction, indicating partial oxidation of CH 4 using Ca 2 Fe 2 O 5 to form syngas is thermodynamically favored. At temperatures higher than 683 • C, CH 4 reacts with the oxygen carrier to form a limited amount of CO 2 . It was found that the change in Gibbs free energy for partial oxidation of CH 4 using Fe 2 O 3 was less negative compared to Ca 2 Fe 2 O 5 , implying the thermodynamic superiority of the CaO-modified Fe 2 O 3 . 

(p15.2) The reduction of metal oxides at different temperatures is important to screen suitable oxygen carrier candidates and operational conditions in CLR. The selection of metal oxides can be made based on a modified Ellingham diagram, where the standard Gibbs free energy change variations with the temperature as shown in figure 12 . A minimization of total Gibbs free energy is a suitable approach to determine the equilibrium compositions of any reacting system. It can be observed that Mn is more easily oxidized compared to Fe and it is thermodynamically favorable for Mn to be oxidized by O 2 to MnO in temperatures up to 1600 • C (de Vos et al 2020a). The complete sequence in order of easiness of oxidation for all transition metals suitable for chemical looping can be ordered as follow Mn > Fe > Co > Ni > Cu. Metals that are more difficult to be oxidized compared to Cu are not suitable for chemical looping since they are not regenerable by air. The metals that are easier to be oxidized compared to Mn become too difficult to reduce with fuel.

(p15.3) Furthermore, the trend from Mn to Cu shows the suitability of the metal/metal oxide pairs for certain chemical looping technologies. While Fe/FeO is more viable for syngas generation by CLR, the transformation between CuO and Cu is utilized much more frequently for chemical looping combustion. As the Gibbs free energy for the oxidation of this Cu/CuO pair is almost zero, it is even eligible for chemical looping with oxygen uncoupling (de Vos et al 2020a). Wang et al (2009) performed the thermodynamics study of glycerol reforming for syngas and H 2 generation. Through the Gibbs free energy minimization method, the optimum conditions were obtained at CO 2 /glycerol ratios of 0-1 with reaction temperatures higher than 702 • C. Reaction at high pressure and CO 2 loading also gives a negative impact on the H 2 and syngas yields. Shah et al (2021) analyzed reforming of methane using Ca 2 Fe 2 O 5 as an oxygen carrier and showed that the change in Gibbs free energy for partial oxidation is much more negative in comparison to that of complete oxidation reaction, indicating partial oxidation of CH 4 using Ca 2 Fe 2 O 5 to form syngas is thermodynamically favored. At temperatures higher than 683 • C, CH 4 reacts with the oxygen carrier to form a limited amount of CO 2 . It was found that the change in Gibbs free energy for partial oxidation of CH 4 using Fe 2 O 3 was less negative compared to Ca 2 Fe 2 O 5 , implying the thermodynamic superiority of the CaO-modified Fe 2 O 3 . 
## (s39) CLR of methane
(p39.0) Methane is the main component of natural gas and unconventional gas, and methane reforming is a high-efficiency and low-energy approach to methane utilization to satisfy the global demand for energy (Yin et al 2022). The CLR is similar to chemical looping combustion, but instead of full combustion of methane to generate water, CO 2 and heat, the methane is partially oxidized by an oxygen carrier to prepare high-quality syngas, which is suitable for high-value-added downstream chemical products (Adanez et al 2012). Therefore, the concept of CLR targets the production of H 2 + CO by partially oxidizing methane in the fuel reactor by the lattice oxygen of a solid oxygen carrier while the oxygen-depleted material is re-oxidized in an air reactor (Sun et al 2022). The heat generated from the redox reactions is used for the endothermic steam/dry reforming (DRM) of methane to produce H 2 + CO . The CLR consists of two reactors, most commonly fixed beds, moving beds and fluidized beds. To choose the right reactor configuration, several factors such as target heat/mass transfer rates, reaction kinetics, and the desired extent of reduction of the oxygen carriers should be considered (Sun et al 2020). Depending on the ratio of oxygen to fuel and the nature of the oxygen carrier, the following reactions can occur during a methane reforming process that can affect the reactor design and syngas selectivity targets (Sun et al 2020).
## (s42) Recent advances in oxygen carriers for CLR
(p42.0) The solid oxygen carrier materials that are used in chemical looping technologies to transfer oxygen from the air to the fuel have a key role in the success of the process for the production of hydrogen (Hu et al 2021b). In this regard, extensive research has been made toward the development of optimum oxygen carrier materials with improved properties which will be discussed in this section. The oxygen carriers can be divided into two main categories including synthetic materials and natural minerals. Although natural minerals are cheap, their reactivity is usually lower than synthetic oxygen carriers (Adanez et al 2012). Metal oxides of Fe, Ni, Co and Mn with inert support such as TiO 2 , Al 2 O 3 and SiO 2 are the most studied synthetic oxygen carriers in the literature which possess their individual advantages and weaknesses. As chemical looping processes are often operate at high temperatures in industrial application, it is critical to select a suitable oxygen carrier based on its thermal stability to avoid material sintering. The melting temperature of several different transition-state metals and their corresponding oxides have been listed in table 3. In addition, the maximum oxygen transport capacity of oxygen carriers was also given in this table. Oxygen carriers with a low circulation rate are suitable from design simplicity and less circulation power point of view. However, it should be high enough to transport sufficient oxygen for complete fuel oxidation as well as to transport the desired heat in case of an endothermic reaction in the fuel reactor .

(p42.1) To ensure the oxygen carriers have desirable qualities, an understanding of the reaction mechanism and morphological changes during the reaction are needed. The various competing factors such as resistance to toxicity, easy scalability, complete fuel conversion to CO and H 2 , environmental aspects, low cost, availability, high attrition resistance, high conversion rate, and stability under repeated oxidation/reduction, high oxygen-carrying capacity and good heat-carrying capacity should take into account before selection of an appropriate oxygen carrier (Sun et al 2020). However, it is not easy to find a metal oxide that could meet all the above factors. In this regard, supporting materials such as MgAl 2 O 4 , ZrO 2 , SiO 2 , TiO 2 and Al 2 O 3 can be added to metal oxides to improve attrition resistance and mechanical strength. Furthermore, depending on which preparation method is used for oxygen carriers, their properties can change. There are several methods to prepare oxygen carriers including spray pyrolysis, sol-gel, spray drying, pelletizing by extrusion, precipitation, mechanical mixing, impregnation, hydrothermal synthesis, dissolution, freeze granulation, deposition precipitation, co-precipitation and citric acid method ( 

(p42.2) The solid oxygen carrier materials that are used in chemical looping technologies to transfer oxygen from the air to the fuel have a key role in the success of the process for the production of hydrogen (Hu et al 2021b). In this regard, extensive research has been made toward the development of optimum oxygen carrier materials with improved properties which will be discussed in this section. The oxygen carriers can be divided into two main categories including synthetic materials and natural minerals. Although natural minerals are cheap, their reactivity is usually lower than synthetic oxygen carriers (Adanez et al 2012). Metal oxides of Fe, Ni, Co and Mn with inert support such as TiO 2 , Al 2 O 3 and SiO 2 are the most studied synthetic oxygen carriers in the literature which possess their individual advantages and weaknesses. As chemical looping processes are often operate at high temperatures in industrial application, it is critical to select a suitable oxygen carrier based on its thermal stability to avoid material sintering. The melting temperature of several different transition-state metals and their corresponding oxides have been listed in table 3. In addition, the maximum oxygen transport capacity of oxygen carriers was also given in this table. Oxygen carriers with a low circulation rate are suitable from design simplicity and less circulation power point of view. However, it should be high enough to transport sufficient oxygen for complete fuel oxidation as well as to transport the desired heat in case of an endothermic reaction in the fuel reactor .

(p42.3) To ensure the oxygen carriers have desirable qualities, an understanding of the reaction mechanism and morphological changes during the reaction are needed. The various competing factors such as resistance to toxicity, easy scalability, complete fuel conversion to CO and H 2 , environmental aspects, low cost, availability, high attrition resistance, high conversion rate, and stability under repeated oxidation/reduction, high oxygen-carrying capacity and good heat-carrying capacity should take into account before selection of an appropriate oxygen carrier (Sun et al 2020). However, it is not easy to find a metal oxide that could meet all the above factors. In this regard, supporting materials such as MgAl 2 O 4 , ZrO 2 , SiO 2 , TiO 2 and Al 2 O 3 can be added to metal oxides to improve attrition resistance and mechanical strength. Furthermore, depending on which preparation method is used for oxygen carriers, their properties can change. There are several methods to prepare oxygen carriers including spray pyrolysis, sol-gel, spray drying, pelletizing by extrusion, precipitation, mechanical mixing, impregnation, hydrothermal synthesis, dissolution, freeze granulation, deposition precipitation, co-precipitation and citric acid method ( 
## (s43) Ni-based oxygen carriers
(p43.0) Using nickel-based oxygen carriers for chemical looping concepts has attracted considerable attention from many researchers due to their low cost, high catalytic activity, outstanding oxygen transfer capacity (0.21 g O 2 /g NiO) and great thermal stability (Roslan et al 2020). The excellent catalytic activity of Ni has been associated with its remarkable ability for breaking the C-C bonds. Ni-based oxygen carriers were the first materials employed for demonstrating the viability of chemical looping as a carbon capture technology. The presence of nickel helps to promote the water-gas shift reaction, leading to an increase in hydrogen production. Nevertheless, they suffer from several limitations such as toxicity and coke formation on the catalyst surface, leading to blockage of nickel active sites and deactivation. A comparison between the reactivity of NiO, Mn 2 O 3 , Fe 2 O 3 and CuO metal oxides showed that the reactivity of NiO with methane is the highest while Fe 2 O 3 offer the lowest reactivity followed by CuO (Zafar et al 2005). In addition, NiO/SiO 2 exhibit the highest selectivity toward hydrogen production compared to others. The reason for the low reaction rate of CuO/SiO 2 is the decomposition of CuO to Cu 2 O during the inert period following the oxidation, which means that less oxygen is available for the oxidation of the fuel. It was reported that the implementation of CO 2 sorption in CLR can increase the purity of hydrogen by more than 90% and decrease the operating temperature, resulting in an improvement in the stability of the Ni. The performance of Ni-based material depends significantly on metal supports that are used in catalyst preparation. It was shown that a high activity can be determined using MgAl 2 O 4 as metal support. Metal supports of SiO 2 and Al 2 O 3 are better candidates in terms of high temperature stability (Nieva et al 2014).

(p43.1) In CLR processes, material deactivation caused by carbon deposition is one of the main issues. The several techniques such as using dry impregnation method to prepare catalyst, the addition of a small amount of alkali metals (K, Mg, Ca), type of support and the addition of a small amount of steam to the reactor were proposed in the literature to reduce carbon deposition on the material surface (Elias et al 2013). For example, it was found that ceria-supported catalyst exhibits the lower carbon deposition compared to MgO, TiO 2 . Ceria establishes a better interaction with the Ni active phase, which causes a higher metal dispersion and inherently available surface area.

(p43.2) Tavanarad et al (2021) employed 15 wt% Ni supported on Al 2 O 3 with 3 wt% promoters such as MgO, CaO, SrO, and BaO in the glycerol reforming. Figure 6 shows glycerol conversion of Ni catalysts at a temperature range from 600 to 750 • C with and without promoters. As can be seen from the figure, all promoters increased the glycerol conversion and among them, SrO exhibited the highest glycerol conversion. The authors explained that this improvement could be related to the adsorption of CO 2 on the catalysts and the smaller crystallite sizes of the promoted catalysts. Furthermore, higher glycerol conversion on the promoted catalysts can be attributed to the enhanced basic properties of the catalysts. The addition of alkaline earth metal oxide promoters improves the adsorption of CO 2 on the catalysts and inhibits the Boudouard reaction, and suppresses the coke formation. The temperature showed a significant effect on glycerol conversion as it increases when temperature increases from 600 to 750 • C due to endothermic nature of the reaction.   

(p43.3) Using nickel-based oxygen carriers for chemical looping concepts has attracted considerable attention from many researchers due to their low cost, high catalytic activity, outstanding oxygen transfer capacity (0.21 g O 2 /g NiO) and great thermal stability (Roslan et al 2020). The excellent catalytic activity of Ni has been associated with its remarkable ability for breaking the C-C bonds. Ni-based oxygen carriers were the first materials employed for demonstrating the viability of chemical looping as a carbon capture technology. The presence of nickel helps to promote the water-gas shift reaction, leading to an increase in hydrogen production. Nevertheless, they suffer from several limitations such as toxicity and coke formation on the catalyst surface, leading to blockage of nickel active sites and deactivation. A comparison between the reactivity of NiO, Mn 2 O 3 , Fe 2 O 3 and CuO metal oxides showed that the reactivity of NiO with methane is the highest while Fe 2 O 3 offer the lowest reactivity followed by CuO (Zafar et al 2005). In addition, NiO/SiO 2 exhibit the highest selectivity toward hydrogen production compared to others. The reason for the low reaction rate of CuO/SiO 2 is the decomposition of CuO to Cu 2 O during the inert period following the oxidation, which means that less oxygen is available for the oxidation of the fuel. It was reported that the implementation of CO 2 sorption in CLR can increase the purity of hydrogen by more than 90% and decrease the operating temperature, resulting in an improvement in the stability of the Ni. The performance of Ni-based material depends significantly on metal supports that are used in catalyst preparation. It was shown that a high activity can be determined using MgAl 2 O 4 as metal support. Metal supports of SiO 2 and Al 2 O 3 are better candidates in terms of high temperature stability (Nieva et al 2014).

(p43.4) In CLR processes, material deactivation caused by carbon deposition is one of the main issues. The several techniques such as using dry impregnation method to prepare catalyst, the addition of a small amount of alkali metals (K, Mg, Ca), type of support and the addition of a small amount of steam to the reactor were proposed in the literature to reduce carbon deposition on the material surface (Elias et al 2013). For example, it was found that ceria-supported catalyst exhibits the lower carbon deposition compared to MgO, TiO 2 . Ceria establishes a better interaction with the Ni active phase, which causes a higher metal dispersion and inherently available surface area.

(p43.5) Tavanarad et al (2021) employed 15 wt% Ni supported on Al 2 O 3 with 3 wt% promoters such as MgO, CaO, SrO, and BaO in the glycerol reforming. Figure 6 shows glycerol conversion of Ni catalysts at a temperature range from 600 to 750 • C with and without promoters. As can be seen from the figure, all promoters increased the glycerol conversion and among them, SrO exhibited the highest glycerol conversion. The authors explained that this improvement could be related to the adsorption of CO 2 on the catalysts and the smaller crystallite sizes of the promoted catalysts. Furthermore, higher glycerol conversion on the promoted catalysts can be attributed to the enhanced basic properties of the catalysts. The addition of alkaline earth metal oxide promoters improves the adsorption of CO 2 on the catalysts and inhibits the Boudouard reaction, and suppresses the coke formation. The temperature showed a significant effect on glycerol conversion as it increases when temperature increases from 600 to 750 • C due to endothermic nature of the reaction.   
## (s44) Fe-based oxygen carriers
(p44.0) The environment friendliness, low price and good redox properties make iron-based oxygen carriers an attractive candidate for the chemical looping process (Lu et al 2021). Furthermore, iron-based materials exhibit high melting points, and high mechanical strength and have no tendency for carbon formation or sulphide/sulphate formation. Although they offer acceptable reactivity for hydrogen and carbon monoxide, they have weak reactivity for methane (Yu et al 2019). Similar to other oxygen carriers, iron-based materials also have a few drawbacks including low oxygen transport capacity and the complexity of heat management due to their endothermic nature (Li et al 2019b). Moreover, ash compositions could react with an iron oxygen carrier which results in sintering and agglomeration (Bao et al 2014). Generally, iron-based oxygen carriers are composed of primary iron oxide for lattice oxygen storage and ceramic support for improved redox stability and activity. Evolution of iron oxide during reforming and reduction was given in figure 7. During the reduction step, Fe 2 O 3 is reduced by gaseous fuel in order to desorb oxygen for CO 2 formation and obtain adequate active sites for catalytic DRM of methane. In the DRM step, CH 4 and CO 2 gases are fed and the catalyst reaction of DRM and POM occur on the active site for syngas production along with oxygen migration. Iron-based oxygen carriers exhibit the maximum capacity for oxygen adsorption and the highest resistance against sintering compared to Co, Cu and Mn-based oxygen carriers. The optimum temperature of cobalt, magnesium, copper and iron metal oxides supported on alumina are 1298 K, 1073 K, 1303 K and 1173 K, respectively (Forutan et al 2015). Lu et al (2021) studied the behavior of magnetite with Fe 3 O 4 in reforming of methane and observed that the temperature rise is beneficial to the reduction of iron oxide in the fuel reactor. Guerrero-Caballero et al (2019) performed a comparative study on several ceria-based oxygen carriers such as Ni, Co and Fe in reforming of methane. It was found that at a temperature around 873 K, Co/CeO 2 shows promising results while Fe-based oxygen carrier exhibits better performance at higher temperatures. Therefore, iron-based material might be a better candidate than nickel in terms of toxicity and environmental reasons. Solunke and Veser (2010) claimed that iron metal oxide is the best option from a melting point, cost, toxicity and reduction cycle point of view. The deactivation of iron oxide over multiple redox cycles is one of their limitations which leads to a decrease in CO selectivity. Moreover, the formation of CO 2 during the reduction of Fe 2 O 3 to Fe 3 O 4 leads to a decrease in CO selectivity and the productivity of value-added fuels generated. The combination Fe and Ce has been suggested by several researchers due to positive effect of the addition of Ce (García-García and Metcalfe 2021). It was reported that Fe-Ce mixed oxides produce pure hydrogen and high-quality syngas due to a strong interaction between CeO 2 and Fe 2 O 3 species which greatly enhances the mobility of oxygen in the Ce-Fe and improves the oxygen vacancies through the formation of CeFeO 3 phases. Furthermore, the addition of CeO 2 to Fe oxide leads to higher hydrogen and CO yields due to synergetic interaction between both cerium and iron oxides and the formation of a peruskite type oxide. Therefore, by controlling the amount of metal oxide in the mixture, product selectivity can be adjusted.

(p44.1) The environment friendliness, low price and good redox properties make iron-based oxygen carriers an attractive candidate for the chemical looping process (Lu et al 2021). Furthermore, iron-based materials exhibit high melting points, and high mechanical strength and have no tendency for carbon formation or sulphide/sulphate formation. Although they offer acceptable reactivity for hydrogen and carbon monoxide, they have weak reactivity for methane (Yu et al 2019). Similar to other oxygen carriers, iron-based materials also have a few drawbacks including low oxygen transport capacity and the complexity of heat management due to their endothermic nature (Li et al 2019b). Moreover, ash compositions could react with an iron oxygen carrier which results in sintering and agglomeration (Bao et al 2014). Generally, iron-based oxygen carriers are composed of primary iron oxide for lattice oxygen storage and ceramic support for improved redox stability and activity. Evolution of iron oxide during reforming and reduction was given in figure 7. During the reduction step, Fe 2 O 3 is reduced by gaseous fuel in order to desorb oxygen for CO 2 formation and obtain adequate active sites for catalytic DRM of methane. In the DRM step, CH 4 and CO 2 gases are fed and the catalyst reaction of DRM and POM occur on the active site for syngas production along with oxygen migration. Iron-based oxygen carriers exhibit the maximum capacity for oxygen adsorption and the highest resistance against sintering compared to Co, Cu and Mn-based oxygen carriers. The optimum temperature of cobalt, magnesium, copper and iron metal oxides supported on alumina are 1298 K, 1073 K, 1303 K and 1173 K, respectively (Forutan et al 2015). Lu et al (2021) studied the behavior of magnetite with Fe 3 O 4 in reforming of methane and observed that the temperature rise is beneficial to the reduction of iron oxide in the fuel reactor. Guerrero-Caballero et al (2019) performed a comparative study on several ceria-based oxygen carriers such as Ni, Co and Fe in reforming of methane. It was found that at a temperature around 873 K, Co/CeO 2 shows promising results while Fe-based oxygen carrier exhibits better performance at higher temperatures. Therefore, iron-based material might be a better candidate than nickel in terms of toxicity and environmental reasons. Solunke and Veser (2010) claimed that iron metal oxide is the best option from a melting point, cost, toxicity and reduction cycle point of view. The deactivation of iron oxide over multiple redox cycles is one of their limitations which leads to a decrease in CO selectivity. Moreover, the formation of CO 2 during the reduction of Fe 2 O 3 to Fe 3 O 4 leads to a decrease in CO selectivity and the productivity of value-added fuels generated. The combination Fe and Ce has been suggested by several researchers due to positive effect of the addition of Ce (García-García and Metcalfe 2021). It was reported that Fe-Ce mixed oxides produce pure hydrogen and high-quality syngas due to a strong interaction between CeO 2 and Fe 2 O 3 species which greatly enhances the mobility of oxygen in the Ce-Fe and improves the oxygen vacancies through the formation of CeFeO 3 phases. Furthermore, the addition of CeO 2 to Fe oxide leads to higher hydrogen and CO yields due to synergetic interaction between both cerium and iron oxides and the formation of a peruskite type oxide. Therefore, by controlling the amount of metal oxide in the mixture, product selectivity can be adjusted.
## (s45) Cu-based oxygen carriers
(p45.0) Cu-based oxygen carriers with attractive properties have been widely studied in the literature. Great oxygen transport capacity, low toxicity, high reactivity in both reduction and oxidation cycles as well as moderate cost make Cu-based materials one of the most known oxygen carriers in chemical looping processes (Abad et al 2007). One of the interesting advantages of this type of material is that reduction and oxidation reactions are exothermic which results in no heat supply energy requirement in the reduction reactor. Furthermore, sulphurous impurities in the fuel do not significantly affect the properties of Cu oxygen carriers (Forero et al 2010). However, the main issue with Cu-based material is their relatively low melting point which results in agglomeration problems.

(p45.1) Agglomeration of oxygen carriers usually occurs when particles of oxygen carriers adhere to one another and form clusters which results in a reduction in material stability and reaction rate. To make Cu-based material a more attractive oxygen carrier, it is essential to improve its performance at high temperatures. This can be achieved using different preparation methods and addition inert supports.
## (s46) Ce-based oxygen carriers
(p46.0) In the DRM of methane process, good resistance to coke is critical for catalysts and favorable from an economic point of view. Ceria-based catalysts exhibit high resistance to coke formation and have unique redox properties. Thanks to its great redox capacity, ceria is the most interesting oxide in the chemical looping POM (Li et al 2019a). Furthermore, CeO 2 is very attractive in chemical looping due to the formation of Ce 3+ sites and CeO 2 oxygen vacancies, which improves the performance of various reactions. Jang et al (2014) used ZrO 2 as support for CeO 2 and indicated an improvement in temperature stability, redox performance and oxygen storage capacity. The production of syngas and hydrogen on CeO 2 -ZrO 2 was found to be about twice that of pure CeO 2 and not race of carbon deposition was observed. Zheng et al (2017) used LaFeO 3 -supported CeO 2 as an oxygen carrier and their results revealed that the presence of CeO 2 improves the resistance toward carbon deposition formation, and this allows the oxygen carrier own high available oxygen storage capacity. As shown in figure 8, pure LaFeO 3 exhibits H 2 /CO ratio of around 2.4 in the produced syngas while CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 showed H 2 /CO ratio near 2 meaning the formation of carbon deposition in CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 is avoided. Since the stoichiometric reaction of a CH 4 molecule with oxygen should yield a H 2 /CO ratio of 2.0, ratios higher than 2 indicates the decomposition of CH 4 which would result in the formation of carbon deposition. Furthermore, CO selectivity for LaFeO 3 and 10%CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 materials was also reported to be about 90% during the 30 redox cycles at 800 • C. Syngas yield for 10%CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 (9.72 mmol g −1 ) was found to be much higher than that over the pure LaFeO 3 (5.86 mmol g −1 ) and it is very stable during the redox testing.

(p46.1) In the DRM of methane process, good resistance to coke is critical for catalysts and favorable from an economic point of view. Ceria-based catalysts exhibit high resistance to coke formation and have unique redox properties. Thanks to its great redox capacity, ceria is the most interesting oxide in the chemical looping POM (Li et al 2019a). Furthermore, CeO 2 is very attractive in chemical looping due to the formation of Ce 3+ sites and CeO 2 oxygen vacancies, which improves the performance of various reactions. Jang et al (2014) used ZrO 2 as support for CeO 2 and indicated an improvement in temperature stability, redox performance and oxygen storage capacity. The production of syngas and hydrogen on CeO 2 -ZrO 2 was found to be about twice that of pure CeO 2 and not race of carbon deposition was observed. Zheng et al (2017) used LaFeO 3 -supported CeO 2 as an oxygen carrier and their results revealed that the presence of CeO 2 improves the resistance toward carbon deposition formation, and this allows the oxygen carrier own high available oxygen storage capacity. As shown in figure 8, pure LaFeO 3 exhibits H 2 /CO ratio of around 2.4 in the produced syngas while CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 showed H 2 /CO ratio near 2 meaning the formation of carbon deposition in CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 is avoided. Since the stoichiometric reaction of a CH 4 molecule with oxygen should yield a H 2 /CO ratio of 2.0, ratios higher than 2 indicates the decomposition of CH 4 which would result in the formation of carbon deposition. Furthermore, CO selectivity for LaFeO 3 and 10%CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 materials was also reported to be about 90% during the 30 redox cycles at 800 • C. Syngas yield for 10%CeO 2 /LaFeO 3 (9.72 mmol g −1 ) was found to be much higher than that over the pure LaFeO 3 (5.86 mmol g −1 ) and it is very stable during the redox testing.
## (s48) Co-based oxygen carries
(p48.0) In general, Co has a few oxidation states such as Co 3 O 4 , CoO and Co during the redox operation. At a temperature higher than 1173 K, Co 3 O 4 is unstable and easily convert into CoO. Among the possible metal oxides for chemical looping technology, cobalt shows the highest oxygen transport capability (Hossain and de Lasa 2008). Therefore, Co-based material might be better choice from an oxygen transport capacity point of view. High melting temperature and fast reactivity are other advantages of this type of material. However, their drawbacks include negative health effects and high cost which limits their application in large-scale operations . The existing literature pertaining to the production of syngas from chemical looping technologies over Co-based material remains scarce.

(p48.1) DRM of methane was studied using CeO 2 -supported Co catalyst in a fixed bed reactor by Ayodele et al (2016). Their results revealed that 20 wt% Co/80 wt% CeO 2 has the potential to be used for production of CO-rich hydrogen which is favorable for the production of other value-added chemicals. Li et al (2018a) examined Co catalyst with MgAl support for low-temperature methane reforming and observed that the Co catalyst shows high coke resistance and stable activity due to its lower activity for CH 4 dissociation/decomposition and its stronger metal-support interaction. Guo et al (2020) studied the role of Co in chemical looping using iron oxide as an oxygen carrier at a temperature ranging from 600 to 800 • C. As can be seen in figure 9, the methane conversion increased by around 300% for Co-doped iron oxide compared to pure iron oxide oxygen carriers. Furthermore, Co-doping-induced oxygen vacancy significantly reduces energy barriers of CH 4 reforming on the surface of iron oxide oxygen carriers, leading to reactivity enhancement. 

(p48.2) In general, Co has a few oxidation states such as Co 3 O 4 , CoO and Co during the redox operation. At a temperature higher than 1173 K, Co 3 O 4 is unstable and easily convert into CoO. Among the possible metal oxides for chemical looping technology, cobalt shows the highest oxygen transport capability (Hossain and de Lasa 2008). Therefore, Co-based material might be better choice from an oxygen transport capacity point of view. High melting temperature and fast reactivity are other advantages of this type of material. However, their drawbacks include negative health effects and high cost which limits their application in large-scale operations . The existing literature pertaining to the production of syngas from chemical looping technologies over Co-based material remains scarce.

(p48.3) DRM of methane was studied using CeO 2 -supported Co catalyst in a fixed bed reactor by Ayodele et al (2016). Their results revealed that 20 wt% Co/80 wt% CeO 2 has the potential to be used for production of CO-rich hydrogen which is favorable for the production of other value-added chemicals. Li et al (2018a) examined Co catalyst with MgAl support for low-temperature methane reforming and observed that the Co catalyst shows high coke resistance and stable activity due to its lower activity for CH 4 dissociation/decomposition and its stronger metal-support interaction. Guo et al (2020) studied the role of Co in chemical looping using iron oxide as an oxygen carrier at a temperature ranging from 600 to 800 • C. As can be seen in figure 9, the methane conversion increased by around 300% for Co-doped iron oxide compared to pure iron oxide oxygen carriers. Furthermore, Co-doping-induced oxygen vacancy significantly reduces energy barriers of CH 4 reforming on the surface of iron oxide oxygen carriers, leading to reactivity enhancement. 
## (s51) Thermodynamic analysis
(p51.0) The reduction of metal oxides at different temperatures is important to screen suitable oxygen carrier candidates and operational conditions in CLR. The selection of metal oxides can be made based on a modified Ellingham diagram, where the standard Gibbs free energy change variations with the temperature as shown in figure 12 . A minimization of total Gibbs free energy is a suitable approach to determine the equilibrium compositions of any reacting system. It can be observed that Mn is more easily oxidized compared to Fe and it is thermodynamically favorable for Mn to be oxidized by O 2 to MnO in temperatures up to 1600 • C (de Vos et al 2020a). The complete sequence in order of easiness of oxidation for all transition metals suitable for chemical looping can be ordered as follow Mn > Fe > Co > Ni > Cu. Metals that are more difficult to be oxidized compared to Cu are not suitable for chemical looping since they are not regenerable by air. The metals that are easier to be oxidized compared to Mn become too difficult to reduce with fuel.

(p51.1) Furthermore, the trend from Mn to Cu shows the suitability of the metal/metal oxide pairs for certain chemical looping technologies. While Fe/FeO is more viable for syngas generation by CLR, the transformation between CuO and Cu is utilized much more frequently for chemical looping combustion. As the Gibbs free energy for the oxidation of this Cu/CuO pair is almost zero, it is even eligible for chemical looping with oxygen uncoupling (de Vos et al 2020a). Wang et al (2009) performed the thermodynamics study of glycerol reforming for syngas and H 2 generation. Through the Gibbs free energy minimization method, the optimum conditions were obtained at CO 2 /glycerol ratios of 0-1 with reaction temperatures higher than 702 • C. Reaction at high pressure and CO 2 loading also gives a negative impact on the H 2 and syngas yields. Shah et al (2021) analyzed reforming of methane using Ca 2 Fe 2 O 5 as an oxygen carrier and showed that the change in Gibbs free energy for partial oxidation is much more negative in comparison to that of complete oxidation reaction, indicating partial oxidation of CH 4 using Ca 2 Fe 2 O 5 to form syngas is thermodynamically favored. At temperatures higher than 683 • C, CH 4 reacts with the oxygen carrier to form a limited amount of CO 2 . It was found that the change in Gibbs free energy for partial oxidation of CH 4 using Fe 2 O 3 was less negative compared to Ca 2 Fe 2 O 5 , implying the thermodynamic superiority of the CaO-modified Fe 2 O 3 . 

(p51.2) The reduction of metal oxides at different temperatures is important to screen suitable oxygen carrier candidates and operational conditions in CLR. The selection of metal oxides can be made based on a modified Ellingham diagram, where the standard Gibbs free energy change variations with the temperature as shown in figure 12 . A minimization of total Gibbs free energy is a suitable approach to determine the equilibrium compositions of any reacting system. It can be observed that Mn is more easily oxidized compared to Fe and it is thermodynamically favorable for Mn to be oxidized by O 2 to MnO in temperatures up to 1600 • C (de Vos et al 2020a). The complete sequence in order of easiness of oxidation for all transition metals suitable for chemical looping can be ordered as follow Mn > Fe > Co > Ni > Cu. Metals that are more difficult to be oxidized compared to Cu are not suitable for chemical looping since they are not regenerable by air. The metals that are easier to be oxidized compared to Mn become too difficult to reduce with fuel.

(p51.3) Furthermore, the trend from Mn to Cu shows the suitability of the metal/metal oxide pairs for certain chemical looping technologies. While Fe/FeO is more viable for syngas generation by CLR, the transformation between CuO and Cu is utilized much more frequently for chemical looping combustion. As the Gibbs free energy for the oxidation of this Cu/CuO pair is almost zero, it is even eligible for chemical looping with oxygen uncoupling (de Vos et al 2020a). Wang et al (2009) performed the thermodynamics study of glycerol reforming for syngas and H 2 generation. Through the Gibbs free energy minimization method, the optimum conditions were obtained at CO 2 /glycerol ratios of 0-1 with reaction temperatures higher than 702 • C. Reaction at high pressure and CO 2 loading also gives a negative impact on the H 2 and syngas yields. Shah et al (2021) analyzed reforming of methane using Ca 2 Fe 2 O 5 as an oxygen carrier and showed that the change in Gibbs free energy for partial oxidation is much more negative in comparison to that of complete oxidation reaction, indicating partial oxidation of CH 4 using Ca 2 Fe 2 O 5 to form syngas is thermodynamically favored. At temperatures higher than 683 • C, CH 4 reacts with the oxygen carrier to form a limited amount of CO 2 . It was found that the change in Gibbs free energy for partial oxidation of CH 4 using Fe 2 O 3 was less negative compared to Ca 2 Fe 2 O 5 , implying the thermodynamic superiority of the CaO-modified Fe 2 O 3 . 
