# Automated phenotyping of plant shoots using imaging methods for analysis of plant stress responses -a review

CorpusID: 255955770 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7524896047766cdfc9db363bfc4dce955997e86c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7524896047766cdfc9db363bfc4dce955997e86c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Recently, a large number of reviews have been published on the advantages and possibilities of high-throughput plant phenotyping approaches [1][2][3][4][5]. Most focus on the potential of these approaches which use precise and sophisticated tools and methodologies to study plant growth and development. To review the state-of-the-art of phenotyping platforms, we present a list of recent publications in Table 1. Interestingly, in about a half of these, only one measuring tool, mostly RGB imaging, for plant phenotyping was used. In the other papers, integrative phenotyping, signifying two or more measuring tools but which are rarely automated, was used (Table 1). This illustrates that the integrative automated highthroughput phenotyping measurements/platforms are still rather rare. Greenhouse-and grow chamber-based plant phenotyping platforms are publically available and these offer their services and collaborative projects. Descriptions, methodological background and focus can be found at http://www.plant-phenotyping-network.eu/eppn/ select_installation. As an example of the integrative automated high-throughput phenotyping platform, a grow chamber-based phenotyping facility installed at Palacký University in Olomouc, Czech Republic is presented in Figure 1.

(p0.1) High-throughput integrative phenotyping facilities provide an opportunity to combine various methods of automated, simultaneous, non-destructive analyses of plant growth, morphology and physiology, providing a complex picture of the plant growth and vigour in one run, and repeatedly during the plant's life-span. Particular methods used in integrative plant phenotyping are often not new and usually represent those which have already been used for a number of years in basic research, e.g. noninvasive methods that employ visible or fluorescence imaging (described in more detail further in the text). High-throughput then allows analysis of the plants on a large scale. This enables users to apply statistics to discover subtle but significant differences between the studied genotypes and treatment variants.

(p0.2) The potential users of such facilities, mostly biologists, are often not very familiar with the applied physical methods used in integrative plant phenotyping. Thus, in this mini-review, we present a simple introduction to the basis of various non-invasive sensors used in highthroughput phenotyping platforms, namely visible redgreen-blue (RGB) imaging, chlorophyll fluorescence imaging (CFIM), thermoimaging, and hyperspectral imaging. Further, we describe potential applications of some of the phenotyping methods that have been used to study the responses of different plant species to various stresses.

(p0.3) Recently, a large number of reviews have been published on the advantages and possibilities of high-throughput plant phenotyping approaches [1][2][3][4][5]. Most focus on the potential of these approaches which use precise and sophisticated tools and methodologies to study plant growth and development. To review the state-of-the-art of phenotyping platforms, we present a list of recent publications in Table 1. Interestingly, in about a half of these, only one measuring tool, mostly RGB imaging, for plant phenotyping was used. In the other papers, integrative phenotyping, signifying two or more measuring tools but which are rarely automated, was used (Table 1). This illustrates that the integrative automated highthroughput phenotyping measurements/platforms are still rather rare. Greenhouse-and grow chamber-based plant phenotyping platforms are publically available and these offer their services and collaborative projects. Descriptions, methodological background and focus can be found at http://www.plant-phenotyping-network.eu/eppn/ select_installation. As an example of the integrative automated high-throughput phenotyping platform, a grow chamber-based phenotyping facility installed at Palacký University in Olomouc, Czech Republic is presented in Figure 1.

(p0.4) High-throughput integrative phenotyping facilities provide an opportunity to combine various methods of automated, simultaneous, non-destructive analyses of plant growth, morphology and physiology, providing a complex picture of the plant growth and vigour in one run, and repeatedly during the plant's life-span. Particular methods used in integrative plant phenotyping are often not new and usually represent those which have already been used for a number of years in basic research, e.g. noninvasive methods that employ visible or fluorescence imaging (described in more detail further in the text). High-throughput then allows analysis of the plants on a large scale. This enables users to apply statistics to discover subtle but significant differences between the studied genotypes and treatment variants.

(p0.5) The potential users of such facilities, mostly biologists, are often not very familiar with the applied physical methods used in integrative plant phenotyping. Thus, in this mini-review, we present a simple introduction to the basis of various non-invasive sensors used in highthroughput phenotyping platforms, namely visible redgreen-blue (RGB) imaging, chlorophyll fluorescence imaging (CFIM), thermoimaging, and hyperspectral imaging. Further, we describe potential applications of some of the phenotyping methods that have been used to study the responses of different plant species to various stresses.
## (s1) Non-destructive analysis of growth and physiology of plant shoots
(p1.0) The methods for automated phenotyping and their aims have been reviewed in a number of recent reports [3,6,7]. In the following text we give a description of the basis of the automated non-invasive analysis of plant 

(p1.1) The methods for automated phenotyping and their aims have been reviewed in a number of recent reports [3,6,7]. In the following text we give a description of the basis of the automated non-invasive analysis of plant 
## (s2) Visible RGB imaging of plant shoots
(p2.0) Apart from the importance of root-growth analysis, a key descriptive parameter in plant physiology is the growth of plant shoots. Although there are numerous secondary traits describing the morphology of shoots in particular species and their developmental stages, the primary and universal trait is biomass formation. Shoot biomass is defined as the total mass of all the aboveground plant parts at a given point in a plant's life [8]. This trait can be easily assessed by a simple weighing of the fresh (FW) and dry (DW) masses. However, this involves the destruction of the measured plant thus only allowing end-point analyses. Similarly, leaf area and consequently the plant growth rate are usually determined by manual measurements of the dimensions of plant leaves [9][10][11]. Such measurements are highly time consuming and thus cannot be used for large scale experiments. For this reason, plant phenotyping facilities prefer to evaluate the growth rate using imaging methods which employ digital cameras with subsequent software image analysis. This enables a faster and more precise determination of the leaf area [12][13][14] and other parameters called projected area (Figure 2), or hull area in the case of monocots [15,16]. In general, non-invasive techniques of shoot growth determination have proven very reliable, and high correlations between the digital area and the shoot fresh, or dry weights, respectively, Figure 1 Scheme of the grow chamber-based automated high-throughput phenotyping platform PlantScreen™ (Photons Systems Instruments, Brno, Czech Republic), installed at Palacký University in Olomouc, Czech Republic [20]. The system is located in a growth chamber with white LED illumination (max. 1000 μmol photons m −2 s −1 ) and controlled environment (10 -40°C, 30 -99% relative humidity). The growth area with roller conveyer has capacity of up to 640 Arabidopsis, cereals and other crops grown in standardized pots. The measuring cabinet contains acclimation chamber for dark adaptation of plants coupled with an automated weighting and watering area. The cabinet is equipped with KCFIM and RGB imaging (top and 2 side views), thermoimaging (IR) to measure stomata openness and SWIR hyperspectral imaging to determine water content. The platform can be controlled either from the place or via remote control software. The operating software enables automatic data evaluation.
## (s11) Introduction
(p11.0) Recently, a large number of reviews have been published on the advantages and possibilities of high-throughput plant phenotyping approaches [1][2][3][4][5]. Most focus on the potential of these approaches which use precise and sophisticated tools and methodologies to study plant growth and development. To review the state-of-the-art of phenotyping platforms, we present a list of recent publications in Table 1. Interestingly, in about a half of these, only one measuring tool, mostly RGB imaging, for plant phenotyping was used. In the other papers, integrative phenotyping, signifying two or more measuring tools but which are rarely automated, was used (Table 1). This illustrates that the integrative automated highthroughput phenotyping measurements/platforms are still rather rare. Greenhouse-and grow chamber-based plant phenotyping platforms are publically available and these offer their services and collaborative projects. Descriptions, methodological background and focus can be found at http://www.plant-phenotyping-network.eu/eppn/ select_installation. As an example of the integrative automated high-throughput phenotyping platform, a grow chamber-based phenotyping facility installed at Palacký University in Olomouc, Czech Republic is presented in Figure 1.

(p11.1) High-throughput integrative phenotyping facilities provide an opportunity to combine various methods of automated, simultaneous, non-destructive analyses of plant growth, morphology and physiology, providing a complex picture of the plant growth and vigour in one run, and repeatedly during the plant's life-span. Particular methods used in integrative plant phenotyping are often not new and usually represent those which have already been used for a number of years in basic research, e.g. noninvasive methods that employ visible or fluorescence imaging (described in more detail further in the text). High-throughput then allows analysis of the plants on a large scale. This enables users to apply statistics to discover subtle but significant differences between the studied genotypes and treatment variants.

(p11.2) The potential users of such facilities, mostly biologists, are often not very familiar with the applied physical methods used in integrative plant phenotyping. Thus, in this mini-review, we present a simple introduction to the basis of various non-invasive sensors used in highthroughput phenotyping platforms, namely visible redgreen-blue (RGB) imaging, chlorophyll fluorescence imaging (CFIM), thermoimaging, and hyperspectral imaging. Further, we describe potential applications of some of the phenotyping methods that have been used to study the responses of different plant species to various stresses.

(p11.3) Recently, a large number of reviews have been published on the advantages and possibilities of high-throughput plant phenotyping approaches [1][2][3][4][5]. Most focus on the potential of these approaches which use precise and sophisticated tools and methodologies to study plant growth and development. To review the state-of-the-art of phenotyping platforms, we present a list of recent publications in Table 1. Interestingly, in about a half of these, only one measuring tool, mostly RGB imaging, for plant phenotyping was used. In the other papers, integrative phenotyping, signifying two or more measuring tools but which are rarely automated, was used (Table 1). This illustrates that the integrative automated highthroughput phenotyping measurements/platforms are still rather rare. Greenhouse-and grow chamber-based plant phenotyping platforms are publically available and these offer their services and collaborative projects. Descriptions, methodological background and focus can be found at http://www.plant-phenotyping-network.eu/eppn/ select_installation. As an example of the integrative automated high-throughput phenotyping platform, a grow chamber-based phenotyping facility installed at Palacký University in Olomouc, Czech Republic is presented in Figure 1.

(p11.4) High-throughput integrative phenotyping facilities provide an opportunity to combine various methods of automated, simultaneous, non-destructive analyses of plant growth, morphology and physiology, providing a complex picture of the plant growth and vigour in one run, and repeatedly during the plant's life-span. Particular methods used in integrative plant phenotyping are often not new and usually represent those which have already been used for a number of years in basic research, e.g. noninvasive methods that employ visible or fluorescence imaging (described in more detail further in the text). High-throughput then allows analysis of the plants on a large scale. This enables users to apply statistics to discover subtle but significant differences between the studied genotypes and treatment variants.

(p11.5) The potential users of such facilities, mostly biologists, are often not very familiar with the applied physical methods used in integrative plant phenotyping. Thus, in this mini-review, we present a simple introduction to the basis of various non-invasive sensors used in highthroughput phenotyping platforms, namely visible redgreen-blue (RGB) imaging, chlorophyll fluorescence imaging (CFIM), thermoimaging, and hyperspectral imaging. Further, we describe potential applications of some of the phenotyping methods that have been used to study the responses of different plant species to various stresses.
## (s12) Non-destructive analysis of growth and physiology of plant shoots
(p12.0) The methods for automated phenotyping and their aims have been reviewed in a number of recent reports [3,6,7]. In the following text we give a description of the basis of the automated non-invasive analysis of plant 

(p12.1) The methods for automated phenotyping and their aims have been reviewed in a number of recent reports [3,6,7]. In the following text we give a description of the basis of the automated non-invasive analysis of plant 
## (s13) Visible RGB imaging of plant shoots
(p13.0) Apart from the importance of root-growth analysis, a key descriptive parameter in plant physiology is the growth of plant shoots. Although there are numerous secondary traits describing the morphology of shoots in particular species and their developmental stages, the primary and universal trait is biomass formation. Shoot biomass is defined as the total mass of all the aboveground plant parts at a given point in a plant's life [8]. This trait can be easily assessed by a simple weighing of the fresh (FW) and dry (DW) masses. However, this involves the destruction of the measured plant thus only allowing end-point analyses. Similarly, leaf area and consequently the plant growth rate are usually determined by manual measurements of the dimensions of plant leaves [9][10][11]. Such measurements are highly time consuming and thus cannot be used for large scale experiments. For this reason, plant phenotyping facilities prefer to evaluate the growth rate using imaging methods which employ digital cameras with subsequent software image analysis. This enables a faster and more precise determination of the leaf area [12][13][14] and other parameters called projected area (Figure 2), or hull area in the case of monocots [15,16]. In general, non-invasive techniques of shoot growth determination have proven very reliable, and high correlations between the digital area and the shoot fresh, or dry weights, respectively, Figure 1 Scheme of the grow chamber-based automated high-throughput phenotyping platform PlantScreen™ (Photons Systems Instruments, Brno, Czech Republic), installed at Palacký University in Olomouc, Czech Republic [20]. The system is located in a growth chamber with white LED illumination (max. 1000 μmol photons m −2 s −1 ) and controlled environment (10 -40°C, 30 -99% relative humidity). The growth area with roller conveyer has capacity of up to 640 Arabidopsis, cereals and other crops grown in standardized pots. The measuring cabinet contains acclimation chamber for dark adaptation of plants coupled with an automated weighting and watering area. The cabinet is equipped with KCFIM and RGB imaging (top and 2 side views), thermoimaging (IR) to measure stomata openness and SWIR hyperspectral imaging to determine water content. The platform can be controlled either from the place or via remote control software. The operating software enables automatic data evaluation.
