# R E V I E W Brain targeting based nanocarriers loaded with resveratrol in Alzheimer's disease: A review

CorpusID: 257694895 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e76a9b6ed6f71748d185c4a925dd70398590ed6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e76a9b6ed6f71748d185c4a925dd70398590ed6)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s1) | RESVERATROL
(p1.0) RES (3, 5, 4 0 -trihydroxystilbene) is a natural polyphenol that can be found in grape skins, plums, peanuts, bilberries, and dark chocolate. RES is one of the most effective components of grape juice [26]. This phytoalexin was first elicited in the medical herbal white hellebore. Subsequently, it was detected in the polygonum cuspidatum, which was used in Chinese herbal medicine as an anti-inflammatory and antifungal agent. RES can exist in geometric arrangements (cis/trans) isomerism from, being trans-form the most therapeutic applications [27]. It can be changed into the cis-form upon exposure to UV radiation (ultraviolet) [28]. Experiments have indicated that RES is very well endured by experimental models with no serious effects. The orally administered RES in rats and dogs (with respective doses of 200 and 600 mg/kg/day) for 90 days led to no obvious side effects [29]. Besides, the RES dosage of 450 mg/day is safe for a 60-kg normal person [30]. Despite the numerous human and animal studies that emphasised the effective and protective properties of RES [31][32][33], limited number of clinical works have addressed the adverse effects of RES.

(p1.1) However, the high efficacy in biologically positive effects of RES elevates the level of antioxidant enzymes, including superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity, catalase (CAT), and glutathione peroxidase (GPx), and reduces ROS [34]. Moreover, it has been reported that RES has different therapeutic efficacies, like modulation of many cell-signalling pathways [35], antioxidant, anti-ageing attributes [36], anti-inflammatory, anticancer [37], and neuroprotective (such as AD and PD) [38]. Studies have shown that RES as a polyphenolic stilbene supplement is involved in various pathophysiological functions of AD [39,40]. According to the chemical and physical properties and the mechanism of its interaction with extracellular and intracellular molecules, RES has anti-amyloidogenic properties and can be promising against neuroinflammation and inhibition of AD [41].
## (s4) | Anti-inflammatory activities
(p4.0) High levels of prolonged free radical injury increases inflammation within the brain. An enhancement in oxidative damage biomarkers can also disturb the homoeostatic balance in inflammatory cytokines, inducing the death of nerve cells [62]. A recent study proposed that people with lower antioxidant capacity are rather vulnerable to oxidative stress [63]. The accumulation of senile plaque-containing intraneuronal Aβ peptides in AD causes microglial activation-induced acute neuroinflammation, which leads to neuronal degeneration and eventually enhanced necroptotic cell death in hippocampal neuron cells [64]. Another proposed mechanism of RES relies on its ability to restrain the proinflammatory signalling molecules related to AD. Feng and Zhang reported that RES considerably deterred the proliferation of Aβ-induced microglial activation BV-2 cells with reduced generation of proinflammation factors IL-6, iNOS, IL-1β, and TNF-α [65]. The neuroprotective and anti-neuroinflammatory abilities of RES are via inhibition of NF-κB. Zhao et al. reported that RES exerted neuroprotection and anti-apoptotic properties in vivo against Aβ1-42 induced CNS inflammation, potentially prevented by the NF-κB signalling pathway-dependent mechanism [66]. Moreover, RES inhibits prostaglandins (PGE2), NO, TNFα, cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1), and NF-κB activity in LPS-exposed rat primary microglia cultures [67,68]. Interestingly, RES can decrease receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) protein expression (receptor for advanced glycation products) in the hippocampus region and suppress the expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), which has been found accountable for junction proteins [66]. RAGEs at the blood-brain barrier (BBB) are the main gate for Aβ peptide transportation to the brain [69]. In addition, RES inhibits the action of Quinone reductase 2 at a low micro molar concentration by providing persistence against ROS-related neuronal damage (see Figure 2) [70,71]. Dasgupta et al. reported that RES is an activator of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and reduces the Aβ levels and deposition, a potent regulator of the survival of neuronal cell line exposed to oxidative damage [72]. Moreover, RES support mitochondria against LPS by a combination of arachidonic acid and iron through a mechanism that involves AMPK-dependent phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK3β) [73]. Another study focussed on treatment with RES-supported SK-N-BE cells against Aβ aggregation-induced cell toxicity via an enhancement in Sirt1 expression that restrained the hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) [74] and Aβ generation in AD by suppressing the α-secretase gene ADAM10. The regulation of the Notch signalling is a principal pathway in cell-fate [75]. One of the molecular pathways of RES-mediated neuroprotection involves the expression of the Sirt1 gene, which can retain neuron cells against oxidation, inflammation, apoptosis, and necrosis [76]. These findings support the idea that the Sirt1 gene might achieve remedial objectives for neurodegenerative disorders, for instance, AD and PD [77]. In vitro results proved that RES remarkably prevented Aβ25-35 induced F I G U R E 2 Increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) is a risk factor for Aβ accumulation and Alzheimer's disease development.
## (s10) | CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PROSPECT
(p10.0) RES shows several biological characteristics and medicinal effects, including anti-tumor, anti-inflammatory, anti-tauopathy, Aβ plaques degradation, and anti-oxidant actions. RES has insignificant bioavailability and extremely low oral absorption efficiency, restricting its clinical use. Nevertheless, clinical trials have not yet succeeded to display these actions, maybe due to the low bioavailability of RES, among other pharmacokinetics specifications. Therefore, studies have considered on the development and progress of RES-Derivatives, which would preserve the neuroprotective attributes of RES, but can present higher efficacy. A suitable drug for the treatment of neurological diseases should enter the brain across the BBB. Regarding its low bioavailability and solubility, RES has a limited permeation across the BBB. Therefore, the bioavailability and stability of RES can be boosted by NCs and encapsulation methods. The NP-drug delivery systems can protect the hydrophobic RES against enzymes, light, and pH. Such systems can also ameliorate drugtargeting specificity in the CNS, enhance medicine loading efficiency, and improve the bioavailability. Studies on animal models of AD displayed successful delivery of the RES-loaded NCs, but little information can be found on the mechanism of carrying drugs into or throughout the body.

(p10.1) Drug delivery methods can revolutionise the application of the bioactive compounds, as the development of novel molecules and the method of their transfer across the BBB could greatly affect the world. Furthermore, the investigations should be concentrated on the co-delivery and target delivery of phytobioactive compounds to prohibit ROS that leads to 162 -JALILI ET AL.
