# Altitude as a determinant of fruit quality with emphasis on the Andean tropics of Colombia. A review

CorpusID: 253014141 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/741f170f326061b5e6c1d4931b5f488a279fd219](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/741f170f326061b5e6c1d4931b5f488a279fd219)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Methods
(p1.0) Information from different databases was used following the PRISMA guide (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis), applying the modified methodology of Page et al. (2021). The keywords "altitude" and "fruit quality" were used, in English and Spanish, which generated 500 article titles in the "Google Academic" database, of which 74 were used (14.8%). The SciELO database only had 19, with 3 (15.8%) used. Scien-ceDirect listed 565 titles, of which 28 (15.8%) were used, and the Redalyc had 4,268 articles, with 57 (1.3%) useful for this review. To ensure better topicality, greater emphasis was placed on publications from 2015 onwards; however, some studies from previous years were included because of their importance.
## (s3) Adaptation of fruit trees to highland conditions
(p3.0) Cultivars originating from regions near the equator and/or higher altitudes, as the case of Andean fruit crops, may have developed a greater tolerance to UV-B radiation (Caldwell et al., 1980). A good example of the adaptation of fruit trees to higher altitudes is the study by Voronkov et al. (2019), who found that the levels of phenolic substances and polyunsaturated fatty acids increased in the skin of apples with altitudes increasing from 300 to 1,200 m a.s.l. in the Caucasus. This increase in phenols protects fruits against high UV radiation because of their powerful antioxidant effects, while unsaturated fatty acids retain the fluidity of the fruit's cell membranes within the physiological range (Voronkov et al., 2019).
## (s4) Effect of altitude on fruit quality
(p4.0) In general, for the comparison of different altitudes, the intrinsic characteristics of each site must be considered, e.g., slope, acidity, and organic matter content of the soil, among others, along with the climatic factors (Brenes-Gamboa, 2017). Table 2 shows some studies (22) that compare the effect of different altitudes on the physical and chemical components of fruits. Pérez and Melgarejo (2015) confirmed that the environmental conditions must be very close to the optimum to achieve the highest possible yields and qualities on fruit plantations, which are determined by the genetic potential of the species.
## (s7) Physiological disorders of fruits at high altitudes
(p7.0) Fruit trees grown at altitudes above their optimal range can suffer abiotic stress, especially from low temperatures (chilling and freezing stress, Fig. 3A), and oxidative stress from high UV radiation, which can cause large production losses (Madani et al., 2019). On clear nights, the surface of the outer tissues of plants and fruits cool below air temperature because of heat exchange, leading to damage to cell membranes and intracellular compartments (Voronkov et al., 2019). In addition, sudden changes in temperature between day and night at altitudes can generate physiological disorders, such as fruit cracking (Fischer, Balaguera-López & Álvarez-Herrera, 2021), as reported by Miranda (2020) for sweet granadilla.
