# Revolutionizing Agrifood Systems with Artificial Intelligence: A Survey

CorpusID: 258461477 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44b7981a24787d87a713c5dc1467282a5b08d97c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44b7981a24787d87a713c5dc1467282a5b08d97c)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Relationship to Related Surveys
(p1.0) 1.2.1 Remote sensing. Several existing surveys have examined the intersection of RS and agriculture [67,74,144,177]. While all of these surveys provide detailed descriptions of the characteristics and applications of RS technology in agriculture, each survey has its own emphasis. For instance, [144] covers the history of RS and its impact on agriculture, as well as various vegetation indices that can be computed from RS images. Meanwhile, [74] reviews and analyzes literature to identify recent developments in agriculture RS from temporal and geographical attributes. In contrast, this survey focuses on RS as a crucial data source for AI models in agrifood systems. Other surveys have focused on specific RS data sources [95,101,136] or specific applications within agriculture [6,199]. Additionally, some surveys have reviewed specific AI models, such as CNNs, in the context of agriculture RS [71].
## (s2) Internet of Things.
(p2.0) Internet of Things (IoT) represents an intelligent network that enables cyber-physical interactions by connecting numerous things with the capacity to perceive, compute, execute, and communicate with the internet. As discussed in the recent surveys, IoT technologies have greatly advanced various areas [147,156,191], such as smart cities, smart homes, and smart health care. Smart agriculture with IoT technologies has also been discussed in [38]. However, they mostly focus on the integration of IoT devices and corresponding areas while neglecting the possibility of AI techniques along with the development of these devices. Recently, [201] discusses the possibilities AI techniques brought in the IoT area, while ignoring the development of integration of AI and the IoT (AIoT) in the agrifood systems. Instead, this survey covers a wide range of topics for the integration of IoT devices and AI techniques in different agrifood areas, including agriculture, animal husbandry, and fishery.

(p2.1) 1.2.3 Agriculture. As AI techniques continue to evolve within the field of agriculture, scholars have taken various perspectives in reviewing these methods. For example, [165] has focused on addressing the growing pressure on global agricultural production by exploring strategies for sustainable development in environment-friendly agriculture. They primarily review different learning methods for crops, including supervised learning, transfer learning, and few-shot Manuscript submitted to ACM learning. Notably, traditional learning methods and other agricultural sectors such as animal husbandry and fisheries are not addressed in their analysis. [68] conducts a comprehensive analysis of data resources, agriculture sectors, and learning methods in their paper. However, their work does not encompass the recent advancements in AI within the agriculture industry since 2018. [195] provides an overview of decision support systems in agriculture, focusing on their systematic application in areas such as agricultural mission planning, water resources management, climate change adaptation, and food waste control. Compared to previous surveys that cover a broad range of topics in agriculture, some researchers have chosen to focus on specific areas within the field of agriculture. For example, [98] analyzes over 30 datasets for diverse agricultural topics, discussing the main characteristics and applications of each dataset, and highlighting key considerations for creating high-quality public agricultural datasets. Crop-related methods are reviewed in [52,93,190] while [77] reviews DL methods in fruit growing, recognition, and yield estimation. Satellite RS technology has become a widely used tool for agrifood monitoring due to its vast observation range and timely data updates. Satellite images provide essential multi-source, multi-temporal, and multi-resolution data for monitoring agricultural production, animal husbandry, and fishery. RS satellites are typically classified as active or passive based on their onboard sensor data acquisition methods. Passive ones usually refer to optical RS satellites, which offer rich spectral and textural features but can be severely impacted by cloudy, rainy, and foggy weather conditions. While active RS technology mainly involves the synthetic aperture radar (SAR), which can operate all around the clock, detecting land surface information by receiving reflected echoes from actively emitted microwaves.  SAR distinguishes different features by analyzing their backscattering characteristics. Because the emitted microwaves are sensitive to moisture, SAR is often used to retrieve soil and vegetation moisture levels [158]. When combined with optical images, it allows for more accurate and refined crop classification [1,148] or monitoring [11,17]. Additionally, SAR can identify surface deformation information, making it useful for crop canopy monitoring. Currently, the most popular SAR satellite is the Sentinel-1, which is favored due to its free accessibility.

(p2.2) Images obtained by optical sensors can mainly be divided into three types: multispectral, hyper-spectral, and panchromatic, as shown in Fig. 1. Hyperspectral sensors receive abundant spectral information, allowing the extraction of a continuous spectral curve of a broad wavelength range for each pixel. Thus, the obtained images are appropriate for distinguishing vegetation with similar visual characteristics. This is very useful in fine-grained vegetation classification Manuscript submitted to ACM [13,111,166]. Multispectral images are most commonly used for agricultural classification and yield prediction. Moderateresolution imaging spectroradiometer (MODIS), Landsat-8, and Sentinel-2 are the three most popular medium-resolution multispectral satellites for agrifood monitoring [51,66,89,94,97,138,142] since their data are easy to acquire and rich in vegetation-sensitive bands. SPOT-5 2.5 [31] QuickBird 0.61 [31] world-view3 0.31 [1,26] AVIRIS*(airborne) 20 [13,111,166] * denotes containing hyperspectral sensor.

(p2.3) Some very high resolution (VHR) satellites such as SPOT5 [31], QuickBird [31], and RapidEye [11] are suitable for finegrained classification and field-level monitoring. However, due to their commercial availability and high cost, these satellites have relatively fewer applications in agrifood monitoring. Table 1 provides details of some common optical RS satellites and their resolutions.
## (s3) Onsite devices.
(p3.0) Onsite devices such as ground height spectrometers, handheld spectrometers, handheld GPS, multispectral cameras, thermal imaging cameras as well as digital cameras have been used for various specific-purpose agricultural studies, such as breeding selection [58] and yield estimation [53,73,196]. For example, [53] uses a highresolution RGB camera mounted on a land-based imaging platform to acquire images for one season to estimate wheat yields, While [58] manually takes high-resolution images of wheat above the canopy from budding to flowering for breeding selection.
## (s4) Other sensors.
(p4.0) Some specialized devices, such as the time domain reflectometer for monitoring soil moisture dynamics of the surface, near-surface, and root zone [7] and the RSX-1 gamma radiation detector for measuring the amount of radiation in the soil [2], are also employed in agrifood systems. The observed data usually is adopted as the ground truth values for training and improving AI models.

(p4.1) 2.1.5 Laboratory conditions. Due to various factors such as field environment, equipment, experimental operation, and data analysis, much experimental data cannot be obtained directly in the field or through RS and other approaches.

(p4.2) At this time, representative research data can be obtained by analyzing collected field samples in the laboratory. For example, in the laboratory, [7,73,158] perform soil organic matter content measurements, [86] uses the Kjeldahl method to measure the Nitrogen content for wheat leaves, while [42,196,213] obtain the dry weight of wheat by desiccation. and other sensors can collect data at any time and in any location, which are cached directly on the onboard disk or sent to a remote data center. In laboratory settings, data are typically recorded manually or by using specialized instruments.
## (s8) AI Methods in Agriculture
(p8.0) 3.2.1 Agrifood classification. RS technologies have been widely applied to agriculture, they provide multi-source, multi-temporal, and multi-resolution data for large-scale, all-weather automated monitoring of crops. As shown in Fig In the early years, most of the methods utilized band algebra and band transformation (e.g., difference vegetation index, enhanced vegetation index (EVI), normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) [16,121,198]) to extract features for classification. However, these methods often result in noisy and inaccurate classification due to manual threshold setting and subjective expert experience. In order to utilize the abundant inter-classes, sample-wise and temporal relationships introduced by RS images, traditional ML methods [137] have been applied in agrifood classification as they can explore the latent and complex information between samples belonging to different categories. At first, researchers usually use a single ML classifier for classification. [111] uses C4.5 DT for hyper-spectral soy-bean mapping. Although the rules generated by C4.5 are easy to understand, this algorithm has low efficiency and cannot handle large datasets due to the limitation of its structure. [79] adopts multilayer perceptron (MLP) for multi-temporal crop classification, but its performance is limited by the small number of latent layers. Most of the traditional ML methods can capture complex nonlinear features with relatively simple structures but some cannot cope with large datasets, and some are easy to trapped by local optimal values. These problems of using a single classifier may lead to a high erroneous recognition rate. Therefore, researchers try to integrate multiple classifiers to comprehensively utilize the advantages of different classifiers [5,121]. The idea of integrating multiple classifiers has later extended to the field of ensemble learning (EL), which is nowadays one of the most representative and effective methods. Typical EL methods like RF [161], XGBoost [88] and GBDT [94] are widely applied in agriculture classification and outperform other single classifier-based methods. [146] summarizes current state-of-theart techniques for sugarcane mapping and monitoring, where RF, SVM, and classification and regression tree are compared and RF shows the best performance.
## (s9) Agrifood growth monitoring.
(p9.0) Crop growth state is a crucial component of agricultural data, as it provides insights into the yield of the crop. RS technologies offer a macroscopic, timely, and dynamic approach to monitoring regional crop growth, giving them great advantages. By using RS data, macro estimations of real-time seedling situations, environmental dynamics, and crop distribution can be conducted. This helps to facilitate a timely understanding of crop distributions, growth conditions, fertilization markets, as well as the dynamics of diseases, pests, and weeds. Ultimately, RS provides an accurate data platform for crop production managers and decision-makers, enabling them to take various management measures that optimize crop production.

(p9.1) Crop growth is affected by many factors, such as light, temperature, soil, water, gas (CO2), fertilizer, diseases, insect pests, disastrous weather, management measures, and so on. In the early stages of crop growth, it is mainly reflected by the quality of crop seedlings, while in the middle and late stages of crop growth and development, it mainly reflects the development of crop plants and the specific characteristics of high and low yields. Although the growth of crops is an extremely complex physiological and ecological process that involves many factors, it still can be characterized by some metrics that can reflect its growth state or are closely related to its growth characteristics. In the past, relevant crop growth state factors and environmental attribute factors were mainly monitored and collected manually, and then comprehensively analyzed by experts according to their experiences or using statistical models containing multiple variables. The obtained results may be subjective and inaccurate, which could not meet the requirements of intelligent and precise agriculture (Fig. 4).

(p9.2) As an important subset of AI, ML techniques have proven to be a promising solution for addressing the spatial analysis of big data and solving nonlinear problems, especially when the extent of theoretical knowledge of a problem is incomplete [80] or when statistical presuppositions are unreliable or not known [33]. At present, ML technologies have made considerable achievements in the field of crop growth monitoring, and some typical examples of agrifood growth monitoring based on RS imagery and statistical ML algorithms are presented in Table 2, and other applications will be described in detail below.

(p9.3) Environmental monitoring: The environment of crop growth encompasses the external natural conditions of the living space of crops, including the effects of various natural environmental conditions and other biological organisms.
## (s11) Manuscript submitted to ACM
(p11.0) Corn Belt using the regularized linear regression algorithm. [42] constructs a wheat yield prediction framework by combining various vegetation indices and multiple methods, such as linear regression, MLR, and stepwise multiple linear regression. Moreover, some other linear models including OLS [135,176], least absolute shrinkage selection operator (LASSO) [108,202,211], and PLSR [105,106] have also been used for yield prediction.

(p11.1) Although linear models are able to perform efficient yield prediction, the complex relationships between yields and some factors, such as crop genetics, environmental factors, and human management practices [128], are not always linear. In such cases, linear models may not perform well. To tackle these issues, various nonlinear ML models have been developed to predict crop yields. For instance, [69] constructs multiple ML models, including Cubist, MLP, support vector regression (SVR), GPR, KNN, and Multivariate

(p11.2) Adaptive Regression Splines, to predict wheat yield in the Australian wheat belt, and finds that SVR achieves the highest prediction accuracy. In another study, [48] develops a yield prediction model framework using the GEE platform to test the performance of KNN, NN, DT, SVM, and GPR models for winter wheat production in China. [108] uses SVR-Linear, SVR-RBF, and MLP models simultaneously to predict the national production of barley, soft wheat, and durum wheat in Algeria during the current season. Other commonly used ML models, such as ANN [42], bayesian neural networks (BNN) [66,99], have also been used to improve the accuracy of crop yield prediction. Nevertheless, since these methods rely on a single model, they may suffer from an overfitting issue when training data is limited.

(p11.3) To improve the generalization ability of ML models, EL techniques have become increasingly popular in recent years. By combining multiple base models, EL methods can compensate for errors and deficiencies in individual models, leading to more robust and accurate predictions [206]. Bagging and Boosting are the two most commonly used EL techniques in ML.

(p11.4) Among bagging approaches, the RF employing multiple decision trees has been widely adopted for crop yield prediction [41,48,72,105]. [41] develops yield prediction models for wheat, barley, and oilseed rape based on MODIS-EVI time series data and the RF algorithm, respectively. The cross-validation results demonstrate that the RF model yields accurate predictions. [72] simulates maize yields using Sentinel-2-generated vegetation indices and ML algorithms (MLR, RF, SVM), with RF achieving the highest accuracy.
## (s12) Artificial Intelligence Methods in Animal Husbandry
(p12.0) 3.3.1 Pasture monitoring and evaluation. The countries with a developed animal husbandry industry typically have vast grassland areas. Due to its contribution to carbon storage, grasslands are mainly used for animal feed production and play an important role in maintaining the ecological system [40]. Therefore, the yield of pasture directly affects animal husbandry productions, and the relevant monitoring is important for the utilization and management of pastures, and the improvement of ecological environments [180]. In recent years, big data-based grassland monitoring has become a hot-spot research topic.

(p12.1) Accurately and effectively modeling the AGB of grasslands is a crucial and fundamental task for monitoring and managing grasslands in pastoral areas. AGB can be estimated using both traditional (or ground-based) and RS methods.
## (s13) Animal individual monitoring.
(p13.0) In addition to monitoring animal husbandry behavior at the group level using remote sensing images, modern animal husbandry also requires monitoring individual animals to ensure their health and growth and prevent the spread of disease.

(p13.1) Animal individual recognition: To conduct individual animal monitoring in animal husbandry, it is necessary to recognize and distinguish each animal on the farm. This recognition is achieved by identifying subtle differences between individuals, such as the length of a cow's face, the shape of a sheep's paw, or the patterns on a dairy cow's coat. Early methods for individual recognition [50] involve directly capturing images of the animals and using CNNs for recognition.
## (s15) Other topics.
(p15.0) Automatic techniques of animal product generation are increasingly important aspects of modern animal husbandry. For example, image processing techniques can be used to determine the optimal storage conditions for meat. While [123] uses visible and NIR hyperspectral images to determine whether meat is fresh or not. This approach can accurately identify the freshness of the meat, ensuring food safety. In addition, AI methods have been also utilized for monitoring animal husbandry fences and poultry houses [216].

(p15.1) 3.3.4 Summary. AI technologies including statistical ML and DL methods have been widely utilized in the animal husbandry system. We conduct a statistical analysis of various AI models used in animal husbandry researches across 69 articles, among them, about 30% of the articles use the RF model, 25% of them adopt SVM and ANN models, and about 10% of them resort to deep learning models.
## (s16) Artificial Intelligence Methods in Fishery
(p16.0) 3.4.1 Fishing area identification and prediction. The identification and prediction of fishing areas have become increasingly important in the era of large-scale fishery exploitations. The availability of dynamic marine ecological data is crucial for ensuring the safety of fisheries, forecasting fishing opportunities, assessing fisheries resources, and managing fishing operations. Table 4 summarizes typical works on fishery-related tasks with AI algorithms.

(p16.1) The scale of the farming area is a critical factor in determining fishery production [21,117,192]. Obtaining a quick and accurate estimation of the large-scale regional farming area can provide an overall understanding of the farming status. To achieve this, [21] proposes a new semantic segmentation network, i.e., the hybrid dilated convolution U-Net (HDCUNet), which combines U-Net with hybrid expanded convolution to extract coastal aquaculture areas from GF-2

(p16.2) images. This approach solves the issue of misclassifying floating objects on the water surface as aquaculture areas and achieves an overall accuracy of 99.2%. In recent studies, with the RS images, researchers have focused on the geometric features to extract aquaculture pond areas [192,193]. Concretely, [192] involves extracting water surfaces from satellite images and performing boundary tracking for each water segment. The geometric features such as perimeter, curvature, and contour-based regularity of the water surface objects are then evaluated using SVM to extract aquaculture ponds. [193] considers the same directional correlation between pixels of aquaculture ponds. For this purpose, based on the extracted features by the FCN, they separately use row and column self-attentions to extract aquaculture ponds from high spatial resolution RS images. In addition to optical RS images, other waveband data such as SAR images are also leveraged in some studies. For example, [117] extracts aquaculture ponds based on backscatter intensity, size, and shape features.

(p16.3) The rational increase of potential fishing areas [87,139,145] is a crucial factor in maintaining the continuous growth of marine fisheries. To achieve this, [139] proposes an automatic raft-by-pixel labeling method using a fully convolutional dual-scale network structure that captures intricate details without downsampling. In contrast, [87] utilizes pseudo-labels generated by conditional generative adversarial nets to improve extraction accuracy, particularly in expanding sample size. They perform interactive tagging experiments on three RS images with different resolutions to simulate a real-life scenario where the spatial resolution of the images to be processed does not match the available sample's spatial resolution, achieving an overall accuracy of 90.6%. For predicting potential fishing areas, [145] proposes a network structure named hybrid ensemble deepfishnets that integrates deep convolutional networks and filter bat recurrent neural networks, achieving remarkable performance.

(p16.4) 3.4.2 Fish production forecast. The ongoing advancement of spatial observation technology has substantially bolstered the capacity to conduct interdisciplinary research on AI within the fisheries domain. Presently, it is feasible to acquire copious amounts of synchronous and dynamic information regarding fish culture areas, which has enhanced the ability to conduct comprehensive studies. Environmental data from potential fishery culture areas can also be collected and analyzed qualitatively to determine the distribution characteristics of fish organisms. These data can then be used to support yield prediction and optimization of fish products, ultimately improving the sustainability and efficiency of fishery management practices. Overall, these advancements in observation technology and research methods have improved our understanding of fish production and are essential for effective fisheries management.
## (s18) CHALLENGES
(p18.0) Despite the great potential of AI technology in agrifood systems, challenges still exist. In this context, we summarize five challenges related to agricultural characteristics, external factors, data acquisition and processing, model design and maintenance, and ethical risks.

(p18.1) Agricultural characteristics Agricultural production has unique characteristics such as regionality and seasonality. These characteristics pose new challenges for the application of AI in agriculture. For example, AI models should consider the wide range of agrifood products produced in different regions, while the long growth cycle of crops can limit the real-time performance of technologies. Therefore, it is essential to consider the characteristics of agricultural activities when designing AI solutions.

(p18.2) External factors Agricultural activities are affected by multiple natural conditions, such as water resources, soil nutrients, terrains, and climates. Climate factors, including light and precipitation, are considered major impact factors on agrifood industries. However, developing AI models that are robust across different climates, especially in regions with extreme or unpredictable weather, can be challenging. Furthermore, some adverse conditions, such as weak network infrastructure in rural areas of developing countries, can limit the integration of AI, IoT, and agriculture.

(p18.3) Data acquisition and processing Agricultural practices are long and complex processes, and relying solely on a single data resource may not lead to effective judgments and expected outcomes. In the agrifood system, data is often heterogeneous as it is obtained from various sources and stored in multiple databases with diverse formats, following a series of preprocessing procedures. Attaining high efficiency in the acquisition, integration, and collaboration of multimodal data has emerged as a major challenge in the implementation of agricultural AI.

(p18.4) Model design and maintenance Designing algorithms with a large amount of data for complex agrifood systems is typically a time-consuming process. Additionally, the resulting AI models can be sophisticated and have high computational complexity, making deployment difficult for farmers. Furthermore, maintaining and updating these models is crucial to meet continuous new demands throughout the long growth cycle. This poses a new challenge for AI service providers.

(p18.5) Ethical risks In addition to accuracy, efficiency, and practicality, it is important to consider the ethical risks associated with adopting AI models. AI solutions are frequently employed in critical decision-making scenarios that involve access to private data. Improper use of such data can result in various legal issues, such as privacy breaches and malicious attacks. Lack of transparency can undermine the trust of farmers and consumers, leading to their reluctance to adopt AI solutions and hindering the development of AI technologies. Therefore, constructing trustworthy AI systems is an urgent and significant issue that demands immediate attention and resolution. Fig. 12. AI models enable reading agrifood product information. The results are obtained by DeepSolo [187] with ViTAEv2-S [204].
## (s21) 5.1.2
(p21.0) The collaboration of multiple sources data. Foundation models possess an important property that allows them to use multiple types of data jointly to achieve more accurate predictions [126]. Agrifood data comes from various sources, such as satellites, UAVs, and other sensors. However, current approaches typically rely on a single data type as input and overlook the complementary between diverse data sources. Foundation models have the potential to learn from these data jointly, which could improve prediction accuracy for tasks such as crop yield prediction or pasture monitoring. By using visual images from UAVs, RS images from satellites, and soil and climate conditions from sensors as inputs, foundation models can provide more accurate and comprehensive results.
## (s23) Cross-domain foundation models.
(p23.0) Except for the applications discussed in this paper, the large-scale foundation models can provide more opportunities for a better agrifood system. For example, large-scale models can be used to predict future climates and help farmers make better decisions regarding the harvesting and seeding time [127].

(p23.1) The medical foundation model contributes to the discovery of better fertilizer and helps identify sick animals. The biology-related foundation models [24] may help the researchers by alleviating their cost of finding better hybrid plants by predicting the properties of specific hybrid plants given the parent plants growth situation.
## (s26) Robust models.
(p26.0) Apart from the above opportunities, the robustness of the AI models is also an important topic in agrifood systems. Due to the influence of weather change or location variants, the captured data may have significantly different distributions from the data used in training. Making the models robust to data with different distributions can greatly simplify the deployment of AI technologies in agrifood systems and improve the reliability of the prediction results made by AI. Apart from algorithm development, hardware systems have also experienced rapid development. AIoT in the agrifood system can also present several key opportunities [201]. For example, the fog and cloud computational systems can provide timely feedback and analysis according to the data captured from edge devices. In this case, advanced IoT devices can help users to make more informed predictions. Besides, the advanced sensors can monitor the health of animals or agriculture in real-time, which can be used to further improve food security and contribute to the development of traceable AI in agrifood systems. Fig. 13 portrays a promising vision of integrating modern AI technologies, including large foundation models, into the IoT ecosystem. This involves utilizing the vast amount of agrifood data collected by edge devices to either pre-train foundation models or automatically label them using well-trained foundation models on cloud servers. Subsequently, the acquired knowledge of these large foundation models can be distilled and transferred to smaller models, thereby enabling their deployment on edge devices. This process creates a closed-loop evolution framework for the agrifood system.
