# LITERATURE REVIEW: EFFECTIVENESS OF STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT AND HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ON WORKPLACE SAFETY

CorpusID: 259616021 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5ec70d0e2ade57057350418c812363af9df5c4a9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5ec70d0e2ade57057350418c812363af9df5c4a9)

Fields: Business

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The community certainly knows that in a work aspect, of course, it can never be separated from the safety and accident aspects, which in the work aspect, of course, can never be separated from these two words so that it can be developed in the concept of the company as said by (Elvik, 2013) in his study where the term concept of safety in a job is usually connected to aspects of work that are connected and simulated as a form of process that is used as one way to prevent the existence of an occupational risk that can result in accidents that can damage the order of life of workers and this will automatically be the concept of safety in each division will be able to alleviate and make it easier for workers to organize their work so as not to be indicated in terms of mixing risks and be able to estimate the existence of a risk that can occur. Broadly speaking, every company will certainly implement ways so that workers who are in the company get a guarantee of safety which will certainly greatly affect the influence of the work done.
## (s4) Effect Of Resource Strategy Management On Worker Safety
(p4.0) In the review imposed by (Alsaadat, 2019), that the human resources aspect contains the notion of work effort or services that can be provided in the production process. In other terms human resources reflect the quality of effort exerted by a person in a given time to produce a good or service. The second definition, human resources concerns people who are able to work to provide services or work efforts. Being able to work means being able to carry out activities that have economic activity, that is, that these activities produce goods or services to meet the needs or community.
## (s6) Data Analysis And Discussion Influence Of Human Resource Strategy Management On Worker Safety
(p6.0) In the review imposed by (Alsaadat, 2019), that the human resources aspect contains the notion of work effort or services that can be provided in the production process. In other terms human resources reflect the quality of effort exerted by a person in a given time to produce a good or service. The second definition, human resources concerns people who are able to work to provide services or work efforts. Being able to work means being able to carry out activities that have economic activity, that is, that these activities produce goods or services to meet the needs or community.
