# Applications and prospects of functional oligosaccharides in pig nutrition: A review

CorpusID: 257017070 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cd4208c9e53e9b3bafbd3c1c8097975cd846d639](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cd4208c9e53e9b3bafbd3c1c8097975cd846d639)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Antibiotics have antibacterial, antiviral, and growth-promoting effects. Since the 1940s, antibiotics have been widely used in livestock and poultry production. Their effects of medical treatment, health care, and growth promotion have had a very beneficial impact on the development of animal husbandry (Yin et al., 2021;Murugaiyan et al., 2022). With the improvement of people's living standards, the demand for meat products increases greatly, which also prompts abuse antibiotics in the breeding process, resulting in antibiotic residues, and causing great harm to human health Yang et al., 2019; Lalou ckov a and Sk rivanov a, 2019). With the progress of science and technology and the improvement of people's safety awareness, the damage of antibiotics to human beings has become increasingly apparent. There are more and more calls to ban antibiotics. The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs of the People's Republic of China issued Notice 194 prohibiting the addition of antibiotics to feed from January 2020. Therefore, the development and utilization of new green residue-free feed additives have been paid more and more attention, and implementing a comprehensive antibiotic prohibition policy has been implemented.
## (s1) Types and sources of functional oligosaccharides
(p1.0) Functional oligosaccharides mainly include FOS, MOS, XOS and COS (Patel et al., 2011). Because functional oligosaccharides have physical and chemical characteristics such as low calorific value, stability, safety and non-toxicity, high viscosity, strong hygroscopicity and not being digested by gastrointestinal tract, and also improve the intestinal microflora, reduce serum cholesterol and neutral fat, improve blood sugar, improve the feed efficiency, improve animal immunity, thus it has attracted the attention of the more and more scholars (Pan et al., 2018). The following mainly introduces the related characteristics and sources of FOS, MOS, XOS and COS.
## (s2) Fructo-oligosaccharides
(p2.0) The molecular formula of FOS, also known as fructo-oligose, glucose-trisaccharide, is GFn (n 4, G for glucose, F for fructose). It is a general term for a group of oligosaccharides formed by binding several D-fructose on the basis of sucrose molecules through b-1,2 glycosidic bonds (Rastall et al., 2010;Rahim et al., 2021). Solid fructo-oligosaccharides are white powdery, easily soluble in water, low in sweetness that only 0.3 to 0.6 of sucrose, and low in energy, which also the only functional oligosaccharide with the dual physiological characteristics of super bifidogenic factors and water-soluble dietary fiber, which widely exists in bananas, potatoes, wheat, barley, onion, garlic, and other plants. Among them, the content of Jerusalem artichoke tuber is the most abundant (Yıldız, 2010;Micciche et al., 2018). It is difficult to extract natural FOS. Commercial production methods of FOS are generally divided into 2 categories, one is the sucrose enzymatic method, and the other is the extraction method (Cano et al., 2020). Relevant studies have shown that FOS can promote the abundance of many beneficial bacteria in the intestinal tract of livestock and poultry, inhibit the growth and reproduction of harmful bacteria, and improve the digestion and absorption of nutrients, and consequently to improve the microecological environment, and improve their immunity and production performance in livestock and poultry.
## (s5) Chitosan oligosaccharides
(p5.0) COS are oligosaccharides linked by b-1,4 glycosidic bonds, and the numbers of glucosamine are usually 2 to 10. As the only natural cationic basic polysaccharide discovered at present, COS are generally less than 3,000 U in molecular weight and have good water solubility, partly soluble in methanol but insoluble in ethanol. Meanwhile, COS have excellent function and high biological activity, and their metabolites are non-toxic and antigenfree, which can be easily absorbed by the body. COS are not easily decomposed in the animal gastrointestinal tract and are absorbed directly by intestinal cells into blood circulation after entering the intestinal tract. The primary source is abundant marine biological resources, such as shrimp shells and crab shells. Then the oligosaccharides with the required degree of polymerization less than 20 were obtained by enzymic degradation (Singla and Chawla, 2001). COS have many physiological functions including antioxidant, regulating intestinal microecological environment, and improving body immunity. They also have the physiological functions such as anti-bacterial, anti-tumor, and improving animal growth performance etc., and consequently have been widely used in livestock, poultry production, and biomedicine (Ma et al., 2011;Swiatkiewicz et al., 2015).
## (s7) Growth performance
(p7.0) Functional oligosaccharides directly enter the intestinal tract of animals in the undegraded form, which can improve the absorption and utilization rate of nutrients in the intestinal tract and promote the overall growth performance of animals (Qiang et al., 2009). Some studies have shown that functional oligosaccharides can improve the intestinal health of pigs during pig breeding, improve feed intake, daily weight gain, and feed conversion rate of pigs, and reduce the diarrhea rate of piglets to a certain extent (Zou et al., 2016;Schokker et al., 2018). Different types of oligosaccharides can promote the growth performance of pigs in the breeding process to a certain time (Table 1). At the same time, the same type of oligosaccharides also has different effects on the growing development and health status of pigs at different growth stages. Diets supplemented with 0.1% FOS increased average daily gain and average daily feed intake, as well as dry matter and nitrogen digestibility of growing pigs from d 0 to 56 of the trial period (Lim et al., 2022). Some studies have found that the average daily gain, average daily feed intake, and weight gain/feed consumption of weaned piglets were significantly improved by adding 100 and 200 mg/kg COS and 80 mg/kg aureomycin in the diet, respectively. Meanwhile, the apparent digestibility of DM, Ca and P was also significantly improved in these 3 groups . The same conclusion was reached in other experiment, with the increase of dietary COS level, the improvement of average daily gain, average daily feed intake and apparent digestible energy of DM and N increased linearly (Chen et al., 2009). These results indicate that adding a certain amount of COS in the diet can replace antibiotics to improve the growth performance of piglets to a certain extent. For sows, studies have shown that functional oligosaccharides can also reduce their feed to milk ratio to a certain extent (Cheng et al., 2015).
## (s8) Immune function
(p8.0) The immune system is the primary weapon of the body to defend against the invasion of pathogens and remove foreign bodies and foreign pathogenic microorganisms. As an immune enhancer, functional oligosaccharides can combine with the surface of some viruses, toxins, and bacteria to improve body's immune function. Functional oligosaccharides can improve B lymphocyte mediated humoral immunity and T lymphocyte mediated cellular immunity, improve mucosal immunity of animals, and thus increase the immune function of animals, which have been used as immune adjuvant in livestock and poultry production (Dawood et al., 2018;Ashaolu et al., 2020). Serum biochemical index can reflect the animal metabolism in the body and help the livestock and poultry farmers detection and diagnosis of livestock and poultry diseases, further improve the animal growth performance . Therefore, serum biochemical levels including immune capacity and antioxidant capacity of livestock and poultry were measured as indicators to measure animal health status, so as to reflect the effect of functional oligosaccharides on immune function. Functional oligosaccharides can prevent and treat diseases by stimulating intestinal immune cells and increasing the production of immunoglobulin after ingested by pigs (Choque-Delgado et al., 2011). After antibiotics are forbidden, diarrhea caused by weaning stress of piglets becomes more and more serious, so it is urgent to find a new antibiotic substitute without residue. Therefore, the main research focus of functional oligosaccharides on immune function is their effect on the immunity of weaned piglets (Table 2). When 30 mg/kg or 500 mg/kg COS is added to the diets of weaned piglets, it can be used as an immunomodulator to increase the serum cytokines levels such as IgA, IgM and IgG (Duan et al., 2020;Xu et al., 2018). IgA, IgM, and IgG are antibodies to specific intestinal immune reactions of piglets, which can prevent pathogenic bacteria and other harmful substances from entering the body and act as a barrier. In addition, the increase of immunoglobulin and interleukin content in serum can also promote the development of immune organs. Shao et al. (2000) also showed that MOS could significantly increase the level of IgG and IgA in the serum of suckling piglets, but it had no significant effect on the content of IgM. Meanwhile, the related research shows that short-chain fructooligosaccharides can improve the secretion of cytokines in sows and enhance the immune response of IgA in serum and intestinal tract. In addition, it can improve the immune barrier function of sows to promote maternal health and maintain the normal growth and development of fetuses. Short-chain fructooligosaccharides can further enhance the immune response of intestinal mucosal cells of weaned piglets by increasing the number of cecal goblet cells (Le Bourgot et al., 2017).
## (s10) Intestinal health
(p10.0) As a critical part of nutrition and nutrient absorption of livestock and poultry, intestinal health is very essential for livestock growth and disease resistance. Maintaining intestinal health is the key to realizing healthy livestock breeding. Among them, the meaning of "intestinal health" is multi-level, maintaining the integrity of the mucosal layer of the body to play a normal immune function, and includes stable intestinal flora structure and suitable intestinal environment (Jha et al., 2019). Functional oligosaccharides can promote animal intestinal development, improve the intestinal morphology and barrier function, and can be fermented to produce short-chain fatty acids of certain bacteria in the intestine. Thus, forming the intestinal acidic environment, providing a suitable living environment for bacteria, acidic environment is conducive to the intestinal epithelial cell proliferation, which can be beneficial to maintain health, intestinal tract to improve their immunity, ensure the follow-up healthy growth of animals and reduce breeding risks  (Cheng et al., 2017). Different types of functional oligosaccharides have certain effects on the intestinal health of pigs at different stages, mainly in promoting the proliferation of Bifidobacteria and Lactobacillus, as well as inhibiting the proliferation of E. coli. Moreover, the application effects of different types of functional oligosaccharides in animals are not consistent. When they are put into use, it is necessary to analyze the structural characteristics and specific conditions of livestock and poultry to select the appropriate type to achieve the best effect (Table 3). Supplementation of 200 mg/kg COS in the diets of weaned piglets infected with E. coli can increase the relative abundance of Lactobacillus, decrease the relative abundance of E. coli, and increase the villus height of ileum and jejunum, which is beneficial to the digestion and absorption of nutrients and intestinal health of weaned piglets (Liu et al., 2010). The relative abundance of Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, and Turicibacter in intestinal contents of weaned piglets was decreased when 100 mg/kg XOS were added in diets . Therefore, the application of different oligosaccharides in animal intestinal health should be further studied, and the mechanism underlying needs to be continuously explored to ensure the stabilizing effect of oligosaccharides in livestock and poultry breeding.
## (s13) Physiological stage
(p13.0) The structure and function of the digestive tract are different in different physiological stages of animals. Functional oligosaccharides generally play a significant role in weaned piglets and diseased piglets. For growing-finishing pig, which have strong immune system and better health status, so adding oligosaccharide to their diets will not show much beneficial effects. Weaned piglets with developing immune system and unstable intestinal microflora are easier to get sick that the main reason of diarrhea is the increase of pathogenic bacteria, so adding functional oligosaccharides after weaning can achieve a better effect. Studies have shown that piglets grow slowly at 1 to 2 wk before and after weaning, and adding mannan oligosaccharides to the diet of weaned piglets improves the growth performance more significantly than pigs at the growth stage (Miguel et al., 2004).  added 200 mg/kg XOS to the diet of weaned piglets. They found that the intestinal microflora structure of piglets was improved, and the relative abundance of Lactobacillus increased, and E. coli decreased. When the same dose of XOS were added to the diets of growing pigs, the intestinal microbiota structure of pigs was not significantly changed (Sutton et al., 2021). Therefore, when selecting functional oligosaccharides as feed additives, the physiological stage of the feeding target should be considered first to better play the role of functional oligosaccharides and achieve the expected results of the feeding target. 
## (s15) Inherent levels of oligosaccharides in diets
(p15.0) The feed materials are rich in oligosaccharides, while the content of oligosaccharides in corn is very low. Still, the non-digestible sugars such as raffinose and stachyose are rich in barley, wheat, and soybean (Karr-Lilienthal et al., 2005), so the oligosaccharides in barley, wheat and soybean may affect the experimental results of dietary functional oligosaccharides.
