# Complications When Infusing Massive Distending Medium in Hysteroscopic Surgery: A Review of Preventions and Cures for Operative Hysteroscopy Intravascular Absorption Syndrome (OHIA)

CorpusID: 253917738 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/262ba695ed429f1413ea78a36c6dea11b1507bb2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/262ba695ed429f1413ea78a36c6dea11b1507bb2)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) The Selection of Bulge Medium
(p3.0) In hysteroscopic surgery, distending medium is a necessary condition to ensure good display of uterine cav-ity; some researchers have reduced the occurrence of pulmonary edema by changing the type of distending medium.

(p3.1) Carbon dioxide, dexanhydride-70, glycine, sorbitol, mannitol, normal saline and lactate Ringer's solution are used in clinical practice, but they all entail certain problems [15]. Studies have shown that the use of normal saline can reduce the occurrence of dilution hyponatremia, but hypervolemic blood is still inevitable [15]. The randomized controlled study of Darwish et al. [24] showed that the application of bipolar energy system with electrolyte dilator can significantly reduce the dilator absorption and the reduction of blood sodium level compared with the use of nonelectrolyte dilator. In addition, compared with the unipolar energy system [25], the bipolar energy system has the advantages of rapid blood coagulation and reduced bleeding, and can provide a better field of vision for the hand surgeon. Further, it can shorten the operation time and reduce the suction of perfusion fluid. For these reasons, a bipolar energy system with electrolyte perfusion fluid is recommended for hysteroscopic surgery.
## (s4) The Choice of Uterine Pressure
(p4.0) Clinicians use various methods to improve the factors that may cause OHIA during hysteroscopic surgery. It is necessary to reduce intrauterine pressure as much as possible to reduce the absorption in the blood vessels and the abdominal cavity [14]. In 2012, Chinese Code for Diagnosis and Treatment of Gynecological Hysteroscopy recommended the use of hysteroscopic perfusion system; the perfusion pressure was set at 80-100 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa or ≤ the patient's mean arterial pressure). Hsieh et al. [26] showed that acute pulmonary edema was caused by excessive perfusion pressure.
## (s6) Operation Time
(p6.0) A study on the relationship between types of hysteroscopic fibroids and medium intake showed that the duration of surgical operation is correlated with medium intake [30], indicating that operative time is also an important fac-tor causing OHIA during surgery. Therefore, shortening the operation time can reduce the probability of OHIA.
## (s10) Management of Hypothermia
(p10.0) At present, there is increased awareness of the harm of hypothermia in clinical practice, and there are many thermal measures for perioperative patients, such as skin warmth, air heating, resistance heating, and heat radiator [33]. However, for hysteroscopic surgery, in addition to the above thermal measures, the temperature of dilatant solution is also worth considering. Sessler [21] showed that it was impossible to warm the patient by heating the infusion of fluids; at ambient temperatures, however, each liter of fluid lowers the average adult's body temperature by about 0.25°C. When a large amount of liquid input is required (i.e., several liters per hour) and heating the air alone proves insufficient to keep warm, the injected liquid should be heated. Therefore, adequate thermal insulation for patients in hysteroscopic surgery is vital. To date, most studies on the temperature of dilatant solution used by hysteroscopy have focused on postoperative pain, patient satisfaction, blood loss and intraoperative clarity of hysteroscopy [33,34]. Although these studies do not show the effect of distending medium on body temperature, we do know that distending medium is safe to reach these temperatures during hysteroscopic surgery. At present, iThermonitor monitoring has been gradually applied to monitor the core temperature of patients in clinical operations. Body temperature monitoring can provide a real-time guide on the effect of warming for patients, thereby reducing perioperative chills, affecting the recovery time and postoperative satisfaction of patients.

(p10.1) In sum, for hysteroscopic surgery, it is necessary to shorten the operation time, reduce the volume of distending medium, decrease infusion pressure, carefully monitor the pulmonary water content, prevent perioperative hypothermia, and exercise close monitoring by an anesthesiologist. Nevertheless, certain complications of hysteroscopic surgery remain difficult to avoid.

(p10.2) It is of utmost importance to prevent complications of hysteroscopic surgery. When complications arise, the first choice is to stop the operation and manage according to different situations (e.g., sodium supplementation in severe hyponatremia). Pulmonary edema should be fully diuretic to promote water excretion. At the same time, fluid insulation measures and perioperative insulation may be used to warm the patient.
