# Common Errors in the Management of Idiopathic Clubfeet Using the Ponseti Method: A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 255932466 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5c1cc28b90739b75a200ff6256046316293e3eb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5c1cc28b90739b75a200ff6256046316293e3eb)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Errors in diagnosis:
(p5.0) There are four types of clubfoot: idiopathic, neuromuscular, syndromic, and positional. Because some clubfeet require specific deviations from the original Ponseti method to adequately treat the foot abnormality, it is vital that physicians are diligent during the initial physical examination to ensure the correct diagnosis is made.

(p5.1) Idiopathic clubfoot is the most common type and is further classified into typical (TIC) and atypical (ATIC) types, both presenting with isolated foot abnormalities and varying degrees of severity. In the TIC, there is a greater amount of fibrotic tissue in the gastrocsoleus, tibialis posterior and long toe flexor muscles, the posterior ankle, and medial tarsal ligaments. In the ATIC, the gastrocsoleus and plantar intrinsic muscles are more involved. This results in a shorter and stubbier foot, severe plantar flexion of all the metatarsals, a deep transverse crease in the sole, a deep crease above the heel, and hyperextended hallux. While TIC is treated with the Ponseti method, modifications are made with ATIC including use of a supination maneuver, midfoot dorsiflexion technique, early tenotomy, and placement of the foot abduction orthosis at less external rotation (40 degrees) [23][24][25].

(p5.2) Neuromuscular clubfoot (NMC) is secondary to disorders such as spina bifida, congenital myotonic dystrophy, congenital myopathies, or congenital peroneal neuropathy [26]. Patients with NMC may present with a drop-toe sign, described as resting toes in a plantar flexion position without toe extension following plantar stimulation. This contrasts with idiopathic clubfeet that show toe dorsiflexion while moving the foot and active toe and ankle dorsiflexion upon plantar stimulation [27]. While treatment protocols are like those for TIC, the cause of relapse is different. In a case series by Lovell et al., 6% of their patient population had relapse events after 7 years of age despite most relapses occurring before the age of 6 years. Thirty-one percent of these patients had a late neuromuscular condition diagnosis such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1A or myasthenia gravis [28]. Therefore, it is important for physicians to realize that relapses may not be due to poor treatment protocol but from an underlying previously undiagnosed neuromuscular condition.

(p5.3) Syndromic clubfoot is usually secondary to other medical conditions such as arthrogryposis, tibial hemimelia, fibular hemimelia, diastrophic dysplasia, and constriction band syndrome, among others. Studies comparing idiopathic and syndromic clubfoot have reported the need for more serial casts to correct the foot deformity (mean of 6.5 versus 4 in the TIC), a greater need for surgical intervention, and a higher rate of relapse for the latter [29,30].

(p5.4) Positional clubfoot presents as a flexible, typically fully developed foot that is inverted and internally rotated due to prolonged positioning in utero. This is commonly associated with larger babies, oligohydramnios, and multiple pregnancies. There are no differences in the length and width of the foot, and the foot has full range of motion in all joints. Because there are no bony or soft tissue abnormalities, conservative treatment of stretching and range of motion exercises are typically sufficient in correcting the clubfoot [31,32].
## (s11) Errors during the bracing phase:
(p11.0) After obtaining correction of all components of the clubfoot deformity through serial casting and tenotomy, patients must wear a foot abduction brace (FAB) full-time for the first 3 months and part-time (night and nap time) for 4-5 years to maintain the correction and prevent relapse [48,49]. Ninety percent of relapses happen before the age of 5 years, which is why currently, the recommendation is to continue wearing the brace until that age even if the parents believe the deformity appears corrected prior. Noncompliance or failure to wear the FAB is one of if not the most significant factor leading to relapse of the deformity [36]. Two studies showed brace noncompliance rates of 41% and 36% were 183 and 120 times more likely to relapse compared to children who fully followed their bracing protocols [36,50]. Another error in bracing is attempting to fit a brace before the foot is fully corrected. Agarwal et al. showed that 7-10% of patients who had not achieved greater than 15 degrees of dorsiflexion, required stretch casts after tenotomy before bracing could be started [51]. One of the largest areas of variability in the Ponseti method is brace design, and as such, poor brace design will increase the risk of brace intolerance, as the brace may not be comfortable to wear and results in non-compliance with the bracing protocol [16,38]. Use of the correct type of brace is important because the child will only wear the brace if it is comfortable [48,52,53]. (Figures 9 and 10) Children 2023, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 17 the brace may not be comfortable to wear and results in non-compliance with the bracing protocol [16,38]. Use of the correct type of brace is important because the child will only wear the brace if it is comfortable [48,52,53]. (Figures 9 and 10) Figure 9. Clinical picture showing a child with fully corrected B/L clubfeet in a correctly designed foot abduction brace. Figure 10. Picture showing the principle of trying to fit a square peg into a round hole; this applies to fitting a clubfoot that is not fully corrected into a foot abduction brace (to be avoided).

(p11.1) Applying the FAB brace too tightly can cause an anterior ankle pressure area, while applying too loosely can cause foot slipping out of the brace a posterior heel pressure area, leading to brace intolerance (Figures 11 and 12). the brace may not be comfortable to wear and results in non-compliance with the bracing protocol [16,38]. Use of the correct type of brace is important because the child will only wear the brace if it is comfortable [48,52,53]. (Figures 9 and 10) Figure 9. Clinical picture showing a child with fully corrected B/L clubfeet in a correctly designed foot abduction brace.
