# The Link between Different Types of Prebiotics in Infant Formula and Infection Rates: A Review

CorpusID: 258227879 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4eff27713006af4b4881c02d0be017867876661](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4eff27713006af4b4881c02d0be017867876661)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Human milk offers multiple advantages in comparison to infant formula, such as a more balanced development of the immune system, decreased prevalence of infections, and better cognitive development [1][2][3]. These differences are at least partially related to the differences in the intestinal microbiota composition of breastfed infants compared to formula-fed infants, particularly with respect to Bifidobacteria species [4][5][6].
## (s3) Galactooligosaccharides (GOSs)/Fructooligosaccharides (FOSs)
(p3.0) We found six publications reporting on four trials with short-chain (sc) GOSs and longchain (lc) FOSs, as listed in Table 2 [26,27,[30][31][32][33]. All patients were healthy term infants born in Europe. Two trials reported short-and long-term observations (six months [30] to two years [26] and one year [32] to five years [33]). A total of 2206 participants were included, of whom 946 participants received scGOSs/lcFOSs in a range of 4 to 8 g/L. A total of 960 participants were included in the control group and received unsupplemented infant formula. In the study of van Stuijvenberg et al. [32,33], a third group with breastfeeding was included as a reference group. One study was not blinded [27]. In one study, only patients with a parental history of atopy were included [26,30], whereas parental atopic history was an exclusion criterion in two other studies [31][32][33].

(p3.1) In the trial reported by Arslanoglu et al., the effect of 8 g/L GOSs/FOSs was evaluated in infants with a parental atopic history. During the six months of intervention, a difference was noted in the prevalence of infections (p = 0.01), recurrent infections (p < 0.05), and recurrent upper respiratory tract infections (p < 0.05) [30]. Antibiotic intake tended to be lower, but this was not statistically significant (p = 0.1). After an observation of two years, the number of infections was still lower (p < 0.01), and a statistically significant difference in antibiotic use was observed (p < 0.05) [26]. There were also less upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs) (p < 0.01). Furthermore, this trial showed a trend of a lower incidence of urinary tract infections (p = 0.06).

(p3.2) In an open controlled trial by Bruzzese et al., infants were given 4 g/L GOSs/FOSs over the course of one year [27]. The included patients were 15 to 120 days old at inclusion and had a minimum of two weeks of exclusive breastfeeding. In this study, the prevalence of diarrhoea episodes was lower (p = 0.015). The number of URTIs was comparable (p = 0.4), but the number of recurrent URTIs tended to be lower (p = 0.06). Only 60% of the participants had at least one URTI, but there were no precise observations about the annual infection rate per child. The mean antibiotic use was lower (p = 0.038), as was the number children receiving two or more antibiotic courses per year (p = 0.004).

(p3.3) Bocquet et al. investigated the effects of 4 g/L GOSs/FOSs added to infant formula [31]. Bifidobacterium animalis subspecies lactis (B. lactis) was added to both the control and intervention formula, given to 278 and 290 infants, respectively. After an intervention and observation time of 12 months, there were no differences in the overall infection rates (p = 0.18), nor in the different types of infections (i.e., upper and lower RTIs, gastrointestinal infections, and others). There were no differences in antibiotic use (p = 0.3).  The fourth study explored the outcomes of 6.8 g/L GOSs/FOSs and 1.2 g/L pectinederived acidic OSs added to infant formula (n = 414), compared to standard formula (n = 416) and breastfeeding (n = 300), during an intervention period of 12 months. The primary outcome was the number of episodes of fever, defined by a rectal temperature > 38.5 • C. After the observation periods of 1 and 5 years, no differences in the occurrence of fever episodes were reported (p > 0.05 [32] and p = 0.22 [33], respectively). However, in a per protocol analysis, a reduction in fever in the first 6 months was reported (p < 0.05) [32]. Overall, a low infection rate (1.15/child/year) was reported. However, it is noteworthy that more infection episodes were reported in the breastfeeding group, especially for 'runny or blocked nose'.
## (s4) Human Milk Oligosaccharides
(p4.0) We retained six publications on human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) ( Table 3) [28,[34][35][36][37][38] involving a total of 1571 infants, conducted in America, Europe, and Asia. Five studies included only healthy term infants, and one study examined the effects of HMOs on infants with cow's milk allergy (CMA). HMOs were added in a range of 0.25 g/L to 5.8 g/L, using 2 -FL, LNnT, 3 -FL, LNT, 3 -SL, and 6 -SL.

(p4.1) The first study was published in 2015 by Marriage et al. In this study, four groups were compared: (i) formula supplemented with 2.2 g/L GOSs and 0.2 g/L 2 -FL; (ii) 1.4 g/L GOSs and 1 g/L 2 -FL; (iii) in the control group, infant formula with 2.4 g/L GOSs; and (iv) a breastfed reference group. After an intervention and observation period of four months, there were more infections in the second intervention group (38/109) and in the control group (28/109) compared to the first intervention group (11/104) (p < 0.05) [34]. These results were not compared to the breastfeeding group. It should be noted that the control group received a prebiotic as well, and that the total dosage of prebiotic was 2.4 g/L in each group. Considering this study setup and its results, which are difficult to interpret, this study was not considered in our conclusions.

(p4.2) In the study by Puccio et al., formula was supplemented with 2 -FL and LNnT for six months [28]. After an observation period of 12 months, fewer infections (p = 0.051) and a decreased use of antibiotics (p < 0.05) were reported. Furthermore, there was less bronchitis (p < 0.01) and a lower incidence of RTIs (p < 0.05).

(p4.3) Storm and co-workers added a small amount of 2 -FL (0.25 g/L) to partially hydrolysed formula containing B. lactis over a period of six weeks. The control formula contained B. lactis as well. In the adverse events, they observed a reduction in the incidence of infections, which was low in both groups (9/38 vs. 3/40; p = 0.05) [35]. Due to the small sample of participants (78 infants), short period of intervention, and low infection rate, this study was not included in our conclusions.

(p4.4) In two RCTs, published by Parschat and Lasekan, a mix of five HMOs (5.75 g/L) was added to infant formula over the course of four months. Both investigations reported no decrease in infection rates. In the study of Parschat et al., the infection rate was 32/113 vs. 28/112 (p = 0.54) [36]. In the study of Lasekan et al., the antipyretic use was comparable (4/128 and 4/126), as was the antibiotic use (4/128 vs. 4/126) [38]. However, the study of Lasekan was conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic, where the infection rates in infants were generally low (7.6% of included patients), which is likely to have had an impact on these observations. When added to extensively hydrolysed formula in a study population of 190 infants, 2 -FL and LNnT were associated with a reduction in the frequency of a range of infections [37]. In the subgroups, there was a risk reduction of 34% for lower RTIs (13/94 vs. 20/96; p = 0.25). There was no difference in the incidence of URTIs (p = 0.77); however, the frequency of URTIs per year was lower (p = 0.003). Further analyses showed a reduction in otitis media (p = 0.17; relative risk reduction 70%) and fewer gastrointestinal infections (p = 0.021). There were no reductions in antipyretic (p = 0.6) or antibiotic use (p = 0.8).
## (s5) Other Prebiotics
(p5.0) Studies concerning other prebiotics are listed in Table 4.     When only adding 4.4-5 g/L GOSs to infant formula until the age of one year, no significant reduction in the prevalence of infections was reported [39]. This conclusion was held after observing 365 infants until the age of one year, where there was no reduction in URTIs (p = 0.44), recurrent URTIs (p = 0.87), episodes of diarrhoea (p = 0.36), or in the prescription rate of antibiotics (p = 0.48). In this trial, only infections diagnosed by a paediatrician were included.
## (s8) Upper Respiratory Tract Infections
(p8.0) Out of four studies, one showed that supplementation with GOSs/FOSs resulted in a reduction in the incidence of URTIs in a short-and long-term observation [26,30]. Another trial did not show a reduction [27]. The other manuscript discussing GOSs/FOSs did not present data on URTIs.

(p8.1) Two studies with HMOs showed no reduction in the total number of episodes of URTIs [28,37], although a reduction in the annual frequency was reported in the second study [37]. The effect on URTIs was not reported in the other trials concerning HMO supplementation.

(p8.2) GOS/PDX supplementation during the first 48 weeks of life was reported to reduce URTIs during this period, but this effect could not be confirmed after 96 weeks [40]. GOSs [39], GOSs with high amounts β-palmitic acid [41], and MOSs [42] did not have an impact on this type of infection.
## (s9) Lower Respiratory Tract Infection
(p9.0) In all of the trials, the incidence of LRTIs was low or not examined. Focusing on GOSs/FOSs, no reduction in LRTIs was proven in two studies [26,27]. HMOs were associated with a reduction in the incidence of LRTIs in one study [28]. A second trial showed a relative risk reduction of 33.7% after adding HMOs [37]. MOSs had no influence on LRTIs [42]. Other prebiotic studies did not examine LRTIs.
## (s10) Gastrointestinal Infections
(p10.0) According to data from four studies, GOSs/FOSs do not reduce the rate of gastrointestinal infections [26,30,31,33]. However, in the study of van Stuijvenberg et al. in 2015, a reduction in the duration of infection was reported [33]. In only one study a reduction in GI infections was reported for GOSs/FOSs [27]. Gastrointestinal infections were reported to be statistically insignificantly reduced (p = 0.2), with a relative risk reduction of 40% in one HMO study [37]. Supplementation with GOSs [39], GOSs/PDX [40], or βPA/GOSs [41] did not influence this type of infection.
## (s11) Other Infections
(p11.0) GOS/FOS supplementation for one year showed a small reduction in the incidence of urinary tract infections during a period of two years in one study [26]. In one trial, there were zero versus four urinary tract infections in a total population of 194 participants after adding HMOs [37].
## (s12) Antibiotic Use
(p12.0) Concerning the addition of GOSs/FOSs to infant formula, three trials showed a reduction in antibiotic use [26,27,30], which is disputed by three other studies [31][32][33] in which there was no difference. The reduction in antibiotic use after adding HMOs to infant formula was only demonstrated in one study [28], while it was refuted in two others [37,38]. Supplementation with GOSs or GOSs/PDX did not influence the incidence of antibiotic use [39,40]. A GOS/PDX trial suggested a reduction in recurrent (>3 times/year) use [39,40].
## (s15) Breastfeeding
(p15.0) The literature shows that breastfeeding during the first four to six months has a significant influence on the infection rate during infancy [44,45]. However, some studies already show an advantage after breastfeeding the first two weeks [46]. It is interesting to reflect on the possible (positive) effects of breastfeeding in the included trials. In most of the studies, the influence of breastfeeding could be considered to be low, as the infants were included before the age of 2-4 weeks. In contrast, in the study of Bruzzese et al., it was impossible to exclude a possible effect of breastfeeding; hence, exclusive breastfeeding during the first two weeks of life was an inclusion criterion [27]. Moreover, inclusion was allowed until the age of four months; thus, breastfeeding was possible during this period. The same influence of breastfeeding can be discussed in the other studies. Furthermore, in some studies, breastfeeding was allowed in the intervention group, along with the infant formula containing the prebiotic, without specifying how much breastfeeding was given [26,27,30,32,33].
## (s16) Dose and Intervention Period
(p16.0) There is an important heterogeneity in the different studies concerning the dose of prebiotics. In the subcategory of GOSs/FOSs, a range of 4 to 8 g/L was added to infant formula in the different trials. This variety was even greater in interventional studies with HMOs, which were supplemented between 0.25 g/L and 5.8 g/L.

(p16.1) If we look at the time period in which the prebiotic is taken, there is a diversity between six weeks and one year. If we take into account that most of the literature suggests that breastfeeding has the greatest advantage against infection during the first six months of life, we could hypothesise that it would be beneficial to add the prebiotic at least during this period. However, it remains unclear what supplemental advantage is offered by adding the prebiotic to infant formula for a longer period.

(p16.2) In the studies in which the observation time was longer than the intervention period, different outcomes were noted. Puccio noted a health advantage at least until the age of 12 months, after taking HMOs until the age of six months [28]. This prolonged prebiotic effect was also noted in the trial of Arslanoglu using scGOSs/lcFOSs [26]. Regarding the intake of GOSs/PDX, they only observed a reduction in respiratory infections during the 48 weeks in which the prebiotic was taken, but this effect was no longer observed in the following 48 weeks [40].
## (s18) Low Infection Rates
(p18.0) The mean annual infection rate in children under three years is three to five [17,18]. In the studies investigated in this review, the incidence of infection in infants and young children varied widely but was lower than expected overall. The low infection rates in the different trials could have led to minimising the observed effect.
## (s19) Atopy/Allergy
(p19.0) In some studies, parental atopic history was an exclusion criterion, focusing the research on healthy infants-for example, in the trials of Van Stuijvenberg et al. and Bocquet et al. [31][32][33]. In contrast, parental history of atopy was an inclusion criterion in other studies [26,30]. Given the fact that parental history of atopy enhances the risk of atopy for the child, and that atopy is relied to more infections [48,49], it might be possible that those children would receive a greater advantage from the prebiotic effect. This assumption has not yet been investigated.
## (s20) Caesarean Section
(p20.0) Caesarean section is also considered to be a contributor to enhanced infection rates. Only in the study of Puccio et al. did a sub-analysis show a more important prebiotic effect in the infants born by caesarean than in those born by vaginal birth [28].
