# R E V I E W Antibacterial Pathways in Transition Metal-Based Nanocomposites: A Mechanistic Overview

CorpusID: 255335223 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ec53bbf3a4b6b45acfae7f3067f7a9e565dcbf27](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ec53bbf3a4b6b45acfae7f3067f7a9e565dcbf27)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s1) Photodynamic Dynamic Antibacterial Therapy Mechanistic Overview of Photodynamic Therapy
(p1.0) Light-actuated materials have been used for some time to treat infections, and for more than 100 years this has been called photodynamic therapy (PDT). PDT needs two components to be useful: light and a material or compound that can be sharpened by bright ultraviolet (UV) or apparent locales of the electromagnetic range of visible light illumination ( Figure 1). Currently, photodynamic therapy is employed as an alternative therapy for the management of malignant disorders. It is based on the uptake of a photosensitizer molecule, which, when activated by light at a specific wavelength, combines with oxygen to produce oxidant species (radicals, singlet oxygen, and triplet species), which cause cell death in the target areas. It has been determined that PDT's cytotoxic effects result from the oxidation of a wide variety of biomolecules in cells, including nucleic acids, lipids, and proteins, which causes a serious modification in cell signaling cascades or in the regulation of gene expression. 44 The mechanism of PDT is described by two sorts of pathways: type I reaction involves electrons and holes transfer to generate radical and radical anion species and type 2 reaction goes through with energy transfer between oxygen and excited nanomaterials. The type I response system of nanomaterials under light illumination can produce ROS like hydroxyl radical (·OH), superoxide anion (·O 2 − ), and hydrogen peroxide and requires higher actuation energy.  
## (s3) 6823
(p3.0) used because of their unrivaled photocatalytic properties, minimal expense, the bandgap is substantially reduced when compared to their single metallic nanostructures, and compelling antibacterial properties. [45][46][47] NPs under notable light illumination are accepted as compelling photocatalysts and can create ROS for powerful antibacterial actions. [48][49][50][51][52][53] Photodynamic
## (s4) Mechanisms of Transition Metals and Their Composites
(p4.0) In our recent study, we reported photodynamic action of CuS nanosheets (NSs) under simulated sunlight irradiation based on ROS and electron spin resonance (ESR) data, and a reaction mechanism for photocatalysis was postulated ( Figure 2A). 54 CuS NSs and CuS NPs outperformed their counterparts in terms of photoactivity and antibacterial efficiency in creating ROS, such as ·OH and ·O 2 − radicals. In addition, simulated light irradiation of CuS microspheres (MSs), CuS NSs, and CuS NPs produced photoelectrons and holes, which produced ROS such as ·OH and ·O 2 − radicals.

(p4.1) As a result, as previously stated, CuS undergoes photodegradation, which produces sulfur vacancies, copper ions, and carbon residues, resulting in the adsorption of ambient moisture (validated by UV-visible-NIR spectroscopy and ESR). Furthermore, the conduction mechanism in CuS NSs and CuS NPs is elicited by ambient oxygen under solar light illumination due to the presence of carbon and oxygen remnants. As a result, carbon and oxygen remnants in CuS NSs and CuS NPs allow the further formation of ·O 2 − radicals by photocatalytic electron transport while also narrowing the gap between CuS NS and CuS NP valence bands (VBs) and conduction bands (CBs). CuS NSs and CuS NPs generate ·OH and ·O 2 − radicals that permanently damage bacterial cell envelopes. Furthermore, E. coli growth curves of CuS NSs and CuSNPs were consistent with prior research on ROS generation and radical identification. [55][56][57] The metallic phase of 1T-MoS 2 nanoflowers (NFs) and the semiconducting phase of 2H-MoS 2 NFs were discovered to be photoactive when exposed to visible light (at ca. 400~700 nm). 58 In this work, metallic 1T-MoS 2 NFs were shown to create more ROS than semiconducting 2H-MoS 2 NFs when exposed to light. The enhanced light-driven antibacterial activity of 1T-MoS 2 NFs over 2H-MoS 2 NFs can possibly be attributed to phase variations between the metallic and semiconducting phases. Previous research showed that metallic 1T-MoS 2 NFs emit photoelectrons when exposed to light via a photoelectronic effect. The mechanism of light-driven antibacterial action of 1T-MoS 2 NFs appears to be that when exposed to light, photoelectrons created by metallic 1T-MoS 2 NFs interact with oxygen to produce superoxide (·O 2 − ), as illustrated in Figure 2B. When exposed to light, semiconducting 2H-MoS 2 NFs create photoinduced electron-hole pairs. Photoinduced electron-hole pair recombination reduces the efficiency of ROS production in semiconducting 2H-MoS 2 NFs, resulting in a reduction in the light-driven antibacterial function. As a consequence, metallic 1T-MoS 2 NFs were shown to exhibit more light-driven antimicrobial properties than semiconducting 2H-MoS 2 NFs. Metallic 1T-MoS 2 NFs, with their excellent photoactivity and simple fabrication, might be a potential light-driven antimicrobial for advances in food security, water cleansing, and medical sterilization. The mechanism of highly light-driven antibacterial action of metallic 1T-MoS 2 NFs is that when exposed to light, metallic 1T-MoS 2 NFs create photoelectrons, which subsequently combine with oxygen to produce superoxide, which causes bacterial death. When exposed to light, semiconducting 2H-MoS 2 NFs generate photoinduced electron-hole pairs, and the recombination of the photoinduced electrons and holes reduces the production of ROS, lowering light-driven antibacterial activity. [58][59][60][61][62] In one of our recent studies, we noted that according to bacterial growth data, light-induced antibacterial activity increased in the sequence of FeS 2 NPs, TiO 2 NPs, and TiO 2 /FeS 2 nanocomposites (NCs). 63 Moreover, the mechanism was explained using bandgaps of TiO 2 NPs and FeS 2 NPs in the UV-visible-NIR range of the electromagnetic spectrum estimated to be 3.2 and 0.95 eV, respectively, using a schematic representation ( Figure 3). 64 Pairing TiO 2 NPs and FeS 2 NPs was found to increase the photoactivity. TiO 2 /FeS 2 NCs were found to have greater light-induced antibacterial activity than TiO 2 NPs or FeS 2 NPs alone in that investigation. Figure 4A displays a schematic of the mechanism of light-induced antibacterial activity in TiO 2 /FeS 2 NCs. When compared to a traditional hydrogen electrode, the CB and VB of TiO 2 NPs were 0.2 and 3 eV, respectively (normal hydrogen electrode (NHE)). As an outcome,  
## (s7) DovePress
(p7.0) International Journal of Nanomedicine 2022:17 6826 revealed that the photodynamic behavior of Ti 3 C 2 /PF 1 O 2 generation was similar to that of black phosphorus and graphene quantum dots. Under light illumination, Ti 3 C 2 /PF generates photoinduced electrons and subsequently transfers energy to the ground-state oxygen, 3 O 2 , to generate 1 O 2 species. Similarly, because of the SPR effect, AuNPs can generate ROS when exposed to light. The Au/Ti 3 C 2 photoactive membrane also showed good photoactive antibacterial capabilities, inactivating 6.7 log10 colony-forming units (CFU) mL -1 E. coli K-12 in 20 min and 7.1 log10 CFU mL -1 Sphingopyxis sp. BM1-1 in 10 min. [78][79][80][81][82][83] To achieve an effective antibacterial effect, a new photocatalytic antibacterial material was developed, and its mechanism of action is shown in Figure 5B. Titanium carbide (Ti 3 C 2 T x )@copper sulfide (CuS) composites were created using a straightforward hydrothermal technique in which CuS NPs were attached to the surface of Ti 3 C 2 Tx to significantly improve its photocatalytic and antibacterial properties. Ti 3 C 2 T x @CuS had 99.6% bactericidal activity against E. coli and 99.1% bactericidal activity against S. aureus. CuS is a p-type semiconductor that is stimulated by a light source to cause hybridization. Excited electrons exit, forming electron-hole pairs. When electrons and holes are separated, they can interact with O 2 and H 2 O to form ROS such as superoxide and hydroxyl radicals. The transfer of excited electrons to the conductive Ti 3 C 2 T x after CuS is compounded with it enhances the separation of electrons and holes and boosts the ROS-generating ability. The Ti 3 C 2 T x @CuS heterojunction offers a wide range of potential applications in the decontamination and antimicrobial domains. [84][85][86] Photothermal Antibacterial Therapy Mechanistic Overview of Photothermal Therapy PTT is one of several ways developed as an innovative strategy to tackle infectious diseases in response to resistance to antibiotics. 87 When photoresponsive nanomaterials are activated with a suitable NIR laser, the plasmon resonance band causes the conversion of electromagnetic energy to heat. The resultant heat can reach levels high enough to kill bacterial cells. The photothermal effect causes membrane damage, which leads to protein inactivation and/or leakage, ultimately leading to bacterial mortality ( Figure 6). [88][89][90] PTT is effective against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, independent of bacterial resistance. It is rapid, non-intrusive, and accurate, and can be regulated by the incident light and duration of irradiation. PTT, moreover, can be used with other therapies like PDT, chemotherapy, radiation, and so on to improve treatment outcomes. As a result, numerous photothermal NPs or nanostructures are being produced to treat bacterial diseases. Photothermal therapy agents are photothermal NPs that are classified as metallic materials, metal sulfides, oxides, carbon-based nanostructured materials, small molecule-based nanomaterials, and polymeric NPs. When compared to inorganic or organic photothermal therapy agents, a group of transition metals and their oxide and sulfide forms can absorb more laser energy. [91][92][93][94][95][96] Furthermore, PTT is considered as one of the most promising methods when combined with transition metals for disinfection and effective antimicrobial activity. 
