# A Review of Current and Evolving Imaging Techniques in Cardiac Amyloidosis

CorpusID: 257360968 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02ecaac26f8d2f5e6e7ec976687f9b8dc1578eeb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02ecaac26f8d2f5e6e7ec976687f9b8dc1578eeb)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Cardiac magnetic resonance
(p7.0) Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging is the gold-standard modality for assessing structure and function in all four chambers of the heart, but its key strength lies in myocardial tissue characterization [56]. Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE), typically used to identify replacement fibrosis in entities such as myocardial infarction or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, has long been noted as a feature of cardiac amyloidosis as well [57]. A notable distinction is that in CA, LGE correlates not with replacement fibrosis, but with interstitial amyloid accumulation [58]. The typical LGE pattern of CA is global, predominantly subendocardial LGE. A closely associated feature, considered pathognomonic for CA, is the inability to null the myocardium on the inversion (TI) scout sequence performed in preparation for LGE imaging. In such scenarios, the myocardial extracellular matrix, expanded with amyloid fibrils, retains a similar amount of gadolinium as the blood pool, leading to indistinguishable T1 recovery curves. This, in turn, leads to difficulty in identifying the T1 null point of healthy myocardium, required for LGE techniques.
## (s8) T1 mapping
(p8.0) Parametric mapping has allowed for additional CMR characterization of cardiac amyloid. Myocardial T1, which represents interstitial expansion that may be commonly related to myocardial edema or fibrosis, is also lengthened by the matrix expansion of myocardial amyloid deposition. The magnitude of T1 elevation is particularly large in CA, allowing for its distinction from other cardiomyopathies [59]. Importantly, so-called native T1 mapping provides a CMR mechanism to CA evaluation that does not require gadolinium contrast.
## (s9) T2 mapping
(p9.0) T2 mapping also aids in the identification and prognostication of cardiac amyloidosis. T2 is sensitive to myocardial water content and state, and the edema associated with the myocyte toxicity of amyloid proteins leads to elevations in T2 times [64]. Myocardial T2 times appear to be prognostic and track response to treatment in AL, but not ATTR amyloid which is thought to be due to the direct cardiotoxicity of light chains themselves causing a greater degree of edema [65].
## (s10) Diffusion tensor MRI
(p10.0) Another non-contrast magnetic resonance technique that has emerged for the characterization of CA is diffusion tensor MRI (DT-MRI). By tracking water diffusion through tissue, DT-MRI allows the evaluation of myocardial microstructure, quantifying fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), and myocardial sheetlet orientation. Early studies have demonstrated that MD tracks well with ECV estimates across amyloid subtypes, but that diastolic sheetlet changes may differ between ATTR and AL [69]. Additional validation studies and standardization of clinical protocols are the next important steps for this promising technique.
