# Planning and Decision-making for Connected Autonomous Vehicles at Road Intersections: A Review

CorpusID: 254113548 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f31a9b2ba85893c4b02455e22d6e44b841e6cf8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f31a9b2ba85893c4b02455e22d6e44b841e6cf8)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s6) End-to-End Neural Network Approach
(p6.0) One common approach for the neural network (NN) approach is the end-to-end approach, that is, by feeding in the images and sensor information of expert drivers driving at intersections and the actual actions of the drivers at such scenarios, a NN network is trained so that when at a similar scenario, giving the original input from the sensors, the model will be able to directly provide actions as output. This mean that the logic in the decision-making from perception to action is embedded in the NNs. Ref. [64] uses end-to-end methods as the core of its proposed algorithm, however, they used 360-degree camera instead of only using front camera as classical end-to-end planners would do. The trained network has also been carefully modified to adapt to the new censoring format. Also, a route planner is added to help the driving task significantly. Which as result, this proposed method could decrease the chances of collision at intersections. Instead of only having camera input for classical end-to-end methods, Ref. [65] took LIDAR and HD maps as inputs which enables a 3D interpretation, the paper put the newly proposed method into real-world practice, and the learned cost volume could help the ego vehicle perform more safely at intersections, and the vehicle is able to handle traffic light while interacting with the surrounding traffic participants.

(p6.1) One common approach for the neural network (NN) approach is the end-to-end approach, that is, by feeding in the images and sensor information of expert drivers driving at intersections and the actual actions of the drivers at such scenarios, a NN network is trained so that when at a similar scenario, giving the original input from the sensors, the model will be able to directly provide actions as output. This mean that the logic in the decision-making from perception to action is embedded in the NNs. Ref. [64] uses end-to-end methods as the core of its proposed algorithm, however, they used 360-degree camera instead of only using front camera as classical end-to-end planners would do. The trained network has also been carefully modified to adapt to the new censoring format. Also, a route planner is added to help the driving task significantly. Which as result, this proposed method could decrease the chances of collision at intersections. Instead of only having camera input for classical end-to-end methods, Ref. [65] took LIDAR and HD maps as inputs which enables a 3D interpretation, the paper put the newly proposed method into real-world practice, and the learned cost volume could help the ego vehicle perform more safely at intersections, and the vehicle is able to handle traffic light while interacting with the surrounding traffic participants.
## (s8) Partially Observable Markov Decision-Making Process Approach
(p8.0) In a Markov decision-making process (MDP) model, all the states, transfer functions, reward functions, etc. are considered to be static. However, in the real-world application and modeling, the states of the participants and environment are not always fully observable. Thus, to represent this uncertainty of the real world, a partially observable Markov decision-making process (POMDP) based approach has been widely applied and is becoming an emerging technique for highly interactive intersection planning problems for self-driving vehicles. POMDP is a decision-making framework for the agent in an uncertain scenario. The model is able to merge the uncertainties formulation into its own framework, for decision-making and planning of self-driving vehicles, these uncertainties could be sensors perception noise, surrounding drivers' intention uncertainties, future paths uncertainties and control output uncertainties. The agent would receive an observation from the reward after a decision had been generated at each time step [72]. The major approach for solving the POMDP problems could be categorized into two types, one of them is the exact solution methods and another one is the approximate solution methods. For real-world intersections planning problems which is very complicated, an exact solution is often impossible to find in real time, therefore, it is common to obtains approximate results as the solution.

(p8.1) Bouton et al. [73] navigated the ego vehicle at intersection scenarios where frequent changes usually occurred by modeling the problem into a POMDP problem and solved the problem using Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) method, the presented results proved that the planner outperform the threshold-based heuristic method in both safety and efficiency. Ref. [74] also formulated the intersection planning and decision-making problem into a POMDP problem, the paper modeled the unknown intention of the surrounding vehicles with a probabilistic model and merged that into the observation model of the POMDP model. By solving the POMDP problem, the ego vehicle was able to make decisions in a continuous space on a fixed path at intersections in an online manner. Extend from Ref. [74], Ref. [75] proposed an intersection planning and decision model that the model is able to coop with multiple surrounding vehicles and was capable to outperform the base-line method in computation time, the proposed POMDP model was also able to operate in a continuous state space. Due to the curse of computational complexity, planning methods using POMDP methods often plans the vehicle's speed on a fixed path. However, this indicates that the intersection is not fully explored, Refs. [76,77] proposed a critical turning point (CTP) concept that enables the ego vehicle to generate several candidate paths to select and follow. which the candidate paths are generated through quintic polynomials. Given the candidate paths, the ego vehicle is able to select a candidate path and then plan speed along the selected path based on the beliefs of the uncertain intentions of the oncoming vehicle. Therefore, the intersection space is better explored under a limited amount of computational power.

(p8.2) Ref. [78] considered occlusion caused by both dynamic and static objects, and represented the movements of the surrounding vehicles in the observation filed (OF) and the phantom vehicles as reachable sets. This enabled the ego vehicle to operate in urban intersections and perform less conservative yet safe actions compared to the traditional method. Brechtel et al. [79] considered several kinds of uncertainties and predicted the results from different actions due to various assumptions in the proposed algorithm. The authors did not applied symbolic representation to represent the state-space for all the possible cases, instead, they used a continuous solver that represents specific situations. Ref. [27] developed decision-making at generalized congested intersections that avoided both static and dynamic obstacles. The objects in the observable area were being predicted and the objects in the occluded area were modified with more attention to avoid dangerous collisions. The proposed algorithm was able to generate human-like behaviors at uncontrolled intersections.

(p8.3) In a Markov decision-making process (MDP) model, all the states, transfer functions, reward functions, etc. are considered to be static. However, in the real-world application and modeling, the states of the participants and environment are not always fully observable. Thus, to represent this uncertainty of the real world, a partially observable Markov decision-making process (POMDP) based approach has been widely applied and is becoming an emerging technique for highly interactive intersection planning problems for self-driving vehicles. POMDP is a decision-making framework for the agent in an uncertain scenario. The model is able to merge the uncertainties formulation into its own framework, for decision-making and planning of self-driving vehicles, these uncertainties could be sensors perception noise, surrounding drivers' intention uncertainties, future paths uncertainties and control output uncertainties. The agent would receive an observation from the reward after a decision had been generated at each time step [72]. The major approach for solving the POMDP problems could be categorized into two types, one of them is the exact solution methods and another one is the approximate solution methods. For real-world intersections planning problems which is very complicated, an exact solution is often impossible to find in real time, therefore, it is common to obtains approximate results as the solution.

(p8.4) Bouton et al. [73] navigated the ego vehicle at intersection scenarios where frequent changes usually occurred by modeling the problem into a POMDP problem and solved the problem using Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) method, the presented results proved that the planner outperform the threshold-based heuristic method in both safety and efficiency. Ref. [74] also formulated the intersection planning and decision-making problem into a POMDP problem, the paper modeled the unknown intention of the surrounding vehicles with a probabilistic model and merged that into the observation model of the POMDP model. By solving the POMDP problem, the ego vehicle was able to make decisions in a continuous space on a fixed path at intersections in an online manner. Extend from Ref. [74], Ref. [75] proposed an intersection planning and decision model that the model is able to coop with multiple surrounding vehicles and was capable to outperform the base-line method in computation time, the proposed POMDP model was also able to operate in a continuous state space. Due to the curse of computational complexity, planning methods using POMDP methods often plans the vehicle's speed on a fixed path. However, this indicates that the intersection is not fully explored, Refs. [76,77] proposed a critical turning point (CTP) concept that enables the ego vehicle to generate several candidate paths to select and follow. which the candidate paths are generated through quintic polynomials. Given the candidate paths, the ego vehicle is able to select a candidate path and then plan speed along the selected path based on the beliefs of the uncertain intentions of the oncoming vehicle. Therefore, the intersection space is better explored under a limited amount of computational power.

(p8.5) Ref. [78] considered occlusion caused by both dynamic and static objects, and represented the movements of the surrounding vehicles in the observation filed (OF) and the phantom vehicles as reachable sets. This enabled the ego vehicle to operate in urban intersections and perform less conservative yet safe actions compared to the traditional method. Brechtel et al. [79] considered several kinds of uncertainties and predicted the results from different actions due to various assumptions in the proposed algorithm. The authors did not applied symbolic representation to represent the state-space for all the possible cases, instead, they used a continuous solver that represents specific situations. Ref. [27] developed decision-making at generalized congested intersections that avoided both static and dynamic obstacles. The objects in the observable area were being predicted and the objects in the occluded area were modified with more attention to avoid dangerous collisions. The proposed algorithm was able to generate human-like behaviors at uncontrolled intersections.
## (s10) Cooperation Methods in Signalized Intersection
(p10.0) Research on optimization algorithms on traffic conflict at intersections began at the end of the last century. Since the concept of CAV has not yet emerged at that time, the early research on traffic optimization algorithms focused on the study of signal timing, i.e., optimization on the traffic signal phase and timing (SPAT).

(p10.1) In 1998, Schutter used optimal control to minimize the queuing length [80]. At the beginning of this century, the second wave of artificial intelligence also affected the field of transportation management. Bingham used a fuzzy neural network method to optimize SPAT [81]. Wiering [82] and Abdulhai [83] introduced reinforcement learning into the field of SPAT optimization. They innovatively regarded the traffic lights in continuous intersections as multiple agents. Through the communication equipment, i.e., V2X technology as shown in Figure 3, the central coordinator collects the position and velocity of the CAVs. Estimation on the waiting time of the vehicles at the intersection is further accomplished to be used in SPAT optimization. In the optimization process, minimizing the waiting time of all CAVs is taken as the optimization target. Q-learning method is applied to optimize the SPAT of multiple intersection traffic lights. Duan extended the previous method, adopting different optimization goals in different traffic flows, and collaboratively optimizing the timing of multiple signal lights [84].
## (s12) CAV Control Methods in the Cooperation
(p12.0) CAV control involves two aspects: longitudinal control and lateral control. In most of the previous research, lateral control is neglected by assuming the CAVs are running on their target lanes. Longitudinal control is the fundamental control problem in intersection management.

(p12.1) Considering a fully autonomous intersection scenario, a hierarchical framework is frequently used to realize the CAV coordination [86]. First, after collecting the information of the CAVs in real-time, the centralized controller schedules the arrival time of the CAVs to improve the traffic efficiency. Then, a distributed controller is applied to the CAV to implement the determined arrival plan. Multiple methods have been proposed to address the vehicle control problem. Milanés proposed a fuzzy logic method to optimize the speed trajectories of two CAVs [111]. Onieva used the fuzzy logic method to analyze the relative driving conditions of a CAV and a conventional vehicle. Then genetic algorithm is used to optimize the control parameter of the vehicle [112].
## (s18) Reliability of Communication
(p18.0) The rapid development of the V2X technology provides an opportunity to improve traffic mobility and safety in intersection management [133]. Through vehicle-tovehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication, a centralized controller is deployed at the intersection to coordinate the connected and automated vehicles (CAVs) to pass through the intersection. Same as the penetration rate of CAVs, many current studies assumed perfect communication environment to support the planning and decision-making method [157,158]. However, communication issues, such as latency [159], package loss [160], band-width [161,162], is highly affect the model performance at intersections. It is hard for a traffic engineer to understand what makes these issues occur. However, more efforts to develop a method with robustness to these issues need to be conducted. Liu et al. considered vehicle coordination at signal-free intersections with latency [163].

(p18.1) Although these factors to impact the reliability of communication has been studied by the networking community and the control community, we still lack a connection between communication performance and intersection level planning and decision-making performance.

(p18.2) The rapid development of the V2X technology provides an opportunity to improve traffic mobility and safety in intersection management [133]. Through vehicle-tovehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication, a centralized controller is deployed at the intersection to coordinate the connected and automated vehicles (CAVs) to pass through the intersection. Same as the penetration rate of CAVs, many current studies assumed perfect communication environment to support the planning and decision-making method [157,158]. However, communication issues, such as latency [159], package loss [160], band-width [161,162], is highly affect the model performance at intersections. It is hard for a traffic engineer to understand what makes these issues occur. However, more efforts to develop a method with robustness to these issues need to be conducted. Liu et al. considered vehicle coordination at signal-free intersections with latency [163].

(p18.3) Although these factors to impact the reliability of communication has been studied by the networking community and the control community, we still lack a connection between communication performance and intersection level planning and decision-making performance.
## (s19) Driver Behavior of CAVs at Intersections
(p19.0) Significant amount of research has been done on the driver behavior under homogeneous traffic conditions at intersections [164], however little or no research has been found on mixed traffic conditions, where vehicles do vary in physical and dynamic characteristics [165]. As for mixed traffic with CAVs and human-driven vehicles, fewer studies related to the area.

(p19.1) Since there are few CAVs in real-world, researchers mainly using simulation approach to analysis the driver behavior of CAVs under mixed traffic at intersections [166][167][168]. R Arvin et al., evaluated the safety performance of CAVs at intersections. A simulation framework was developed, and Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) and cooperative CACC car following models are used to mimic the behavior of CAVs [169].

(p19.2) The nature of human planning and decision-making at intersections has significant research value. A welldeveloped driver behavior is robust to environmental uncertainties and can well capture the real-world behavior of human drivers. By adapting the driver behavior model, vehicles with more accurate predictions of human actions can be provided when operating in mixed traffic environments.

(p19.3) Significant amount of research has been done on the driver behavior under homogeneous traffic conditions at intersections [164], however little or no research has been found on mixed traffic conditions, where vehicles do vary in physical and dynamic characteristics [165]. As for mixed traffic with CAVs and human-driven vehicles, fewer studies related to the area.

(p19.4) Since there are few CAVs in real-world, researchers mainly using simulation approach to analysis the driver behavior of CAVs under mixed traffic at intersections [166][167][168]. R Arvin et al., evaluated the safety performance of CAVs at intersections. A simulation framework was developed, and Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) and cooperative CACC car following models are used to mimic the behavior of CAVs [169].

(p19.5) The nature of human planning and decision-making at intersections has significant research value. A welldeveloped driver behavior is robust to environmental uncertainties and can well capture the real-world behavior of human drivers. By adapting the driver behavior model, vehicles with more accurate predictions of human actions can be provided when operating in mixed traffic environments.
## (s20) Multi Intersections Coordination and Optimization
(p20.0) The current planning and decision-making technologies using CAV mainly emphasized on isolated intersection. Few of them discussed coordination and optimization between two or more intersections. The main challenge of Multi intersections planning and decision-making is how to use CAVs and other communication devices to coordinate multiple intersections, and how to effectively solve the resulting large-scale problems. These issues require further specialized investigation. Bui et al. focused on optimizing traffic flow at multiple intersections using Cooperative game-theoretic approach [170]. Zhang et al. coordinated control of traffic signals between intersections using adaptive genetic algorithm based on cloud computing [171].

(p20.1) Analyzing the planning and decision level coordination and optimization for multi intersections still needs more efforts to conducted. Finding global optimal solution with avoid falling into a local optimum and has fast solution efficiency can significant improve the mobility of the transportation system.

(p20.2) The current planning and decision-making technologies using CAV mainly emphasized on isolated intersection. Few of them discussed coordination and optimization between two or more intersections. The main challenge of Multi intersections planning and decision-making is how to use CAVs and other communication devices to coordinate multiple intersections, and how to effectively solve the resulting large-scale problems. These issues require further specialized investigation. Bui et al. focused on optimizing traffic flow at multiple intersections using Cooperative game-theoretic approach [170]. Zhang et al. coordinated control of traffic signals between intersections using adaptive genetic algorithm based on cloud computing [171].

(p20.3) Analyzing the planning and decision level coordination and optimization for multi intersections still needs more efforts to conducted. Finding global optimal solution with avoid falling into a local optimum and has fast solution efficiency can significant improve the mobility of the transportation system.
## (s21) Multi-objective Multi-agent Planning and Decision-making
(p21.0) The traffic condition at intersections very complicated. The geometry of the intersection is often inconsistent and participants are various. Therefore, the planning and decision-making objectives for each traffic participants at intersections are usually different. Current algorithms for optimizing traffic operations at an isolated intersection consider mostly one objective function [19,66,170]. For example, vehicle delay is main factor to impact traffic mobility. The approach to optimize vehicle delay can lead to long pedestrian waiting times as well as reducing safety conditions at the intersection. We know that some optimization goals cannot be achieved at the same time, and some are even contradictory. How to balance or adjust the final collaborative optimization according to different purposes is one of the research directions. Ref. [172] presented a multi-criteria optimization approach to the isolated intersection. The trade-off algorithm between vehicle and pedestrian delay is developed. The proposed approach is tested and showed that by worsening vehicle delays, pedestrian delays can be improved.
## (s23) Energy Conservation
(p23.0) In the past decades, the transportation system has resulted in increased air pollution and energy waste issues. Passenger vehicles are a major pollution contributor, producing significant nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and other pollution. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that vehicles cause nearly 75 percent of the carbon monoxide pollution in the United States. China claims that the country would reach peak carbondioxide emissions by 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060. When vehicles pass through intersections, the complexity and uncertainty of the environment often lead to incomplete planning and decision-making, which causes congestion. Traffic congestion usually leads to high energy usage and air pollutant emissions. Therefore, the urgent need to reduce the transportation sector fuel consumption levels requires researchers and policymakers to develop various advanced energy conservation strategies for planning and decision-making at road intersections. There are two major types of research topics in this area. One focuses on the CAVs approaching process, and the other focuses on the CAVs leaving process. For CAVs approaching process, avoiding queuing and green wave driving are two common research topics. Ref. [117] developed an Eco-CACC algorithm that computes the fuel-optimum vehicle trajectory through a signalized intersection by ensuring that the vehicle arrives at the intersection stop bar just as the last queued vehicle is discharged. The result demonstrated that the proposed Eco-CACC system produces vehicle fuel savings up to 40%. Meanwhile, human driving error and mixed traffic are also discussed in some research to improve energy conservation further. As for CAVs leaving process, ecodeparture technologies draw researchers' attention to the CAV leaving process. Ref. [123] analyzed the ecodeparture of CAVs With V2X communication at signalized intersections. The results showed that eco-driving has the potential to save fuel for CAVs. However, its realization requires accurate control of the engine and transmission. Although there are several publications related to energy conservation at a road intersection, there is still lots of research and work that needs to be done in this area. The assumption of the existing papers is usually too idealistic. Maybe the research work's good starting point is to analyze the planning and decision-making under an unsignalized intersection environment.

(p23.1) In the past decades, the transportation system has resulted in increased air pollution and energy waste issues. Passenger vehicles are a major pollution contributor, producing significant nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and other pollution. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that vehicles cause nearly 75 percent of the carbon monoxide pollution in the United States. China claims that the country would reach peak carbondioxide emissions by 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060. When vehicles pass through intersections, the complexity and uncertainty of the environment often lead to incomplete planning and decision-making, which causes congestion. Traffic congestion usually leads to high energy usage and air pollutant emissions. Therefore, the urgent need to reduce the transportation sector fuel consumption levels requires researchers and policymakers to develop various advanced energy conservation strategies for planning and decision-making at road intersections. There are two major types of research topics in this area. One focuses on the CAVs approaching process, and the other focuses on the CAVs leaving process. For CAVs approaching process, avoiding queuing and green wave driving are two common research topics. Ref. [117] developed an Eco-CACC algorithm that computes the fuel-optimum vehicle trajectory through a signalized intersection by ensuring that the vehicle arrives at the intersection stop bar just as the last queued vehicle is discharged. The result demonstrated that the proposed Eco-CACC system produces vehicle fuel savings up to 40%. Meanwhile, human driving error and mixed traffic are also discussed in some research to improve energy conservation further. As for CAVs leaving process, ecodeparture technologies draw researchers' attention to the CAV leaving process. Ref. [123] analyzed the ecodeparture of CAVs With V2X communication at signalized intersections. The results showed that eco-driving has the potential to save fuel for CAVs. However, its realization requires accurate control of the engine and transmission. Although there are several publications related to energy conservation at a road intersection, there is still lots of research and work that needs to be done in this area. The assumption of the existing papers is usually too idealistic. Maybe the research work's good starting point is to analyze the planning and decision-making under an unsignalized intersection environment.
## (s35) End-to-End Neural Network Approach
(p35.0) One common approach for the neural network (NN) approach is the end-to-end approach, that is, by feeding in the images and sensor information of expert drivers driving at intersections and the actual actions of the drivers at such scenarios, a NN network is trained so that when at a similar scenario, giving the original input from the sensors, the model will be able to directly provide actions as output. This mean that the logic in the decision-making from perception to action is embedded in the NNs. Ref. [64] uses end-to-end methods as the core of its proposed algorithm, however, they used 360-degree camera instead of only using front camera as classical end-to-end planners would do. The trained network has also been carefully modified to adapt to the new censoring format. Also, a route planner is added to help the driving task significantly. Which as result, this proposed method could decrease the chances of collision at intersections. Instead of only having camera input for classical end-to-end methods, Ref. [65] took LIDAR and HD maps as inputs which enables a 3D interpretation, the paper put the newly proposed method into real-world practice, and the learned cost volume could help the ego vehicle perform more safely at intersections, and the vehicle is able to handle traffic light while interacting with the surrounding traffic participants.

(p35.1) One common approach for the neural network (NN) approach is the end-to-end approach, that is, by feeding in the images and sensor information of expert drivers driving at intersections and the actual actions of the drivers at such scenarios, a NN network is trained so that when at a similar scenario, giving the original input from the sensors, the model will be able to directly provide actions as output. This mean that the logic in the decision-making from perception to action is embedded in the NNs. Ref. [64] uses end-to-end methods as the core of its proposed algorithm, however, they used 360-degree camera instead of only using front camera as classical end-to-end planners would do. The trained network has also been carefully modified to adapt to the new censoring format. Also, a route planner is added to help the driving task significantly. Which as result, this proposed method could decrease the chances of collision at intersections. Instead of only having camera input for classical end-to-end methods, Ref. [65] took LIDAR and HD maps as inputs which enables a 3D interpretation, the paper put the newly proposed method into real-world practice, and the learned cost volume could help the ego vehicle perform more safely at intersections, and the vehicle is able to handle traffic light while interacting with the surrounding traffic participants.
## (s37) Partially Observable Markov Decision-Making Process Approach
(p37.0) In a Markov decision-making process (MDP) model, all the states, transfer functions, reward functions, etc. are considered to be static. However, in the real-world application and modeling, the states of the participants and environment are not always fully observable. Thus, to represent this uncertainty of the real world, a partially observable Markov decision-making process (POMDP) based approach has been widely applied and is becoming an emerging technique for highly interactive intersection planning problems for self-driving vehicles. POMDP is a decision-making framework for the agent in an uncertain scenario. The model is able to merge the uncertainties formulation into its own framework, for decision-making and planning of self-driving vehicles, these uncertainties could be sensors perception noise, surrounding drivers' intention uncertainties, future paths uncertainties and control output uncertainties. The agent would receive an observation from the reward after a decision had been generated at each time step [72]. The major approach for solving the POMDP problems could be categorized into two types, one of them is the exact solution methods and another one is the approximate solution methods. For real-world intersections planning problems which is very complicated, an exact solution is often impossible to find in real time, therefore, it is common to obtains approximate results as the solution.

(p37.1) Bouton et al. [73] navigated the ego vehicle at intersection scenarios where frequent changes usually occurred by modeling the problem into a POMDP problem and solved the problem using Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) method, the presented results proved that the planner outperform the threshold-based heuristic method in both safety and efficiency. Ref. [74] also formulated the intersection planning and decision-making problem into a POMDP problem, the paper modeled the unknown intention of the surrounding vehicles with a probabilistic model and merged that into the observation model of the POMDP model. By solving the POMDP problem, the ego vehicle was able to make decisions in a continuous space on a fixed path at intersections in an online manner. Extend from Ref. [74], Ref. [75] proposed an intersection planning and decision model that the model is able to coop with multiple surrounding vehicles and was capable to outperform the base-line method in computation time, the proposed POMDP model was also able to operate in a continuous state space. Due to the curse of computational complexity, planning methods using POMDP methods often plans the vehicle's speed on a fixed path. However, this indicates that the intersection is not fully explored, Refs. [76,77] proposed a critical turning point (CTP) concept that enables the ego vehicle to generate several candidate paths to select and follow. which the candidate paths are generated through quintic polynomials. Given the candidate paths, the ego vehicle is able to select a candidate path and then plan speed along the selected path based on the beliefs of the uncertain intentions of the oncoming vehicle. Therefore, the intersection space is better explored under a limited amount of computational power.

(p37.2) Ref. [78] considered occlusion caused by both dynamic and static objects, and represented the movements of the surrounding vehicles in the observation filed (OF) and the phantom vehicles as reachable sets. This enabled the ego vehicle to operate in urban intersections and perform less conservative yet safe actions compared to the traditional method. Brechtel et al. [79] considered several kinds of uncertainties and predicted the results from different actions due to various assumptions in the proposed algorithm. The authors did not applied symbolic representation to represent the state-space for all the possible cases, instead, they used a continuous solver that represents specific situations. Ref. [27] developed decision-making at generalized congested intersections that avoided both static and dynamic obstacles. The objects in the observable area were being predicted and the objects in the occluded area were modified with more attention to avoid dangerous collisions. The proposed algorithm was able to generate human-like behaviors at uncontrolled intersections.

(p37.3) In a Markov decision-making process (MDP) model, all the states, transfer functions, reward functions, etc. are considered to be static. However, in the real-world application and modeling, the states of the participants and environment are not always fully observable. Thus, to represent this uncertainty of the real world, a partially observable Markov decision-making process (POMDP) based approach has been widely applied and is becoming an emerging technique for highly interactive intersection planning problems for self-driving vehicles. POMDP is a decision-making framework for the agent in an uncertain scenario. The model is able to merge the uncertainties formulation into its own framework, for decision-making and planning of self-driving vehicles, these uncertainties could be sensors perception noise, surrounding drivers' intention uncertainties, future paths uncertainties and control output uncertainties. The agent would receive an observation from the reward after a decision had been generated at each time step [72]. The major approach for solving the POMDP problems could be categorized into two types, one of them is the exact solution methods and another one is the approximate solution methods. For real-world intersections planning problems which is very complicated, an exact solution is often impossible to find in real time, therefore, it is common to obtains approximate results as the solution.

(p37.4) Bouton et al. [73] navigated the ego vehicle at intersection scenarios where frequent changes usually occurred by modeling the problem into a POMDP problem and solved the problem using Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) method, the presented results proved that the planner outperform the threshold-based heuristic method in both safety and efficiency. Ref. [74] also formulated the intersection planning and decision-making problem into a POMDP problem, the paper modeled the unknown intention of the surrounding vehicles with a probabilistic model and merged that into the observation model of the POMDP model. By solving the POMDP problem, the ego vehicle was able to make decisions in a continuous space on a fixed path at intersections in an online manner. Extend from Ref. [74], Ref. [75] proposed an intersection planning and decision model that the model is able to coop with multiple surrounding vehicles and was capable to outperform the base-line method in computation time, the proposed POMDP model was also able to operate in a continuous state space. Due to the curse of computational complexity, planning methods using POMDP methods often plans the vehicle's speed on a fixed path. However, this indicates that the intersection is not fully explored, Refs. [76,77] proposed a critical turning point (CTP) concept that enables the ego vehicle to generate several candidate paths to select and follow. which the candidate paths are generated through quintic polynomials. Given the candidate paths, the ego vehicle is able to select a candidate path and then plan speed along the selected path based on the beliefs of the uncertain intentions of the oncoming vehicle. Therefore, the intersection space is better explored under a limited amount of computational power.

(p37.5) Ref. [78] considered occlusion caused by both dynamic and static objects, and represented the movements of the surrounding vehicles in the observation filed (OF) and the phantom vehicles as reachable sets. This enabled the ego vehicle to operate in urban intersections and perform less conservative yet safe actions compared to the traditional method. Brechtel et al. [79] considered several kinds of uncertainties and predicted the results from different actions due to various assumptions in the proposed algorithm. The authors did not applied symbolic representation to represent the state-space for all the possible cases, instead, they used a continuous solver that represents specific situations. Ref. [27] developed decision-making at generalized congested intersections that avoided both static and dynamic obstacles. The objects in the observable area were being predicted and the objects in the occluded area were modified with more attention to avoid dangerous collisions. The proposed algorithm was able to generate human-like behaviors at uncontrolled intersections.
## (s39) Cooperation Methods in Signalized Intersection
(p39.0) Research on optimization algorithms on traffic conflict at intersections began at the end of the last century. Since the concept of CAV has not yet emerged at that time, the early research on traffic optimization algorithms focused on the study of signal timing, i.e., optimization on the traffic signal phase and timing (SPAT).

(p39.1) In 1998, Schutter used optimal control to minimize the queuing length [80]. At the beginning of this century, the second wave of artificial intelligence also affected the field of transportation management. Bingham used a fuzzy neural network method to optimize SPAT [81]. Wiering [82] and Abdulhai [83] introduced reinforcement learning into the field of SPAT optimization. They innovatively regarded the traffic lights in continuous intersections as multiple agents. Through the communication equipment, i.e., V2X technology as shown in Figure 3, the central coordinator collects the position and velocity of the CAVs. Estimation on the waiting time of the vehicles at the intersection is further accomplished to be used in SPAT optimization. In the optimization process, minimizing the waiting time of all CAVs is taken as the optimization target. Q-learning method is applied to optimize the SPAT of multiple intersection traffic lights. Duan extended the previous method, adopting different optimization goals in different traffic flows, and collaboratively optimizing the timing of multiple signal lights [84].
## (s41) CAV Control Methods in the Cooperation
(p41.0) CAV control involves two aspects: longitudinal control and lateral control. In most of the previous research, lateral control is neglected by assuming the CAVs are running on their target lanes. Longitudinal control is the fundamental control problem in intersection management.

(p41.1) Considering a fully autonomous intersection scenario, a hierarchical framework is frequently used to realize the CAV coordination [86]. First, after collecting the information of the CAVs in real-time, the centralized controller schedules the arrival time of the CAVs to improve the traffic efficiency. Then, a distributed controller is applied to the CAV to implement the determined arrival plan. Multiple methods have been proposed to address the vehicle control problem. Milanés proposed a fuzzy logic method to optimize the speed trajectories of two CAVs [111]. Onieva used the fuzzy logic method to analyze the relative driving conditions of a CAV and a conventional vehicle. Then genetic algorithm is used to optimize the control parameter of the vehicle [112].
## (s47) Reliability of Communication
(p47.0) The rapid development of the V2X technology provides an opportunity to improve traffic mobility and safety in intersection management [133]. Through vehicle-tovehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication, a centralized controller is deployed at the intersection to coordinate the connected and automated vehicles (CAVs) to pass through the intersection. Same as the penetration rate of CAVs, many current studies assumed perfect communication environment to support the planning and decision-making method [157,158]. However, communication issues, such as latency [159], package loss [160], band-width [161,162], is highly affect the model performance at intersections. It is hard for a traffic engineer to understand what makes these issues occur. However, more efforts to develop a method with robustness to these issues need to be conducted. Liu et al. considered vehicle coordination at signal-free intersections with latency [163].

(p47.1) Although these factors to impact the reliability of communication has been studied by the networking community and the control community, we still lack a connection between communication performance and intersection level planning and decision-making performance.

(p47.2) The rapid development of the V2X technology provides an opportunity to improve traffic mobility and safety in intersection management [133]. Through vehicle-tovehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication, a centralized controller is deployed at the intersection to coordinate the connected and automated vehicles (CAVs) to pass through the intersection. Same as the penetration rate of CAVs, many current studies assumed perfect communication environment to support the planning and decision-making method [157,158]. However, communication issues, such as latency [159], package loss [160], band-width [161,162], is highly affect the model performance at intersections. It is hard for a traffic engineer to understand what makes these issues occur. However, more efforts to develop a method with robustness to these issues need to be conducted. Liu et al. considered vehicle coordination at signal-free intersections with latency [163].

(p47.3) Although these factors to impact the reliability of communication has been studied by the networking community and the control community, we still lack a connection between communication performance and intersection level planning and decision-making performance.
## (s48) Driver Behavior of CAVs at Intersections
(p48.0) Significant amount of research has been done on the driver behavior under homogeneous traffic conditions at intersections [164], however little or no research has been found on mixed traffic conditions, where vehicles do vary in physical and dynamic characteristics [165]. As for mixed traffic with CAVs and human-driven vehicles, fewer studies related to the area.

(p48.1) Since there are few CAVs in real-world, researchers mainly using simulation approach to analysis the driver behavior of CAVs under mixed traffic at intersections [166][167][168]. R Arvin et al., evaluated the safety performance of CAVs at intersections. A simulation framework was developed, and Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) and cooperative CACC car following models are used to mimic the behavior of CAVs [169].

(p48.2) The nature of human planning and decision-making at intersections has significant research value. A welldeveloped driver behavior is robust to environmental uncertainties and can well capture the real-world behavior of human drivers. By adapting the driver behavior model, vehicles with more accurate predictions of human actions can be provided when operating in mixed traffic environments.

(p48.3) Significant amount of research has been done on the driver behavior under homogeneous traffic conditions at intersections [164], however little or no research has been found on mixed traffic conditions, where vehicles do vary in physical and dynamic characteristics [165]. As for mixed traffic with CAVs and human-driven vehicles, fewer studies related to the area.

(p48.4) Since there are few CAVs in real-world, researchers mainly using simulation approach to analysis the driver behavior of CAVs under mixed traffic at intersections [166][167][168]. R Arvin et al., evaluated the safety performance of CAVs at intersections. A simulation framework was developed, and Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) and cooperative CACC car following models are used to mimic the behavior of CAVs [169].

(p48.5) The nature of human planning and decision-making at intersections has significant research value. A welldeveloped driver behavior is robust to environmental uncertainties and can well capture the real-world behavior of human drivers. By adapting the driver behavior model, vehicles with more accurate predictions of human actions can be provided when operating in mixed traffic environments.
## (s49) Multi Intersections Coordination and Optimization
(p49.0) The current planning and decision-making technologies using CAV mainly emphasized on isolated intersection. Few of them discussed coordination and optimization between two or more intersections. The main challenge of Multi intersections planning and decision-making is how to use CAVs and other communication devices to coordinate multiple intersections, and how to effectively solve the resulting large-scale problems. These issues require further specialized investigation. Bui et al. focused on optimizing traffic flow at multiple intersections using Cooperative game-theoretic approach [170]. Zhang et al. coordinated control of traffic signals between intersections using adaptive genetic algorithm based on cloud computing [171].

(p49.1) Analyzing the planning and decision level coordination and optimization for multi intersections still needs more efforts to conducted. Finding global optimal solution with avoid falling into a local optimum and has fast solution efficiency can significant improve the mobility of the transportation system.

(p49.2) The current planning and decision-making technologies using CAV mainly emphasized on isolated intersection. Few of them discussed coordination and optimization between two or more intersections. The main challenge of Multi intersections planning and decision-making is how to use CAVs and other communication devices to coordinate multiple intersections, and how to effectively solve the resulting large-scale problems. These issues require further specialized investigation. Bui et al. focused on optimizing traffic flow at multiple intersections using Cooperative game-theoretic approach [170]. Zhang et al. coordinated control of traffic signals between intersections using adaptive genetic algorithm based on cloud computing [171].

(p49.3) Analyzing the planning and decision level coordination and optimization for multi intersections still needs more efforts to conducted. Finding global optimal solution with avoid falling into a local optimum and has fast solution efficiency can significant improve the mobility of the transportation system.
## (s50) Multi-objective Multi-agent Planning and Decision-making
(p50.0) The traffic condition at intersections very complicated. The geometry of the intersection is often inconsistent and participants are various. Therefore, the planning and decision-making objectives for each traffic participants at intersections are usually different. Current algorithms for optimizing traffic operations at an isolated intersection consider mostly one objective function [19,66,170]. For example, vehicle delay is main factor to impact traffic mobility. The approach to optimize vehicle delay can lead to long pedestrian waiting times as well as reducing safety conditions at the intersection. We know that some optimization goals cannot be achieved at the same time, and some are even contradictory. How to balance or adjust the final collaborative optimization according to different purposes is one of the research directions. Ref. [172] presented a multi-criteria optimization approach to the isolated intersection. The trade-off algorithm between vehicle and pedestrian delay is developed. The proposed approach is tested and showed that by worsening vehicle delays, pedestrian delays can be improved.
## (s52) Energy Conservation
(p52.0) In the past decades, the transportation system has resulted in increased air pollution and energy waste issues. Passenger vehicles are a major pollution contributor, producing significant nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and other pollution. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that vehicles cause nearly 75 percent of the carbon monoxide pollution in the United States. China claims that the country would reach peak carbondioxide emissions by 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060. When vehicles pass through intersections, the complexity and uncertainty of the environment often lead to incomplete planning and decision-making, which causes congestion. Traffic congestion usually leads to high energy usage and air pollutant emissions. Therefore, the urgent need to reduce the transportation sector fuel consumption levels requires researchers and policymakers to develop various advanced energy conservation strategies for planning and decision-making at road intersections. There are two major types of research topics in this area. One focuses on the CAVs approaching process, and the other focuses on the CAVs leaving process. For CAVs approaching process, avoiding queuing and green wave driving are two common research topics. Ref. [117] developed an Eco-CACC algorithm that computes the fuel-optimum vehicle trajectory through a signalized intersection by ensuring that the vehicle arrives at the intersection stop bar just as the last queued vehicle is discharged. The result demonstrated that the proposed Eco-CACC system produces vehicle fuel savings up to 40%. Meanwhile, human driving error and mixed traffic are also discussed in some research to improve energy conservation further. As for CAVs leaving process, ecodeparture technologies draw researchers' attention to the CAV leaving process. Ref. [123] analyzed the ecodeparture of CAVs With V2X communication at signalized intersections. The results showed that eco-driving has the potential to save fuel for CAVs. However, its realization requires accurate control of the engine and transmission. Although there are several publications related to energy conservation at a road intersection, there is still lots of research and work that needs to be done in this area. The assumption of the existing papers is usually too idealistic. Maybe the research work's good starting point is to analyze the planning and decision-making under an unsignalized intersection environment.

(p52.1) In the past decades, the transportation system has resulted in increased air pollution and energy waste issues. Passenger vehicles are a major pollution contributor, producing significant nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and other pollution. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that vehicles cause nearly 75 percent of the carbon monoxide pollution in the United States. China claims that the country would reach peak carbondioxide emissions by 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060. When vehicles pass through intersections, the complexity and uncertainty of the environment often lead to incomplete planning and decision-making, which causes congestion. Traffic congestion usually leads to high energy usage and air pollutant emissions. Therefore, the urgent need to reduce the transportation sector fuel consumption levels requires researchers and policymakers to develop various advanced energy conservation strategies for planning and decision-making at road intersections. There are two major types of research topics in this area. One focuses on the CAVs approaching process, and the other focuses on the CAVs leaving process. For CAVs approaching process, avoiding queuing and green wave driving are two common research topics. Ref. [117] developed an Eco-CACC algorithm that computes the fuel-optimum vehicle trajectory through a signalized intersection by ensuring that the vehicle arrives at the intersection stop bar just as the last queued vehicle is discharged. The result demonstrated that the proposed Eco-CACC system produces vehicle fuel savings up to 40%. Meanwhile, human driving error and mixed traffic are also discussed in some research to improve energy conservation further. As for CAVs leaving process, ecodeparture technologies draw researchers' attention to the CAV leaving process. Ref. [123] analyzed the ecodeparture of CAVs With V2X communication at signalized intersections. The results showed that eco-driving has the potential to save fuel for CAVs. However, its realization requires accurate control of the engine and transmission. Although there are several publications related to energy conservation at a road intersection, there is still lots of research and work that needs to be done in this area. The assumption of the existing papers is usually too idealistic. Maybe the research work's good starting point is to analyze the planning and decision-making under an unsignalized intersection environment.
