# Utilization of kinase inhibitors as novel therapeutic drug targets: A review

CorpusID: 256583582 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7b9fc5e977e382294f58d7cc4353f7a5372e10](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7b9fc5e977e382294f58d7cc4353f7a5372e10)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Cellular metabolism, cell cycle regulation, cellular endurance, and differentiation are the essential functions conducted by kinases [1][2][3]. Nowadays, considerable attention has been given to research on kinases. The signaling pathways mediated by protein kinases have been related to a variety of diseases, such as diabetes, inflammation, and cancer [4]. The kinases are categorized into a wide group lipid kinases, carbohydrates, and protein kinases. According to human genome sequencing, approximately 2% of the human genome codes for protein kinases, which are further classified as families and subfamilies. The major kinases found in mammalian signaling pathways are lipid kinases, tyrosine kinases, serine/threonine kinases, and dual kinases (Ser/Thr and Ty). Protein kinases are enzymes that use the end γ-phosphate group from ATP to phosphorylate serine, tyrosine, or threonine residues in other proteins. Phosphorylation changes target protein activity by controlling signaling pathways by amplification, cellular location, or interaction with other controlling proteins [5]. The study on human kinases revealed that there are 518 protein kinases grouped into families reliant on their biological functions as well as statistical sequence evaluation [6].
## (s1) Role of kinase inhibitors in drug design
(p1.0) Kinase inhibitors are a rapidly growing and important category of target therapeutics. To target kinases signaling, drug discovery and development initiatives have looked at a range of approaches. The role of kinases in drug designing and as delivery systems has been described as follows:

(p1.1) Many protein kinases are part of "cascade systems," where multiple protein kinases sequentially activate each other. A kinase cascade plays a vital role in amplification, diversification of signal effects, and permission for grouping signaling pathways to form networks. Because kinase cascades exist, it is possible to find and produce drugs that are not kinase inhibitors but prevent kinases from being triggered due to the subsequent "upstream" kinase in the cascade through attachment to them. PD98059 is certainly the first kinase inhibitor developed for the Ras-Raf MEK-ERK cascade, which acts through binding to MEK1 and then blocking its stimulation via Raf [29,30]. The dualspecificity protein kinases (MEK1/2) that block the RAS-Raf-MEK MAP kinase pathway are trametinib, binimetinib, cobimetinib, and selumetinib. Among these, binimetinib and cobimetinib are used in combination with encorafenib and vemurafenib, respectively for curing melanoma. Selumetinib is employed for Von Recklinghausen disease [7]. Raf, Src, epidermal growth factor, and breakpoint cluster area are all kinase targets. Early on in the investigation of oncogenic proteins, Abelson's kinase (bcr-Abl) was discovered. Clinical usage of these inhibitors has also resulted in the growth of drug-resistant malignancies as additional consequences [31,32]. The detection alongside subsequent exploitation of numerous configurational positions of kinases is part of the tale of developing these kinase inhibitors. Previously, selectivity had been identified as a problem during the development of kinase inhibitors that bind at the ATP (Adenosine Triphosphate) pocket. As ATP is a cofactor required for the functioning of the kinase, developmental pressure has been applied to keep the binding site of discrete kinases in a general shape and chemical similarity. As a result, the active sites avoiding the direct binding of ATP or kinase conformations with more structural and chemical heterogeneity have been employed. The activation and inactivation modes of kinases allow for the utilization of conformational variability. A rationale based on the structure was also proposed to prevent the formation of drug-resilient mutations. Since the inactive version of a kinase does not require binding with the conjoint substrate  [27,28] ATP, it has been found to have higher structural diversity. A pioneer kinase inhibitor, Imatinib, exhibits binding to the inactive forms of PDGF, c-Kit, and Abl kinases [33][34][35][36]. Imatinib is used to treat chronic myelogenous leukemia as it causes inhibition of BCR-Abl, an oncogenic tyrosine kinase fusion protein also employed to manage gastrointestinal tumors and myeloproliferative disorders caused by inhibition of c-Kit tyrosine kinase and PDGF receptors, respectively. As a result, oncology happens to be the therapeutic area of choice for the vast majority of drug development efforts for kinase inhibitors [33,37]. Most of the small protein kinase inhibitors that have been approved or are on the verge of getting approval for their clinical use, along with the majority of kinase inhibitors currently in the clinical trial phase, intend to target tyrosine kinases and are employed for the treatment of varied cancers. The global market for kinase inhibitors is increasing gradually. Although cancer will likely remain a top priority for kinase medication development for several years, the number of kinase inhibitors in clinical studies for many other disorders has expanded [38][39][40]. For example, Janus Kinase inhibitors such as tofacitinib and ruxolitinib have been approved to treat rheumatoid arthritis and myelofibrosis, respectively [29,41]. Inhibition of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) by six approved molecules, i.e., Alectinib, Brigatinib, Ceritinib, Crizotinib, Entrectinib, and Lorlatinib, has been employed for the treatment of NSCLC (Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer) (link). Targets used for developing kinase inhibitors for diseases other than cancer are described in Fig. 1. WNKs direct the phosphorylation and activation of two interrelated protein kinases: SPAK (STE20/SPS1-related Proline/Alanine-Rich Kinase), OSRK1 (Oxidative Stress Responsive Kinase1), leading to the discovery that they control blood pressure. The unique location of a catalytic lysine residue on WNK isoforms might be of potential use in contrast to many other kinases to build WNK-specific ATP-competitive inhibitors, opening up a new avenue for developing better blood pressure medications. Although it is uncertain which WNK isoform of the four mammalian isoforms is possibly essential to be blocked to lower NCC (Na+/Cl− co-transporter) and NKCC2 (Na+/K+/2Cl − co-transporter-2) activity in the kidney. Additionally, in some studies, WNK4 was a negative controller of WNK1 signaling; signifying that blockage of this isoform might enhance renal salt reassimilation and blood pressure [42]. Patients with mutations of LRKK2 acquire signs of disease that are identical to both the onset and progression of idiopathic Parkinson's syndrome. LRKK2 is a multidomain protein with a large GTPase and a kinase domain of 2527 residues. Numerous particular LRKK2 inhibitors have been developed for the treatment of Parkinson's syndrome. Biological drugs, like adalimumab tend to neutralize TNF-α and have a specific role in treating many inflammatory disorders like Crohn's disease, psoriatic arthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis. Several Ser/Thr specific protein kinases are involved in the Myeloid cell signaling pathway, which regulates translation, transcription, processing, and secretion of TNF-α along with other pro-inflammatory cytokines. Many serine/threonine-specific protein kinases are involved in these systems, which regulate TNF and other proinflammatory cytokines' transcription, translation, processing, and secretion. However, it is challenging to develop advanced drugs to target these signaling pathways owing to the complexity in deciding the target protein kinase due to the production of cytokines other than IL-6/12 and TNF-α [29,43,44].
## (s3) ABL
(p3.0) The Tyr specific Abelson murine leukemia (Abl) viral oncogene analogue is another well-studied protein kinase named p150, JTK, c-Abl, Abl1. Dysregulation of Abl has been linked to apoptosis in cancer. ABL owns 1 cap with an N-terminal, 2 Src (SH2/3) homology domains, an actinbinding domain, and a DNA binding domain in addition to the kinase domain. Myristoylation of the N-terminal cap controls the autoinhibition of Abl by phosphorylation. GNF-2 binding caused Abl autoinhibition due to bending vibration of the α-I helix and the resulting configurationally stabilization of the kinase active site via the Sh2 and Sh3 domains [68][69][70]. Furthermore, GNF-2 enhances the effectiveness of the ATP-competitive antagonists, implying the possible contact of ATP pocket with the myristate. A larger and heavier ligand in the myristate groove, on the other hand, was found to provide an impact on the potential of Abl [68].

(p3.1) AKT Phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1, an AGC lineage constituent, is a leading kinase and a stimulator for several AGC kinases involved in insulin and growth factor signaling, including SGK, AKT, PKC, and S6K. Unlike other kinases, PDK1 lacks a C-terminal hydrophobic motif for intramolecular binding to the hydrophobic channel. The hydrophobic pocket of PDK1 performs like an identification spot in favor of the hydrophobic motif of its substrate kinases [71]. Balendran et al. revealed that the hydrophobic groove of PDK1 exhibited interaction with the C-terminal present in PKC-allied protein kinase 2 (PRK2) and named as PDK1-interacting fragment (PIK). Consequently, the hydrophobic groove was quickly labeled as a PIF binding pocket [72].
## (s4) JNK1
(p4.0) The JNKs are c-Jun N-terminal kinases comprising three isoforms, JNK 1/2/3, which are the subdivision of MAP kinases termed "anxiety/stress-triggered kinase". Accordingly, these have been linked to checking inflammatory responses by triggering cytokine expressions like eotaxin, GM-CSF, and IL-1 employing downstream targets such as p53, AP-1, ATF2, and BAD. Like a few other MAP kinases, JNKs are regulated by phosphorylation of the A-loop through higher kinases like MKK4/ MKK7. Stebbins et al. examined 30000 compounds using DELFIA, i.e. Dissociation Enhanced Lanthanide Fluoro-Immuno Assay, and determined a series of tiny compounds that interfere with JNK1-pepJIP1 binding [73]. Whereas several of these drugs compete successfully via pepJIP1 binding, and BI-78D3 like compounds were capable of subsiding JNK1 phosphorylation pursuit with IC50 value, both in the micromolar and nanomolar range [74].
## (s5) CHK1
(p5.0) CHK1 is a Ser/Thr type kinase known as checkpoint kinase 1 and is a key transducer that plays a role in the cell division cycle through the control of the DNA impairment response during mitosis. Academics, as well as the pharmaceutical sector, have created many conventional ATP-competitive CHK1 antagonists, but they have limited cellular efficacy. Following drug development and co-crystal structure, studies with CHK1 verified the inhibitors' allosteric binding location, which included H-bonds alongside hydrophobic contacts to the exterior of the protein next to the αD-helix extant on the C-lobe. Unlike additional kinases, αD-helix of CHK1 comprises a PDIG array having N-terminal Pro that prompts a tight turn, causing the development of a superficial, vastly surface-uncovered groove that these inhibitors can target [75,76].
## (s7) CDK2
(p7.0) Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are specifically Ser/Thr type kinases, and CDK2 is the fundamental unit in the transition phase of the cell cycle from G1 to S-phase. Misregulation of CDKs can result in various diseases, like inflammation and cancer. Although, some kinases may adopt unique A-loop configurations like DFG-in/ out that are usually markers of their activity level, others, like CDK2, exhibit difficulty in adopting the DFG-out conformation [80,81]. Betzi et al. discovered ANS, i.e., 8-anilino-1naphthalene sulfonate as a unique allosteric CDK2 antagonist in addition to a distinct mechanism of binding.

(p7.1) The antagonistic efficacy of ANS was comparable to that of CDK2 activator cyclin A but not to that of ATP or Type I CDK2 inhibitors like JWS648. ANS in bimolecular form bind near to DFG motif present in a void produced through C-helix and the filaments of N-lobe like β3, β4, β5, which is still in DFG-in conformation. Major reconstitutions of the ATP binding pocket were needed to fit the two inhibitor molecules [82]. mTOR Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase-related kinases, also known as Ser/Thr kinase mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) are a module of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling cascade. The mTOR complex 1, comprising mLST8, PRAS40, & raptor; mTOR complex 2, comprising mSIN1, mLST8, & rictor, all possessing separate biologic functions, can build 2 separate complexes using various protein combinations [83]. Rapamycin, a natural substrate derived from Streptomyces hygroscopicus, acts as an allosteric inhibitor of mTORC1. It binds to the C-terminus of mTOR, also termed the FKBP12-rapamycin binding domain, via hydrophobic interactions with the 12-kDa FK506-binding protein, culminating in a complex that can limit mTORC1 function [84]. Due to rapamycin's limited solubility and bioavailability, a variety of derivatives, also termed rapalogs, have been designed and investigated in clinical trials [85].
