# Citation: Wearable Continuous Blood Pressure Monitoring Devices Based on Pulse Wave Transit Time and Pulse Arrival materials Wearable Continuous Blood Pressure Monitoring Devices Based on Pulse Wave Transit Time and Pulse Arrival Time: A Review

CorpusID: 257411187 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bf4433867a8015faf66e0a7f852dc15beeaf989](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bf4433867a8015faf66e0a7f852dc15beeaf989)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s2) Definition of Pulse Transit Time (PTT) and Pulse Arrival Time (PAT)
(p2.0) Pulse transit time (PTT) is the time it takes for a pulse wave to travel between two places in the cardiovascular system, also known as the time it takes for a pulse wave to travel along a fixed arterial segment of length [34]. PTT is a powerful physiological parameter that has been widely used in various clinical applications, such as sleep quality monitoring [35], the evaluation of arterial stiffness [9], myocardial ischemia [36], etc. However, with the continuous development of research, more and more studies have demonstrated that changes in PTT can reliably track changes in BP and indirectly measure BP [37][38][39]. Generally, if the BP is higher, the blood will travel faster, and the PTT will be shorter over the same distance; if the BP is lower, the blood will travel slower, and the PTT will be longer for the same distance, which means that there is a conversion relationship between BP and PTT. Therefore, PTT becomes an indicator for estimating BP, and a linear or nonlinear regression model can be established according to PTT to calculate BP [9].

(p2.1) The definitions of Pulse Arrival Time (PAT) and PTT are similar, but there are also significant differences. PAT usually refers to the interval between the R peak of the ECG signal and the peak of the PPG signal, and PAT is the sum of the PTT and the pre-ejection time (PEP). PEP is the time between the electrical systole (ECG Q wave) and the initial opening of the aortic valve [40], and it is usually negligible and relatively constant. The R-wave is typically used instead of the Q-Wave [41]. In many references, researchers refer to PAT simply as PTT, such as in Figure 1d and Wang et al. [22].

(p2.2) Among various regression models, the linear regression model using only PTT is the simplest BP estimation model. In addition to the linear regression model based on PTT, there are many nonlinear regression models, such as reciprocal type [42], exponential type [43], logarithmic type [9], and so on. All of these models can complete the estimation of BP based on PTT, but there are differences in the calculation accuracy and computational complexity. In addition, PTT can also be combined with other physiological indicators (heart rate [44], age and gender [22], etc.) to form a multiple regression model, which can reflect human physiological information more comprehensively, thus improving the accuracy of continuous BP estimation. In actual research, appropriate physiological indicators and calculation models should be selected according to the characteristics of individuals.
## (s3) Acquisition of PTT/PAT
(p3.0) PAT is the interval between the peak value of the R wave of the ECG signal and the peak value of the PPG signal; researchers usually calculate PAT by identifying these two peaks, and some researchers treat PAT as PTT. Therefore, the ECG and PPG signals must be obtained through the ECG sensor and the PPG sensor first. However, the quality of the ECG and PPG signals directly affects the accuracy of the PTT and, thus, the accuracy of the BP estimation model. Thus, the quality of the ECG sensor and PPG sensor is crucial, and the measuring principles, design methods, preparation processes, and properties of many ECG sensors and PPG sensors are discussed below to provide a reference and guidance for the design of future ECG sensors and PPG sensors. In addition, there are also other ways to calculate PAT; J. Sola et al. proposed a method for estimating PAT based only on the characteristic point of the pressure pulse waveform, without the ECG signal [45]. We can also estimate PTT instead of measuring it; J. Sola et al. established a lumped model of the segments of the arterial tree involved in Pulse Wave Velocity (PWV) measurements [46], so PTT can be estimated by the formula PTT = distance/PWV.
## (s5) ECG Sensors
(p5.0) The principle of ECG technology is as follows. During systole and diastole, the heart generates the bioelectric current that is conducted to the surface of the body by the conductive tissue and fluid surrounding the heart. ECG electrodes are placed at specific points on the surface of the body to detect potential caused by the heart's bioelectric current.

(p5.1) In 2008, Espina et al. monitored ECG signals using a standard medical electrode with the single lead ECG patch on the chest [51]. The standard medical electrode ensured the mechanical stability and electrical coupling of the skin-electrode contact and thus was not interfered with by noise during motion. From the ECG signal of the subjects, the R-peak both at rest and during movement was able to be extracted. However, the traditional standard ECG electrode is a usually wet electrode, which is complicated to use and requires medical staff to help clean the skin of the subjects and apply the conductive gel. The gel may cause skin allergic reactions after long-term use, and signal quality attenuation will happen due to the evaporation of water in the wet electrode. Therefore, designing a convenient ECG electrode with better biocompatibility and long-term endurance is an urgent problem to be solved.

(p5.2) In 2010, Xu et al. designed and fabricated a novel micromachined physiological recording electrodes with hollow microneedles [53]; the microneedle array is made of heavily doped silicon, which provides excellent electrical conductivity. The microneedle can directly penetrate the outer surface of the skin, reducing the electrode-skin-electrode impedance and eliminating the need for skin cleaning. The ECG signal is extracted to facilitate the extraction of the R-peak and the calculation of the heart rate.

(p5.3) When using an ECG device to measure ECG signals, a ground electrode is usually required as a reference (usually placed on the right leg). Other electrodes are often placed far away from the right leg, resulting in a decrease in the integration of the system. In 2018, Lee et al. designed a small device capable of measuring ECG signals at the fingertips ( Figure 11a) [31]. The circuit framework is shown in Figure 11b, which is mainly composed of a low-noise amplifier (LNA), low-pass filter (LPF), and buffer amplifier (BA). The LNA is a combination of an instrumentation amplifier (IA) and a programmable gain amplifier (PGA). Operational transconductance amplifiers (OTA) are used as the active circuit element (Figure 11c). The maximum gain that the LNA is designed to achieve is 40 dB. The ECG signal is passed through a low-pass filter (LPF) with adjustable cutoff frequencies of 0.2−10 kHz. The signal is amplified by a buffer amplifier (BA) with a variable gain of 0−20 dB. To avoid the use of a grounded electrode, a stable voltage of 0.9 V (VCM) was provided to enable the ECG signal acquisition at the fingertips using only two electrodes. To achieve low cutoff frequencies (such as 1 Hz), MOSFET resistors are used to provide resistance in the range of gigaohms while maintaining a small active area (2.53 mm 2 ). This approach makes the ECG device more compact and integrated.
## (s6) PTT-Based BP Estimation Model
(p6.0) In addition to PPT/PAT, there are many other physiological indicators, such as heart rate, height, weight, age, BMI, etc. Different physiological indicators can reflect different physiological information. Therefore, combining various physiological indicators can reflect human physiological conditions more comprehensively.

(p6.1) In 2016, Hsiao et al. added different physiological parameters to the BP estimation equation (Table 1) to select the best parameter combination [78]. As can be observed in Table 1, Hsiao et al. tried to add various physiological parameters to the equation. The experimental results show that the error decreases when one more physiological parameter is added to the equation. On the one hand, it can be seen from Figure 14a,b that HR has a greater impact on PTT than on SBP. For both men and women, the data in Figure 14b tend to have a higher correlation than those in Figure 14a. Therefore, it is necessary to include HR in BP estimation to correct PTT. On the other hand, it can be seen from Figure 14c that SBP is proportional to age, that is, BP increases with age, but the BP of women is generally lower than that of men. Therefore, different estimation equations should be provided for different genders. The final experimental results show that the error of SBP is 6.9 mmHg ± 8.6 mmHg, which does not meet the AAMI standard (5 mmHg ± 8 mmHg) but was close enough to indicate the feasibility of introducing physiological parameters other than PTT into the BP estimation equation.  28.5%, and 29.3%, respectively, which meet the AAMI standard. It can also be seen from Figure 14e that the PTT&HR-SBP model is more stable than the PTT-SBP model. Therefore, introducing HR and other information into the BP regression model will help improve the accuracy and robustness of the BP calculation model. In 2017, Aboughaly et al. compared the accuracy of linear and nonlinear BP regression models on the same dataset, in which the nonlinear BP regression model selected an exponential-type function [79]. After calculation, in the linear regression model, PTT and SBP have strong correlation characteristics (Figure 15a), with 0.92~0.99, but the correlation between PTT and DBP is very weak. As shown in Figure 15b, the linear model assumes negative values of PTT for high BP values and vice versa, while the nonlinear model provides a more realistic prediction for the relationship between PPT and BP. Therefore, the nonlinear model may be the future BP estimation equation's main form.  Figure 14d) and compared it with many PTT-SBP models [70], proving the necessity of introducing HR information into the BP regression model. As shown in Figure 14e, the performance of seven PTT-SBP models is worse than that of the PTT&HR-SBP model. Even the worstperforming Model 10 in the PTT&HR-SBP model has ME ± STD, MAE, and RMSE values of 1.63 ± 4.44, 3.68, and 4.71, respectively. Compared with Model 1, STD, MAE, and RMSE are reduced by 35.1%, 28.5%, and 29.3%, respectively, which meet the AAMI standard. It can also be seen from Figure 14e that the PTT&HR-SBP model is more stable than the PTT-SBP model. Therefore, introducing HR and other information into the BP regression model will help improve the accuracy and robustness of the BP calculation model.

(p6.2) In 2017, Aboughaly et al. compared the accuracy of linear and nonlinear BP regression models on the same dataset, in which the nonlinear BP regression model selected an exponential-type function [79]. After calculation, in the linear regression model, PTT and SBP have strong correlation characteristics (Figure 15a), with 0.92~0.99, but the correlation between PTT and DBP is very weak. As shown in Figure 15b, the linear model assumes negative values of PTT for high BP values and vice versa, while the nonlinear model provides a more realistic prediction for the relationship between PPT and BP. Therefore, the nonlinear model may be the future BP estimation equation's main form. In 2017, Lu et al. estimated BP using PTT and a large number of features extracted from PPG waves based on statistical learning and predictive analysis [80]. Three kinds of PTT approximations were used in the prediction model, including the time between the start of the QRS wave group (ECG), the start of the PPG wave, the maximum rise point of the PPG wave, the peak value of the PPG wave, and features extracted from the first and second derivatives of the PPG signal. Finally, the predicted BP met the AAMI and IEEE standards. It is proved that the PPG signal and its derivative data contain rich physiological information to a certain extent, indicating that it is necessary to carry out deeper information mining of the PPG signal; reasonable feature extraction of the PPG signal will be conducive to BP estimation.

(p6.3) Although PTT and PAT are two completely different concepts, some scholars regard PAT and PTT as the same index, without considering which is more suitable for BP estimation. Therefore, the accuracy of these two methods should be evaluated and compared to determine whether the addition of PEP can improve the accuracy. In 2019, Ebrahim et al. compared the PTT and PAT methods [81]. Instead of using only the PPG sensor and ECG sensor to measure PTT, the on-body continuous wave radar (CWR) was added to measure the pre-ejection PEP. PTT was calculated and combined with PAT (Figure 16a), and the SBP of PTT-based/PAT-based was calculated by a mathematical model ( Figure  16b). As shown in Figure 16c, it can be seen that the calculation of SBP by PTT has considerable improvement compared with that by PAT. Removing PEP from PAT improves accuracy by about 9% based on the cumulative errors calculated in the literature. Meanwhile, the author also collected data under different postures and movement conditions. Figure 16d shows the SBP results measured under three different postures, indicating that there is no clear relationship between the PAT value and SBP, while PTT and SBP remain negatively correlated despite the same trend due to posture changes. There was an inverse relationship between PTT/PAT and SBP during exercise. It can be seen that the fitted In 2017, Lu et al. estimated BP using PTT and a large number of features extracted from PPG waves based on statistical learning and predictive analysis [80]. Three kinds of PTT approximations were used in the prediction model, including the time between the start of the QRS wave group (ECG), the start of the PPG wave, the maximum rise point of the PPG wave, the peak value of the PPG wave, and features extracted from the first and second derivatives of the PPG signal. Finally, the predicted BP met the AAMI and IEEE standards. It is proved that the PPG signal and its derivative data contain rich physiological information to a certain extent, indicating that it is necessary to carry out deeper information mining of the PPG signal; reasonable feature extraction of the PPG signal will be conducive to BP estimation.

(p6.4) Although PTT and PAT are two completely different concepts, some scholars regard PAT and PTT as the same index, without considering which is more suitable for BP estimation. Therefore, the accuracy of these two methods should be evaluated and compared to determine whether the addition of PEP can improve the accuracy. In 2019, Ebrahim et al. compared the PTT and PAT methods [81]. Instead of using only the PPG sensor and ECG sensor to measure PTT, the on-body continuous wave radar (CWR) was added to measure the pre-ejection PEP. PTT was calculated and combined with PAT (Figure 16a), and the SBP of PTT-based/PAT-based was calculated by a mathematical model (Figure 16b). As shown in Figure 16c, it can be seen that the calculation of SBP by PTT has considerable improvement compared with that by PAT. Removing PEP from PAT improves accuracy by about 9% based on the cumulative errors calculated in the literature. Meanwhile, the author also collected data under different postures and movement conditions. Figure 16d shows the SBP results measured under three different postures, indicating that there is no clear relationship between the PAT value and SBP, while PTT and SBP remain negatively correlated despite the same trend due to posture changes. There was an inverse relationship between PTT/PAT and SBP during exercise. It can be seen that the fitted curves based on the PAT for different subjects were more dispersed than those based on PTT, while the calculated curves of PTT-SBP were more consistent with a higher linear correlation than those based on PAT-SBP. Therefore, the performance of the PTT-SBP model can be effectively improved after the removal of PEP. In the future, when using the BP calculation model based on PTT, attention should be paid to eliminating PEP to improve the accuracy of the model. curves based on the PAT for different subjects were more dispersed than those based on PTT, while the calculated curves of PTT-SBP were more consistent with a higher linear correlation than those based on PAT-SBP. Therefore, the performance of the PTT-SBP model can be effectively improved after the removal of PEP. In the future, when using the BP calculation model based on PTT, attention should be paid to eliminating PEP to improve the accuracy of the model. After PTT is derived using the PPG and ECG signals, BP is usually calculated by establishing a regression model, but more and more studies have shown that combining PTT with other physiological parameters can construct a more accurate and stable BP estimation model. At the same time, the PPG and ECG signal itself also contains very rich feature information (PPG first derivative, second derivative, etc.), which can play a role in optimizing the BP model and will be conducive to the estimation of BP. Therefore, it is necessary to dig deeper into the information contained in various physiological signals. After PTT is derived using the PPG and ECG signals, BP is usually calculated by establishing a regression model, but more and more studies have shown that combining PTT with other physiological parameters can construct a more accurate and stable BP estimation model. At the same time, the PPG and ECG signal itself also contains very rich feature information (PPG first derivative, second derivative, etc.), which can play a role in optimizing the BP model and will be conducive to the estimation of BP. Therefore, it is necessary to dig deeper into the information contained in various physiological signals.
