# An overview on current trends and future outlook of hydrogels in drug delivery

CorpusID: 259515885 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5aedafcac552b6c41f34f82d3bdd788f1c6d63fb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5aedafcac552b6c41f34f82d3bdd788f1c6d63fb)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) The terminology "Drug Delivery System" (DDS) refers to a method of introducing a drug into the body and increasing its efficiency by regulating the rate and time at which the medication is released into the targeted organ. To get over the disadvantages of traditional drug formulations, controlled drug delivery systems that provide drugs at predetermined rates have been developed [1]. There are many types of the DDS's that are in use nowadays. In this study, the hydrogels were investigated as drug carriers for a controlled drug release. Hydrogels are three-dimensional hydrophilic polymeric matrices that may absorb large amounts of water or biological fluids. Due to their high water content, porosity, and soft consistency, hydrogels are more similar to living tissues than other artificial biomaterials. [2]. As a result of their swelling capability, hydrogels, which have become extremely desirable materials nowadays, are commonly used in medicine and healthcare. Hydrogels can provide optimum conditions and environments for biological interactions to take place. One of the most significant materials of option is hydrogel, which is employed in bio generators, drug delivery systems, contact lenses, wound dressings, and biomedical applications.
## (s7) PREPARATION METHODS OF HYDROGELS
(p7.0) Polymer networks made from natural or manmade polymers make up hydrogels. Chemical crosslinking, physical cross-linking, grafting polymerization, and radiation cross-linking are some of the preparation methods employed [31]. The next sections explain how to prepare hydrogels in general.
## (s12) CROSS-LINKING BY CHEMICAL MEANS
(p12.0) This method includes grafting the monomers onto polymer chains or binding two polymer chains together with a cross-linking agent. The reaction between functional groups like NH2, COOH, and OH with cross-linking agents that can be aldehyde causes cross-linking of synthetic and natural polymers. Hydrogels which are cross-linked chemically can be produced in a variety of ways. Crosslinking via complimentary groups chemical reactions, crosslinking with free radical polymerization, and crosslinking with enzymes are the three most common chemical processes [36].
## (s13) COMPLIMENTARY GROUP CROSS-LINKING REACTION
(p13.0) Polymers which contain hydrophilic groups like NH2, COOH, and OH can be utilized in preparing hydrogels. Isocyanate-OH/NH2 reactions, amine-carboxylic acid reactions, and Schiff base production are all examples of reactions that can be utilized to understand covalent connections among the chains of polymers [36].
## (s16) VIA THE USE OF CONDENSATION REACTIONS
(p16.0) This reaction which involves -OH groups or -NH2 with -COOH or derivatives can be utilized to make polyesters and polyamides, respectively. These reactions are utilized in hydrogel preparation. N,N-(3dimethylaminopropyl)-N-ethyl carbodiimide is a particularly effective agent to cross-link amide groups with hydrophilic polymers [43].
## (s18) CROSS-LINKING VIA ENZYMES
(p18.0) Sperinde et al. devised a technique for synthesizing PEG-based gels by employing an enzyme. Tetrahydroxy PEG was used to functionalize glutaminyl groups (PEG-Qa). PEG networks were created when transglutaminase was added to aqueous solutions of poly (lysine-co-phenylalanine) and PEG-Qa. The creation 7 of an amide bond among the -amine group of lysine and the -carboxamide group of PEG-Qa was mediated by transglutaminase [47].
## (s19) CROSS-LINKING VIA RADIATION
(p19.0) The fact that in this method there is no requirement to use chemical additives, preserving hydrogel's biocompatibility, has made it a popular approach. Furthermore, the alteration and sterilizing may be completed in one step, making it an economical technique for modifying hydrogels with specific uses in medical applications [48]. The process is based on the production of free radicals in the polymer upon exposure to a high-energy source such as an x-ray, gamma ray, or electron beam. The polymer environment, such as dilute solution, concentrated solution, or solid state, will largely determine the action of radiation, which might be direct or indirect.
## (s21) HYDROGELS WITH NATURAL ORIGIN
(p21.0) This type of hydrogels is made from natural materials. Animals and living plants can provide them. Microorganisms are also capable of producing biodegradable polymers. Some examples of polymers that are used to make these hydrogels can be proteins and polysaccharides such as dextran, chitosan, and alginate [49].
## (s25) COPOLYMERIC HYDROGELS
(p25.0) The structure of these hydrogels is a mixture of two monomer units [55]. These units can be arranged in a variety of ways, including block, graft, alternate, and random. Chemically, these hydrogels can be made by polymerizing or cross-linking both monomers with the help of an initiator and a cross-linker. Different forces, including as hydrogen bonding, chain aggregations, ionic contact, and ion-polymer complexations, can also physically cross-link them [56,57].
## (s27) Interpenetrating network (IPN)
(p27.0) Two interlaced polymer networks with no chemical bond between the polymers make up this type of hydrogel. One of the polymers has a linearly structured network, while the other polymer's network is crosslinked. There is a diffusion of the linear network into the cross-linked network [59]. Figure 3.11 shows an interpenetrating network (IPN) hydrogel which has a molecular structure that includes the arrangement of monomers and crosslinking.
## (s30) IONIC HYDROGELS
(p30.0) Cationic and anionic hydrogels are two types of ionic hydrogels. -Positively charged side groups such as amines and sulphonic acid are found in cationic hydrogels. At low pH, they show an increase in swelling. -Negatively charged side groups, like carboxylic acid and sulphonic acid, are present in anionic hydrogels. When the pH is too high, they swell more [55,60]. -
## (s31) AMPHOLYTIC HYDROGELS
(p31.0) These hydrogels can hold both negative and positive electrical charges at one polymer chain. This can lead to a balance at the isoelectric point [55,60]. Based on the existence of electric charge, a schematic representation of several hydrogels is depicted in Figure 3.12.
## (s38) CROSS-LINKING BASED CLASSIFICATIONS
(p38.0) Hydrogels are grouped into main two categories according to the sort of cross-linking used. The two types are chemical hydrogels and physical hydrogels. Covalent cross-linking is utilized to make chemical hydrogels, while physical hydrogels are cross-linked through a variety of physical actions like hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic interactions, and crystallization [62].
## (s39) CLASSIFICATION BASED ON EXTERNAL STIMULI RESPONSE
(p39.0) These hydrogels go through rapid and reversible changes as a response to changes that occur in their environment. Smart hydrogels are categorized according to their responses to changes such as changes in pH, temperature, irradiation, pressure, and chemical stimuli. Smart polymers can be used for several applications like medical and engineering applications [63].
## (s40) HYDROGELS IN DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS
(p40.0) Drug delivery systems are one of the most prominent applications of hydrogels. Because of its unique features such as flexibility, hydrophobicity, and biocompatibility, hydrogels are exploited as drug carriers. Hydrogels are composed of a hydrophilic network that acts as a water absorber and instantly identifies the desired location. To inject the gel into the targeted tissue, a hole that corresponds to the gel dimension is necessary. Patients may be exposed to danger and discomfort as a result of this application. As a result, to distribute the medicine, three-dimensional matrices must be created. Hydrogels can create three-dimensional matrices with biocompatibility, elasticity, and the ability to absorb water thanks to their cross-linking network. Hydrogels can also administer medicine at a specific moment and with a controlled release [64].

(p40.1) Hydrogels have the ability to undergo structure alterations which enables them to be used as carriers for drugs. Drugs can be released from hydrogels according to their target organ and administration route. In this method, the drug can be delivered to the body in a specific method to meet the precise curative demands [65,66].
