# Clinical and electrophysiological pattern of startle epilepsy: a comprehensive literature review

CorpusID: 254362659 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8c5edc58e1bd35e15470fcc1a28e6be40e2a9396](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8c5edc58e1bd35e15470fcc1a28e6be40e2a9396)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) 4
(p0.0) and are triggered by a startle motor response. Though the pathophysiological mechanisms and networks involved are still poorly understood, they are thought to originate in the fronto-central regions. Patients are usually drug-resistant, and some studies have suggested the efficacy of surgery [7]. We could diagnose a typical form of startle epilepsy despite the variable clinical and electrophysiological patterns provided in the cohorts of the 83 patients reported in literature [5,[8][9][10][11]].
## (s10) Review methodology
(p10.0) We reviewed literature on startle epilepsy along with the most frequent electrophysiological characteristics reported in PubMed and Google Scholar database. And searched the following keywords: startle AND epilepsy AND electrophysiology OR EEG recording. This review included papers from 1955 to 2021 (this study was conducted in 2021). We selected studies and case reports that matched our keywords and investigated further studies with large cohorts and electrophysiological data. After selecting 35 studies, most of which were isolated case reports, we focused on five cohorts reporting electro-clinical data of over ten patients [5,[8][9][10][11]].
## (s12) Triggers of seizure
(p12.0) The auditory modality is the most common trigger of seizures, followed by somesthetic stimulation (most often stimulation of the paretic hemisphere) and visual stimulation. A case of seizures triggered by a strong and startling odor has been described [19]. The intensity of the stimulus which is required to trigger seizures is highly variable, depending on the patient's level of attention and anticipation. The occurrence of seizures during sleep, as in our patient, has been described (25% of patients in the cohort of Aguglia et al. [8]). The occurrence of unprovoked seizures is also quite frequent, up to 100% of patients depending on studies, and is described in the 5 cohorts [5,[8][9][10][11]].
## (s13) Clinical manifestations of seizures
(p13.0) There is a great heterogeneity in the ictal manifestations described in startle epilepsy. Our patient's seizures starting with paresthesia followed by a hemi-tonic contraction, were reported in 26% of the cases in the cohort of Manford et al. [5]. Initial somesthetic manifestations could have been underestimated in the other cohorts, particularly those in which patients suffered a major cognitive impairment [10]. Literature also reports symptoms such as epigastric sensation, automatism, or urination [10]. Hemi-tonic seizures (in the paretic limbs) are the most frequent type of seizure, followed by myoclonic seizures and bilateral tonic seizures. Generalized tonic-clonic seizures are also common and may be found as frequently as tonic seizures in some studies [9]. Rarely, patients may show absence-type seizures [5,11] or atonic seizures [8]. As shown in Table 1, the distribution of clinical data according to seizures' type is variable across studies. The phenomenology of unprovoked and provoked seizures can be similar or quite distinct. In most cases, like ours, unprovoked seizures of different phenomenology can precede by years the onset of startle epilepsy. Literature is homogeneous in terms of high seizure frequency, over one seizure per day.
## (s16) [10]
(p16.0) Yang et al. 2010 [11] Number of patients 16  9 onset of seizures [5,10,11,14] in 9 to 40% of cases. The most common initial pattern in these cohorts is diffuse flattening of the background rhythm (called diffuse electro-decremental pattern or DEP), present in approximately 60% of patients. Ictal EEG pattern appears as an isolated focal spike (over median, right, or left fronto-central electrodes) followed by a rhythmic localized or bilateral discharge of spikes. The representation of each ictal EEG pattern is different across the five cohorts [5,[8][9][10][11]. It is important to note that EEG recording may be normal during a seizure or difficult to interpret due to muscle artifacts in 22 to 66% of cases [5,10]. In fact, identifying startle muscle artifacts can hamper the analysis of the seizure's onset.
## (s17) Intracerebral EEG recordings
(p17.0) Chauvel et al. [2] provide SEEG recordings from twenty patients with startle epilepsy. The seizure starts with an abnormally high voltage in the primary motor cortex or supplementary motor area, in the same time frame as a spike recorded in scalp EEG over the central median electrode, i.e., Cz (called "evoked spike"). This is followed by a low-voltage rapid discharge, also localized either in the primary motor cortex or in the supplementary motor area, with a propagation to the mesial cortex of the homolateral and contralateral frontal lobes. For Chauvel and colleagues, startle epilepsy seizures thus originate in the motor and premotor cortices. Other recent studies reported a seizure onset zone located in the premotor cortex [21][22], the prefrontal cortex, and anterior and middle cingulate cortex [23]. The SMA was involved in the epileptic network of the majority of cases [21][22][23][24]. Using the Epileptogenicity Maps method, Job et al. [18] identified an increase of high frequency oscillations in the premotor and prefrontal areas during startle epilepsy seizures and a constant involvement of the SMA.
