# materials Alternative Materials from Agro-Industry for Wood Panel Manufacturing-A Review

CorpusID: 250160666 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b373aa73a71988b5d5ce5771b81aa9edcd4b6e49](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b373aa73a71988b5d5ce5771b81aa9edcd4b6e49)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s3) Crop
(p3.0) Residue Process residues, including agro-industrial residues or secondary residues, are created when the plants are processed from the primary resource. Husks, hulls, peels, coir, bagasse, and skins are produced during the processing of the main product. The terms husk, shell, and hull can be used interchangeably [32] or with different meanings [33]. Since there is no standard terminology, all main crop's protective surrounding materials are named husks in this work. Husk material is first produced in the field during the harvest and can also be collected during mechanical cleaning in industrial processing. Different products are obtained during the processing of cereal grain, for instance, husks, flour, and bran.
## (s7) Fiber Characteristics of Alternative Materials
(p7.0) The morphology of the fibers is essentially relevant for their application in fiber form in relevant wood-based panels (i.e., fiberboards). However, if NWLM or ARs are used in particle form, the particle properties are also influenced by the fiber structure. For the production of fiberboards, long fibers with a higher aspect ratio are preferred [42]. Long fibers provide a larger surface area, allowing the adhesive to spread more evenly.
## (s8) Utilization of Alternative Furnish Materials for Panel Manufacturing
(p8.0) The application of NWLM and other alternative furnish materials solely or mixed with wood fibers or chips in panel production has been extensively studied during the last decades. Various studies are summarized in Tables 5-8, where these materials were used as raw materials in fiberboard or particleboard, in combination with another material, as well as the type and quantity of adhesives. Tests in which NWLM or ARs were only used as a filler or as an adhesive component were not considered. The produced panels were evaluated for their mechanical and physical properties, i.e., internal bond (IB), modulus of elasticity (MOE), modulus of rupture (MOR), thickness swelling (TS), and water absorption (WA). * derived from figure, CL (core layer), ind. (industrial), PF (phenol-formaldehyde), pMDI (polymeric diphenylmethane diisocyanate), SL (surface layer), and UF (urea-formaldehyde).    In most cases, however, only some of the properties were examined in the various studies. Since IB and MOR were predominantly tested and are included in the standard and industry requirements for the application of panels in the dry interior, IB and MOR values are presented in the tables. In addition, it is highlighted whether they meet the minimum requirements of the European Norm (EN) 622-3: 2004 for fiberboard and EN 312: 2003 for particleboard. The panel thickness and density were considered in each case. Unless otherwise noted, material mixes are at a 1:1 weight ratio.

(p8.1) In general, it can be stated that the combinations of NWLM (Table 5) or AR (Tables 6-8) with a wooden material usually show better properties than panels without wood content. Up to a proportion of approximately 30% of wood substitutes, the required strength properties are usually achieved. Beyond that level, the properties decrease significantly. Compared to AR, panels containing NWLM achieve higher MOR values, which could be due to the longer fibers.

(p8.2) Tröger et al. [80] reported that the addition of long flax fibers by 20% in the surface layer (SL) increased the bending properties and decreased the IB values in three-layer particleboards. Papadopoulos and Hague [106] mixed industrial wood chips and flax fibers (0%, 10%, and 30%) in single-layer particleboards by using a 13% urea-formaldehyde (UF) resin binder. Panels with a 30% flax share met the European Standard of P3 particleboard requirements in terms of MOR, IB, and TS. However, the mechanical strength of panels made from 100% wood was always higher. Particleboards made with 100% flax fibers had an insufficient IB strength but an acceptable MOR for P2 boards. The authors attribute the low IB to the relatively thin cell walls of flax.
## (s9) Panel Manufacturing Parameters
(p9.0) The performance of the panels prepared from alternative furnish raw materials are highly influenced by production parameters, including adhesive type and ratio, panel density, and pressing factors (speed and press temperature). Previous studies have shown a direct relation between the panel's adhesive type and ratio and mechanical properties [91,162].
## (s10) Material Processing and Pretreatment
(p10.0) In addition to the type of raw materials and manufacturing parameters, the processing and pretreatment affect the properties of the final panel. The raw materials from non-wood lignocellulosic and agricultural sources have been mainly processed mechanically and some were chemically pretreated to create evenly sized particles or to improve their performance in final panels [72,126,139]. The mechanical processing of NWLMs and ARs, such as canola stalks, with a hammermill, has often been used to prepare the raw material [122]. Ndazi et al. [179] produced single-layer particleboards with ground (8 mm sieve) and untreated rice husks and 15% of PF. The results showed that the mechanical properties of the panels decreased by grinding.

(p10.1) Many factors can be varied in fiber production for fiberboard raw material. Zawawi et al. [180] investigated the influence of refining conditions, pressure and temperature on oil palm fruit husk's fiber and fiberboard properties. It was found that higher pressure and a higher temperature in the refiner ultimately led to increasing MOE, MOR, IB and reduced water absorption. Overly aggressive refining conditions, however, produced shorter fiber lengths and consequently reduced the fiberboards' physical and mechanical properties.

(p10.2) Chemical pretreatments of raw materials are performed to optimize the bonding capability of the particles and the adhesive. Due to the increase in reactive hydroxide (OH) groups during an alkali treatment, the binding of the raw material and the adhesive improves [181,182]. The hydrophilic nature of raw materials can also reduce mechanical properties due to water absorption and a reduction of the water resistance. Acetylation can increase the hydrophobicity of a raw material, which leads to less thickness swelling and improved mechanical strength. [183].

(p10.3) Cotton stalks pretreated with 1-5% sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were used to prepare single-layer particleboards in combination with 10% UF adhesive [126]. The NaOH decomposes the lignin and reduces the content of hemicelluloses and extractives. In relative terms, since cellulose is more resistant to NaOH, the proportion increases. In addition, the surface roughened by the NaOH treatment offers better bonding between raw material and adhesive [184].

(p10.4) The results showed that the static bending properties of the panels (MOE and MOR) improved by 1% NaOH treatment, while pretreatment of the cotton stalks at 3% and 5% of NaOH resulted in the strength reduction of the panels. Treatment at a higher concentration degrades the cell wall components stronger and deforms the particle structure, resulting in a reduction in mechanical strength. Figure 4 shows NaOH treated canola stalks with rougher surface than untreated ones. Mo et al. [139] bleached wheat stalks with 3% sodium hypochlorite in a ratio of 1:10 for 30 min at 50 • C. When bleaching lignocellulosic materials, the hydrophobic wax and inorganic components on the surface, such as silica, are removed.

(p10.5) The corn stalks were fermented in a process similar to the common procedure used in agriculture. Crops were stored under anaerobic conditions to inhibit undesirable microbial growth and prevent deterioration. The boards from corn stalks, fermented for 21 days, showed improved MOR and MOE as well as significantly increased IB values.

(p10.6) TS and WA were also noticeably reduced. However, with a longer fermentation than 21 days, all mechanical and physical properties deteriorated again. The reason was assumed to be the interaction of several biological factors. The surface structure may have increased due to the hydrolysis of carbohydrates, and a micro biofilm may act as an adhesive.  [184].
## (s11) Conclusions and Future Scopes
(p11.0) Lignocellulosic materials from non-wood and agricultural sources represent a potential alternative choice to wood materials for wood-based panel manufacturing. These materials are derived from renewable sources and can be used as a partial or entire replacement for wood chips and fibers. One advantage of most of these materials for easier integration in industrial manufacturing processes of wood panels is their similar nature to wood materials in terms of chemical composition and fiber morphology.

(p11.1) However, these alternative raw materials suffer from several different issues that prevent their application in industry. Some NWLMs have to be cultivated separately, and This increases the wettability of the stalks and the bonding ability of the entire panel with water-based adhesives [185]. The pretreatment led to a significant improvement in mechanical properties (MOE, MOR, and IB) of single-layer particleboards bonded with 8% UF adhesive. Despite the intensification of the hydrophilic nature of the stalks, TS and WA only increased slightly. Among other things, TS is closely related to the bonding quality. As this could be significantly enhanced, less water could penetrate into the panels, and the increased hydrophilicity had little effect [139].

(p11.2) To optimize the curing behavior of UF resin in fiberboards made with wheat stalks, Halvarsson et al. [120] pretreated the stalks with a 10% sulfuric acid solution to decrease the pH value below 6 before fiber refining. However, no significant changes in the mechanical properties of the panels were determined. Ciannamea et al. [72] compared the effects of alkaline and alkaline-oxidation pretreatments on the performance of single-layer particleboards made with rice husks using 10% of a modified soybean protein adhesive.

(p11.3) The authors reported that the two-phase pretreatment, NaOH followed by a hydrogen peroxide treatment, resulted in higher mechanical strength and lower water resistance in comparison with panels prepared by only alkaline pre-treated rice husks and also with those with untreated husks. This is due to the reduction of lipids and waxes after the peroxide treatment, thus, allowing a better bonding of the raw material and the adhesive.
## (s12) Conclusions and Future Scopes
(p12.0) Lignocellulosic materials from non-wood and agricultural sources represent a potential alternative choice to wood materials for wood-based panel manufacturing. These materials are derived from renewable sources and can be used as a partial or entire replacement for wood chips and fibers. One advantage of most of these materials for easier integration in industrial manufacturing processes of wood panels is their similar nature to wood materials in terms of chemical composition and fiber morphology.

(p12.1) However, these alternative raw materials suffer from several different issues that prevent their application in industry. Some NWLMs have to be cultivated separately, and they are in direct economic competition with food agriculture and its land use. Economically practical use of grow care residues currently appears rather unlikely for wood-based panels as they result in low-performing panels. The different stalk types of harvest residues usually show shorter fiber lengths and a high extractive content, which can primarily affect the bonding quality and affinity to the adhesive in the panel.

(p12.2) It should be noted that laboratory panels from alternative panels were tested for their use in interior furniture, and their strength performance is sufficient for load-bearing purposes. A great challenge is that the agricultural harvest is only performed seasonally, and therefore no continuous flow of raw materials can be guaranteed. Storage capacities would be required to ensure constant production with seasonal harvest residues. This would result in high costs, and the influence of long-term storage on the raw material should be examined beforehand.

(p12.3) The bulk density of most alternative materials is low, thereby, making their handling more expensive than wood [131] and contributing to high logistic costs for their transportation [30]. In addition, it appears that there is an upper limit on the wood replacement ratio. If the proportion of an alternative raw material to wood is higher than 30% in combination with traditional UF resin, the mechanical properties deteriorate significantly. The thickness swelling and water absorption of experimental panels are also relatively high.

(p12.4) However, the use of alternative synthetic adhesives, especially pMDI, shows that panels from 100% agricultural residues can also fulfill the requirements. A life cycle assessment (LCA) for sugarcane bagasse added in particleboard demonstrated that the agricultural residue can replace the traditional wood as a raw material due to its better environmental performance. The required mechanical properties of panels can be achieved, comparatively less land is occupied, and further material use reduces abiotic depletion and ecotoxicity [186].

(p12.5) The selection of new raw materials should focus on plants grown for various purposes and have an appropriate structural composition. There should be no competition for the use of the residues, their price should be low, and sufficient quantities should be available. The industrial production of wood-based panels is a process that has been optimized over decades, and a modification of the handling and processing of raw materials requires long-term optimization processes. Therefore, initially, small volume niche products should be considered as more feasible panel types for those materials.

(p12.6) The increased production volume of fiberboards in the last few decades provides good future opportunities. Since the production of fiberboards has increased considerably (Figure 1), the high availability of hemp and flax fibers provides an advantage for using these materials. Compared to wood, the fibers are longer and have a higher cellulose content. The use of 100% flax fibers in panels was proven to be sufficient to produce mechanically robust panels at a laboratory scale, though further optimization is needed to improve their internal bond strength.

(p12.7) Trunks of wood species from which the fruit is used commercially can serve as a substitute raw material. For example, large amounts of harvest residues from oil palm production can be used more effectively. Panels made from oil palm wood, which is less tied to seasonal harvest, have mostly shown adequate mechanical properties. Harvest residues are suitable as raw materials because they have an enormously high production potential. When harvesting wheat and rice, more than the same amounts of stalk residues accumulate.

(p12.8) In addition, the tested panels achieved acceptable properties with a suitable adhesive. An advantage of the process residues is that, typically, they are already integrated into an industrial material flow system, e.g., flour production, which can reduce the logistical effort for panel manufacturing. For example, oat and hazelnut husks have similar chemical compositions.

(p12.9) Furthermore, the panels produced can meet the minimum requirements for mechanical strength. In addition, the materials have already been removed from the ecosystem, and using them as raw material for panels adds value and enhances sustainability compared to thermal incineration only. An integration of husks for special panel types with adapted requirements should be considered. Consequently, selected raw materials from the various categories can be used in wood-based panels. The first thing to consider is their local availability and the intended use. Focus should be given to an appropriate type of adhesive and dosing.

(p12.10) In particular, alternatives to UF, such as pMDI or PF, have proven that panels made entirely of agricultural residues can meet the requirements. It should be kept in mind that additional costs might occur for the pretreatment of some raw materials as a necessary or optional approach to improve the panel performance. The information gathered in this review provides the set of current knowledge in this research field. It identifies promising alternative raw materials and their challenges in replacing partially or entirely standard wood materials for more sustainable wood-based panel production.

(p12.11) Finally, it should be noted that this review has its limitations. No definite conclusions can be made on ideal alternative materials from agro-industry to substitute wood in woodbased panels as there are many factors to consider. Further investigations should focus on regional availability of such materials and demand for specific product types. Then, suitable alternative materials could be identified more clearly. The search for new raw materials could also be expanded, such as to include raw materials from short-rotation plantations or plantations in general. The focus of this work has been on fiberboard and particleboard panels. The wide range of applications of non-wood lignocellulosic materials and agricultural residues in other panel types, such as wood-plastic composites, should also be considered in the future.  
