# A review of current evidence for mild behavioral impairment as an early potential novel marker of Alzheimer's disease

CorpusID: 258867478 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f7d064ba5f9f88e3c894006c5393eb66d344ade](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f7d064ba5f9f88e3c894006c5393eb66d344ade)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) There are currently more than 55 million people living with dementia worldwide, with an average of one new dementia patient every 3 s (1, 2). By 2050, the number of people affected is expected to reach 139 million. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an irreversible neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive cognitive dysfunction and behavioral impairment (3). AD is the most common cause of dementia estimated to account for 60-80% of dementia cases (2). AD poses a serious threat to the health and safety of older adults and places a heavy burden on families, society, and healthcare systems (2). No drugs can effectively delay AD (4), so early diagnosis and intervention are particularly important.
## (s1) The ISTART-AA MBI diagnostic criteria
(p1.0) Based on the need for early identification and treatment of neurodegenerative disorders, the International Society to Advance Alzheimer's Research and Treatment (ISTAART) NPS Professional Interest Area has expanded the Taragano MBI diagnostic criteria and proposed new diagnostic criteria for research, the ISTART-AA MBI diagnostic criteria (25) (Figure 1).

(p1.1) The ISTAART-AA criteria for the diagnosis of MBI require the observation of behavioral or personality changes that start later in life (age ≥ 50 years). These changes are inconsistent with the person's usual behavior or personality, persist at least intermittently for ≥6 months, and can be demonstrated by changes in at least one of MBI domains of decreased motivation, affective dysregulation, impulsive dyscontrol, social inappropriateness, and abnormal perception or thought content. Notably, the criteria emphasize that an individual with MBI achieves at least minimal functional impairment in social, occupational, or interpersonal functioning and that the impairment must be attributable to NPS rather than cognitive decline (25). In addition, MBI is only diagnosed in people without dementia but can be co-diagnosed with MCI (25).
## (s2) Epidemiology and measurement
(p2.0) MBI is seen as a late-life transition state between normal aging and the prodromal stage of dementia and increases the risk of dementia in cognitively normal individuals or individuals with MCI (23, 25).
## (s3) MBI and cognitive function correlation
(p3.0) To better assess the role of MBI and its domains in preclinical AD, existing NPI data can be used. A retrospective study of psychiatric outpatients using the NPI for the diagnosis of MBI found that the hazard ratio (HR) for dementia was higher for MBI than other psychiatric diseases (HR = 8.07, 95% CI: 4.34-15.03, p < 0.001), and those with affective disorders had an increased risk of developing dementia among MCI patients (HR = 1.646) (28). This result is interesting in that we can see that MBI predicts a higher risk of dementia, and the predictive power seems to be different for different MBI domains, which informs the subsequent predictive power of dementia risk for individual MBI domains. Of course, the study has limitations, such as the follow-up time of some subjects was insufficient (minimum 1 month) and the retrospective study design may have some insufficient information.
## (s7) Conclusion/future directions
(p7.0) It has long been recognized that NPS are prevalent in dementia, widespread across the cognitive spectrum, and associated with poorer outcomes, including heavier caregiver burden (79), lower quality of life (80), higher rates of institutionalization (81), worsening dementia, and even death (82). In 1996, the International Psychogeriatric Association defined the presence of NPS in dementia as the "behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia" (83), with evidence from a number of studies. Nevertheless, there is no unifying concept of NPS that appears in the pre-dementia stage or even in cognitively normal individuals, nor has there been an abundance of relevant studies. Until recently, the formal introduction of the MBI concept (23) and the establishment of the ISTART-AA MBI diagnostic criteria (25) have provided a clear framework within which to study NPS as an early marker of dementia risk.
