# An overview of experimental simulations of microbial activity in early Earth

CorpusID: 255600713 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c26138a3f4d2ee54fff7fb5e0b0cf370fbbbacb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c26138a3f4d2ee54fff7fb5e0b0cf370fbbbacb)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Microbes are the main drivers for global biogeochemical cycles throughout the Earth history (e.g., Falkowski et al., 2008). In fact, microbial activity not only sustains the habitable environments of the Earth surface, but also is responsible for the gradual development of an oxygen-rich atmosphere that paved the way for the rise of eukaryotes (e.g., Lyons et al., 2014). Life only existed as single-cell microbes before the appearance of multicellular eukaryotes, perhaps as early as the Mesoproterozoic (e.g., Zhu et al., 2016; Figure 1). Thus, these primitive microbes were important in shaping the biogeochemical cycles as well as the environmental conditions of early Earth.
## (s7) Mineral formation Banded iron formation
(p7.0) The sediments of the Precambrian could be different from those found in today's environments. In particular, a substantial number of BIFs with alternating layers of iron minerals and silica were formed in the Precambrian (e.g., Konhauser et al., 2017), in contrast to the lack of such deposits during the Phanerozoic. Both abiotic and biotic models of BIF formation have been proposed and intensely investigated. Many microbial experiments have been performed to investigate the mechanism of BIF formation, which has been reviewed in Posth et al. (2013Posth et al. ( , 2014 and will only be briefly discussed here.
## (s9) Future works
(p9.0) Although microbial cultivation experiment can greatly advance our understanding of the interaction between life and environments during the early Earth, there are several pitfalls to using this method. Firstly, as mentioned above, the environmental conditions of the Precambrian were quite different from those of the modern era in multiple aspects, and the artificial Precambrian environments used in cultivation experiments usually only consider a limited number of environmental factors, which cannot fully simulate the actual processes in the Precambrian. For instance, the primary productivity of the Precambrian could be influenced by various environmental forcings such as UV intensity, solar constant, length of daytime, pCO 2 , marine pH, temperature, nutrient concentrations, and toxic components such as Fe(II). Thus, more constraints on the Precambrian environmental conditions would certainly be beneficial for further experimental simulation, and the consideration of additional environmental factors during the cultivation experiments would increase the reliability of the conclusions.

(p9.1) Secondly, the microbial species of the Precambrian could be different from those of today. Although it has been suggested that the components of well-adapted ecosystems may remain unchanged if there is no change in the physical-biological environment (e.g., Schopf et al., 2015), the environmental settings of the Precambrian were significantly different from those of modern environments and a perfect modern analogue for Precambrian settings is lacking. Thus, it is not known whether the species used in current cultivation experiments did actually exist during the Precambrian. On the other hand, there are a lot of biological mechanisms in the organisms of the early Earth that have now been lost due to evolutionary redundancy under current environmental conditions. Moreover, there are many species with similar functions and yet there are even more species to be discovered in the modern Earth surface, which adds more complexity to the identification of species that are applicable to the Precambrian. For example, a considerable number of photoferrotrophs in both fresh water and seawater are known today, including green sulfur bacteria, purple sulfur bacteria and purple non-sulfur bacteria (Posth et al., 2014 and the references therein). Knowledge of the first group of microorganisms that has developed certain metabolic pathways such as photoferrotrophs and the time of gene transfer between microbial groups would certainly be helpful in the design of simulation experiments. In this case, biomarkers may provide vital information on the existence of specific groups or even species of microbes in rock records. Other methods such as molecular clock and geochemical tracer, could also be helpful in the identification of certain metabolic pathways or groups of microorganisms on early Earth. Meanwhile, the similarities between the environmental settings of modern strains and those of the Precambrian should be evaluated to identify the applicability of certain species to the Precambrian period.
