# Persimmon Leaves: Nutritional, Pharmaceutical, and Industrial Potential-A Review

CorpusID: 257059369 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/481230ccb798ecfa8e2dc6ef9f84d90e20b74c59](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/481230ccb798ecfa8e2dc6ef9f84d90e20b74c59)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Persimmon, mainly Diospyros kaki L., is primarily cultivated in Eastern Asia, including China, Japan, and Korea, and is also grown in India, Azerbaijan, Spain, Türkiye, Brazil, and the USA. Persimmon fruit is eaten fresh or dried (primarily astringent type), while leaves are well-known as functional tea in East Asian countries. In Japanese culture, PL are infused with hot water and consumed as functional tea ("kakinoha-cha"), which is traditionally known for curing paralysis, burns, and frostbite, as well as to stopping bleeding [1,2]. Persimmon trees are deciduous, hence their leaves are of interest as functional food ingredients, nutraceuticals, and pharmaceuticals. Persimmon leaves (PL) contain a wide range of bioactive compounds such as phenolics (flavonoids), terpenoids, polysaccharides (cellulose, hemicelluloses, and lignins), caffeine, carotenoids (kryptoxanthin), amino acids, vitamin C, minerals, and chlorophylls. In particular, the leaves are abundant in phenolic compounds, including proanthocyanidins, quercetin, isoquercetin, catechin, flavonol glucosides, myricitrin, and kaempferol, thus exhibiting antioxidant, anticancer, antiallergic, anti-inflammatory, antidiabetic, antihypertensive, and vasorelaxant effects [3,4]. For example, Huang et al. [5] identified 32 compounds in PL using high-performance liquid chromatography-quadrupole time of flight-mass spectrometry (HPLC-QTOF-MS) in negative ion mode, and the major compounds were hyperoside, quercetin, kaempferol, myricetin, trifolin, vitexin, astragalin, 19α,24-dihydroxy ursolic acid, barbinervic acid, and pomolic acid.

(p0.1) PL have attracted much attention in the cosmeceutical industries in Asian countries due to their antioxidant, anti-tyrosinase, anti-inflammatory, photo-protective, antiallergic, These leaves are deciduous and bluish-green in color, which turn into orange, yellow, or red in the autumn. They are simple, alternate, and ovate elliptic in shape and have a mild flavor with a slightly bitter, astringent, and sweet taste. The fruit of this plant are typically harvested during the fall season (September to October) [10]. Almost every part of the persimmon plant, including fruits, peels, seeds, leaves, and bark, has been used in These leaves are deciduous and bluish-green in color, which turn into orange, yellow, or red in the autumn. They are simple, alternate, and ovate elliptic in shape and have a mild flavor with a slightly bitter, astringent, and sweet taste. The fruit of this plant are typically harvested during the fall season (September to October) [10]. Almost every part of the persimmon plant, including fruits, peels, seeds, leaves, and bark, has been used in traditional medicine, especially young leaves, which are mainly used as functional tea due to their abundance of antioxidants. Generally, mature leaves with less antioxidative compounds are not considered for tea, and this could be due to the movement of bioactive compounds (e.g., antioxidants) from leaves to fruits during fruiting [13].
## (s4) Phenolic Compounds
(p4.0) Phenolic compounds are secondary metabolites containing hydroxylated aromatic rings, which play an essential role in the growth and development with a defense mechanism in the plant. In particular, they engage in plants' defense by inhibiting herbivory, ultraviolet radiation, and pathogen attacks. In addition, they are responsible for the flavor, color, bitterness, and astringency of fruits such as persimmon [26]. Phenolic compounds in plants primarily originate from phenylalanine, and to a lesser extent, tyrosine. For example, p-hydroxycinnamic acid is derived from tyrosine with the assistance of tyrosine ammonialyase (TAL), whereas trans cinnamic acid is derived from phenylalanine, catalyzing by phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL). The major phenolics present in plants are flavonoids, phenolic acids, tannins, stilbenes, lignans, and coumarin [26][27][28]. Phenolic compounds are well known as antioxidants, which demonstrate inhibitory activities against α-glucosidase and tyrosinase activities as well as LDL-cholesterol, DNA, and lipid oxidation [29].
## (s5) Terpenoids
(p5.0) Terpenoids are a large class of diverse organic compounds, occurring naturally in plants to protect against biotic and abiotic stresses. Based on the number of isoprene units, terpenoids can be classified into monoterpenes (10 carbons), sesquiterpenes (15 carbons), diterpenes (20 carbons), sesterpenes (25 carbons), and triterpenes (30-40 carbons) [45]. They are the major constituents of essential oils (EOs) and exhibit several pharmacological and biological activities [45]. The major terpenoids found in PL are mainly pentacyclic triterpenoids such as ursolic acid, 19,24-dihydroxyursolic acid, 19-hydroxyursolic acid, 24-hydroxyursolic acid, siaresinolic acid, oleanolic acid, barbinervic acid, rotungenic acid, amyrin, and uvaol, among others ( Figure 3).
## (s7) Other Compounds
(p7.0) Other compounds such as naphthoquinones (3-bromoplumbagin, 3-methoxy-7-methyluglone, 8 -hydroxy-isodiospyrin, martinone, isodiospyrin, diospyrin, neodiospyrin, mamegakinone, and 7-methyluglone), organic acids (benzoic, succinic, salicylic, pyromucic, indoleacetic, and procatechuic acids), and coumarins (6-7-hydroxyl-7-hydroxycoumarin and scopoletin) have been reported in PL [10]. Secoiridoids and lignans were identified from PL, which were mainly persimmonoid A and B, ligustroside, oleuropein, medioresinol, syringaresinol, pinoresinol, medioresinol monoglucoside, syringaresinol-β-D-glucoside, and pinoresinol-β-D-glucoside, isolariciresinol [55]. Additionally, Chen et al. [56] identified two new compounds, such as 4,6-dihydroxy-2-O-β-D-glucopyranosylbenzophenone (kakispyrone) and kakisaponin A, from PL along with 11 known compounds, mainly phenolic compounds ( Figure 4).  
## (s14) Antidiabetic Effects
(p14.0) Persimmon leaves have demonstrated potential hypoglycemic effects, mainly by inhibiting/controlling α-amylase and α-glucosidase enzymes. For example, Hong et al. [66] suggested that Korean PL showed α-amylase and α-glucosidase inhibitory activities, possibly due to the presence of phenolics in the leaves. Similarly, PL compounds, mainly proanthocyanidins, decreased blood glucose levels in Wistar rats in a dose-dependent manner, which could be linked to the inhibition of pancreatic α-amylase [33]. Moreover, aqueous extract of PL inhibited α-glucosidase activity and enhanced glucose tolerance, improved blood lipid parameters, reduced body weight gain, suppressed fat accumulation in the liver, and maintained islet structure in db/db mice [41]. In addition, the novel glucosidase inhibitor, vomifoliol 9-O-α-arabinofuranosyl (1→6)-β-D-glucopyranoside, isolated from PL exhibited strong α-glucosidase inhibitory activity in HepG2 cells, suggesting that the PL could augment peripheral glucose as an insulin-sensitizing agent against Type 2 diabetes mellitus. In addition, addition of PL powder (5%, w/w) to a normal diet of C57BL/KsJ-db/db mice for 5 weeks decreased homeostatic index of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR), blood glucose, total cholesterol, and plasma triacylglycerol (TAG) levels, and also hepatic lipid droplets and liver weight, while increasing adiponectin and plasma highdensity lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) levels [69]. The anti-hyperglycemic potential was associated with the decreased effect of gluconeogenic enzymes and increased glucokinase activity and glycogen content in the liver, suggesting the potential for PL activity against type 2 diabetes. Furthermore, Khan et al. [7] developed a mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic approach to determine proteomic molecular signatures that could be applied to investigate the therapeutic potential of PL amelioration of diabetes. It was found that the salivary proteomic profile was changed after incorporating PL extract in prediabetic subjects, which could be used as potential protein signature candidates.
## (s15) Antihyperlipidemic and Anti-Obesity Effects
(p15.0) Hyperlipidemia is linked with changes in lipid peroxide and lipid peroxidation. Persimmon leaves have been reported to improve lipid profiles and suppress body weight gain. For example, the hypolipidemic effects of powdered PL were investigated in rats fed on a high-fat diet (HFD) and it was found that PL significantly lowered the plasma TAG and total cholesterol (TC) contents, whereas it elevated the ratio of HDL-C/total-C and enhanced the atherogenic index [8]. Moreover, PL rich in phenolic compounds increased the hepatic 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl (HMG)-CoA reductase and acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT) activities, and also the contents of fecal TAG, cholesterol, and acidic sterol than the control groups. Similarly, flavonoids obtained from PL significantly decreased TC, TAG, and LDL-C, but increased HDL-C, lipoprotein lipase (LPL), and hepatic lipase (HL) in the lipid metabolic disorder of hyperlipidemia rats, indicating its lipid-lowering effect [75]. Similarly, Jung et al. [74] demonstrated the potential anti-obesity and lipid-lowering effects of persimmon leaves as they lowered body fats and improved plasma and hepatic lipid profiles in HFD-fed rats.
## (s16) Immunostimulatory Effects
(p16.0) Immunostimulants are considered one of the body's defense strategies for preventing and fighting against inflammatory diseases, infections, and cancer, among others. The bioactive compounds, mainly polysaccharides, of PL have been characterized for their immunostimulatory activities. The immunostimulatory potential of polysaccharides isolated from PL was investigated in RAW 264.7 macrophages, and their in vivo effects on cyclophosphamide-induced immunosuppression in mice were also examined [53]. The immunostimulatory effect of PL in interferon-γ (IFN-γ)-primed RAW 264.7 macrophages was noted as they enhanced the phagocytic effects and the expressions of immune modulators, including cytokines and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). PL increased the mRNA expressions of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), IL-6, and interleukin-1β (IL-1β). Similarly, pectic polysaccharides of PL phosphorylated mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) in RAW 264.7 cells in a dose-dependent manner [76]. Moreover, the effect of polysaccharides on IL-6 generation was completely suppressed by specific inhibitors of c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) and extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK), suggesting macrophage activation. In another study, Shin et al. [54] suggested that the major polysaccharides in PL were 2-O-methyl-xylose, 2-O-methyl-fucoseapiose, 3-deoxy-D-manno-2-octulosonic acid, apiose, uronic acid, and 3-deoxy-D-lyxo-2-heptulosaric acid, which showed immune-stimulating activity. Meanwhile, triterpenoids of PL were reported to suppress tyrosyl phosphorylation of neutrophil proteins by inhibition of protein tyrosine kinase and stimulus-induced superoxide generation [46].
## (s17) Neuroprotective Effects
(p17.0) Oxidative stress induced by ROS is linked to the pathogenesis of chronic neurodegenerative diseases, and PL, mainly their phenolic compounds, are reported to have potential neuroprotective effects in attenuating oxidative injury. For example, flavonoids isolated from PL were investigated in H 2 O 2 -induced apoptosis-like damage of NG108-15 cells and it was found that PL were able to protect the nerve cells from injury and apoptosis by upregulating Bcl-2 expression and increasing redox imbalance, thus suggesting the potential of PL in preventing and treating ischemia/reperfusion injury and other neurodegenerative diseases [17]. Quercetin and kaempferol, along with rutin, astragalin, hyperin, and isoquercitrin, were the main flavonoids in PL, which may play critical roles in attenuating oxidative injury. Similarly, Bei et al. [40] stated that flavonoids extracted from PL significantly protected rats from middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) and four-vessel occlusion (4-VO) from ischemic injury in vivo and protected hippocampal neurons from glutamate-induced excitotoxic injury, indicating the potential neuroprotective effects of flavonoids (quercetin and kaempferol) due to their antioxidant activities. Furthermore, ethyl acetate extract of PL, rich in flavonoids, and triterpenoids exhibited potential protective effects on cognitive deficits induced by Aβ in rats, suggesting the possible inhibitory effect against Alzheimer's disease. Apart from flavonoids, secoiridoids, and lignans isolated from PL also demonstrated potential neuroprotective effects. For instance, secoiridoids and lignans, mainly (+)-medioresinol and (+)-syringaresinol-β-D-glucoside, showed potential neuroprotective effects against neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell injury induced by H 2 O 2 [55].
