# Summer Reading Program: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 255048877 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6575cdc78ee19e641a6e80a852002f8890ff94c1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6575cdc78ee19e641a6e80a852002f8890ff94c1)

Fields: Education

## (s7) Short-term effect of summer reading program in cross-sectional studies
(p7.0) In this section, we describe the different interventions proposed in the studies in chronological order, together with the effects obtained. We highlight the heterogeneity of the programs implemented over the last decade.

(p7.1) Rafferty (2012) presented a study of the effect of self-monitoring strategies with a tactile prompting device delivered during a summer reading program on oral reading fluency and behavioral tasks in 4 Grade-2 children with emotional and/or behavioral disorders. The children received the intervention in a small group setting. They counted the number of words correctly read. In addition, the authors assessed how well the children were able to use these strategies at the class level. They measured children's behaviors (sitting at a desk, listening to the teacher, participating, taking notes) and oral reading fluency. The intervention was beneficial for all the children. And they applied themselves well to the tasks and their oral reading fluency performance improved. In addition, the intervention allowed the children to achieve similar task scores to the control group. This study provided promising results regarding interventions specifically designed for children with behavioral and emotional disorders. However, as noted by the authors, the very small sample size did not make it possible to generalize the results. Sinatra and Eschenauer (2012) reported an innovative study on the effect of a summer program on homeless children and adults. As our literature review focuses on children, we will only present the results for the former. Different age-adapted activities were carried out for 4 weeks with children from Grades 3 to 8 (literacy, mathematics, robotics, biology, chemistry, tennis, etc.). The results showed that the control group performed better in vocabulary than the experimental group in both the pre-and post-test. Moreover, there was no difference in the gain in vocabulary and spelling skills between the groups, except in the writing task (Cohen's d = 0.97). Thus, writing practice led to an improvement in writing skills in this population.
## (s9) Long-term effect of summer reading programs in longitudinal studies
(p9.0) Most of the studies included in our article were cross-sectional studies involving one or more years of observation, and only one of them employed a longitudinal design that followed the children over several summers. This is probably due to the fact that such studies are difficult to set up and the interest in summer programs is quite recent. Furthermore, the results of a longitudinal study cannot be published until the final measurement has been taken, thus considerably lengthening the time between the beginning of the study and its publication. Kraft and Monti-Nussbaum (2017) reported on a 2-year longitudinal study (September 2014 to June 2016) which examined the effectiveness of parent-taught literacy development at home. A guide divided into 18 texts was provided for parents to promote literacy skills in children in Grades 1-2 and 3-4. The scripts allowed parents to suggest literacy activities as well as other enrichment activities. Parents were asked to encourage their children to read, or to read stories to their children themselves. The results showed a beneficial effect of the program on reading comprehension for children in Grades 3 to 4 only. In addition, the authors noted that this type of program maximized the interaction between parents and teachers. Thus, parental involvement appears to be important in children's literacy development.  

(p9.1) Most of the studies included in our article were cross-sectional studies involving one or more years of observation, and only one of them employed a longitudinal design that followed the children over several summers. This is probably due to the fact that such studies are difficult to set up and the interest in summer programs is quite recent. Furthermore, the results of a longitudinal study cannot be published until the final measurement has been taken, thus considerably lengthening the time between the beginning of the study and its publication. Kraft and Monti-Nussbaum (2017) reported on a 2-year longitudinal study (September 2014 to June 2016) which examined the effectiveness of parent-taught literacy development at home. A guide divided into 18 texts was provided for parents to promote literacy skills in children in Grades 1-2 and 3-4. The scripts allowed parents to suggest literacy activities as well as other enrichment activities. Parents were asked to encourage their children to read, or to read stories to their children themselves. The results showed a beneficial effect of the program on reading comprehension for children in Grades 3 to 4 only. In addition, the authors noted that this type of program maximized the interaction between parents and teachers. Thus, parental involvement appears to be important in children's literacy development.  
## (s23) Short-term effect of summer reading program in cross-sectional studies
(p23.0) In this section, we describe the different interventions proposed in the studies in chronological order, together with the effects obtained. We highlight the heterogeneity of the programs implemented over the last decade.

(p23.1) Rafferty (2012) presented a study of the effect of self-monitoring strategies with a tactile prompting device delivered during a summer reading program on oral reading fluency and behavioral tasks in 4 Grade-2 children with emotional and/or behavioral disorders. The children received the intervention in a small group setting. They counted the number of words correctly read. In addition, the authors assessed how well the children were able to use these strategies at the class level. They measured children's behaviors (sitting at a desk, listening to the teacher, participating, taking notes) and oral reading fluency. The intervention was beneficial for all the children. And they applied themselves well to the tasks and their oral reading fluency performance improved. In addition, the intervention allowed the children to achieve similar task scores to the control group. This study provided promising results regarding interventions specifically designed for children with behavioral and emotional disorders. However, as noted by the authors, the very small sample size did not make it possible to generalize the results. Sinatra and Eschenauer (2012) reported an innovative study on the effect of a summer program on homeless children and adults. As our literature review focuses on children, we will only present the results for the former. Different age-adapted activities were carried out for 4 weeks with children from Grades 3 to 8 (literacy, mathematics, robotics, biology, chemistry, tennis, etc.). The results showed that the control group performed better in vocabulary than the experimental group in both the pre-and post-test. Moreover, there was no difference in the gain in vocabulary and spelling skills between the groups, except in the writing task (Cohen's d = 0.97). Thus, writing practice led to an improvement in writing skills in this population.
## (s25) Long-term effect of summer reading programs in longitudinal studies
(p25.0) Most of the studies included in our article were cross-sectional studies involving one or more years of observation, and only one of them employed a longitudinal design that followed the children over several summers. This is probably due to the fact that such studies are difficult to set up and the interest in summer programs is quite recent. Furthermore, the results of a longitudinal study cannot be published until the final measurement has been taken, thus considerably lengthening the time between the beginning of the study and its publication. Kraft and Monti-Nussbaum (2017) reported on a 2-year longitudinal study (September 2014 to June 2016) which examined the effectiveness of parent-taught literacy development at home. A guide divided into 18 texts was provided for parents to promote literacy skills in children in Grades 1-2 and 3-4. The scripts allowed parents to suggest literacy activities as well as other enrichment activities. Parents were asked to encourage their children to read, or to read stories to their children themselves. The results showed a beneficial effect of the program on reading comprehension for children in Grades 3 to 4 only. In addition, the authors noted that this type of program maximized the interaction between parents and teachers. Thus, parental involvement appears to be important in children's literacy development.  

(p25.1) Most of the studies included in our article were cross-sectional studies involving one or more years of observation, and only one of them employed a longitudinal design that followed the children over several summers. This is probably due to the fact that such studies are difficult to set up and the interest in summer programs is quite recent. Furthermore, the results of a longitudinal study cannot be published until the final measurement has been taken, thus considerably lengthening the time between the beginning of the study and its publication. Kraft and Monti-Nussbaum (2017) reported on a 2-year longitudinal study (September 2014 to June 2016) which examined the effectiveness of parent-taught literacy development at home. A guide divided into 18 texts was provided for parents to promote literacy skills in children in Grades 1-2 and 3-4. The scripts allowed parents to suggest literacy activities as well as other enrichment activities. Parents were asked to encourage their children to read, or to read stories to their children themselves. The results showed a beneficial effect of the program on reading comprehension for children in Grades 3 to 4 only. In addition, the authors noted that this type of program maximized the interaction between parents and teachers. Thus, parental involvement appears to be important in children's literacy development.  
