# Adaptive thermal comfort for energy saving office building design-A literature review

CorpusID: 259480052 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aff3e0a2f76c94c1f6eb76616287c8ce7199480d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aff3e0a2f76c94c1f6eb76616287c8ce7199480d)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s1) Methodology
(p1.0) The current study gives a thorough summary of the thermal comfort research that has been done in office buildings all over the globe. As indicated below [30], various studies have distinct features of office.

(p1.1) Naturally ventilated (NV): An office runs continuously freely. Free running (FR): An office has an HVAC system or is naturally ventilated, however throughout the research time, HVAC system is turned off. Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC): One of the heating and cooling systems in the office was operational during the research time. Mixed Mode (MM): MM buildings are divided into three categories: concurrent (HVAC and natural ventilation occur at the same time), zoned (natural ventilation and HVAC occur in distinct parts of the building), and change-over (HVAC and natural ventilation occur at different times in the same area)

(p1.2) In this research, the adaptive thermal comfort models and regression equations were studied in a variety of office running modes. Only a few studies have given adaptive thermal comfort models. Apart from thermal comfort, the energy-saving potential of the adaptive model has been studied in numerous research. Natural ventilation is another smart approach for buildings to use less energy. Various studies have been conducted to assess the prospects for energy savings by using natural ventilation. 
## (s7) Relation of indoor temperature to comfort temperature
(p7.0) Individuals have a wide variety of potential adaptive responses, and different populations encounter different environmental conditions, therefore the temperatures at which people feel comfortable should vary [2]. Figure 2 depicts the relationship between comfort temperature and indoor or globe temperature of workplaces in airconditioned and naturally ventilated buildings. When compared to both modes, a naturally ventilated building has a better link between indoor and comfort temperature. From the given figure, we can observe that the comfort temperature is always greater than the indoor air or globe temperature if it is less than 24.5°C, and it is always less than the indoor air temperature if it is greater than 24.5°C [30].
## (s8) Relation of comfort temperature to outdoor temperature
(p8.0) There is a powerful connection of outside temperature to inside comfort temperature [62]. It has been found that the comfortable condition indoors is dependent on the external temperature because people adjust well in their offices using adaptive mechanisms [2,5]. According to different thermal comfort research, the indoor comfort temperature is dependent on the outside temperature [62,67]. As a result, we can link the weather and season to the appropriate temperature for indoor comfort. Standards based on this type of connection would improve adaptive thermal comfort while simultaneously lower energy usage [68]. The link between comfort temperature and outdoor temperature will be useful in designing comfortable structures [10]. Figure 3 depicts a relationship that may be used to explain the difference in comfort temperatures between air-conditioned and naturally ventilated buildings. Individuals within naturally ventilated buildings acclimatize to the outside temperature via the building's envelope. The thermostat of a heated or cooled building, which is typically controlled by the building management, regulates the temperature, and the residents become used to of this predefined temperature. Figure 3 shows how peoples of naturally ventilated buildings have greater comfort temperatures and has better connection to outdoor temperatures than peoples of air-conditioned structures. We found the following equations using regression analysis [30]. The thermal design of buildings will improve from these equations. We estimated a regression coefficient of 0.43 for NV buildings, This has a greater gradient than the ASHRAE standard. Similarly, for HVAC building, we find 0.22 coefficient, which is also steeper than CIBSE guide. This could be due to the larger range of outside climatic fluctuation investigated by this study. In contrast, the regression coefficient of 0.31 obtained in MM building is more similar to that found in field studies by Manu et al. [41] and Trebilcock et al. [49]. Figure 3, and it may be used to determine if a building needs to be heated or cooled. In many situations, there ought to be a way of obtain the comfortable indoor temperature without using a heating system because the comfort indoor temperature in air-conditioned buildings is consistently higher than the mean temperature of outdoor. It is possible not to provide cooling facility in numerious situations through the careful design of building [30]. In some areas when the mean temperature of outdoor surpasses 25°C, the indoor comfortable temperature is consistently less than the mean temperature of outdoor.   Figures 4 and 5. Various studies has different adaptive thermal comfort model, and they are identical in terms of their tendency, the comfort temperature and exterior temperature are directly proportional to each other. That line's length shows the diversity of comfort temperature of a specific location. The line's length varies due to the wide range of outdoor temperatures. The comfort temperature rises as the exterior temperature rises. However, the coefficient varies across countries.
## (s10) Energy saving by thermal adaptation
(p10.0) Peoples are active elements in terms of diverse adaptations, not only passive thermal environment objects [5,65]. High energy consumption from HVAC system in order to keep precise control of the room's temperature is directly connected to human thermal adaptation [69].
## (s13) Overall discussion
(p13.0) As shown in Figure 6, the comfort temperatures indicated by several research for NV or FR buildings are displayed on the ASHRAE 55 comfort standard. The slope of this research is steeper since the coefficient is higher than in ASHRAE 55. This might be due to the larger range of outside climate fluctuation investigated by this study [30]. The majority of the comfort temperature is determined to fall within the ASHRAE band of comfort, and comfort temperature rises as the external temperature rises. Adaptive behaviour is, as we all know, embedded into climate and society.
