# Citation: A Review on Microfluidics-Based Impedance A Review on Microfluidics-Based Impedance Biosensors

CorpusID: 255670328 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c2c3cc10ff6e3d7854aac66dd615c6eff68ba90](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c2c3cc10ff6e3d7854aac66dd615c6eff68ba90)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Biology

## (s2) Printed Circuit Board (PCB)-Based Impedance Biosensors
(p2.0) Printed circuit boards (PCBs) are flat plates that were originally used to make circuits, which are very commercialized. Their electrode width and electrode spacing are not very small; therefore, the sensitivity limit of the sensor is not low either.

(p2.1) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy biosensors consist of PCBs with gold-coated electrodes, which are mainly used to detect plant pathogens [34], where the antibody is first bound to the surface of the electrochemical sensor. For papaya ring spot virus, the biosensor was shown to be capable of detecting papaya ring spot virus coat protein with high sensitivity. A chip using a microfluidic impedance sensing system to detect the transgenic protein Cry1Ab was designed, as shown in Figure 2a [35]. Gold electrodes were printed on commercial printed circuit boards, with the spacing between two printed electrodes being 250 µm. The impedance signal at the optimal test frequency (358.3 Hz) presented a good linear relationship with the concentration of the transgenic protein Cry1Ab in the range of 0-0.2 nM. Clinically, the degree of red blood cell agglutination is divided into five grades by visual inspection, which is routinely conducted in hospitals [36]. An electrical impedance blood-sensing chip was designed by Chang et al. to distinguish the degree of blood agglutination. The interdigitated electrode array was designed on a PCB.

(p2.2) ZnO nanowires were synthesized on the surface of the electrode array in order to improve the sensitivity of impedance measurement. An electrical impedance sensor was used to detect the degree of fibrosis in liver tissue, as shown in Figure 2b [37], where liver tissue was detected by a pair of gold electrodes on the PCB. The experimental results indicate that the maximum resistance difference between healthy and fibrotic tissue was about 2 kΩ at day 8.

(p2.3) Biosensors 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 27 blood agglutination. The interdigitated electrode array was designed on a PCB. ZnO nanowires were synthesized on the surface of the electrode array in order to improve the sensitivity of impedance measurement. An electrical impedance sensor was used to detect the degree of fibrosis in liver tissue, as shown in Figure 2b [37], where liver tissue was detected by a pair of gold electrodes on the PCB. The experimental results indicate that the maximum resistance difference between healthy and fibrotic tissue was about 2 kΩ at day 8. (b) An electrical impedance sensor was used to detect the degree of fibrosis in liver tissue. Reproduced with permission from [37]. Copyright Biosensors 2022.

(p2.4) The development of PCB chips is limited by the electrode line width in traditional PCB processes. Microelectrodes that are not tiny enough will lead to an inability to improve the sensitivity. Therefore, PCB chips are more suitable for the production or commercial design where the induction is fast and the sensitivity requirements are not high.
## (s7) Detection of Blood Samples
(p7.0) The manufacturing of electrical impedance measurement systems became possible with microfabrication technology. For example, wet etching was used to obtain microchannels on a coverslip [2], and gold electrodes were plated on both sides of the microchannel. The authors scanned the electric impedance spectroscopy of ionic salt solutions, air, and deionized (DI) water in the frequency range from 100 Hz to 2 MHz. Their experimental results showed the efficacy of electrical impedance spectroscopy for human polymorphonuclear leukocytes and teleost fish red blood cells. Mishra et al. used three microelectrodes on a chip to sense the impedance of human CD4(+) cells in blood, as shown in Figure 5a [61]. The reference electrode, working electrode, and counter electrode were microfabricated on glass wafers. As the protein adsorbed onto the microelectrode surface, the detected impedance value increased even more. The impedance also increased with the number of captured cells. Kuttel et al. used impedance spectroscopy to detect red blood cells infected with Babesia bovis [62]. The change in impedance was mainly due to the presence of the parasite in the cell changing the impedance value of the original red blood cells, white blood cells, or platelets. Therefore, infected cells could be easily and quickly distinguished from healthy cells. In areas without good infrastructure or in very remote areas, the use of impedance spectroscopy to detect parasites in whole blood samples can greatly reduce the time of diagnosis for medical personnel. Holmes et al. developed a high-speed microfluidic single-cell impedance cytometer using dual frequency for whole blood analysis [63], which is mainly used for the impedance measurement and identification of T lymphocytes, monocytes, and neutrophils. The experiments showed that, at low frequencies, T lymphocytes and neutrophils can be distinguished. The cells were conjugated with fluorescently labeled antibodies, allowing the system to analyze fluorescence and impedance simultaneously. Han et al. developed a microfluidic chip that integrates red blood cell lysis with a microfluidic impedance cytometer, as shown in Figure 5b [64]. Their laboratory developed a buffer that not only lyses red blood cells but also increases the identification of monocytes and neutrophils. The method for multi-step cell lysis described in this paper is of great help for the microfluidic system, in terms of whole blood analysis. Lei et al. designed an electrical impedance to monitor the blood coagulation process in a microfluidic chip, which can obtain impedance results consistent with clinical reports at different temperatures and blood cell counts, as shown in Figure 5c [65]. This device provides a new analytical method for the sensitive and real-time monitoring of coagulation in whole blood samples. Song et al. developed a microfluidic impedance flow cytometer to identify undifferentiated and differentiated mouse embryonic stem cells [66], where two micropores and three electrodes were designed in the chip. The experimental results indicated that undifferentiated stem cells and polystyrene spheres could be distinguished at any frequency, while undifferentiated and differentiated stem cells require higher frequency and opacity to be distinguished. Du et al. designed an electrical impedance flow cytometer targeting red blood cells infected with Plasmodium falciparum [67]. The physiological and electrical properties of erythrocytes were altered 48 h after P. falciparum infection. In addition to the cytometer, the authors incorporated new offset parameters to make it easier to distinguish infected erythrocytes from uninfected erythrocytes. Spencer et al. used a microfluidic impedance cytometer for the detection of a representative circulating tumor cell (the MCF7 tumor cell line) [68]. The red blood cells were removed by lysis, and the buffer did not affect the dielectric properties of the MCF7 cells. Through impedance analysis, MCF7 cells were shown to have a larger size and membrane capacitance. The experimental results indicated that 100 MCF7 cells could be detected in 1 mL of whole blood. The average recovery rate was as high as 92%. Liu et al. developed an electrical impedance microflow cytometer that can control oxygen flow for the analysis of sickle blood cells, as shown in Figure 5d [69]. The two-layer microfluidic channel was separated by a 150 µm thick PDMS film. The upper layer is a ser-pentine gas channel that controls oxygen, while the lower layer is a microchannel through which sickle cells and red blood cells flow. Ti/Au electrodes were designed to measure the impedance of sickle cells in the lower microchannel. Under normoxic conditions, the authors distinguished between normal and sickle cells using impedance signals measured at intermediate frequencies.

(p7.1) The same research demonstrated that impedance signals can be obtained without the need for hemolysis. Their experimental results also proved that the impedance signal of the microflow cytometer can be used as an indicator of red blood cell disease and sickle cell disease.
## (s9) Static Cell Analyzed by Electrical Impedance Spectroscopy
(p9.0) A microfluidic impedance sensor was designed to measure the cell migration of cancer cells in a three-dimensional extracellular matrix [70]. A total of 16 sets of sensing electrode arrays and cell grabbing arrays were designed in the microchannel. Under continuous monitoring, the migration of MDA-MB-231 cells allowed for a rapid change in imped- 
## (s10) Static Cell Analyzed by Electrical Impedance Spectroscopy
(p10.0) A microfluidic impedance sensor was designed to measure the cell migration of cancer cells in a three-dimensional extracellular matrix [70]. A total of 16 sets of sensing electrode arrays and cell grabbing arrays were designed in the microchannel. Under continuous monitoring, the migration of MDA-MB-231 cells allowed for a rapid change in impedance amplitude (of about 10 Ω/s). Liu et al. designed a microfluidic chip with embedded measurement electrodes to monitor the cell migration process using impedance measurement technology [71]. Cells were measured and recorded in the microfluidic channel as they pass through multiple parallel electrodes. This method enables the accurate and objective recording of cell migration activity and the calculation of migration rates among different stimulating drugs. Huang et al. designed a microchannel filled with Matrigel to quantify cell migration velocity as an assay tool, as shown in Figure 6a [72]. The successful measurement of cells suspended in a 3D environment and the induction of cell migration by stimulatory factors were used to record the migration speed of cells. The measurement sensitivity was better than that of a traditional trans-well assay.

(p10.1) R PEER REVIEW 12 of 27 by stimulatory factors were used to record the migration speed of cells. The measurement sensitivity was better than that of a traditional trans-well assay.  Lei et al. developed a perfusion three-dimensional (3D) cell culture microfluidic chip combined with real-time and non-invasive impedance monitoring [73]. This device can simulate complex 3D biological microenvironments to culture cells and monitor the impedance changes under different concentrations of drug stimulation through impedance measurements. The impedance results are analyzed to determine the cell proliferation and chemosensitivity of 3D cell cultures. Lei et al. designed an impedance measurement device for cell colonies cultured on hydrogels [74][75][76]. Huang et al. constructed a 3D biological barrier using Matrigel and induced angiogenesis to extend into the microchannel, as shown in Figure 6b [77]. The angiogenesis process could be monitored by label-free impedance, using electrodes at the bottom of the microchannel. The device can also successfully quantify the time and distance of angiogenesis, thereby providing a reliable and quantitative method for the assay of angiogenesis.
## (s12) Detection of Viruses
(p12.0) The key to the use of impedance biosensors for virus sensing is the immobilization of antibodies, where the antibody must be immobilized on the surface of the electrode first. However, the impedance signal will be altered due to the binding of both antibodies and antigens.

(p12.1) Pathogenic avian influenza viruses have been detected by impedance sensors [112]. The polyclonal antibody was immobilized on the surface of a gold microelectrode by protein A. The antibody-antigen binding reaction in the same research could be amplified by red blood cells, and the proposed impedance immunosensor could be completed in as little as 2 h. A portable impedance biosensor for avian influenza virus H5N2 was developed by Wang et al. [113]. Magnetic nanobeads and interdigitated array microelectrodes were integrated on a microfluidic chip, where the magnetic nanobeads captured avian influenza virus subtype-specific antibodies. The entire detection time was less than 1 h, which was greatly reduced compared with traditional avian influenza virus detection. The experimental results indicate that the sensitivity of the impedance biosensor is comparable to that of real-time reverse transcriptase PCR. Jacob Lum designed an impedance biosensor, mainly for avian influenza virus subtype H5N1 [55]. For this purpose, immuno-  [108]. Copyright Scientific Reports 2020. (d) A microfluidic impedance cytometer was used for the analysis of antigen-specific T lymphocytes. Reproduced with permission from [110]. Copyright Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 2021.
## (s13) Detection of Viruses
(p13.0) The key to the use of impedance biosensors for virus sensing is the immobilization of antibodies, where the antibody must be immobilized on the surface of the electrode first. However, the impedance signal will be altered due to the binding of both antibodies and antigens.

(p13.1) Pathogenic avian influenza viruses have been detected by impedance sensors [112]. The polyclonal antibody was immobilized on the surface of a gold microelectrode by protein A. The antibody-antigen binding reaction in the same research could be amplified by red blood cells, and the proposed impedance immunosensor could be completed in as little as 2 h. A portable impedance biosensor for avian influenza virus H5N2 was developed by Wang et al. [113]. Magnetic nanobeads and interdigitated array microelectrodes were integrated on a microfluidic chip, where the magnetic nanobeads captured avian influenza virus subtype-specific antibodies. The entire detection time was less than 1 h, which was greatly reduced compared with traditional avian influenza virus detection. The experimental results indicate that the sensitivity of the impedance biosensor is comparable to that of real-time reverse transcriptase PCR. Jacob Lum designed an impedance biosensor, mainly for avian influenza virus subtype H5N1 [55]. For this purpose, immunomagnetic nanoparticles and interdigitated microelectrodes were designed on a microfluidic chip. The polyclonal antibody was immobilized on the surface of the microelectrode, which binds to avian influenza virus H5N1 to generate an impedance signal. Chicken red blood cells were used as biomarkers attached to interdigital microelectrodes. The results showed that the impedance signal can be increased by more than 100%. For the detection of human immunodeficiency virus, Shafiee et al. designed a microfluidic sensing chip to measure the impedance spectrum of virus nanolysates [114]. Two gold electrodes were designed on both sides of the microchannel cavity. The lysis of the virus results in the release of the ions and charged molecules of the virus into a non-ionic solution. That research demonstrated that impedance spectroscopy provides a convenient and rapid tool for the detection of multiple pathogens. Singh et al. developed an electrical impedance sensing chip to detect influenza H1N1 virus, as shown in Figure 8a [115,116], for which three microelectrodes were fabricated on a glass substrate. The authors used reduced graphene oxide and monoclonal antibodies as electrode modifications.

(p13.2) Biosensors 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 27 magnetic nanoparticles and interdigitated microelectrodes were designed on a microfluidic chip. The polyclonal antibody was immobilized on the surface of the microelectrode, which binds to avian influenza virus H5N1 to generate an impedance signal. Chicken red blood cells were used as biomarkers attached to interdigital microelectrodes. The results showed that the impedance signal can be increased by more than 100%. For the detection of human immunodeficiency virus, Shafiee et al. designed a microfluidic sensing chip to measure the impedance spectrum of virus nanolysates [114]. Two gold electrodes were designed on both sides of the microchannel cavity. The lysis of the virus results in the release of the ions and charged molecules of the virus into a non-ionic solution. That research demonstrated that impedance spectroscopy provides a convenient and rapid tool for the detection of multiple pathogens. Singh et al. developed an electrical impedance sensing chip to detect influenza H1N1 virus, as shown in Figure 8a [115,116], for which three microelectrodes were fabricated on a glass substrate. The authors used reduced graphene oxide and monoclonal antibodies as electrode modifications.  [115]. Copyright Scientific Reports 2017. (b) Impedance sensors were developed for DNA hybridization. Reproduced with permission from [117]. Copyright Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 2011. (c) Single-stranded DNA probes were functionalized onto electrodes. Complementary DNA hybridization was then induced using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Reproduced with permission from [118]. Copyright Biosensors and Bioelectronics 2012. (d) Galectin-1 protein is a biomarker of bladder cancer. An impedance immunosensor was developed to detect Galectin-1 protein in urine. The dielectrophoretic force was used to capture Galectin-1 antibody to improve the sensitivity of the sensor. Reproduced with permission from [119]. Copyright Biosensors and Bioelectronics 2016.
## (s14) Detection of Other Analytes and Chemicals
(p14.0) Berdat et al. used an impedance sensor based on an interdigitated microelectrode array to sense DNA [116], for which 5 μm wide microelectrodes were fabricated using a lift-off process method. The complementary probe was first immobilized on the electrode and hybridized to the target ssDNA. Finally, impedance sensors were used to detect the pathogen Salmonella choleraesuis in dairy products. Javanmard et al. developed a set of (a) (b) (c) (d) Figure 8. Glass-based impedance biosensors for detecting other organisms and chemicals. (a) An electrical impedance sensing chip was developed to detect influenza H1N1 virus. Reproduced with permission from [115]. Copyright Scientific Reports 2017. (b) Impedance sensors were developed for DNA hybridization. Reproduced with permission from [117]. Copyright Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 2011. (c) Single-stranded DNA probes were functionalized onto electrodes. Complementary DNA hybridization was then induced using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Reproduced with permission from [118]. Copyright Biosensors and Bioelectronics 2012. (d) Galectin-1 protein is a biomarker of bladder cancer. An impedance immunosensor was developed to detect Galectin-1 protein in urine. The dielectrophoretic force was used to capture Galectin-1 antibody to improve the sensitivity of the sensor. Reproduced with permission from [119]. Copyright Biosensors and Bioelectronics 2016.
## (s15) Detection of Other Analytes and Chemicals
(p15.0) Berdat et al. used an impedance sensor based on an interdigitated microelectrode array to sense DNA [116], for which 5 µm wide microelectrodes were fabricated using a lift-off process method. The complementary probe was first immobilized on the electrode and hybridized to the target ssDNA. Finally, impedance sensors were used to detect the pathogen Salmonella choleraesuis in dairy products. Javanmard et al. developed a set of impedance sensors for DNA hybridization, as shown in Figure 8b [117]. Oligonucleotide probes were immobilized on the surface of the microchannel, and target DNA strands were immobilized on the surface of polystyrene beads. Contact between the probe and the target DNA strand results in the hybridization of the DNA, leading to the capture of the polystyrene beads on the surface of the microchannel. An impedance chip for sensing DNA hybridization was developed by Hadar et al., as shown in Figure 8c [118]. Single-stranded DNA probes were functionalized onto electrodes, and complementary DNA hybridization was then induced using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. DC-biased AC electroosmotic vortex was utilized to design a label-free electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)-based DNA biosensing chip [119]. Based on the electro-osmotic vortex, 20-base target DNA fragments were hybridized to achieve 90% within 141 s. The ultrasensitive detection limit was 0.5 aM. Another study indicated that the electric field was manipulated by alternating current (AC) electrokinetics to improve hybridization efficiency and reduce hybridization time [120]. Thus, the chip was realized for faster and more efficient detection.

(p15.1) Galectin-1 protein is a biomarker of bladder cancer. An impedance immunosensor for detecting bladder cancer in urine was developed, as shown in Figure 8d [121]. Before measuring the impedance signal, the authors used dielectrophoretic force to capture nanoprobes (Gal-1 antibody) on the surface of the microelectrode, in order to improve the sensitivity of the sensor. Alsabbagh et al. designed a microfluidic impedance biosensor for the detection of myocardial infarction proteins by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy [122]; in particular, Troponin I, which is a biomarker for the diagnosis of myocardial infarction, was targeted. Self-assembled thiolated oligonucleotides tested on gold electrodes were found to perform better, as they improved the performance of the impedance signal. Fluorescence analysis and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy were integrated to measure aggregated C-reactive proteins [123]. The circular array of electrodes was designed to create electrokinetic flow for C-reactive protein aggregation. Interdigitated microelectrode arrays were modified by the self-assembled monolayers of mercaptocaproic acid for detecting the arthritis anti-CCP-ab biomarker [124]. The experimental results showed that the sensor response increased linearly with the stepwise increase of the biomarker concentration. A polyaniline (PANI)/MoS2-modified screen-printed electrode was detected for anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide [125]. Among them, the polymerized PANI-Au nanomatrix was utilized to entrap the aCCP antibodies for amplification of the higher signal. A peptide-based electrochemical sensor was used to detect autoantibodies for the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis [126]. The developed peptides were modified on the gold surface of the working electrode by a self-assembled monolayer method. Subsequently, the sensor was clinically demonstrated to have better sensitivity using 10 clinically validated samples from rheumatoid arthritis patients and 5 healthy control samples.

(p15.2) Chiriaco et al. designed a microfluidic electrochemical impedance biosensor to detect cholera toxin [127] with sensitivity less than 10 pM. Liu et al. developed a biosensor for the rapid screening of toxic substances in drinking water [128]. Cells are damaged due to toxins in water, resulting in decreased impedance and an increase in resonance frequency. Impedance and mass sensing measurements can help to improve sensor accuracy. An impedance biosensor was used to detect the cytotoxicity of tamoxifen in cervical cancer cells [129]. The experimental results showed that the dose of tamoxifen resulted in a significant reduction in the number of HeLa cells. The same article demonstrated that impedance biosensors can be used for the evaluation of novel drugs and cytotoxicity.

(p15.3) A microfluidic impedance sensor was designed for pesticide detection in vegetables [130]. Anti-chlorpyrifos monoclonal antibody was immobilized on an interdigitated electrode array. The capture of chlorpyrifos produced a change in impedance. Zeng et al. integrated magnetic focusing into impedance microsensors for oil monitoring [131]. The highly focused magnetic field was derived from two electromagnetic coils and eight silicon steel tips, where the silicon steel tips greatly improved the sensitivity of the sensor.
## (s18) Stretchable Biosensors
(p18.0) Furniturewalla et al. designed a microfluidic impedance cytometer on a flexible circuit board in the form of a portable wristband [145]. Lock-in amplification, a microfluidic biosensor, a microcontroller, and a Bluetooth module are integrated into the wristband. Flexible and stretchable biosensors for skin physiological parameter monitoring have been developed [146], where screen printing was used to fabricate sensing electrodes in flexible and stretchable conductive materials originally intended for epidermal tattooing. A retractable body biosensor for sensing the biomarker cortisol in sweat was published, as shown in Figure 10a [147]. A pullable body impedance biosensor was designed at the bottom layer and attached to the skin, following which microfluidic microvalves and microchannels were applied to this wearable patch. A stretchable microfluidic immunobiosensor patch was used for sensing neuropeptide Y in human sweat [148]. Conductive microfibers that can be stretched help to improve the sensitivity of the biosensor patches. Sensors attached to the skin can detect biomarker concentrations in human sweat at levels as low as fm. A wearable microfluidic impedance immunosensor for sweat cortisol detection was designed, as shown in Figure 10b [149], where microfluidic channels and chambers were integrated into the wearable patch, and Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets were incorporated in the porous structure of graphene. The wearable microfluidic impedance immunosensor could detect cortisol down to 88 pM. Paper-based chips have great advantages due to their low material cost. Microelectrodes with small line widths on paper-based chips and antibodies combined onto the microelectrodes will be key technologies for the development of paper-based chips.
## (s19) Stretchable Biosensors
(p19.0) Furniturewalla et al. designed a microfluidic impedance cytometer on a flexible circuit board in the form of a portable wristband [145]. Lock-in amplification, a microfluidic biosensor, a microcontroller, and a Bluetooth module are integrated into the wristband. Flexible and stretchable biosensors for skin physiological parameter monitoring have been developed [146], where screen printing was used to fabricate sensing electrodes in flexible and stretchable conductive materials originally intended for epidermal tattooing. A retractable body biosensor for sensing the biomarker cortisol in sweat was published, as shown in Figure 10a [147]. A pullable body impedance biosensor was designed at the bottom layer and attached to the skin, following which microfluidic microvalves and microchannels were applied to this wearable patch. A stretchable microfluidic immunobiosensor patch was used for sensing neuropeptide Y in human sweat [148]. Conductive microfibers that can be stretched help to improve the sensitivity of the biosensor patches. Sensors attached to the skin can detect biomarker concentrations in human sweat at levels as low as fm. A wearable microfluidic impedance immunosensor for sweat cortisol detection was designed, as shown in Figure 10b [149], where microfluidic channels and chambers were integrated into the wearable patch, and Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets were incorporated in the porous structure of graphene. The wearable microfluidic impedance immunosensor could detect cortisol down to 88 pM. Figure 10. Stretchable impedance biosensors. (a) All-polymer electrochemical microfluidic biosensors were used for sensing the biomarker cortisol in sweat. The pullable body impedance biosensor was designed at the bottom layer and attached to the skin. Reproduced with permission from [147]. Copyright Biosensors and Bioelectronics 2020. (b) A wearable microfluidic impedance immunosensor was designed for sweat cortisol detection. Microfluidic channels and chambers were integrated into the wearable patch. Reproduced with permission from [149]. Copyright Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 2021.

(p19.1) Stretchable chips for microfluidic impedance sensors comprise a novel research direction. At present, impedance sensing signals are mostly measured on the skin. The stretchability and bendability of such materials are key features, especially the flexibility of the electrode materials. In this line, conductive hydrogels may be a helpful technology.

(p19.2) (a) (b) Figure 10. Stretchable impedance biosensors. (a) All-polymer electrochemical microfluidic biosensors were used for sensing the biomarker cortisol in sweat. The pullable body impedance biosensor was designed at the bottom layer and attached to the skin. Reproduced with permission from [147]. Copyright Biosensors and Bioelectronics 2020. (b) A wearable microfluidic impedance immunosensor was designed for sweat cortisol detection. Microfluidic channels and chambers were integrated into the wearable patch. Reproduced with permission from [149]. Copyright Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 2021.

(p19.3) Stretchable chips for microfluidic impedance sensors comprise a novel research direction. At present, impedance sensing signals are mostly measured on the skin. The stretchability and bendability of such materials are key features, especially the flexibility of the electrode materials. In this line, conductive hydrogels may be a helpful technology.
