# EDITED BY Digital health in pain assessment, diagnosis, and management: Overview and perspectives

CorpusID: 258172040 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2799587443e5a1ac5881863ea68a66bd32b36375](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2799587443e5a1ac5881863ea68a66bd32b36375)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Examples of digital health applications in pain management
(p1.0) There are too many examples of how digital health is being applied in the field of pain management to be able to outline in one paper. This paper provides selected examples as an illustration of digital health interventions, but these are by no means exhaustive. These examples merely provide a glimpse into the art and science of the possible and should stimulate further research and innovation. As stressed in the above section, the area requires a greater degree of evidence-based research to validate and replicate findings and thus advance the field. This research and application should be undertaken within a framework to enable better comparison and generalisability of research (see below).

(p1.1) The Australian web-based resource "painHealth", for example, provides evidence-based research sourced in collaboration with academic institutions and the Department of Health to patients to assist in the self-management of musculoskeletal pain (8). This form of pain intervention outlines rehabilitation and exercise for treatment and recovery and has been shown to be as effective as in-person treatment (24).
## (s2) A framework to consider digital health interventions for pain management
(p2.0) In order for digital health interventions to be widely accepted and used in pain management, there is a need to demonstrate scalability, raise awareness among healthcare professionals, the public, policy makers (and legislators) and insurers (22). While Covid-19 provided some of this opportunity, the evidence-based efficacy of interventions beyond telehealth and app-based information sharing is necessary. The imperative of a framework that is able to consider all stakeholder needs within a system aligns well with a design-thinking approach. Design-thinking allows for the inclusion of contextual factors, usability, and relevance-all features of an innovation that is more likely to be effective. Importantly, design thinking involves identifying the need in context, creating an idea, and testing it to refine, implementing the innovation and checking its efficacy. This is an approach that is iterative and user focused (31).

(p2.1) The literature above considers the needs of users in various settings and when combined a proposed framework can be created. The following features should be included as important matters for policy makers, medical strategists and/or healthcare professionals when considering the use of digital health interventions in their populations for pain management:

(p2.2) -Regulation and policy: Is the technology evidence-based and does it have regulatory approval? It is necessary to consider the evidence of efficacy, as many technologies exist that are untested, and with little real world based, significant trials conducted (19). -Design: Health innovations are numerous with only a minority effectively implemented. Arguably, using design-thinking improves the efficacy of interventions as it starts from identifying a real-world need from evidence, considering the system in which the need occurs and testing and refinement in situ (32). -Research rigour: Is there an intervention protocol or implementation plan provided? In this case, stand-alone pilot examples of digital interventions are useful, but it is hard to apply them in socio-cultural contexts without a systemic implementation plan that includes buy-in and approval from policy makers, healthcare professionals and the community. -Cost-benefit analysis or socio-economic evaluation: Has consideration been given to the time and effort the digital intervention will take compared to that which healthcare workers currently spend with patients? For instance, a VR intervention requires extensive first consultation training and monitoring to implement (8). -Change management plan: Has the digital intervention been sufficiently explained and considered as a complementary practice to a multi-modal approach? -Usage: Rejula et al (2021) note that for a product to be successful a number of requirements need to be considered (7): 1. Inter-operability-being able to operate across platforms and hardware, integrate software, and use various technologies such as machine learning, AI, analytics, and allow for data sharing. 2. Socialisation-the ability to exchange patient data with other members. 3. Integration-is the innovation able to integrate into the patient's lifestyle and way of living, thereby reducing time with a physician? 4. Quality of evidence-what evidence of efficacy exists, with RDTs and outcomes being imperative considerations. Has the innovation been tested for usability as well as efficacy?
