# Effect of Machined Surface Integrity on Fatigue Performance of Metal Workpiece: A Review

CorpusID: 254114535 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dea212a4794356af22eb6dc49c47ba5e32f15ca3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dea212a4794356af22eb6dc49c47ba5e32f15ca3)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The requirements of high reliability and long service life are increasingly stringent for mechanical components used in aerospace field. Fatigue fracture is a main failure mode of mechanical components subjected to cyclical mechanical and thermal loads, and fatigue failure is generally sudden and can lead to disastrous results. According to the statistics of Cowles B in 1996 (Figure 1), fatigue-related failures account for 49% of all typical component failure modes in military gas turbine engines [1]. Therefore, fatigue performance is critical for the mechanical components subjected to cyclical stresses. Experiments prove that fatigue cracks are usually initiated from free surfaces. Thus, fatigue performance was highly dependent on the integrity of machined surface [2][3][4]. Consequently, great efforts have been exerted by researchers to improve the fatigue performance of machined components by enhancing their surface integrity, such as by optimizing machining parameters and developing new inserts [5]. The fatigue strength of surfaces obtained by different kinds of machining processes

(p0.1) The requirements of high reliability and long service life are increasingly stringent for mechanical components used in aerospace field. Fatigue fracture is a main failure mode of mechanical components subjected to cyclical mechanical and thermal loads, and fatigue failure is generally sudden and can lead to disastrous results. According to the statistics of Cowles B in 1996 (Figure 1), fatigue-related failures account for 49% of all typical component failure modes in military gas turbine engines [1]. Therefore, fatigue performance is critical for the mechanical components subjected to cyclical stresses. Experiments prove that fatigue cracks are usually initiated from free surfaces. Thus, fatigue performance was highly dependent on the integrity of machined surface [2][3][4]. Consequently, great efforts have been exerted by researchers to improve the fatigue performance of machined components by enhancing their surface integrity, such as by optimizing machining parameters and developing new inserts [5]. The fatigue strength of surfaces obtained by different kinds of machining processes
## (s8) Influence Mechanism and Critical Indicators of Residual Stress
(p8.0) Although the influence mechanism of machined surface residual stress on fatigue performance has been widely investigated, it is still controversial. Most researchers agreed with the conclusion of Wagner and Gregory [49] that compressive residual stress could retard crack growth significantly, but its effect on crack initiation was insignificant. Some researchers [11,88,89] believed that compressive residual stress could reduce the fatigue crack growth rate and thus improve the workpiece fatigue performance. Guo and Warren [8] suggested that the compressive residual stress could impede crack growth by closing the crack tip. However, some researchers compared the location of crack initiation of samples and found that the compressive residual stress could affect the fatigue crack initiation as well. Compressive residual stress could force the movement of the location of fatigue crack initiation from the sample surface to the subsurface [75,84,90,91]. The disagreement on the influence mechanism of residual stress resulted in the argument on the most critical indicators of residual stress that determined the fatigue performance. The typical residual stress depth profile on the machined surfaces is as shown in Figure 7 (Obtained with hard turned bearing steel). Regardless whether the residual stress was tensile or compressive on the surface, it fell off to a maximum compressive state with an increase in depth. Subsequently, the compressive residual stress decreased gradually until a steady value was achieved in the near workpiece substrate [92][93][94].
## (s9) Residual Stress Relaxation
(p9.0) Although residual stress relaxation has been recognized to be non-negligible in analyzing the effect of residual stress on fatigue performance of workpiece, its effect degree was controversial [34,81,83]. Benedetti et al. [98] studied the reverse bending fatigue behavior of a shot peened 7075-T651 aluminum alloy and found that residual stress relaxation only existed when the material plastic flow stress was achieved in the compressive part of the loading cycle. This result agreed well with Hempel et al. [99] and Liu et al. [100], who all suggested that once the summation of residual stress and applied stress reached or exceeded the yield strength of workpiece material, the residual stress could mostly be released in several cycles, thereby resulting in the negligible effect of residual stress on fatigue performance. Based on this important finding, most researchers suggested that machined surface residual stress mainly affected the high-cycle fatigue (lowstress fatigue) [16,101].

(p9.1) However, Ozdemir et al. [102] and Dalaei et al. [103] found that the relaxation of compressive residual stress could also occur under cyclic loadings even when the total loading is below the yield strength of the material. Zhuang et al. [104] and Torres et al. [105] suggested that residual stress relaxation was related to the applied stress value and the number of fatigue cycles, and an analytical model was proposed to estimate the residual stress relaxation (Eq. (5)):

(p9.2) where σ re 0 and σ re N are the initial surface residual stress and the surface residual stress after N cycles, respectively. A and m are material constants which dependent on cyclic stress and strain response. Constant B controls the relaxation rate versus loading cycles. σ a is the cyclic load amplitude and σ y is the material yield strength. C w is a parameter which accounts for the degree of cold working. R is the loading ratio and N is the loading cycle.

(p9.3) Given the residual stress relaxation, Cretu and Popinceanu [106] suggested the existence of an optimum residual stress distribution that can achieve the best fatigue performance for a certain loading. However, the authors did not present the method for determining the optimum residual stress distribution.

(p9.4) Although residual stress relaxation has been recognized to be non-negligible in analyzing the effect of residual stress on fatigue performance of workpiece, its effect degree was controversial [34,81,83]. Benedetti et al. [98] studied the reverse bending fatigue behavior of a shot peened 7075-T651 aluminum alloy and found that residual stress relaxation only existed when the material plastic flow stress was achieved in the compressive part of the loading cycle. This result agreed well with Hempel et al. [99] and Liu et al. [100], who all suggested that once the summation of residual stress and applied stress reached or exceeded the yield strength of workpiece material, the residual stress could mostly be released in several cycles, thereby resulting in the negligible effect of residual stress on fatigue performance. Based on this important finding, most researchers suggested that machined surface residual stress mainly affected the high-cycle fatigue (lowstress fatigue) [16,101].

(p9.5) However, Ozdemir et al. [102] and Dalaei et al. [103] found that the relaxation of compressive residual stress could also occur under cyclic loadings even when the total loading is below the yield strength of the material. Zhuang et al. [104] and Torres et al. [105] suggested that residual stress relaxation was related to the applied stress value and the number of fatigue cycles, and an analytical model was proposed to estimate the residual stress relaxation (Eq. (5)):

(p9.6) where σ re 0 and σ re N are the initial surface residual stress and the surface residual stress after N cycles, respectively. A and m are material constants which dependent on cyclic stress and strain response. Constant B controls the relaxation rate versus loading cycles. σ a is the cyclic load amplitude and σ y is the material yield strength. C w is a parameter which accounts for the degree of cold working. R is the loading ratio and N is the loading cycle.

(p9.7) Given the residual stress relaxation, Cretu and Popinceanu [106] suggested the existence of an optimum residual stress distribution that can achieve the best fatigue performance for a certain loading. However, the authors did not present the method for determining the optimum residual stress distribution.
## (s14) Reciprocal Effect of Different Factors on Fatigue Performance
(p14.0) Although the effect of surface topography, residual stress, work hardening and metallurgical structure changes on machined workpiece fatigue performance was discussed separately above, the machining processes usually change these surface integrity factors synchronously [3,82]. Given that all of these factors can change the fatigue crack initiation and propagation processes, reciprocal effects must exist among them. As such, the fatigue performance of the machined workpiece is determined by their comprehensive influence [76,93]. The reciprocal effects of different surface integrity factors on fatigue performance were analyzed and summarized in Figure 10. First, based on the effects of poor surface topography and compressive residual stress on fatigue crack initiation and propagation process, concluding that their effects on fatigue performance inhibit each other is easy. The poor surface topography (i.e., the large surface roughness, local defects and inclusions) could induce stress concentration and accelerate fatigue crack initiation [21,71]. Stress concentration can enlarge the local loading on the workpiece severely, which may cause the local stress to reach or even exceed the material yield strength. Once the summation of residual stress and applied stress reached or exceeded the material yield strength, serious residual stress relaxation would occur [99,100]. Therefore, the severe stress concentration induced by poor surface topography could dilute the effect of compressive residual stress on fatigue performance by inducing residual stress relaxation.

(p14.1) In addition, Yao et al. [127] found that the poor surface topography could cause early unstable fracture and reduce the area ratio of the fatigue propagation zone. Nevertheless, many researchers suggested that the compressive residual stress mainly inhibit the crack propagation process to improve fatigue strength [8,11,49,88,89]. Therefore, the reduced fatigue propagation zone caused by poor surface topography could restrain the effect of compressive residual stress on inhibiting crack propagation and thus dilute the effect of compressive residual stress on fatigue performance.

(p14.2) In return, the crack tip closing [8] and the subsurface fatigue crack initiation [75,84,90,91] induced by compressive residual stress could restrain the negative effect of poor surface topography on fatigue crack initiation.
## (s25) Introduction
(p25.0) The requirements of high reliability and long service life are increasingly stringent for mechanical components used in aerospace field. Fatigue fracture is a main failure mode of mechanical components subjected to cyclical mechanical and thermal loads, and fatigue failure is generally sudden and can lead to disastrous results. According to the statistics of Cowles B in 1996 (Figure 1), fatigue-related failures account for 49% of all typical component failure modes in military gas turbine engines [1]. Therefore, fatigue performance is critical for the mechanical components subjected to cyclical stresses. Experiments prove that fatigue cracks are usually initiated from free surfaces. Thus, fatigue performance was highly dependent on the integrity of machined surface [2][3][4]. Consequently, great efforts have been exerted by researchers to improve the fatigue performance of machined components by enhancing their surface integrity, such as by optimizing machining parameters and developing new inserts [5]. The fatigue strength of surfaces obtained by different kinds of machining processes

(p25.1) The requirements of high reliability and long service life are increasingly stringent for mechanical components used in aerospace field. Fatigue fracture is a main failure mode of mechanical components subjected to cyclical mechanical and thermal loads, and fatigue failure is generally sudden and can lead to disastrous results. According to the statistics of Cowles B in 1996 (Figure 1), fatigue-related failures account for 49% of all typical component failure modes in military gas turbine engines [1]. Therefore, fatigue performance is critical for the mechanical components subjected to cyclical stresses. Experiments prove that fatigue cracks are usually initiated from free surfaces. Thus, fatigue performance was highly dependent on the integrity of machined surface [2][3][4]. Consequently, great efforts have been exerted by researchers to improve the fatigue performance of machined components by enhancing their surface integrity, such as by optimizing machining parameters and developing new inserts [5]. The fatigue strength of surfaces obtained by different kinds of machining processes
## (s33) Influence Mechanism and Critical Indicators of Residual Stress
(p33.0) Although the influence mechanism of machined surface residual stress on fatigue performance has been widely investigated, it is still controversial. Most researchers agreed with the conclusion of Wagner and Gregory [49] that compressive residual stress could retard crack growth significantly, but its effect on crack initiation was insignificant. Some researchers [11,88,89] believed that compressive residual stress could reduce the fatigue crack growth rate and thus improve the workpiece fatigue performance. Guo and Warren [8] suggested that the compressive residual stress could impede crack growth by closing the crack tip. However, some researchers compared the location of crack initiation of samples and found that the compressive residual stress could affect the fatigue crack initiation as well. Compressive residual stress could force the movement of the location of fatigue crack initiation from the sample surface to the subsurface [75,84,90,91]. The disagreement on the influence mechanism of residual stress resulted in the argument on the most critical indicators of residual stress that determined the fatigue performance. The typical residual stress depth profile on the machined surfaces is as shown in Figure 7 (Obtained with hard turned bearing steel). Regardless whether the residual stress was tensile or compressive on the surface, it fell off to a maximum compressive state with an increase in depth. Subsequently, the compressive residual stress decreased gradually until a steady value was achieved in the near workpiece substrate [92][93][94].
## (s34) Residual Stress Relaxation
(p34.0) Although residual stress relaxation has been recognized to be non-negligible in analyzing the effect of residual stress on fatigue performance of workpiece, its effect degree was controversial [34,81,83]. Benedetti et al. [98] studied the reverse bending fatigue behavior of a shot peened 7075-T651 aluminum alloy and found that residual stress relaxation only existed when the material plastic flow stress was achieved in the compressive part of the loading cycle. This result agreed well with Hempel et al. [99] and Liu et al. [100], who all suggested that once the summation of residual stress and applied stress reached or exceeded the yield strength of workpiece material, the residual stress could mostly be released in several cycles, thereby resulting in the negligible effect of residual stress on fatigue performance. Based on this important finding, most researchers suggested that machined surface residual stress mainly affected the high-cycle fatigue (lowstress fatigue) [16,101].

(p34.1) However, Ozdemir et al. [102] and Dalaei et al. [103] found that the relaxation of compressive residual stress could also occur under cyclic loadings even when the total loading is below the yield strength of the material. Zhuang et al. [104] and Torres et al. [105] suggested that residual stress relaxation was related to the applied stress value and the number of fatigue cycles, and an analytical model was proposed to estimate the residual stress relaxation (Eq. (5)):

(p34.2) where σ re 0 and σ re N are the initial surface residual stress and the surface residual stress after N cycles, respectively. A and m are material constants which dependent on cyclic stress and strain response. Constant B controls the relaxation rate versus loading cycles. σ a is the cyclic load amplitude and σ y is the material yield strength. C w is a parameter which accounts for the degree of cold working. R is the loading ratio and N is the loading cycle.

(p34.3) Given the residual stress relaxation, Cretu and Popinceanu [106] suggested the existence of an optimum residual stress distribution that can achieve the best fatigue performance for a certain loading. However, the authors did not present the method for determining the optimum residual stress distribution.

(p34.4) Although residual stress relaxation has been recognized to be non-negligible in analyzing the effect of residual stress on fatigue performance of workpiece, its effect degree was controversial [34,81,83]. Benedetti et al. [98] studied the reverse bending fatigue behavior of a shot peened 7075-T651 aluminum alloy and found that residual stress relaxation only existed when the material plastic flow stress was achieved in the compressive part of the loading cycle. This result agreed well with Hempel et al. [99] and Liu et al. [100], who all suggested that once the summation of residual stress and applied stress reached or exceeded the yield strength of workpiece material, the residual stress could mostly be released in several cycles, thereby resulting in the negligible effect of residual stress on fatigue performance. Based on this important finding, most researchers suggested that machined surface residual stress mainly affected the high-cycle fatigue (lowstress fatigue) [16,101].

(p34.5) However, Ozdemir et al. [102] and Dalaei et al. [103] found that the relaxation of compressive residual stress could also occur under cyclic loadings even when the total loading is below the yield strength of the material. Zhuang et al. [104] and Torres et al. [105] suggested that residual stress relaxation was related to the applied stress value and the number of fatigue cycles, and an analytical model was proposed to estimate the residual stress relaxation (Eq. (5)):

(p34.6) where σ re 0 and σ re N are the initial surface residual stress and the surface residual stress after N cycles, respectively. A and m are material constants which dependent on cyclic stress and strain response. Constant B controls the relaxation rate versus loading cycles. σ a is the cyclic load amplitude and σ y is the material yield strength. C w is a parameter which accounts for the degree of cold working. R is the loading ratio and N is the loading cycle.

(p34.7) Given the residual stress relaxation, Cretu and Popinceanu [106] suggested the existence of an optimum residual stress distribution that can achieve the best fatigue performance for a certain loading. However, the authors did not present the method for determining the optimum residual stress distribution.
## (s39) Reciprocal Effect of Different Factors on Fatigue Performance
(p39.0) Although the effect of surface topography, residual stress, work hardening and metallurgical structure changes on machined workpiece fatigue performance was discussed separately above, the machining processes usually change these surface integrity factors synchronously [3,82]. Given that all of these factors can change the fatigue crack initiation and propagation processes, reciprocal effects must exist among them. As such, the fatigue performance of the machined workpiece is determined by their comprehensive influence [76,93]. The reciprocal effects of different surface integrity factors on fatigue performance were analyzed and summarized in Figure 10. First, based on the effects of poor surface topography and compressive residual stress on fatigue crack initiation and propagation process, concluding that their effects on fatigue performance inhibit each other is easy. The poor surface topography (i.e., the large surface roughness, local defects and inclusions) could induce stress concentration and accelerate fatigue crack initiation [21,71]. Stress concentration can enlarge the local loading on the workpiece severely, which may cause the local stress to reach or even exceed the material yield strength. Once the summation of residual stress and applied stress reached or exceeded the material yield strength, serious residual stress relaxation would occur [99,100]. Therefore, the severe stress concentration induced by poor surface topography could dilute the effect of compressive residual stress on fatigue performance by inducing residual stress relaxation.

(p39.1) In addition, Yao et al. [127] found that the poor surface topography could cause early unstable fracture and reduce the area ratio of the fatigue propagation zone. Nevertheless, many researchers suggested that the compressive residual stress mainly inhibit the crack propagation process to improve fatigue strength [8,11,49,88,89]. Therefore, the reduced fatigue propagation zone caused by poor surface topography could restrain the effect of compressive residual stress on inhibiting crack propagation and thus dilute the effect of compressive residual stress on fatigue performance.

(p39.2) In return, the crack tip closing [8] and the subsurface fatigue crack initiation [75,84,90,91] induced by compressive residual stress could restrain the negative effect of poor surface topography on fatigue crack initiation.
