# Science fiction or clinical reality: a review of the applications of artificial intelligence along the continuum of trauma care

CorpusID: 257355121 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7b00324021393770f5d40a7f7157b2203a9af20](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7b00324021393770f5d40a7f7157b2203a9af20)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s3) Injury prediction
(p3.0) AI applications in trauma begin before injury. While trauma and emergency physicians use heuristics and patterns to predict when injuries are most likely to happen (e.g., date, time of day, weather [54]), these approaches lack sensitivity and adaptability. AI can help refine injury prediction.

(p3.1) Within injury prediction, motor vehicle crashes (MVCs) are the most studied. MVC studies can be further subdivided into crash occurrence and crash severity prediction studies. Crash occurrence models are complex and appear to be earlier in development. MVC occurrence prediction has been modeled using simulators that predict crash occurrence or non-occurrence based on car movement (e.g., gravity, drift angle) and environment (e.g., weather) [14]. Elamrani Abou Assad et al. were able to achieve prediction accuracies of 92.00% for an SVM and 93.34% for a multilayer perceptron (MLP), which is a type of ANN [14]. While these accuracy levels are very high, simulator studies have limited utility in healthcare as every road, car, and driver cannot be tracked for upto-date predictions, and limited research has been done to apply this principle to populations due to the spatial and temporal complexities of this process. Bao et al. [12] is one of the few who has approached this task by using a spatiotemporal convolutional long short-term memory network to predict short-term crash risk at a weekly, daily, and hourly level within Manhattan using historical crashes, taxi GPS, road networks, land use, weather, and population. This model achieved a 71.02-99.21% prediction accuracy based on the spatial and temporal resolution used (with increasing accuracy at lower resolutions); however, tools like this may be impractical for prospective use due to the processing power and volume of data required [12].
## (s5) Results (testing set)
(p5.0) Nederpelt et al. [22] Design algorithm to support in-field triage decisions after gunshot wound  Building and validating these predictive algorithms has clinical and public health applications. Clinically, an AIbased application could be used by 911 dispatchers based on caller information to predict injury severity and more accurately inform EMS prioritization and response. Systemically, understanding the variables associated with injury severity can support harm-reduction and injury prevention public health strategies [12,14,55].
## (s6) Pre-hospital triage
(p6.0) Once injury occurs, AI can help triage patients before hospital arrival. Currently, remote triage takes time and relies on (1) EMS to contact hospitals when high-acuity patients are en route and (2) effective communication between the EMS team and the receiving physician. AI has been shown to predict the need for critical care/lifesaving interventions to help stratify incoming trauma patients pre-hospital both generally [17,[19][20][21] and in specific trauma subtypes, such as gunshot wounds and after resuscitation [22,33]. The ability to predict the need for life-saving interventions can help inform hospital selection, allowing EMS to route to hospitals with the capacity to handle the necessary care for their patient. This could be especially useful in rural and remote settings where decisions must be made about air evacuation. Further, more detailed information and predictions about patients en route to hospital could help receiving centers prepare for the upcoming trauma activation, such as through allocating appropriate resource/operating rooms or ensuring available staff.
## (s7) Emergency department volumes
(p7.0) AI has been shown to predict trauma volumes within the emergency department (ED) [23][24][25][26]. Inputs reflecting human activity and environmental conditions such as date, traffic, special events, precipitation, temperature, and air quality, are the basis of these algorithms have been used in previous studies [23][24][25][26]. Like algorithms predicting crash occurrence in MVCs, predicting ED volumes relies on ANNs to capture the complexity of the relationship between large-scale patterns of human behavior and individual center-level outputs. Further, unlike in previously discussed algorithms in this paper that use AI to predict categorical variables, these algorithms are tasked with continuous outputs.

(p7.1) Unfortunately, differences in data reporting/statistical analysis in the current literature makes cross-comparison between studies difficult. Stonko et al. [26] and Dennis et al. [23] used correlation coefficients to show that ANNs could be used to predict mean ISS, total number of traumas, and number of penetrating traumas in a given day with a correlation of 0.87-0.89. Menke et al. [24] and Rauch et al. [25] used deviations from the true value/ average error to show efficacy, showing the predicted ED volume falling within 20 visits of the true volume 95% of the time and a mean average error of 2.32-3.25 patients, respectively. Overall, these systems show lower accuracy at extreme ends of the spectrum (very low-and high-volume days). Each study requires more robust statistical analysis to show accuracy, and thus, the ability to draw conclusions about the future applications in trauma is limited; however, based on information available, they appear to be able to predict volume and acuity on average, which has important implications for trauma care optimization.

(p7.2) Better prediction of trauma volumes can not only improve resourcing for cost savings to the healthcare system but can also lead to better patient outcomes when there is appropriate capacity available to treat each case. However, more investigation will be needed about the adaptability of these algorithms to shifting patterns in human behavior in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.
## (s9) Predictive analytics
(p9.0) Prediction of prognosis can help differentiate patients who are critically ill versus those who are not and identify those who will need life-saving interventions. In practice, an AI-based tool in this setting would use easily assessed variables (e.g., vitals, GCS) inputted by the receiving trauma team to initially determine patient prognosis and need for interventions. Studies have taken dramatically different approaches to addressing this task. Liu et al. [32] developed an MLP that used vitals, demographics, and GCS to determine the need for life-saving interventions at ED presentation with an achieved AUC of 0.99.
## (s10) Diagnostics and clinical decision support
(p10.0) Concomitant with determining need for life-saving intervention, clinicians in the ED often need to investigate and rule out injuries on CT, such as cervical spine injury (CSI). Extensive work has gone into creating guidelines to aid physicians in determining when imaging is needed as part of CSI workup, [56]. Despite evidence-based guidelines, imaging is often inappropriately used, with clinically relevant injury found in just 2% of imaged patients [56]. Bektas et al. [28] compared a logistic regression with an ANN to supplement CT in detecting CSI. The ANN had a significantly better negative predictive value than the logistic model at 97.3% versus 87.9%, respectively [28]. The ANN also had a positive predictive value of 100% and detected 2 CSIs that were missed on CT alone [28]. Furthermore, AI can support decision-making in pediatrics where imaging over-use is of greater concern due to carcinogenic irradiation [29]. Using GCS, age, gender, and injury mechanics, an optimal classification tree algorithm predicted CSI in patients < 3 years old with a 93.38% sensitivity and 82.34% specificity [29]. Other studies have demonstrated that AI can assess pelvic hematoma on CT imaging [31]. Volume of pelvic free fluid is used clinically to predict the need for transfusion and angioembolization yet is challenging and time-consuming to quantify on CT [31]. Dreizin et al. [31] developed AI capable of segmenting these CTs to produce reliable volume measurements; this algorithm had results on par to physician judgment with much less time and effort investment, with AUC of 0.81 as compared to an AUC of 0.80 when manually done by radiologists.

(p10.1) AI can supplement other imaging in trauma workup [30,31,52]. Ultrasound, while indispensable in trauma evaluation, is limited by its wide sensitivity range (28-100%) [30]. Cheng et al. [30] designed a model that interprets free fluid in Morison's pouch during FAST exams after torso trauma. The model was trained to not only to detect free fluid, which it did with 96.7% accuracy, but to also determine if the image captured on ultrasound was qualified to make such predictions, which it could determine with 94.1% accuracy. Further studies have used ML to accelerate workup, improve diagnostic accuracy [31], and reduce unnecessary imaging [28,29].

(p10.2) AI has a potential role in imaging workup in situations where clinicians must rapidly interpret imaging to inform patient management. In high-acuity settings where time is of the essence, these algorithms could evaluate images faster than and with equal or superior accuracy to human review, allowing for the identification of pathology more rapidly and precisely.
## (s11) Outcomes
(p11.0) Trauma patients are a heterogeneous group at high risk of complications, including but not limited to organ failure, cardiac arrest, infection, respiratory distress, shock, stroke, and death [40,45]. Owing to their heterogenicity and rapidly changing status, it remains challenging for physicians to predict a clinical course for these patients in hospital. Numerous non-AI-based risk prediction tools exist for these complications and outcomes, but these tools lack the ability to intelligently adjust the weight of input variables and instead are linear and additive [40]. As such, it is unsurprising that much of the body of the literature around AI in trauma is centered on intervention and outcome prediction. Within intervention and outcome prediction, there are three main types of algorithms: complication prediction, survival prediction, and discharge prediction.
## (s12) Complication prediction
(p12.0) ML has been studied to assess its ability to perform risk prediction and accurate prognostication of clinical outcomes in trauma patients [37,40,45,48]. An ideal AIbased tool for complication prediction would either (1) use variables that are readily available to the trauma team after a brief workup (i.e., vitals, comorbidities, injury factors/TRISS scores ± laboratory results) to help identify which complications a patient is most at risk of and which interventions have the greatest possibility of mitigating these complications or (2) use variables that are collected post-intervention (i.e., using all the same variables above but with invention-related inputs) to identify likely downstream postsurgical complications. While complication prediction would have high clinical utility, this type of prediction is technically challenging due to the many potential complications these patients can encounter. To predict an output, there needs to be sufficient examples of that output in the training dataset to determine the relationship between the inputs and the output. With a perfect dataset and infinite computing power, all outputs could be predicted with equal accuracy; however, in practice, data limitations can result in wildly variable capabilities to predict individual outputs within a single algorithm. Christie et al. [37], for example, looked at 7 complications and was able to predict their occurrence with an AUC 0.45-0.74. Maurer et al. [45] looked at 11 complications and achieved c-statistics of 0.689-0.835. As such, individual algorithms that have been developed may be able to accurately predict certain complications but may not be reliable at predicting the full suite of complications that may befall a patient. Further, with the ever-changing condition of trauma patients, the ideal risk calculator could dynamically alter predictions in real time and identify modifiable factors to change outcomes [37]. Christie et al. [37] designed the "SuperLearner, " an algorithm that incorporates data across time and re-evaluates mortality and complication risk. Although, SuperLearner's variability in prediction by complication means it may not yet be ready for clinical application, tools that can dynamically adjust predictions over time would have exciting applications in trauma care [37]. In the future, machine learning merged with causal inference methods may be able to predict which treatment would provide the best outcome and could be the basis of precision medicine in trauma.
## (s14) Discharge prediction
(p14.0) Understanding discharge disposition and length of stay can help health systems prioritize bed allocation, begin discharge planning in advance, and set realistic expectations for patients and families post-injury. This is especially important post-traumatic brain injury (TBI) where long-term effects can be unpredictable. Pang et al. [47] and Nourelahi et al. [46] compared the efficacy of several algorithm types to predict Glasgow Outcome Scoring for patients' post-TBI. Both used demographics, GCS, and pupillary responses (with some additional unique inputs per study) and were able to achieve accuracy of 63-78% [46,47]. Compared to other clinical applications of AI in trauma discussed in this paper, TBI outcome appears to be of lower accuracy, likely due to the high variability in patient recovery post-injury. Length of stay is also a burgeoning area of discharge prediction studies. Staziaki et al. [52] and Ji et al. [43] used several algorithms, including SVM and ANN, to predict duration of hospitalization. Both papers tested a variety of combinations of input variables, including but not limited to demographics, GCS, vitals, and injury scoring, to achieve accuracy levels of 58-79% for SVM and 65-79% for ANN [43,52].
## (s15) Speech interpretation: supporting the trauma care continuum
(p15.0) Narrative clinical documentation in trauma is often difficult to analyze in real time as it is not entered as discrete and time stamped data elements, which is critical for clinically relevant algorithms. Natural language processing (NLP) and automatic speech recognition (ASR) are two fields of AI that can relieve the burden and time of converting speech notes to text and provide higher-quality data input. Research by Blackley et al. [58] found that speech recognition saves time, increases efficiency, and allows for quicker and more relevant documentation. AI related to speech/audio can also help diagnose pneumonia, asthma, and other infections. For example, investigators using cough data [59] achieved 100% asymptomatic COVID-19 detection rate and 88% accuracy on all subjects. Converting narrative data to structured data using NLP/ASR would be potentially transformative in fastpaced and data-rich trauma resuscitation environments, where critical decisions are often made without integration of all available information.
