# Analgesia and sedation for intratracheal intubation in the neonatal period: an integrative literature review

CorpusID: 253482267 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fc8b57b7b60046989fcfe0957724e03d0e767323](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fc8b57b7b60046989fcfe0957724e03d0e767323)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Introduction
(p2.0) In the last three decades, there has been a significant advance in the production of knowledge related to the assessment and management of neonatal pain. The finding that newborns (NB) can detect, process and react to algic 1 stimulus and demonstrate permanent changes in immature brains in these patients 2,3 have driven research aimed at understanding pain in this population, as well as strategies for its identification and management. In the past, invasive procedures and potentially painful, such as intratracheal intubation itself, were performed without any analgesia or sedation, which today is considered ethically unacceptable.

(p2.1) Intratracheal intubation is a stressful, painful, and potentially dangerous procedure that can lead to airway trauma, laryngospasm, bronchospasm, hemodynamic changes, and increased risk of intracranial hemorrhage. The practice of using premedications before intubation in adults and children, aiming to facilitate the procedure, and reduce pain, stress, and the deterioration of vital signs, is already well established. In the scope of newborns, there is no wellestablished practice of sedation and analgesia and few studies on the use of premedications. 4 Among the main reasons for not using premedications for intratracheal intubation in the neonatal period are the short and long-term effects of these drugs, ranging from respiratory depression, hemodynamic instability, and even induction of neuroapoptosis. Therefore, on one hand, there are studies showing that the exposure to sedatives and analgesics in immature brains of this population is able to lead to important neurological changes, on the other hand, there is sufficient evidence showing the susceptibility to the pain of these patients and the negative neurological impact that these repeated experiences cause.

(p2.2) In this approach and aiming to contribute and add to the efforts to improve newborn care, this research aimed to assess the available evidence in the literature on the use of sedation and analgesia for intratracheal intubation of newborns.
## (s4) Discussion
(p4.0) For newborns, intubation is a common procedure in the neonatal ICU and also in the delivery rooms, but despite this, there is no well-established practice of sedation and analgesia and few studies on the use of premedications in this age group. This is confirmed by the small number of articles found on the subject in the various databases used in this research. There is evident little scientific production on the subject, and the absence of controlled and randomized clinical trials on the subject, which represent the highest degree of scientific evidence. The lack of randomization present in the clinical trials of the selected studies can generate biases and some limitations in the generalization of their conclusions.

(p4.1) In a recent review of evidence-based clinical guidelines, included in this study, there are strong recommendations for reducing neonatal stress and using non-pharmacological methods of pain control, combined with bolus analgesia of opioids before invasive procedures, as well as the use of premedications before intratracheal intubation. This recommendation is in line with the knowledge already built up on neonatal pain and also aims to make the procedure faster, less traumatic, and safer.

(p4.2) In the selected studies, there is a consensus recommending the use of premedications in non-emergency intratracheal intubations, which do not occur in emergency cases. This is reflected in the data obtained in a study conducted in France, where 100% of elective intubations were performed with analgesia and sedation versus 50% in emergencies and 90% in those considered semi-emergency. There is a trend described in the literature towards an increase in the use of analgesia, sedation, and protocols for intratracheal intubation over the years, which demonstrates a concern of the scientific community regarding the management of neonatal pain and its short and long-term effects.

(p4.3) Among the medications that could be used, one capable of producing analgesia and sedation quickly was sought, and that had a short half-life and no major side effects. Regarding to this, the authors have two prospective studies. One of the clinical trial dosage types, is where the author studies the use of propofol for the intubation of newborns and investigates the dose capable of producing analgesia and sedation   9 BMJ Open A multicenter, observational, prospective study that observed for two months several neonatal transport teams in the Paris region as to whether or not sedation and analgesia were used when intubation was necessary. It found that more than 70% of intubations were performed after premedication; such complications were more frequent when more than one intubation attempt was made, and that there was no agreement on the drugs to be used (the most frequent association being sufentanil + midazolam).  Acta Paediatrica An observational and prospective study of the feasibility and efficacy of inserting a short venous catheter for analgesia in intubating premature infants in the delivery room. Patients were screened at the discretion of the attending physician to receive ketamine (1.8 +-0.9 mg/kg) and atropine (20 ucg/kg) 1 min before intubation, when this was indicated. As a II 116 S. Naujorks, G.H. Knob, P.P. Dotto et al. Pediatric Critical Care Medicine

(p4.4) An observational and prospective study, which described the frequency and nature of premedication used before intratracheal intubation in certain neonatal units in France. A premedication use rate of 56% was found, being mainly composed of opioids (67%) and midazolam (53%). It concluded that the use of premedication for intubation has increased but remains inconsistent and not systematized. It also described that the medications when used were either not recommended or not described by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). V without side effects. In this study, it was found that high doses were needed to produce good sedation and analgesia, which led to hypotension in almost 60% of the patients, making its use impractical, in view of the wide variety of responses in the different gestational ages of newborns. The other is a study on the feasibility and efficacy of the use of ketamine as an analgesic for intubation in the delivery room. Both studies are characterized by the lack of Little used for intubation, according to the selected studies, due to its long action time and its long half-life, combined with its respiratory depressant effect. Fentanyl (0.05 mg/mL) IV and intranasal use at a dose of 2 mcg/kg. When IV, it has an action time of 1 min and an elimination half-life of 9.5 hours. When intranasal, it has an action time of 5À10 min.

(p4.5) A synthetic opioid that is fast acting, but has a relatively long half-life. Produces chest tightness when given quickly (less than 3 min). Intranasal use for intubation in the delivery room is well described.
