# A review on the potential effects of environmental and economic factors on sheep genetic diversity: Consequences of climate change

CorpusID: 253649345 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6591b526077c33314f68a18d956cf4c37e55ec52](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6591b526077c33314f68a18d956cf4c37e55ec52)

Fields: Environmental Science, Economics, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Animal breeding involves selecting and mating of parent animals with the desired superior phenotypes to produce the next generation that performs better than the average of the parental population. In the current animal farming systems, the selection of livestock breeds is done for improved efficiency and productivity. Therefore, livestock breeders prefer the performance of superior breeds over native breeds whose production potential is limited by their genetics. Little attention is given to adaptation traits in the development of breeding programs (Dudu et al., 2016). Thus, the authors have cautioned that the state of native farm animal species and breeds is increasingly becoming uncertain with the current breeding trend.
## (s4) Inadequate feed availability, digestibility, and absorption
(p4.0) Feed availability in this context refers to both feed quantity and quality. Animal nutrition is positively correlated with growth, reproduction, and production. Poor and/or inadequate nutrition negatively affects the performance of the aforementioned. With the projected increase in atmospheric CO 2 and air temperatures coupled with changed soil quality because of climate change, the quality and quantity of forage are expected to be affected. Further, intensive rainfall and longer dry periods are also projected leading to varied inter-annual precipitation variability (Grant et al., 2014). Persistent inter-annual rainfall variability leads to a continuous variation of soil moisture leading to crops subjected to moisture stress (Fay, 2009).

(p4.1) To understand the importance of feed available on the genetic architecture of the local sheep population, it is vital to understand the basic ingredients of forage first. In forage, protein, digestible energy, and the passage rate are the most important elements of ruminant nutrition determining forage quality. Crude proteins are converted from forage nitrogen by ruminal microbes, soluble carbon compounds, as well as cellulose and hemicellulose, are main sources of energy. Cellulose and hemicellulose are also digestible, but the rate of passage is limiting, digestibility can be hampered by the presence of lignin. The rate of passage in ruminants is more complex, but generally, ''the greater the digestibility, the lower the lignin and the higher the rate of passage" (Milchunas et al., 2005) hence a higher absorption.

(p4.2) A combination of soil water stress and warming reduces forage quality by increasing lignin content, reducing starch and crude protein digestibility of C 4 grass (Habermann et al., 2019). C 4 grasses belong to the sub-families panicoide and Eragrostoidae a Gramineae family. They are mainly found in cool temperate to hot-wet tropics with a high concentration in semi-arid and arid regions which are characterized by high solar radiation, high daytime temperatures, daily and/or seasonal water stress (Doliner & Jolliffe, 1979).

(p4.3) Elevated carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) concentration in the atmosphere combined with the rise in global temperatures, affects forage quality and quantity (Babinszky et al., 2011). Forage quality is determined by the digestibility and absorption of the ingested feed. Digestibility is one of the components of feed nutritive value, others are feed consumption and energetic efficiency ( Van Soest, 2018). Digestibility can be apparent digestibility; the balance of feed less the feces or true digestibility; a balance between respective feed residues from the diet escaping digestion and arriving in the feces excluding metabolic products (Soest, 1963). It is also worth noting that plants, most importantly forage plants, respond differently to climate change effects depending on their photosynthesis types either C3, C4, or CAM (Babinszky et al., 2011). Therefore, as the dynamics of climate change events increase, the possibility of vegetation change also increases as more uncommon vegetation types emerge, not used to by existing livestock species, forcing them to either change their feeding habits, migrate, or starve to death at the worst scenario.

(p4.4) Also, a combination of climate change variables may alter the forage quality since the existing forage changes may also be forced to adjust their intrinsic mechanisms to adapt to the environmental conditions. Furthermore, the impact of climate change on quantity will also depend on photosynthesis pathway crops, however, Babinszky et al. (2011) noted that C3 crops will be more negatively affected, reducing their herbage quantity and quality in the event of increased temperatures and reduced rainfall. This could lead to reduced feed utilization by animals, compromising energy intake and in the long term, the species could face risks of extinction if it does not have an adequate adaptive mechanism. Extinction leads to the loss of vital domestic animal genetic resources.

(p4.5) Prolonged exposure to elevated CO 2 causes a reduction in photosynthesis leading to reduced growth in a phenomenon referred to as photosynthetic downregulation (Sanz-Sáez et al., 2012). The authors also emphasized that some other environmental variables also interact with CO 2 and surface temperature to affect plant growth. They include soil nitrogen, soil water content, atmospheric humidity, and solar radiation. Amongst them all, Nitrogen is the limiting factor and its presence is positively correlated with forage quality, in other words, elevated CO 2 concentration with a deficiency in nitrogen supply causes reduced photosynthesis hence reduced yield (Sanz-Sáez et al., 2012). Further, nitrogen deficiency in the soil causes reduced shoot nitrogen content under elevated CO 2 concentration, causing reduced crude protein and enhanced fiber concentration content hence lowering forage quality. The quality of neutral detergent fiber (NDF), acid detergent fiber (ADF), and acid detergent lignin (ADL) (Reid et al., 1988;Sanz-Sáez et al., 2012;Soest, 1963) determines digestibility, ingestion, and palatability of grass forages. NDF includes cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin while ADF includes cellulose and lignin (Sanz-Sáez et al., 2012). Some studies have indicated that elevated concentration of CO 2 significantly reduces nitrogen concentration in herbage while increasing lignin concentration and carbon: nitrogen and lignin: nitrogen ratios (Cha et al., 2017) reducing forage quality and negatively affecting digestibility.

(p4.6) Under heat stress, animal productivity is reduced since feed intake, digestibility (Maia et al., 2020), and absorption (Ríus, 2019) are decreased. Further, heat stress negatively affects rumination activity, a vital activity in the digestive physiology of ruminants (Maia et al., 2020;Reiter et al., 2018). Behavioral traits like chewing and rumination play an important role in feed intake and digestion efficiency (Beauchemin, 2018). A negative effect on these two activities negatively affects feed intake, thereby, affecting energy available for their output.
## (s5) Prevalence of parasites, pests, and disease
(p5.0) Climate change is predicted to cause major ecological and biological changes that directly or indirectly impacts on sheep's health within the ecosystem. It is, therefore, unreasonable not to consider the impacts of climate change on animal health and the possible intrinsic mechanisms animals use to tolerate the prevalence of health hazards. Majorly, these mechanisms are genetically driven hence the need to have an adequate genetic base that would provide opportunities to withstand threats to animal health. In this context, disease and parasite tolerance refer to an animal constantly being productive with normal reproductive efficiency despite the presence of parasites, pests, and disease-causing agents and to a further extent break the life cycle of pathogens by developing internal conditions unfavorable for pathogen, survivability, reproduction, and pathogenicity. It is challenging to select for parasite resistance using pedigree because several research publications suggest that the hereditability to parasite resistance is low and may range between h 2 = 0.04 to h 2 = 0.16 (Pacheco et al., 2021).

(p5.1) Climate change affects the distribution, prevalence, and seasonality of parasites, pests, and diseases. Pathogens and vectors habitats change with the climate, thus, with the projected increase in changing climate events, the distribution, prevalence, and seasonality of pests and diseases are also projected to change (Medlock & Leach, 2015), especially vector-borne diseases that have seasonal and spatial patterns influenced by environmental heterogeneity (de La Rocque et al., 2008). IPPC report of 2007 envisaged an increase in the spatial distribution of animal disease-causing vectors that are most sensitive to temperature changes (IPCC, 2007), inferring the role of climate change to the spread of infectious diseases by allowing disease-causing agents e.g. ''Fungi, Viruses, bacteria and protozoa" to move to new ecosystems where they can cause harm to livestock, humans, and wildlife. Furthermore, the recent spread of vector-borne diseases such as trypanosomiasis, Lyme disease, tick-borne encephalitis, blue tongue, and dengue (de La Rocque et al., 2008) was linked to climate change. For instance, Higher temperatures have a greater impact on the lifecycle of disease-causing pathogens like aiding in shortening the incubation period of pathogens, increasing the incubation rates, and enhancing the chances of the vectors to live longer to transmit infections (Kutz et al., 2005). The authors averred that an increase in temperature by 1°C shifted the protostronglid nematodes (U. pallikuukensis) larval development from 2 years to a 1-year cycle, expanded the period of transmission of the third stage of larvae development (L3) in slugs, and increased larvae infectious period. Some studies have shown a positive linkage between temperature and expansion of geographical ranges of arthropod vectors like bluetongue virus while others infer a contrasting trend like tsetse flies in sub-Saharan Africa. Moreover, there is a reported positive association between extreme events (cold and hot) and disease outbreaks, such as Rift valley fever outbreaks in East Africa (Bett et al., 2017;Kutz et al., 2005). Distribution, prevalence, and seasonality of pests, parasites, and diseases are not influenced by climate change alone, but other factors both biophysical (i.e. land cover, landscapes, and host abundance) and directly anthropogenic (i.e. public health, diet, socio-political, and other human behaviors) modulate contact between pathogens, vectors and reservoirs shifting disease behavior (de La Rocque et al., 2008).

(p5.2) Individual differences in immune responses are observed widely and many studies have associated them with genetic differences between individuals. Therefore, understanding the gene and environment interaction and its role in generating immune response variation within and between populations is important for sustained sheep breeding and selection. It would be much more judicious, therefore, to consider the importance of having the animal genetic base that would be a backbone for sustainable production in the presence of these health risk challenges, thus sheep populations that are more genetically diverse provide opportunities for improved adaptation. Breeding for resistance will minimize drug use, ultimately enhancing food safety by reducing drug residues in sheep products (Aguerre et al., 2018). Recently, a consensus on the possibility of genetic selection for immunity response in sheep was reached and some studies reported successful experiments in this effect e.g. (Bouix et al., 1998;Gauly & Erhardt, 2001).

(p5.3) An example of a major disease of concern and whose immunity and genetic architecture are widely studied is mastitis. Mastitis is a disease-causing inflammation of mammary glands and causes major economic losses in the sheep industry (Giannakopoulos et al., 2019;Larsgard & Vaabenoe, 1993). The disease is environmentally influenced hence climate change catalyzed. Due to its economic importance and the risk, it poses to the affected population, genetic diversity within and among populations would enhance the survivability of the breed in the face of climate change events. Recently, studies on the genetics of disease resistance have been performed. For example, Larsgard & Vaabenoe (Larsgard & Vaabenoe, 1993) estimated heritability from ewe's resistance to mastitis to be 0.13 (±0.16) by the LS-method and 0.49 by the nonlinear threshold method. Conington et al. (2008) have reviewed and discussed extensively breeding for mastitis resistance and its economic ramifications. Further use of marker-assisted selection for resistance has been embraced in the past few years with the aim of enhancing genetic improvement as well as maintaining genetic diversity, an opportunity for sustained production in the current uncertainties of climate change. Using genome-wide association studies, genes SOCS2, CTLA4, C6, C7, C9, PTGER4, DAB2, CARD6, OSMR, PLXNC1, IDH1, ICOS, FYB, and LYFR were identified based upon analysis of an ovine transcriptional atlas and transcriptome data derived from milk somatic cells to be under selection confirming the presence of animal genetic variability in mastitis resistance among 609 ewes of the Greek Chios breed (Banos et al., 2017). Other studies and evaluations of the role of sheep genetics on adaptation were conducted on nematodes. Different sheep breeds, like Rhön sheep, which a local sheep breeds in Germany (Gauly & Erhardt, 2001), and Polish longwool sheep from Poland (Bouix et al., 1998) have been evaluated on their resistance to nematodes facilitating selection for resistance.
## (s6) Sheep genetic diversity and potential selection signatures for adaptation traits
(p6.0) In the recent past, scientists have developed interest in studying the genetic diversity of different animal species globally using different genetic markers. These studies aimed at elucidating either the origin, migratory paths, genetic diversity status within the breed and among populations resulting in classifying breeds according to extinction risk status and recommending conservation measures if need be. Little attention has been placed on the effects of genotype -environment (GxE) interaction on the loss of diversity in different species. Since domestication, sheep have been subjected to forces of natural and artificial selection leading to several mutations, allele realignment and frequencies in several generations in response to changing environmental conditions resulting from climate change (Gauly & Erhardt, 2001). These genetic changes were meant to align animals to meet the production needs of the environment as well as the farmer. However, due to the increased demand for animal products in the recent past, pressure for improved production has ensued, leading to enhanced selection intensity, especially in exotic sheep breeds. An intensive selection coupled with reduced population size leads to a loss of diversity (Eusebi et al., 2020). Previously, the emphasis was put on breeding strategies that ensured the maintenance of heterozygosity disregarding ''allelic diversity". Allelic diversity in this context refers to a full range of potentially adaptive alleles in the species (Notter, 1999), but this was less useful since heterozygosity did not effectively address genetic diversity corresponding with the changing environmental conditions. Intensive selection for additive traits of economic importance alongside inbreeding are the possible causes of declining allele diversity (Caballero et al., 2020;Simm et al., 1996). Another cause of declining genetic diversity is reduced effective population size (Zhao et al., 2014). The loss of genetic variability has also been greatly impacted by the transfer of breeds to new environments without taking GxE interaction into account. According to the fundamental theory of the GxE interaction, phenotypes of one breed may vary between two different environmental situations (Gavojdian et al., 2014). Hence, introducing breeds in new production environments may lead to decreased fitness traits, putting the breed at risk of extinction. Diversity loss reduces the breed and species' ability to withstand the extreme environments caused by climate change.

(p6.1) Identification of differences in allele frequencies and genetic diversity at a specific genomic region has enabled the possibility of associating the selection pressure to different ecological regions. Evidence of selection pressure for adaptation has been investigated recently and several genomic regions underlying adaptations have been detected. Analysis of allele frequencies between populations to infer selective pressure in one population and analysis of the reduction of genetic diversity at a certain genomic region are the main methods of detecting selection signatures. The latter method allows detection of possible ''selective sweeps" arising from the regions where favorable alleles have risen in frequencies hence reducing levels of diversity in that genomic region or locus (Saravanan et al., 2020).
