# Journal of Technology Management and Business Social Well-Being Elements Through the Lens of Low-Income Group among Malays in Malaysia After 14th General Election: A Systematic Literature Review Centre for General Studies, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia and Principal Researcher for Sustainable Community, Culture & Economy Development (SUCCEED), MALAYSIA *Corresponding Author

CorpusID: 255257114 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1b14b1fa8cea95800c3d905286b81c5875e79ef5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1b14b1fa8cea95800c3d905286b81c5875e79ef5)

Fields: Sociology

## (s4) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
(p4.0) The main characteristic of choosing the articles is the inclusion and exclusion criteria table (Table 1). The review process steps of PRISMA, including identification, screening, and eligibility, were also carried out, followed by data abstraction and analysis.

(p4.1) PRISMA was used because it allows a review to be conducted systematically. In addition, it has three advantages, which are: (a) clarifies research questions, which enables systematic research; (b) identifies the inclusion and exclusion criteria; and (c) enables examination through large databases of scientific literature promptly (Sierra-Correa & Kintz, 2015). The selection criteria were set by referring to the refined results section on the left side of the database (referring to Scopus and Web of Science). The criteria were based on the keywords ( Table 2) social well-being, Malays, post Malaysia's general election of 14 th , and low-income group. Meanwhile, the timeline chosen was between 2018 and 2021 because this paper intended to look into the situation after the phenomenon of Malaysia's 14 th general election in 2018. Therefore, related articles published after that phenomenon would be a potential review in this paper. Only relevant and related articles that fit the keywords were displayed in the database using this method. Thus, only related articles were found in the options.
## (s9) Analysis Descriptive
(p9.0) Based on the findings using a snowballing technique, only 13 articles were eligible to be reviewed. All the articles focused on the contributing factors of social well-being of low-income group among Malays after Malaysia's 14 th general election happened in 2018. Thus, it is crucial to filter the right timeline as it tells the situation at that particular moment.

(p9.1) Two articles out of 13 were published in Singapore, while the rest were published in Malaysia. Since GE-14 occurred in Malaysia, majority of the articles were published in Malaysia as it required the researcher to closely observe and understand deeply the local situation instead of observing this issue from a milestone away. As for the articles published in Singapore, Singapore is just located 22 kilometres away from the southern tip of peninsular Malaysia. In addition, Singapore and Malaysia have historical affiliations related to politics, land, and culture. Thus, closer observation can be performed by Singaporean researchers. Those two articles were conducted by Lee (2019) and Dettman (2020).
