# Effect of Severe Plastic Deformation on the Performance of Magnesium for Biomedical Applications. materials An Overview on the Effect of Severe Plastic Deformation on the Performance of Magnesium for Biomedical Applications

CorpusID: 257620004 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/55bab5152be87e73b584f53d32a103129b3167d6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/55bab5152be87e73b584f53d32a103129b3167d6)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) It has been suggested that biomaterials can be divided into different generations depending on their bioactivity and clinical goals. Thus, the first generation were developed solely to avoid harming tissues, and the materials were biologically inert. The second generation were developed for tissue bonding, and the bioactivity developed via surface erosion. The third generation were designed for tissue regeneration, and the bioactivity provided via material biodegradation [1]. Magnesium alloys fit into the third generation, and there are now multiple clinical reports of their successful use [2][3][4].

(p0.1) The performance of a biodegradable implant is linked to its tissue interaction, the type of corrosion and corrosion rate, the load-bearing ability and the reliability of its use. The performance is therefore affected by a combination of multiple properties, including the material strength, ductility, corrosion and biocompatibility. These properties are strongly affected by the material structure which depends on alloy composition and processing operations. It follows that severe plastic deformation (SPD) techniques, such as high-pressure torsion (HPT) and equal-channel angular pressing (ECAP), have attracted significant attention as processing operations, with the ability to improve the properties and performance of magnesium-based implants due to their impact on the grain refinement and homogenization of the structure. These points are illustrated in the processing-structureproperties-performance relationships, as shown in Figure 1. There has been great interest in evaluating the structure and properties of magnesium alloys processed via SPD. Many advances were obtained in the past twenty years in understanding the mechanism of the grain refinement of magnesium alloys during ECAP, and processing routes were developed enabling the fabrication of magnesium alloys with ultrafine (<1 µm) grain structures. In addition, the HPT technique, which enables the processing of magnesium and its alloys at room temperature and achieves significant grain refinement, gained considerable popularity in recent years. As a consequence, there is now a large number of studies on the use of SPD to process magnesium and its alloys aiming for biomedical applications. These studies reveal trends in the relationship between grain size and mechanical properties, whereas the effect of corrosion is not clear. Various topics, including the processing of Mg, mechanisms of microstructure refinement, mechanical and corrosion properties and the biological response, are critically reviewed in the present paper.
## (s3) Structure Evolution
(p3.0) The mechanism of grain refinement in magnesium and its alloys during S cessing differs from the mechanism observed in other metallic materials. The diffe attributed to the hexagonal close-packed (h.c.p.) structure and the occurrence of d recrystallization at high temperatures. A detailed description of the mechanism o tallization in magnesium is available elsewhere [22]. Thus, while materials with f tered cubic (f.c.c.) and body-centered cubic (b.c.c.) structures display homogeneo refinement, magnesium displays grain refinement initially concentrated nea boundaries. A model was developed to illustrate the mechanism of grain refine magnesium processed via ECAP [23,24]. Figure 3 shows an illustration of the mode the grain structure evolution depends on the initial grain size, the ECAP process ditions (strain rate and temperature) and the amount of strain imposed on the m The size of the newly formed grains depends strongly on the temperature and str during ECAP. The lower the temperature and the higher the strain rate, the sma size of the new grains which are formed along the grain boundaries of the startin rial. The difference in size between the initial grains and the new grains and the of strain imposed during ECAP will affect the homogeneity in the final structure. situations in which the size of the initial grain structure, d, is larger than a critic size, dc, the new grains will not occupy the whole volume and a heterogeneous gr distribution develops.

(p3.1) ECAP processing of coarse-grained magnesium can lead to heterogeneous gr distribution if the processing is carried out at low temperatures, with this route b lustrated in the top row of Figure 3, or a homogeneous distribution of modera grains if the processing is carried out at high temperatures, and this is illustrate second row. The incorporation of a preliminary thermo-mechanical processing op 
## (s4) Structure Evolution
(p4.0) The mechanism of grain refinement in magnesium and its alloys during SPD processing differs from the mechanism observed in other metallic materials. The difference is attributed to the hexagonal close-packed (h.c.p.) structure and the occurrence of dynamic recrystallization at high temperatures. A detailed description of the mechanism of recrystallization in magnesium is available elsewhere [22]. Thus, while materials with face-centered cubic (f.c.c.) and body-centered cubic (b.c.c.) structures display homogeneous grain refinement, magnesium displays grain refinement initially concentrated near grain boundaries. A model was developed to illustrate the mechanism of grain refinement in magnesium processed via ECAP [23,24]. Figure 3 shows an illustration of the model. Thus, the grain structure evolution depends on the initial grain size, the ECAP processing conditions (strain rate and temperature) and the amount of strain imposed on the material. The size of the newly formed grains depends strongly on the temperature and strain rate during ECAP. The lower the temperature and the higher the strain rate, the smaller the size of the new grains which are formed along the grain boundaries of the starting material. The difference in size between the initial grains and the new grains and the amount of strain imposed during ECAP will affect the homogeneity in the final structure. Thus, in situations in which the size of the initial grain structure, d, is larger than a critical grain size, d c , the new grains will not occupy the whole volume and a heterogeneous grain size distribution develops.

(p4.1) There is experimental evidence in the literature supporting the different grain structure evolutions depicted in Figure 3. It is therefore expected that the grain structures produced via ECAP vary significantly in different reports and that these different structures will display different properties. In fact, there is a great dispersion in the properties of magnesium processed via ECAP in the literature, and this will be examined in the next sections. Figure 3. Illustration of the mechanism of grain refinement of magnesium processed via ECAP [23].

(p4.2) The amount of strain imposed during HPT is typically much larger than in ECAP. This means that, despite some heterogeneity in grain size distribution observed in the early stage of processing, the grain structure usually evolves to a homogeneous distribution of ultrafine grains. Figure 4 shows the evolution of the grain structure, observed using EBSD, of pure magnesium at different stages of HPT processing [25]. High-angle boundaries are depicted in black lines and low-angle boundaries in red. Coarse grains surrounded by fine grains are observed at a low number of turns and a homogeneous distribution of ultrafine grains is observed after multiple turns. As HPT processing is usually carried out at room temperature, grain growth is prevented, and the final grain sizes are smaller than in ECAP. For example, final grain sizes larger than 10 µm were reported in pure magnesium processed via ECAP at high temperatures [10,26], while grain sizes smaller than 1 µm were reported in pure magnesium processed via HPT at room temperature [25,27]. ECAP processing of coarse-grained magnesium can lead to heterogeneous grain size distribution if the processing is carried out at low temperatures, with this route being illustrated in the top row of Figure 3, or a homogeneous distribution of moderate-sized grains if the processing is carried out at high temperatures, and this is illustrated in the second row. The incorporation of a preliminary thermo-mechanical processing operation can refine the initial structure of the material, and this route, illustrated in the bottom rows, can lead to the development of a homogeneous distribution of fine grains.

(p4.3) There is experimental evidence in the literature supporting the different grain structure evolutions depicted in Figure 3. It is therefore expected that the grain structures produced via ECAP vary significantly in different reports and that these different structures will display different properties. In fact, there is a great dispersion in the properties of magnesium processed via ECAP in the literature, and this will be examined in the next sections.

(p4.4) The amount of strain imposed during HPT is typically much larger than in ECAP. This means that, despite some heterogeneity in grain size distribution observed in the early stage of processing, the grain structure usually evolves to a homogeneous distribution of ultrafine grains. Figure 4 shows the evolution of the grain structure, observed using EBSD, of pure magnesium at different stages of HPT processing [25]. High-angle boundaries are depicted in black lines and low-angle boundaries in red. Coarse grains surrounded by fine grains are observed at a low number of turns and a homogeneous distribution of ultrafine grains is observed after multiple turns. As HPT processing is usually carried out at room temperature, grain growth is prevented, and the final grain sizes are smaller than in ECAP. For example, final grain sizes larger than 10 µm were reported in pure magnesium processed via ECAP at high temperatures [10,26], while grain sizes smaller than 1 µm were reported in pure magnesium processed via HPT at room temperature [25,27].  The grain sizes achieved during SPD processing can be reduced by the incorporation of alloying elements and second phase particles which reduce grain boundary mobility. Consequently, the average grain sizes reported in magnesium alloys processed via SPD are usually smaller than the grain sizes obtained in pure magnesium. A summary of grain sizes reported in magnesium and its alloys after HPT processing is available elsewhere [29]. Figure 5 shows the structure of an Mg-8.2%Gd-3.2%Y-1.0%Zn-0.4%Zr alloy in which a mean grain size of only 35 nm was reported after processing via HPT [30].  The grain sizes achieved during SPD processing can be reduced by the incorporation of alloying elements and second phase particles which reduce grain boundary mobility. Consequently, the average grain sizes reported in magnesium alloys processed via SPD are usually smaller than the grain sizes obtained in pure magnesium. A summary of grain sizes reported in magnesium and its alloys after HPT processing is available elsewhere [29]. Figure 5 shows the structure of an Mg-8.2%Gd-3.2%Y-1.0%Zn-0.4%Zr alloy in which a mean grain size of only 35 nm was reported after processing via HPT [30].  The grain sizes achieved during SPD processing can be reduced by the incorporation of alloying elements and second phase particles which reduce grain boundary mobility. Consequently, the average grain sizes reported in magnesium alloys processed via SPD are usually smaller than the grain sizes obtained in pure magnesium. A summary of grain sizes reported in magnesium and its alloys after HPT processing is available elsewhere [29]. Figure 5 shows the structure of an Mg-8.2%Gd-3.2%Y-1.0%Zn-0.4%Zr alloy in which a mean grain size of only 35 nm was reported after processing via HPT [30].  
## (s5) Mechanical Properties
(p5.0) There are multiple reports of higher strength in magnesium and its alloys after ECAP processing and this is attributed to grain refinement. There is also a significant dispersion in the mechanical properties of magnesium processed via ECAP. The dispersion is a consequence of the multiple processing routes which produce different microstructures, as discussed in the previous section. Moreover, the mechanical behavior of magnesium depends strongly on the sample texture and loading direction. The texture developed in magnesium is affected by the number of passes [31,32], the die geometry [33] and the ECAP route [31], which is defined by the sequence of rotations of the billet between successive passes. The alloy composition can also affect the intensity of the texture [32].

(p5.1) The mechanical behavior of magnesium alloys processed via ECAP varies significantly depending on the loading direction [34,35]. Accordingly, ECAP processing might produce a texture meaning basal slip is favored for loading along the billet direction, and this leads to enhanced ductility for tensile tests in this direction [34,36]. Nevertheless, high strength can also be achieved by controlling ECAP processing parameters and texture development. Figure 6 shows tensile stress-strain curves for a magnesium alloy AZ31 processed via ECAP in which the grain size was significantly refined [37]. Increasing strength with decreasing grain size is observed.
## (s7) Corrosion Behavior
(p7.0) It has been suggested that grain refinement increases the corrosion resistance of magnesium [51][52][53]. It is expected that severe plastic deformation via ECAP and HPT increases the corrosion resistance, provided a significant structure refinement and homogeneity are introduced. This modification has a favorable effect on corrosion resistance and pitting The experimental data of flow stress of magnesium alloys were also plotted as a function of the elongation in tension to evaluate the strength-ductility relationship [44]. It was reported that grain refinement improves the mechanical properties of magnesium alloys, leading to a significant expansion of range in flow stress, σ, vs elongation plots. This is shown in Figure 9, in which the data from coarse-grained magnesium (d > 20 µm) and finegrained (d < 2 µm) are plotted with different symbols. Fine-grained magnesium can display higher strength, a better combination of strength and ductility and exceptional ductility compared to their coarse-grained counterparts [44]. Accordingly, the trends revealed in this analysis show that SPD processing can significantly improve the mechanical properties of magnesium and its alloys due to its ability to promote grain refinement. The experimental data of flow stress of magnesium alloys were also plotted as a function of the elongation in tension to evaluate the strength-ductility relationship [44]. It was reported that grain refinement improves the mechanical properties of magnesium alloys, leading to a significant expansion of range in flow stress, σ, vs elongation plots. This is shown in Figure 9, in which the data from coarse-grained magnesium (d > 20 µm) and fine-grained (d < 2 µm) are plotted with different symbols. Fine-grained magnesium can display higher strength, a better combination of strength and ductility and exceptional ductility compared to their coarse-grained counterparts [44]. Accordingly, the trends revealed in this analysis show that SPD processing can significantly improve the mechanical properties of magnesium and its alloys due to its ability to promote grain refinement. 
## (s8) Corrosion Behavior
(p8.0) It has been suggested that grain refinement increases the corrosion resistance of magnesium [51][52][53]. It is expected that severe plastic deformation via ECAP and HPT increases the corrosion resistance, provided a significant structure refinement and homogeneity are introduced. This modification has a favorable effect on corrosion resistance and pitting 
## (s9) Corrosion Behavior
(p9.0) It has been suggested that grain refinement increases the corrosion resistance of magnesium [51][52][53]. It is expected that severe plastic deformation via ECAP and HPT increases the corrosion resistance, provided a significant structure refinement and homogeneity are introduced. This modification has a favorable effect on corrosion resistance and pitting susceptibility. In a more homogeneous surface, corrosion behavior tends to change from local to uniform and general corrosion. The increasing grain boundary density can lead to an improvement in passive film formation and adhesion.

(p9.1) A review [54] on the effect of SPD on corrosion behavior concluded that SPD does not compromise corrosion resistance and, in many cases, improves it, despite some contradictory results. There are to date a large number of investigations of the corrosion behavior of magnesium processed via ECAP and HPT, and Table 1 displays the comprehensive summary based on the material, SPD processing method, grain size, mechanical properties, corrosion testing conditions and results. Despite a large number of investigations, it is not easy to establish trends in the corrosion behavior of Mg due to the multiple variables, including alloy composition, type of test and corrosion media, which affect the output. Many papers reported that SPD improves the corrosion resistance of Mg and its alloys, but there are also reports that it does not affect, or it even deteriorates, the corrosion resistance. This divergence is discussed next.  Ringer's E.P. Improved [100] HPT It is important to keep in mind that grain size and homogeneity should affect the corrosion behavior. SPD processing via ECAP is usually carried out at high temperatures due to the limited ductility of magnesium and its alloys at lower temperatures. As discussed previously, processing at high temperatures compromises the grain refinement ability, and therefore many papers reported coarse grain structures after ECAP processing. Additionally, the mechanism of grain refinement of magnesium differs from other metallic materials in a way that a heterogeneous grain size distribution might develop after a few passes of ECAP [23,24,101]. Therefore, the results summarized in Table 1 include studies in samples in which SPD processing did not refine the grain structure significantly, and the grain structure is rather heterogeneous. The corrosion rate in samples processed via ECAP and HPT are plotted as a function of the grain size in Figure 10, and different symbols are used to separate the results in which the authors reported that SPD improved corrosion resistance from the results in which SPD did not affect or deteriorated the corrosion resistance. Different symbols are also used to separate results from samples processed via ECAP and samples processed via HPT. However, further processing of this alloy to a larger number of turns caused homogenization of the grain structure and improved the corrosion resistance [93]. A recent paper showed that localized corrosion can develop in areas in which deformation heterogeneity takes place during HPT processing. This might include the center and the edge of the discs [19]. Therefore, it is of great importance that SPD processing routes are developed in order to produce homogeneous structures. Moreover, recent papers have shown that residual stresses imposed with surface treatments can affect the corrosion behavior of magnesium alloys [103,104]. Improvement in corrosion resistance has also been reported in magnesium alloys processed via friction stir processing [105] and multi-axial isothermal forging [106]. 
## (s10) Biological Response
(p10.0) It is now well known that magnesium displays a good biological response and there are prospects of increasing its use as an implant material [2,4,107,108]. The previous sections showed that severe plastic deformation can improve both the mechanical properties and the corrosion behavior of this material. However, it is important to review studies on whether such processing could compromise their biological response. Table 2 summarizes the output of cytotoxicity tests carried out in magnesium processed via ECAP or HPT. Different alloys and different cell types were considered in these investigations, and in practice, there is no report of any significant toxicity. In fact, an increase in cell viability It is apparent that many studies in which the material was processed via ECAP failed to produce samples with ultrafine (less than 1 µm) grain sizes. Most of the studies reporting that SPD deteriorated corrosion resistance made use of samples in which the grain structure was not ultrafine. Careful observation of the data in Figure 10 shows that decreasing the grain size decreases the corrosion rate, despite the different alloy compositions and testing methods. This observation supports the theory that the grain interior acts as a cathode and the grain boundary as an anode during corrosion and that a decrease in the ratio between the cathode and anode area fraction can decrease the corrosion rate [54,102]. It is also apparent that samples produced via HPT display smaller grain sizes and lower corrosion rates. This is attributed to the lower temperature in which HPT is usually carried out and the larger amount of strain imposed. The former reduces the grain size, and the latter increases the homogeneity of the structure.

(p10.1) It is worth noting that the homogeneity of the structure can significantly affect the corrosion behavior of magnesium processed via SPD. An early paper reported the processing of pure magnesium via ECAP at different temperatures, a process which led to different average grain sizes and grain size distributions. A higher corrosion rate was reported in a sample in which the grain size distribution was less homogeneous [55]. A deteriorated corrosion resistance was reported in a ZK60 magnesium alloy processed by a few turns of HPT and was also attributed to heterogeneous grain size distribution [93]. However, further processing of this alloy to a larger number of turns caused homogenization of the grain structure and improved the corrosion resistance [93]. A recent paper showed that localized corrosion can develop in areas in which deformation heterogeneity takes place during HPT processing. This might include the center and the edge of the discs [19]. Therefore, it is of great importance that SPD processing routes are developed in order to produce homogeneous structures. Moreover, recent papers have shown that residual stresses imposed with surface treatments can affect the corrosion behavior of magnesium alloys [103,104]. Improvement in corrosion resistance has also been reported in magnesium alloys processed via friction stir processing [105] and multi-axial isothermal forging [106].
## (s20) Magnesium Composites
(p20.0) The performance of magnesium implants can be improved by the incorporation of other materials into composites [110]. High-pressure torsion provides the opportunity to consolidate different metallic materials, including magnesium, into a bulk sample in which the structure is significantly refined [111,112]. Thus, recent papers have exploited this procedure, and different composites and hybrids have been produced using HPT. For instance, it is now known that the strength of magnesium can be significantly increased by mixing it with other metallic materials such as Al [113][114][115] or Zn [116][117][118][119]. The Mg-Zn system is especially interesting since both materials are biodegradable, and its corrosion behavior in SBF has been investigated [119].

(p20.1) It is also possible to incorporate hard ceramic particles into a magnesium matrix through HPT, and this provides the opportunity to produce magnesium composites with bioactive particles. Recent papers reported the incorporation of bioactive glass [120] and hydroxyapatite [120,121] into the magnesium matrix. Cytotoxicity tests showed the Mg-HA composite is biocompatible [120]. Figure 14 shows an elemental composition map across a cut on the surface of the composite after immersion in Hank's solution. A hydroxyapatite particle and the corrosion product layer are rich in Ca and P, and it was reported that the corrosion product layer is uniformly distributed on the surface of the sample [121]. It is expected that such a surface layer improves the interaction between a magnesium implant and the surrounding tissue. 
## (s21) Magnesium Composites
(p21.0) The performance of magnesium implants can be improved by the incorporation of other materials into composites [110]. High-pressure torsion provides the opportunity to consolidate different metallic materials, including magnesium, into a bulk sample in which the structure is significantly refined [111,112]. Thus, recent papers have exploited this procedure, and different composites and hybrids have been produced using HPT. For instance, it is now known that the strength of magnesium can be significantly increased by mixing it with other metallic materials such as Al [113][114][115] or Zn [116][117][118][119]. The Mg-Zn system is especially interesting since both materials are biodegradable, and its corrosion behavior in SBF has been investigated [119].

(p21.1) It is also possible to incorporate hard ceramic particles into a magnesium matrix through HPT, and this provides the opportunity to produce magnesium composites with bioactive particles. Recent papers reported the incorporation of bioactive glass [120] and hydroxyapatite [120,121] into the magnesium matrix. Cytotoxicity tests showed the Mg-HA composite is biocompatible [120]. Figure 14 shows an elemental composition map across a cut on the surface of the composite after immersion in Hank's solution. A hydroxyapatite particle and the corrosion product layer are rich in Ca and P, and it was reported that the corrosion product layer is uniformly distributed on the surface of the sample [121]. It is expected that such a surface layer improves the interaction between a magnesium implant and the surrounding tissue. 
