# Electron beam powder bed fusion of copper components: a review of mechanical properties and research opportunities

CorpusID: 251558253 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af577ecffd047508580c2f68d570081274fc09a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af577ecffd047508580c2f68d570081274fc09a3)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Additive manufacturing (AM) refers to a category of manufacturing processes that sequentially add layers or units of standard input materials to enable the production of physical products. This process was previously called rapid prototyping but is now applied in three dimensions and leads to the commonly applied terminology, 3D printing.

(p0.1) By this simple definition, AM processes have existed for centuries, for instance, in the form of common brick (laying) used for the building of complex structures. A commercially relevant explanation of AM must also include a restriction that this technology is digitally driven, whereby AM is enabled by digital definitions of the planned geometry and related process parameters. This qualification enables the diverse range of sophisticated design outcomes related to modern AM processes, comprising high-complexity customised 3D structures, inexpensive functional components, high-value structures systems and inexpensive, fully customised patient-specific surgical guides [1,2].
## (s1) Principle of EB-PBF
(p1.0) The electron beam can be used for both additive and subtractivebased manufacturing. For instance, this process can be used to formulate channel structures for copper ingots by melting and evaporation [18]. If the electron beam is used in subtractive regions, it is called electron beam machining, which is not within the scope of this research.

(p1.1) Electron beam powder bed fusion (EB-PBF), which is known as selective electron beam melting (SEBM) and electron beam melting (EBM) by Arcam, has become a successful method for PBF. EB-PBF system uses a high-energy electron beam (compared to laser-based powder bed fusion (LB-PBF) to fuse metal powder particles. Researchers at the Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden, first developed this process. EB-PBF was commercialised by Arcam AB, Sweden, in 2001, and is now owned by GE.

(p1.2) Similar to LB-PBF, in the EB-PBF, a focused electron beam scans along a thin layer of spread and settled powder, causing localised fusion/melting and solidification per the slice cross-section. Table 1 summarises the differences between EB-PBF and LB-PBF. Most of the presented differences in this table are due to EB-PBF having an energy/ heat source of electrons. Nevertheless, other differences are associated with engineering trade-offs as practised in EB-PBF and LB-PBF and are not necessarily inherent to the processing.
## (s4) Microstructure and mechanical property of EB-PBF copper components
(p4.0) The production of pure copper components by EB-PBF shows less chance of oxides as the material is processed in a vacuum. High preheats in EB-PBF show less thermal gradient and internal stresses in cooling. Ramirez et al. [28] investigated the microstructure and mechanical properties of open cellular parts. They showed that EB-PBF is a great tool to produce lattice copper parts, such as heat exchangers. This study showed that Cu 2 O appeared in the microstructure and it can improve the mechanical properties. However, if the Cu 2 O exceeds a certain value (0.0235%wt), cracks happen, which negatively affect the mechanical properties. Pure copper powder is much less reflective (< 50%) to the electron beam compared to the laser beam (~ 70%), and this causes higher induced heat on the surface of the powder bed. The generation of fully melted tracks and a reduction in pore formation were observed. However, due to difficulties such as over sintering due to increased heat in the build area, a higher layer cooling time was introduced to maintain the temperature of the process, which leads to elemental segregation and related defects. Momeni [29] reported that chrome-rich spheres (1 ≤ µm) surrounded by Cu matrix are formed in EB-PBF of copper chrome parts. This study also reported that elemental segregation can produce heterogeneous nucleation of primary Cr-rich particles and affect the produced parts.
## (s5) Technical challenges of EB-PBF of pure copper
(p5.0) In EB-PBF of copper, the lack of component-level data can be related to the significant processing challenges. Even though copper has a relatively low melting temperature, several physical properties of this material present significant processing challenges for EB-PBF. The narrow process window for EB-PBF is related to the sensitivity of the copper to thermal boundary conditions and geometric effects within a layer. Thus, while AM produces complex geometries from copper powder, the process parameter and properties data are typically associated with small prismatic specimens [39]. The AM process selection needs many cares and considerations to ensure the good quality and performance of the printed components. The reflectivity of the copper powder in an electron beam is quite lower than a laser; therefore, the efficiency of the EB-PBF is higher than that of laser-based systems. Higher preheat temperature in electron beam systems reduces the effect of periodic cooling and heating as well as the need for thermal processing to solve residual stress issues. This has culminated in the quality of EB-PBF parts in comparison with LB-PBF. Due to using a higher power energy source and larger beam size, the dimensional accuracy of EB-PBF is lower than LB-PBF. Therefore, more post-processing to achieve surface quality and dimensional deviation is needed for the EB-PBF component that can add to the total manufacturing lead time and the cost of the production.

(p5.1) EB-PBF of unalloyed copper generally has fewer challenges compared to LB-PBF. The induced energy between the beam and the powder is significantly higher, the mid-level vacuum environment (~ 2 × 10 −3 to 2 × 10 −6 mBar) minimises oxidation, and the high scan speed and beam power facilitate efficient bed preheating to reduce thermal gradients and residual stresses.

(p5.2) Pure copper has high thermal conductivity (400 Wm −1 K −1 at room temperature) which, while ideal for thermal management applications, promptly conducts heat away from the melt track leading to local thermal gradients. This phenomenon increases the chances of layer curling, delamination, and ultimately, component and builds failure. The resulting rapid Fig. 15 The printed Cu-70Al catalysts using powder particle sizes of 45 to 105 µm [46]. (Open access no. permission is required) solidification of the melt track, coupled with the low viscosity of melted copper, causes the lack of flowability of the material and also tends to retain defects such as keyholes [11]. Moreover, copper's high ductility prevents post-build powder removal and recovery which reduces the efficiency of the process. Copper powder particles also tend to agglomerate, reducing overall flowability and hindering powder deposition. Great care must be taken in storage and handling before, during and after part fabrication due to the sensitivity of copper to oxidation [35].

(p5.3) Key concerns when producing copper components by EB-PBF for fabrication of vacuum electronics parts are the requirements for high purity materials with small feature sizes, low surface roughness and ultra-high vacuum compatibility. The purity of the feedstock needs to be as high as possible. In addition, the material purity also needs to be preserved within the melting and solidification steps. In EB-PBF, even relatively low frequency (i.e. S-band) vacuum electron devices cause challenges in requiring small feature sizes and high surface quality (~ 1 μm) [48].
