# R E V I E W A review of microbial-environmental interactions recorded in Proterozoic carbonate-hosted chert

CorpusID: 253045506 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88d286927f078db43b10dd210a474e5c1ec704f4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88d286927f078db43b10dd210a474e5c1ec704f4)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Geology

## (s5) The physiological and morphological responses of modern analogs to UV radiation and desiccation provide clues as to how
(p5.0) Eoentophysalis may have lived in, adapted to, and interacted with the Proterozoic supratidal environments. In laboratory growth experiments, modern pustular mat-forming cyanobacteria produce more EPS when grown under UV stress compared to those that grow under normal ambient light conditions (Figure 8). Moreover, experimental taphonomy of these cyanobacteria reveals some of these stress responses-especially the production of EPS-as critical to early silicification (see Section 3.1; Moore et al., 2020Moore et al., , 2021.

(p5.1) Given that the UV radiation, desiccation, and high salinity impacted organisms such as Eoentophysalis that lived in peritidal environments during the Proterozoic eon (Butterfield, 2015), the production of abundant EPS in response to these environmental stresses likely contributed to the early silicification of Proterozoic cyanobacteria in these environments.
## (s9) | Carbonate precipitation in modern microbial systems
(p9.0) Carbonate surrounds many of the fossiliferous chert formations from Proterozoic tidal environments. Although it does not preserve cellular shapes and structures with the same detail as chert, early diagenetic microcrystalline or micritic carbonate (calcite, aragonite, or dolomite) and even carbonate precursors that have been replaced by dolomite do preserve kerogen and microbial lamination [e.g., Balbirini Dolomite (Oehler, 1978); Table 1]. As such, the spatial and temporal connections between chert and carbonate and the microbial-environmental interactions that contributed to the early diagenetic mineral precipitation deserve attention.
## (s10) | Biosignatures in supratidal and subtidal carbonate
(p10.0) Whether early diagenetic dolomite, high Mg-calcite, or calcite replaced by dolomite, Proterozoic chert-hosting carbonate frequently preserved evidence of microbial colonization in the form of stratiform, pustular, and sometimes tufted microbial mats with organic-rich laminae (Table 1). In many supratidal formations, these carbonate-hosted laminae extend into the fossil-bearing cherts,

(p10.1) where body fossils are also preserved. For example, in the Belcher Island Group and Balbirini Dolomite and some other formations (Table 1), pustular microbial lamination contains densely packed organic matter in the carbonate regions and occurs within millimeters to centimeters of the chert nodules and lenses ( Figure 10) (Hofmann, 1975;Oehler, 1978). Many other formations similarly contain organic-rich, microbially laminated regions in the dolomite and other carbonates (Table 1). In the Bitter Springs Formation, several types of dense organic-rich laminations have been described.

(p10.2) Most are hosted within chert, but dense organic lamination that exhibits a billowy texture is preserved within both fine crystalline chert and dolomite (Knoll & Golubic, 1979). Fossils are generally absent from dolomite in supratidal deposits, but some formations do contain rare and poorly preserved fossils in the dolomite alongside the chert (Oehler, 1978).
## (s11) | OUTLO O K
(p11.0) The microbial ability to mediate mineral formation in modern en- Proterozoic peritidal-to-subtidal environments (Butterfield, 2015), and the fossil record as we know it. The combined insights from experiments and the fossil record motivate continuing studies of how diversity of microbial chemistries, lifestyles, and stress responses, as well as interactions among specific organisms and the environment can help account for the range of preservation modes and lithologies that we observe in the rock record.

(p11.1) Insights from experimental taphonomy and environmental studies (Bischoff et al., 2020;Bontognali et al., 2010;Gérard et al., 2018;Moore et al., 2021;Perri et al., 2018;Souza-Egipsy et al., 2005) can be combined with analyses of fossil materials to identify specific mechanisms of fossilization and microbial-environmental interactions that characterized past environments. For example, a recent study of Proterozoic fossil assemblages tested the predictions of EPS-and cation-mediated silicification  by mapping the distribution of cations associated with organic matter in Proterozoic cherts . These analyses revealed that kerogen preserved in the chert is consistently enriched in Ca and Mg and embedded with cation-rich nanophases . Based on the findings of taphonomy experiments, these enrichments can be attributed to binding of cations in microbial EPS and the cation bridging process that mediates silica precipitation around organic matter (Bischoff et al., 2020;Bontognali et al., 2010;Gérard et al., 2018;Moore et al., 2021;Perri et al., 2018;Souza-Egipsy et al., 2005).

(p11.2) The combination of experimental fossilization and spatially resolved elemental and molecular analyses of ancient organic matter provides both a mechanistic understanding of organic preservation and a means of recognizing processes that enabled organic preservation in past environments. This approach provides a path toward constraining chemical conditions such as salinity, dissolved ion concentrations, and pH in Proterozoic environments from the combined records of silica and carbonate minerals. These approaches can also be combined with comparative genomic, ecological, and physiological studies that explore the evolution of different microbial surfaces, metabolisms, and stress responses through time and determine if and how these stress responses contributed to mineral forming processes, geochemical cycles, and fossilization. Through these combined approaches, we may also better understand taphonomic biases-why some organisms tend to be preserved in certain environments while others do not-and address the gaps in our knowledge of past biospheres that arise from taphonomic biases. Once we uncover the relationships between microbes and their environments, the processes that lead to mineral formation, and the mechanisms that enable preservation, we can begin to paint a more complete picture of life that colonized and shaped Proterozoic shallow marine environments, how that life influenced biogeochemical cycles of metals, silica, and carbon in benthic ecosystems, and the coevolution of these ecosystems and environments through time.
