# Understanding common population markers for SARS-CoV-2 RNA normalization in wastewater -A review

CorpusID: 258740197 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b493ff419360e76cc01473138fb744d16c9bea1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b493ff419360e76cc01473138fb744d16c9bea1)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s5) Creatinine
(p5.0) Creatinine is a chemical by-product of energy-producing processes in muscles. Creatinine is excreted into the urine and is therefore present in wastewater. Creatinine is often used as a marker for estimating the total amount of urine in wastewater samples, as the excretion of creatinine is relatively constant across individuals. It is common in wastewater and is easy to quantify, but it degrades readily, so the stability of creatinine has been a concern. Creatinine can be monitored using LC-MS after removing particulate matter and spiking with internal standard (Creatinine-d3). Creatinine might be useful as a biomarker for infection in clinical samples (Pourakbari et al., 2021), but the ease at which it degrades in wastewater makes it worrisome to be used as a population indicator (Choi et al., 2018). Stability issues with creatinine can be solved by acidification, preservation, and even filtration (Chen et al., 2014).

(p5.1) Patients with elevated creatinine kinase have been diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2 positive cases through reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) (Chan et al., 2020), which shows a relationship between the presence of increased creatinine in wastewater and SARS-CoV-2.
## (s8) Nicotine/cotinine
(p8.0) Many people worldwide widely consume tobacco, and its main stimulant ingredient is the alkaloid nicotine. Nicotine is a plant-derived drug in everyday use worldwide, while cotinine is a by-product of the oxidative enzymatic metabolism of nicotine in the liver (Buerge et al., 2008;Mackuľak et al., 2015). Nicotine metabolites might give an accurate representation of the population than nicotine itself because the higher concentration of nicotine in wastewater has been reported to have originated from multiple sources rather than human waste (Senta et al., 2015). Similarly, Cotinine (one of the nicotine metabolites) has a longer half-life (18-20 h) than nicotine (half-life, 1-2 h) and is therefore a more reliable chemical tracer for tracking tobacco use. An agreement has been reported between nicotine metabolites and the population size (Senta et al., 2015). However, no attempt has been made to normalize SARS-CoV-2 RNA with nicotine or its metabolites.
## (s10) 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid
(p10.0) 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) is a serotonin metabolite with high daily excretion rates and therefore was proposed as a biomarker of the population for data normalization (Chen et al., 2014). SARS-CoV-2 RNA normalized with 5-HIAA has been found to have a strong correlation (r > 0.9) with the cumulative incidence of COVID19 cases (Gudra et al., 2022). 5-HIAA was stable in wastewater and can readily be analysed with LC-MS . However, another group reported that it degrades rapidly in untreated wastewater (Chen et al., 2014). It reduced 3 times a week in wastewater at room temperature but stable at pH 2 when stored below 4 • C (Jang et al., 2019). Another study reported a day-to-day variation in the load of 5-HIAA (Gudra et al., 2022). The variation in the day-to-day load of 5-HIAA might not be due to the stability of the compound but to population dynamics or the variability in the excretion rate by the discharging population (Gracia-Lor et al., 2017). Furthermore, 5 -HIAA excretion might vary because of disease or diet, such as nuts or salts consumption (Gracia-Lor et al., 2017).

(p10.1) However, there is an argument that 5-HIAA concentration excreted is not habit or lifestyle-dependent (Gudra et al., 2022). It is important to note that an average healthy individual has a consistent excretion rate of 3 μg/day (Choi et al., 2018). Another study showed that 5-HIAA excreted varied from 103 × 10 3 μg/day to 17 × 10 3 μg/day in two cities (Gudra et al., 2022). A similar observation was reported in Valencia, where the concentration varied between 5.5 and 14.3 μg/L (Jang et al., 2019). Since the excretion rate might vary because of infection, the variation in the weekly load of 5-HIAA might not accurately represent the discharging population. Interestingly 5-HIAA varied between weekdays and weekends, which correlates moderately with the movement of people (Gudra et al., 2022).
## (s11) Androstenedione
(p11.0) Androstenedione is a sex steroid hormone and has been reported in wastewater at a concentration from 15 ± 5-55 ± 7 (Baalbaki et al., 2017), 80 ± 6.3-93.5 ± 6.8 ng/L (Esperanza et al., 2007), 270 ± 132 ng/L and (Chang et al., 2011). However, it is not stable in untreated wastewater and degrades rapidly within 24 h (Chen et al., 2014;Thai et al., 2019). Its concentration was reported to be close to the method detection limit of the analytical instrument and thus could not be quantified with reasonable certainty (Esperanza et al., 2007).

(p11.1) It is lipophilic (log K ow 2.75 (Baalbaki et al., 2017),); hence direct injection into LC-MS is probably not the most useful or practical analytical approach. So, a study used large-volume injection LC-MS (Backe et al., 2011). In brief, wastewater samples were centrifuged at 1625 x G for 15 min. Supernatant aliquots were transferred into glass autosampler vials and were spiked with stable-isotope internal standard (D3-Stan). Injection volumes of 1800 μL were employed for wastewater influent and effluent (Backe et al., 2011).

(p11.2) Steroid hormones are frequently extracted with SPE; for example, C-18 SPE disks were employed for androstenedione extraction after filtration and spiking with mesterolone (surrogate standard). Then extracts were subjected to the derivatization step and analysed by gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (GC/MS/MS) (Kolodziej et al., 2003). However, Chen et al. (2014) employed the UCT™ XRDAH cartridge in SPE/LC-MS method for quantification of androstenedione. Both cotinine and androstenedione were extracted following the same protocol, but methanol was used to elute androstenedione and androstenolone-d5 (neutral fraction), while cotinine and cotinine-d3 (basic fraction) was eluted with a mixture of 96% dichloromethane: isopropanol (80:20) and 4% ammonia (Chen et al., 2014). Still, another group used the Oasis HLB cartridge and preconditioned it with ethyl acetate, acetonitrile, and distilled water (Chang et al., 2011). Rinse with distilled water and dry after loading the wastewater spiked with surrogate standard, then extracted with ethyl acetate. The ethyl acetate extracts were dried and resuspended with ethyl acetate and hexane. Clean-up was employed in this research despite the targeted quantification instrument being LC-MS. This clean-up was done on silica cartridges, preconditioned with water-saturated ethyl acetate and hexane/ethyl acetate, and rinsed with hexane/ethyl acetate. The reconstituted extract was loaded on the cartridge and eluted with hexane/ethyl acetate. The final extract was then dried and reconstituted with methanol. This additional step employed in this research is unnecessary with LC-MS because most of the latest equipment is very sensitive.

(p11.3) In another study, androstenedione was extracted from 1 L of wastewater by solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Esperanza et al., 2004). Cartridges used were superclean Envi-18 (Supelco) prepacked with 500 mg of solid phase material. The cartridges were preconditioned with methanol and distilled water. A total of 1% methanol was added to all samples. Surrogate standards were spiked prior to extraction. Samples were loaded onto the cartridges at a flow rate between 5 and 10 mL/min. Cartridges were then washed with distilled water and dried for 15 min by applying a vacuum. Androstenedione was eluted with methanol and collected in a silanized conical bottom culture tube. The extract was cleaned up using SPE neutral alumina (Supelco) cartridges containing 1 g of the adsorbent to remove interferences during GC analysis (Esperanza et al., 2004). Alumina cartridges were preconditioned with 30% methanol in acetone and 20% dichloromethane (DCM) in isooctane. C-18 extracts were taken to dryness using a gentle nitrogen stream while the tubes were submerged in a bath at 40 • C. Extracts were reconstituted in 20% DCM in isooctane and quantitatively transferred to the cartridges. The cartridges were washed with hexanes and eluted with 30% methanol in acetone. The cleaned-up extracts were then concentrated to approximately 1 mL under nitrogen and transferred quantitatively to 2-mL reaction vials for derivatization.

(p11.4) LC-MS is a faster method of quantification because derivatization step can be avoided. For example, before injection in the GC-MS, androstenedione was derivatized in two steps (Esperanza et al., 2004(Esperanza et al., , 2007. First, the extracts were taken to dryness under a gentle nitrogen stream at 40 • C. The dried residue was reconstituted with 15% (w/v) MOX in pyridine. The reaction occurs in a heating block maintained at 70 • C for 4 h. After completion of the first reaction, vials were cooled, and excess reactant was evaporated under a nitrogen stream. Samples of pyridine and 100 μL of 10% TMCS in BSTFA were added, and vials were returned to the reaction block. The reaction was left for a long time over the reaction block because conversion of the hydroxyl groups requires a long hour of heating (15 h at 70 • C). The contents of the vials were taken once more to dryness, and the derivatized target compounds were reconstituted in injection solvent, 20% DCM in hexanes plus 5% (v/v) BSTFA. Before injection, 250 ng of each internal standard, 5 R-androstane and 5 R-cholestane, was added to each vial. The derivatization step involves using additional chemicals, which are costly and waste time. Nevertheless, one-step derivatization using MTBS-TFA is becoming popular because it is quicker than 2-steps, but it still involves additional cost.

(p11.5) Using appropriate stationary and mobile phase is essential to avoid mass loss because of instrumentation errors. The recovery was greater than 78% when the C18 column was employed as a stationary phase, with methanol and water containing 0.1% formic acid chosen as mobile phases (Chang et al., 2011). Another group had replaced formic acid with acetic acid as the second mobile phase .

(p11.6) It can be detected in positive ion mode; the precursor ion was 482, and the daughter ions were 467, 268 and 253 (Kolodziej et al., 2003(Kolodziej et al., , 2004. The LOD and LOQ are 0.1 and 0.3 ng/L, indicating GC/MS/MS is a good instrument for its detection since the signal-to-noise ratio was greater than 6 (Kolodziej et al., 2004). It has been reported that no significant ionization suppression was observed from the analysis of androstenedione (Chang et al., 2011). Thus, MS/MS will be a good detector for androstenedione.

(p11.7) Androstenedione is a sex steroid hormone and has been reported in wastewater at a concentration from 15 ± 5-55 ± 7 (Baalbaki et al., 2017), 80 ± 6.3-93.5 ± 6.8 ng/L (Esperanza et al., 2007), 270 ± 132 ng/L and (Chang et al., 2011). However, it is not stable in untreated wastewater and degrades rapidly within 24 h (Chen et al., 2014;Thai et al., 2019). Its concentration was reported to be close to the method detection limit of the analytical instrument and thus could not be quantified with reasonable certainty (Esperanza et al., 2007).

(p11.8) It is lipophilic (log K ow 2.75 (Baalbaki et al., 2017),); hence direct injection into LC-MS is probably not the most useful or practical analytical approach. So, a study used large-volume injection LC-MS (Backe et al., 2011). In brief, wastewater samples were centrifuged at 1625 x G for 15 min. Supernatant aliquots were transferred into glass autosampler vials and were spiked with stable-isotope internal standard (D3-Stan). Injection volumes of 1800 μL were employed for wastewater influent and effluent (Backe et al., 2011).

(p11.9) Steroid hormones are frequently extracted with SPE; for example, C-18 SPE disks were employed for androstenedione extraction after filtration and spiking with mesterolone (surrogate standard). Then extracts were subjected to the derivatization step and analysed by gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (GC/MS/MS) (Kolodziej et al., 2003). However, Chen et al. (2014) employed the UCT™ XRDAH cartridge in SPE/LC-MS method for quantification of androstenedione. Both cotinine and androstenedione were extracted following the same protocol, but methanol was used to elute androstenedione and androstenolone-d5 (neutral fraction), while cotinine and cotinine-d3 (basic fraction) was eluted with a mixture of 96% dichloromethane: isopropanol (80:20) and 4% ammonia (Chen et al., 2014). Still, another group used the Oasis HLB cartridge and preconditioned it with ethyl acetate, acetonitrile, and distilled water (Chang et al., 2011). Rinse with distilled water and dry after loading the wastewater spiked with surrogate standard, then extracted with ethyl acetate. The ethyl acetate extracts were dried and resuspended with ethyl acetate and hexane. Clean-up was employed in this research despite the targeted quantification instrument being LC-MS. This clean-up was done on silica cartridges, preconditioned with water-saturated ethyl acetate and hexane/ethyl acetate, and rinsed with hexane/ethyl acetate. The reconstituted extract was loaded on the cartridge and eluted with hexane/ethyl acetate. The final extract was then dried and reconstituted with methanol. This additional step employed in this research is unnecessary with LC-MS because most of the latest equipment is very sensitive.

(p11.10) In another study, androstenedione was extracted from 1 L of wastewater by solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Esperanza et al., 2004). Cartridges used were superclean Envi-18 (Supelco) prepacked with 500 mg of solid phase material. The cartridges were preconditioned with methanol and distilled water. A total of 1% methanol was added to all samples. Surrogate standards were spiked prior to extraction. Samples were loaded onto the cartridges at a flow rate between 5 and 10 mL/min. Cartridges were then washed with distilled water and dried for 15 min by applying a vacuum. Androstenedione was eluted with methanol and collected in a silanized conical bottom culture tube. The extract was cleaned up using SPE neutral alumina (Supelco) cartridges containing 1 g of the adsorbent to remove interferences during GC analysis (Esperanza et al., 2004). Alumina cartridges were preconditioned with 30% methanol in acetone and 20% dichloromethane (DCM) in isooctane. C-18 extracts were taken to dryness using a gentle nitrogen stream while the tubes were submerged in a bath at 40 • C. Extracts were reconstituted in 20% DCM in isooctane and quantitatively transferred to the cartridges. The cartridges were washed with hexanes and eluted with 30% methanol in acetone. The cleaned-up extracts were then concentrated to approximately 1 mL under nitrogen and transferred quantitatively to 2-mL reaction vials for derivatization.

(p11.11) LC-MS is a faster method of quantification because derivatization step can be avoided. For example, before injection in the GC-MS, androstenedione was derivatized in two steps (Esperanza et al., 2004(Esperanza et al., , 2007. First, the extracts were taken to dryness under a gentle nitrogen stream at 40 • C. The dried residue was reconstituted with 15% (w/v) MOX in pyridine. The reaction occurs in a heating block maintained at 70 • C for 4 h. After completion of the first reaction, vials were cooled, and excess reactant was evaporated under a nitrogen stream. Samples of pyridine and 100 μL of 10% TMCS in BSTFA were added, and vials were returned to the reaction block. The reaction was left for a long time over the reaction block because conversion of the hydroxyl groups requires a long hour of heating (15 h at 70 • C). The contents of the vials were taken once more to dryness, and the derivatized target compounds were reconstituted in injection solvent, 20% DCM in hexanes plus 5% (v/v) BSTFA. Before injection, 250 ng of each internal standard, 5 R-androstane and 5 R-cholestane, was added to each vial. The derivatization step involves using additional chemicals, which are costly and waste time. Nevertheless, one-step derivatization using MTBS-TFA is becoming popular because it is quicker than 2-steps, but it still involves additional cost.

(p11.12) Using appropriate stationary and mobile phase is essential to avoid mass loss because of instrumentation errors. The recovery was greater than 78% when the C18 column was employed as a stationary phase, with methanol and water containing 0.1% formic acid chosen as mobile phases (Chang et al., 2011). Another group had replaced formic acid with acetic acid as the second mobile phase .

(p11.13) It can be detected in positive ion mode; the precursor ion was 482, and the daughter ions were 467, 268 and 253 (Kolodziej et al., 2003(Kolodziej et al., , 2004. The LOD and LOQ are 0.1 and 0.3 ng/L, indicating GC/MS/MS is a good instrument for its detection since the signal-to-noise ratio was greater than 6 (Kolodziej et al., 2004). It has been reported that no significant ionization suppression was observed from the analysis of androstenedione (Chang et al., 2011). Thus, MS/MS will be a good detector for androstenedione.
## (s30) Creatinine
(p30.0) Creatinine is a chemical by-product of energy-producing processes in muscles. Creatinine is excreted into the urine and is therefore present in wastewater. Creatinine is often used as a marker for estimating the total amount of urine in wastewater samples, as the excretion of creatinine is relatively constant across individuals. It is common in wastewater and is easy to quantify, but it degrades readily, so the stability of creatinine has been a concern. Creatinine can be monitored using LC-MS after removing particulate matter and spiking with internal standard (Creatinine-d3). Creatinine might be useful as a biomarker for infection in clinical samples (Pourakbari et al., 2021), but the ease at which it degrades in wastewater makes it worrisome to be used as a population indicator (Choi et al., 2018). Stability issues with creatinine can be solved by acidification, preservation, and even filtration (Chen et al., 2014).

(p30.1) Patients with elevated creatinine kinase have been diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2 positive cases through reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) (Chan et al., 2020), which shows a relationship between the presence of increased creatinine in wastewater and SARS-CoV-2.
## (s33) Nicotine/cotinine
(p33.0) Many people worldwide widely consume tobacco, and its main stimulant ingredient is the alkaloid nicotine. Nicotine is a plant-derived drug in everyday use worldwide, while cotinine is a by-product of the oxidative enzymatic metabolism of nicotine in the liver (Buerge et al., 2008;Mackuľak et al., 2015). Nicotine metabolites might give an accurate representation of the population than nicotine itself because the higher concentration of nicotine in wastewater has been reported to have originated from multiple sources rather than human waste (Senta et al., 2015). Similarly, Cotinine (one of the nicotine metabolites) has a longer half-life (18-20 h) than nicotine (half-life, 1-2 h) and is therefore a more reliable chemical tracer for tracking tobacco use. An agreement has been reported between nicotine metabolites and the population size (Senta et al., 2015). However, no attempt has been made to normalize SARS-CoV-2 RNA with nicotine or its metabolites.
## (s35) 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid
(p35.0) 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) is a serotonin metabolite with high daily excretion rates and therefore was proposed as a biomarker of the population for data normalization (Chen et al., 2014). SARS-CoV-2 RNA normalized with 5-HIAA has been found to have a strong correlation (r > 0.9) with the cumulative incidence of COVID19 cases (Gudra et al., 2022). 5-HIAA was stable in wastewater and can readily be analysed with LC-MS . However, another group reported that it degrades rapidly in untreated wastewater (Chen et al., 2014). It reduced 3 times a week in wastewater at room temperature but stable at pH 2 when stored below 4 • C (Jang et al., 2019). Another study reported a day-to-day variation in the load of 5-HIAA (Gudra et al., 2022). The variation in the day-to-day load of 5-HIAA might not be due to the stability of the compound but to population dynamics or the variability in the excretion rate by the discharging population (Gracia-Lor et al., 2017). Furthermore, 5 -HIAA excretion might vary because of disease or diet, such as nuts or salts consumption (Gracia-Lor et al., 2017).

(p35.1) However, there is an argument that 5-HIAA concentration excreted is not habit or lifestyle-dependent (Gudra et al., 2022). It is important to note that an average healthy individual has a consistent excretion rate of 3 μg/day (Choi et al., 2018). Another study showed that 5-HIAA excreted varied from 103 × 10 3 μg/day to 17 × 10 3 μg/day in two cities (Gudra et al., 2022). A similar observation was reported in Valencia, where the concentration varied between 5.5 and 14.3 μg/L (Jang et al., 2019). Since the excretion rate might vary because of infection, the variation in the weekly load of 5-HIAA might not accurately represent the discharging population. Interestingly 5-HIAA varied between weekdays and weekends, which correlates moderately with the movement of people (Gudra et al., 2022).
## (s36) Androstenedione
(p36.0) Androstenedione is a sex steroid hormone and has been reported in wastewater at a concentration from 15 ± 5-55 ± 7 (Baalbaki et al., 2017), 80 ± 6.3-93.5 ± 6.8 ng/L (Esperanza et al., 2007), 270 ± 132 ng/L and (Chang et al., 2011). However, it is not stable in untreated wastewater and degrades rapidly within 24 h (Chen et al., 2014;Thai et al., 2019). Its concentration was reported to be close to the method detection limit of the analytical instrument and thus could not be quantified with reasonable certainty (Esperanza et al., 2007).

(p36.1) It is lipophilic (log K ow 2.75 (Baalbaki et al., 2017),); hence direct injection into LC-MS is probably not the most useful or practical analytical approach. So, a study used large-volume injection LC-MS (Backe et al., 2011). In brief, wastewater samples were centrifuged at 1625 x G for 15 min. Supernatant aliquots were transferred into glass autosampler vials and were spiked with stable-isotope internal standard (D3-Stan). Injection volumes of 1800 μL were employed for wastewater influent and effluent (Backe et al., 2011).

(p36.2) Steroid hormones are frequently extracted with SPE; for example, C-18 SPE disks were employed for androstenedione extraction after filtration and spiking with mesterolone (surrogate standard). Then extracts were subjected to the derivatization step and analysed by gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (GC/MS/MS) (Kolodziej et al., 2003). However, Chen et al. (2014) employed the UCT™ XRDAH cartridge in SPE/LC-MS method for quantification of androstenedione. Both cotinine and androstenedione were extracted following the same protocol, but methanol was used to elute androstenedione and androstenolone-d5 (neutral fraction), while cotinine and cotinine-d3 (basic fraction) was eluted with a mixture of 96% dichloromethane: isopropanol (80:20) and 4% ammonia (Chen et al., 2014). Still, another group used the Oasis HLB cartridge and preconditioned it with ethyl acetate, acetonitrile, and distilled water (Chang et al., 2011). Rinse with distilled water and dry after loading the wastewater spiked with surrogate standard, then extracted with ethyl acetate. The ethyl acetate extracts were dried and resuspended with ethyl acetate and hexane. Clean-up was employed in this research despite the targeted quantification instrument being LC-MS. This clean-up was done on silica cartridges, preconditioned with water-saturated ethyl acetate and hexane/ethyl acetate, and rinsed with hexane/ethyl acetate. The reconstituted extract was loaded on the cartridge and eluted with hexane/ethyl acetate. The final extract was then dried and reconstituted with methanol. This additional step employed in this research is unnecessary with LC-MS because most of the latest equipment is very sensitive.

(p36.3) In another study, androstenedione was extracted from 1 L of wastewater by solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Esperanza et al., 2004). Cartridges used were superclean Envi-18 (Supelco) prepacked with 500 mg of solid phase material. The cartridges were preconditioned with methanol and distilled water. A total of 1% methanol was added to all samples. Surrogate standards were spiked prior to extraction. Samples were loaded onto the cartridges at a flow rate between 5 and 10 mL/min. Cartridges were then washed with distilled water and dried for 15 min by applying a vacuum. Androstenedione was eluted with methanol and collected in a silanized conical bottom culture tube. The extract was cleaned up using SPE neutral alumina (Supelco) cartridges containing 1 g of the adsorbent to remove interferences during GC analysis (Esperanza et al., 2004). Alumina cartridges were preconditioned with 30% methanol in acetone and 20% dichloromethane (DCM) in isooctane. C-18 extracts were taken to dryness using a gentle nitrogen stream while the tubes were submerged in a bath at 40 • C. Extracts were reconstituted in 20% DCM in isooctane and quantitatively transferred to the cartridges. The cartridges were washed with hexanes and eluted with 30% methanol in acetone. The cleaned-up extracts were then concentrated to approximately 1 mL under nitrogen and transferred quantitatively to 2-mL reaction vials for derivatization.

(p36.4) LC-MS is a faster method of quantification because derivatization step can be avoided. For example, before injection in the GC-MS, androstenedione was derivatized in two steps (Esperanza et al., 2004(Esperanza et al., , 2007. First, the extracts were taken to dryness under a gentle nitrogen stream at 40 • C. The dried residue was reconstituted with 15% (w/v) MOX in pyridine. The reaction occurs in a heating block maintained at 70 • C for 4 h. After completion of the first reaction, vials were cooled, and excess reactant was evaporated under a nitrogen stream. Samples of pyridine and 100 μL of 10% TMCS in BSTFA were added, and vials were returned to the reaction block. The reaction was left for a long time over the reaction block because conversion of the hydroxyl groups requires a long hour of heating (15 h at 70 • C). The contents of the vials were taken once more to dryness, and the derivatized target compounds were reconstituted in injection solvent, 20% DCM in hexanes plus 5% (v/v) BSTFA. Before injection, 250 ng of each internal standard, 5 R-androstane and 5 R-cholestane, was added to each vial. The derivatization step involves using additional chemicals, which are costly and waste time. Nevertheless, one-step derivatization using MTBS-TFA is becoming popular because it is quicker than 2-steps, but it still involves additional cost.

(p36.5) Using appropriate stationary and mobile phase is essential to avoid mass loss because of instrumentation errors. The recovery was greater than 78% when the C18 column was employed as a stationary phase, with methanol and water containing 0.1% formic acid chosen as mobile phases (Chang et al., 2011). Another group had replaced formic acid with acetic acid as the second mobile phase .

(p36.6) It can be detected in positive ion mode; the precursor ion was 482, and the daughter ions were 467, 268 and 253 (Kolodziej et al., 2003(Kolodziej et al., , 2004. The LOD and LOQ are 0.1 and 0.3 ng/L, indicating GC/MS/MS is a good instrument for its detection since the signal-to-noise ratio was greater than 6 (Kolodziej et al., 2004). It has been reported that no significant ionization suppression was observed from the analysis of androstenedione (Chang et al., 2011). Thus, MS/MS will be a good detector for androstenedione.

(p36.7) Androstenedione is a sex steroid hormone and has been reported in wastewater at a concentration from 15 ± 5-55 ± 7 (Baalbaki et al., 2017), 80 ± 6.3-93.5 ± 6.8 ng/L (Esperanza et al., 2007), 270 ± 132 ng/L and (Chang et al., 2011). However, it is not stable in untreated wastewater and degrades rapidly within 24 h (Chen et al., 2014;Thai et al., 2019). Its concentration was reported to be close to the method detection limit of the analytical instrument and thus could not be quantified with reasonable certainty (Esperanza et al., 2007).

(p36.8) It is lipophilic (log K ow 2.75 (Baalbaki et al., 2017),); hence direct injection into LC-MS is probably not the most useful or practical analytical approach. So, a study used large-volume injection LC-MS (Backe et al., 2011). In brief, wastewater samples were centrifuged at 1625 x G for 15 min. Supernatant aliquots were transferred into glass autosampler vials and were spiked with stable-isotope internal standard (D3-Stan). Injection volumes of 1800 μL were employed for wastewater influent and effluent (Backe et al., 2011).

(p36.9) Steroid hormones are frequently extracted with SPE; for example, C-18 SPE disks were employed for androstenedione extraction after filtration and spiking with mesterolone (surrogate standard). Then extracts were subjected to the derivatization step and analysed by gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (GC/MS/MS) (Kolodziej et al., 2003). However, Chen et al. (2014) employed the UCT™ XRDAH cartridge in SPE/LC-MS method for quantification of androstenedione. Both cotinine and androstenedione were extracted following the same protocol, but methanol was used to elute androstenedione and androstenolone-d5 (neutral fraction), while cotinine and cotinine-d3 (basic fraction) was eluted with a mixture of 96% dichloromethane: isopropanol (80:20) and 4% ammonia (Chen et al., 2014). Still, another group used the Oasis HLB cartridge and preconditioned it with ethyl acetate, acetonitrile, and distilled water (Chang et al., 2011). Rinse with distilled water and dry after loading the wastewater spiked with surrogate standard, then extracted with ethyl acetate. The ethyl acetate extracts were dried and resuspended with ethyl acetate and hexane. Clean-up was employed in this research despite the targeted quantification instrument being LC-MS. This clean-up was done on silica cartridges, preconditioned with water-saturated ethyl acetate and hexane/ethyl acetate, and rinsed with hexane/ethyl acetate. The reconstituted extract was loaded on the cartridge and eluted with hexane/ethyl acetate. The final extract was then dried and reconstituted with methanol. This additional step employed in this research is unnecessary with LC-MS because most of the latest equipment is very sensitive.

(p36.10) In another study, androstenedione was extracted from 1 L of wastewater by solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Esperanza et al., 2004). Cartridges used were superclean Envi-18 (Supelco) prepacked with 500 mg of solid phase material. The cartridges were preconditioned with methanol and distilled water. A total of 1% methanol was added to all samples. Surrogate standards were spiked prior to extraction. Samples were loaded onto the cartridges at a flow rate between 5 and 10 mL/min. Cartridges were then washed with distilled water and dried for 15 min by applying a vacuum. Androstenedione was eluted with methanol and collected in a silanized conical bottom culture tube. The extract was cleaned up using SPE neutral alumina (Supelco) cartridges containing 1 g of the adsorbent to remove interferences during GC analysis (Esperanza et al., 2004). Alumina cartridges were preconditioned with 30% methanol in acetone and 20% dichloromethane (DCM) in isooctane. C-18 extracts were taken to dryness using a gentle nitrogen stream while the tubes were submerged in a bath at 40 • C. Extracts were reconstituted in 20% DCM in isooctane and quantitatively transferred to the cartridges. The cartridges were washed with hexanes and eluted with 30% methanol in acetone. The cleaned-up extracts were then concentrated to approximately 1 mL under nitrogen and transferred quantitatively to 2-mL reaction vials for derivatization.

(p36.11) LC-MS is a faster method of quantification because derivatization step can be avoided. For example, before injection in the GC-MS, androstenedione was derivatized in two steps (Esperanza et al., 2004(Esperanza et al., , 2007. First, the extracts were taken to dryness under a gentle nitrogen stream at 40 • C. The dried residue was reconstituted with 15% (w/v) MOX in pyridine. The reaction occurs in a heating block maintained at 70 • C for 4 h. After completion of the first reaction, vials were cooled, and excess reactant was evaporated under a nitrogen stream. Samples of pyridine and 100 μL of 10% TMCS in BSTFA were added, and vials were returned to the reaction block. The reaction was left for a long time over the reaction block because conversion of the hydroxyl groups requires a long hour of heating (15 h at 70 • C). The contents of the vials were taken once more to dryness, and the derivatized target compounds were reconstituted in injection solvent, 20% DCM in hexanes plus 5% (v/v) BSTFA. Before injection, 250 ng of each internal standard, 5 R-androstane and 5 R-cholestane, was added to each vial. The derivatization step involves using additional chemicals, which are costly and waste time. Nevertheless, one-step derivatization using MTBS-TFA is becoming popular because it is quicker than 2-steps, but it still involves additional cost.

(p36.12) Using appropriate stationary and mobile phase is essential to avoid mass loss because of instrumentation errors. The recovery was greater than 78% when the C18 column was employed as a stationary phase, with methanol and water containing 0.1% formic acid chosen as mobile phases (Chang et al., 2011). Another group had replaced formic acid with acetic acid as the second mobile phase .

(p36.13) It can be detected in positive ion mode; the precursor ion was 482, and the daughter ions were 467, 268 and 253 (Kolodziej et al., 2003(Kolodziej et al., , 2004. The LOD and LOQ are 0.1 and 0.3 ng/L, indicating GC/MS/MS is a good instrument for its detection since the signal-to-noise ratio was greater than 6 (Kolodziej et al., 2004). It has been reported that no significant ionization suppression was observed from the analysis of androstenedione (Chang et al., 2011). Thus, MS/MS will be a good detector for androstenedione.
