# Interventional metabology: A review of bariatric arterial embolization and endovascular denervation for treating metabolic disorders

CorpusID: 259844319 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0e5b6e5beeb3117a7c38407377817edab4f0a9d3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0e5b6e5beeb3117a7c38407377817edab4f0a9d3)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) | INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) The prevalence of obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is increasing globally, 1,2 with the two conditions sharing essential pathophysiological mechanisms. Obesity is associated with insulin resistance and increased lipid metabolic abnormality, making it one of the major driving factors of the T2DM epidemic. 3 T2DM is responsible for 90% of diabetes-related mortality and disability worldwide. 2 Although there are various therapeutic strategies for obesity and T2DM, including bariatric surgeries, pharmacotherapies, and lifestyle modification, their efficacy is limited in a number of patients.

(p0.1) Interventional radiology (IR) uses imaging modalities to guide minimally invasive procedures, thus reducing the complications associated with traditional surgery. IR has recently been introduced as a treatment for metabolic disorders, with bariatric arterial embolization (BAE) and endovascular denervation (EDN) emerging as two novel interventional procedures. This review aims to provide the latest evidence for these approaches.
## (s1) | BARIATRIC EMBOLIZATION
(p1.0) Behavioral modification, pharmacotherapy, and bariatric surgery are the main therapeutic approaches to obesity, with behavioral modification being the first-line treatment, 4 supplemented by pharmacotherapy. 5 However, their long-term efficacy is limited. 6,7 Although bariatric surgery is effective for obesity and has a high potentiality in T2DM treatment, 8,9 a number of individuals are ineligible because of their body mass index (BMI). 10 Furthermore, its invasiveness may lead to intra-and postoperative problems. 11 Other nonpharmaceutical therapies such as endoscopy and interventional bariatric and metabolic therapies offer more options to manage metabolic disorders.
## (s3) | Other metabolic effects of BAE
(p3.0) Weight loss improves glycemic control, 45,46 and several studies explored the metabolic effect of BAE. In a prospective study, BAE improved glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) from 6% to 4.7% at 6 months post procedure in prediabetic patients. 33 Meanwhile, Weiss et al 35 reported a decrease in HbA1c at 12 months after BAE, although the improvements in glycemic control were independent of weight reduction. These findings revealed that BAE has the potential for glycemic control and that there may be other mechanisms apart from weight loss contributing to the improvements.

(p3.1) However, several concerns require resolution. First, although minor ulceration is a confirmed adverse event of BAE, whether it will cause functional changes such as gastric emptying and gastric acid secretion requires clarification. Second, although the underlying mechanism of BAE is currently considered to be ghrelin inhibition, the degree of weight reduction is not always correlated with ghrelin reduction. Finally, the potential role of BAE in glycemic control and its underlying mechanism requires further exploration. Recently, our team conducted a canine model experiment and found that, in addition to weight loss, which is one of the hypoglycemic mechanisms, BAE may contribute to delayed gastric emptying and therefore improve postprandial glucose excursion (unpublished). Despite this, further animal experiments and clinical trials are necessary before BAE becomes a widely used approach to treating morbid obesity and related metabolic disorders.
## (s4) | ENDOVASCULAR DENERVATION
(p4.0) The primary goal of treating T2DM is to control glycemia. Modulating the sympathetic nervous system (SNS), whose overactivation contributes to metabolic disorders, is a potential therapeutic strategy. Catheter-based renal denervation (RDN) is a novel procedure that directly targets the SNS, but its efficacy in treating T2DM is inconsistent and not reproducible across studies. To target hepatic and islet innervation instead of renal nerves, we introduced denervation at the celiac and hepatic arteries, known as EDN, and explored the safety and efficacy in treating T2DM. 47 3.1 | The rationale for EDN T2DM is often accompanied by SNS overactivation, exacerbating hyperglycemia and increasing the risk of F I G U R E 1 Bariatric embolization. The left gastric artery is the feeding artery of the fundus and lesser curvature. Embolic agents are delivered through the catheter to achieve embolization. CHA, common hepatic artery; LGA, left gastric artery; SA, splenic artery.
## (s6) | The preliminary clinical evidence of EDN
(p6.0) Based on the preclinical evidence, we applied a minimally invasive, catheter-based EDN procedure at the celiac artery and aorta around the celiac artery to treat T2DM. 47 We registered the first-in-human study on ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT04086043) and reported the feasibility and safety of EDN in 11 patients with T2DM, as well as its initial efficacy. In our study, both HbA1c levels and homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance were significantly reduced at 6 months (9.9% vs. 8 However, the metabolic benefits were not associated with changes in body weight, body mass index, or waist F I G U R E 2 Endovascular denervation. The sympathetic nerves originating from the celiac ganglia run along the feeding arteries of the abdominal organs. The sixelectrode radiofrequency catheter is placed at the celiac artery to achieve denervation of the liver and islets. AA, abdominal artery; CA, celiac artery; CG, celiac ganglion; CHA, common hepatic artery. circumference (p > .05). Our study provides the first evidence of the clinical efficacy of EDN in treating T2DM. As a pilot study with a relatively simple design, we further initiated well-designed studies to validate the efficacy and elucidate the clinical mechanism (NCT05631561, NCT05673668). Before more applications of EDN, it is important to address several issues. First, the dose-response relationship requires clarification. Research has been conducted to study the optimal ablation parameters in RDN, and similar extensive data are needed for radiofrequency ablation in the celiac and hepatic arteries. Second, due to the comprehensive innervation of celiac sympathetic nerves, the effects on different organs need to be clearly understood to optimize ablation sites and reduce complications. Last, the long-term effects of EDN have not yet been evaluated. Therefore, further preclinical experiments and clinical trials are still required to fully understand the potential risks and benefits of EDN.
