# Application of named entity recognition method for Indonesian datasets: a review

CorpusID: 255024417 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/941c79b384bc652cca8e8fe5b0e406ae971af713](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/941c79b384bc652cca8e8fe5b0e406ae971af713)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Named entity (NE) was introduced at the sixth message understanding conference (MUC-6). With the introduction of NE, the MUC conference has helped to advance the field of information extraction [1]. NE refers to a proper name that designates a person, location, or organization. For example, there are three NE in the following sentence: "James is a doctoral student in the Faculty of Computer Science at the University of Indonesia." James an NE insofar as it is the name of a person (P); Indonesia refers to a location (L); and the Faculty of Computer Science refers to the organization (O). Named entity recognition (NER) is a procedure that finds, extracts, and automatically classifies named entities from open domains and unstructured texts such as newspaper articles. It then categorizes these NE into predefined types [2]. There are four approaches to NER: i) a rule-based approach, which does not require annotated data because it relies on artificial rules; ii) an unsupervised learning approach; iii) a feature-based supervised learning approach that relies on supervised learning algorithms with careful feature engineering; and iv) a deep-learning-based approach, which automatically finds the required representation for detecting or classifying raw input in an end-to-end manner [3], [4]. NER is a straightforward process for humans because many named entities are self-names, and most of them have initial capital letters and can be easily recognized, but for machines, it is very difficult [5]. Information extraction often uses data available on social media, online news, and e-commerce [3]. Much information can thereby be obtained, including product reviews, analysis, and information extraction. For example, NER research is used for Indonesian news articles [6]. The use of NER is also carried out for the extraction of comments related to flood monitoring and traffic monitoring [7], [8]. On the other hand, the use of this method is also useful for quote identification [9]. The role of language in text-analysis often determines which model is used [10], because not all libraries are available for specific tasks [2].

(p0.1) NER has been applied to a wide variety of tasks [3], but a brief survey of the application of NER to texts in the Indonesian language reveals a total of only 241 documents (accessed December 2021). Meanwhile, the need to perform NER with Indonesian datasets is continuing to grow. Currently, there are libraries and tools available to facilitate machine learning (ML) as it pertains to the use of NE to extract information, but are there enough datasets? To what extent is NER used to extract information on social media and online news in an Indonesian-language context? Not all natural language processing (NLP) functions are available in Indonesian because, unlike in English, the functions that rely on the ML model mentioned above are not directly supported [11], [12].

(p0.2) In addition, another motivation for doing SLR is triggered by the emergence of illegal financial technology (Fintech) problems [13], [14]. Several previous studies on Fintech have been carried out and the main side that can be solved is by monitoring entities on social media [15]. But the challenge is that not all corpus (text set) is available in all languages.

(p0.3) This study looks at research trends in the application of NER to Indonesian datasets, including specific tasks, datasets, method/techniques, and entity labels. Therefore, this article will help facilitate the design of experiments to extract Fintech information on social media and online news. With the hope that it is not only a Fintech platform but can be a proposal for supervision of agencies or organizations based on social media data and online news.

(p0.4) Named entity (NE) was introduced at the sixth message understanding conference (MUC-6). With the introduction of NE, the MUC conference has helped to advance the field of information extraction [1]. NE refers to a proper name that designates a person, location, or organization. For example, there are three NE in the following sentence: "James is a doctoral student in the Faculty of Computer Science at the University of Indonesia." James an NE insofar as it is the name of a person (P); Indonesia refers to a location (L); and the Faculty of Computer Science refers to the organization (O). Named entity recognition (NER) is a procedure that finds, extracts, and automatically classifies named entities from open domains and unstructured texts such as newspaper articles. It then categorizes these NE into predefined types [2]. There are four approaches to NER: i) a rule-based approach, which does not require annotated data because it relies on artificial rules; ii) an unsupervised learning approach; iii) a feature-based supervised learning approach that relies on supervised learning algorithms with careful feature engineering; and iv) a deep-learning-based approach, which automatically finds the required representation for detecting or classifying raw input in an end-to-end manner [3], [4]. NER is a straightforward process for humans because many named entities are self-names, and most of them have initial capital letters and can be easily recognized, but for machines, it is very difficult [5]. Information extraction often uses data available on social media, online news, and e-commerce [3]. Much information can thereby be obtained, including product reviews, analysis, and information extraction. For example, NER research is used for Indonesian news articles [6]. The use of NER is also carried out for the extraction of comments related to flood monitoring and traffic monitoring [7], [8]. On the other hand, the use of this method is also useful for quote identification [9]. The role of language in text-analysis often determines which model is used [10], because not all libraries are available for specific tasks [2].

(p0.5) NER has been applied to a wide variety of tasks [3], but a brief survey of the application of NER to texts in the Indonesian language reveals a total of only 241 documents (accessed December 2021). Meanwhile, the need to perform NER with Indonesian datasets is continuing to grow. Currently, there are libraries and tools available to facilitate machine learning (ML) as it pertains to the use of NE to extract information, but are there enough datasets? To what extent is NER used to extract information on social media and online news in an Indonesian-language context? Not all natural language processing (NLP) functions are available in Indonesian because, unlike in English, the functions that rely on the ML model mentioned above are not directly supported [11], [12].

(p0.6) In addition, another motivation for doing SLR is triggered by the emergence of illegal financial technology (Fintech) problems [13], [14]. Several previous studies on Fintech have been carried out and the main side that can be solved is by monitoring entities on social media [15]. But the challenge is that not all corpus (text set) is available in all languages.

(p0.7) This study looks at research trends in the application of NER to Indonesian datasets, including specific tasks, datasets, method/techniques, and entity labels. Therefore, this article will help facilitate the design of experiments to extract Fintech information on social media and online news. With the hope that it is not only a Fintech platform but can be a proposal for supervision of agencies or organizations based on social media data and online news.
## (s1) METHOD 2.1. Systematic literature review
(p1.0) First, this article presents a SLR of the field of NER research. A SLR aims to collect all research on a particular topic, evaluates it critically, and reaches conclusions that synthesize that research. Then follows a discussion of how NER has been applied to Indonesian texts. SLR has been used in various research domains such as P2P lending [13], Fintech [14], Teaching and learning via webinars [16], supply chain management model [17], and software engineering [18].

(p1.1) A SLR was carried out in three stages: the planning stage, the implementation stage and the reporting stage (see Figure 1). In the first stage, the planning stage is carried out to identify the need for a systematic review of the use of the agile project management (APM) method. At this stage, a review protocol was also developed by setting research questions (RQ) and formulating a boolean search to determine search keywords. This study used the population, intervention, comparison, outcomes, and context (PICOC) strategy to determine the RQ, as shown in Table 1.  There follows the RQ that guided the following analysis: RQ. "What are the trends in the application of NER to extract information from Indonesian online news and social media?" In this study, the search string is ("named-entity recognition" OR NER OR "named entity recognition") AND ("online news" OR "social media") AND (Indonesia* OR Bahasa). According to the research question, the criteria for inclusion and exclusion in Table 2 were used to define the results. In the second stage, this research defines a search strategy, namely selecting a publication database, selection results for research, data extraction and the synthesis process. These processes are sequential processes where each process aims to find the right study to be used in this research. The search and selection process are an elimination process based on the criteria specified in each process.

(p1.2) The authors collected papers from relevant electronic databases such as SCOPUS, ACM, IEEEXplore, and Science Direct, then used Mendeley software to organize the data. Some irrelevant papers were omitted in the first stage of collection based on the title and abstract. The second stage of selection articles is a full-text selection. Figure 2 illustrates the procedure of text-selection. The total number of papers obtained from the four databases was initially 241. Upon completion of the selection procedure, however, only 20 papers remained. The low number of papers is both a challenge to and an opportunity for NER research in an Indonesian context, as few studies have used the "Bahasa" dataset. The third stage is reporting the results and analyzing the results of this review. We mapped research results from previous studies and examined how the experimental process in NER was, what libraries could be used for Indonesian language datasets, how to approach NER, and proposed future research. Table 2. Criteria of selection studies process Inclusion criteria Exclusion criteria The paper studied about NER The paper is not using English Studies published in the last 5 years, between 2016-2021

(p1.3) Not full-text paper The paper being studied is in the form of a journal or proceedings/conference Same papers from different database Papers discussing NER but not the Indonesian text dataset 

(p1.4) First, this article presents a SLR of the field of NER research. A SLR aims to collect all research on a particular topic, evaluates it critically, and reaches conclusions that synthesize that research. Then follows a discussion of how NER has been applied to Indonesian texts. SLR has been used in various research domains such as P2P lending [13], Fintech [14], Teaching and learning via webinars [16], supply chain management model [17], and software engineering [18].

(p1.5) A SLR was carried out in three stages: the planning stage, the implementation stage and the reporting stage (see Figure 1). In the first stage, the planning stage is carried out to identify the need for a systematic review of the use of the agile project management (APM) method. At this stage, a review protocol was also developed by setting research questions (RQ) and formulating a boolean search to determine search keywords. This study used the population, intervention, comparison, outcomes, and context (PICOC) strategy to determine the RQ, as shown in Table 1.  There follows the RQ that guided the following analysis: RQ. "What are the trends in the application of NER to extract information from Indonesian online news and social media?" In this study, the search string is ("named-entity recognition" OR NER OR "named entity recognition") AND ("online news" OR "social media") AND (Indonesia* OR Bahasa). According to the research question, the criteria for inclusion and exclusion in Table 2 were used to define the results. In the second stage, this research defines a search strategy, namely selecting a publication database, selection results for research, data extraction and the synthesis process. These processes are sequential processes where each process aims to find the right study to be used in this research. The search and selection process are an elimination process based on the criteria specified in each process.

(p1.6) The authors collected papers from relevant electronic databases such as SCOPUS, ACM, IEEEXplore, and Science Direct, then used Mendeley software to organize the data. Some irrelevant papers were omitted in the first stage of collection based on the title and abstract. The second stage of selection articles is a full-text selection. Figure 2 illustrates the procedure of text-selection. The total number of papers obtained from the four databases was initially 241. Upon completion of the selection procedure, however, only 20 papers remained. The low number of papers is both a challenge to and an opportunity for NER research in an Indonesian context, as few studies have used the "Bahasa" dataset. The third stage is reporting the results and analyzing the results of this review. We mapped research results from previous studies and examined how the experimental process in NER was, what libraries could be used for Indonesian language datasets, how to approach NER, and proposed future research. Table 2. Criteria of selection studies process Inclusion criteria Exclusion criteria The paper studied about NER The paper is not using English Studies published in the last 5 years, between 2016-2021

(p1.7) Not full-text paper The paper being studied is in the form of a journal or proceedings/conference Same papers from different database Papers discussing NER but not the Indonesian text dataset 
## (s5) SLR results
(p5.0) After investigating the VOSViewer results, we examined 20 articles collected from the ACM, IEEE, ScienceDirect, and SCOPUS portals. The articles were then extracted and mapped according on author, task,  Table 3). It is clear from the table above that several NER studies with Indonesian datasets have been carried out for the following tasks: complaint classification [19], quote identification [9], [20], flood monitoring extraction [7], traffic monitoring [8], [21], tourist attractions [22], zakat [23], lipstick product reviews [24], and various model combination tests for twitter [25]- [28], online news [6], [29]- [31], and Wikipedia [32], [33]. 

(p5.1) After investigating the VOSViewer results, we examined 20 articles collected from the ACM, IEEE, ScienceDirect, and SCOPUS portals. The articles were then extracted and mapped according on author, task,  Table 3). It is clear from the table above that several NER studies with Indonesian datasets have been carried out for the following tasks: complaint classification [19], quote identification [9], [20], flood monitoring extraction [7], traffic monitoring [8], [21], tourist attractions [22], zakat [23], lipstick product reviews [24], and various model combination tests for twitter [25]- [28], online news [6], [29]- [31], and Wikipedia [32], [33]. 
## (s8) Recommendations for illegal Fintech supervision strategies with the NER approach based on social media data and online news
(p8.0) Based on the SLR, new ideas emerge to utilize this method in the era of technological and social media transformation. The digital economy can change society and business's economic activities, from what was originally manual to fully automated. This impacts the provision of financial services by startups and Fintech companies. Currently, Fintech practices in Indonesia are very developed, starting from payments, funding, and Robo-advisors. However, in its implementation, Fintech lending (online lending) received special attention because it caused several problems, namely the emergence of illegal fintech. Unreasonable billing processes, issues of personal data protection, and even moral hazards are the focus of the supervision. In Indonesia, a government website channel is available for illegal Fintech complaints, but people tend to use social media to submit their complaints [15]. With the NER concept described in the previous section and the basics of libraries, POS tagging, and named entities, this research becomes the basis for developing ML models in the early identification of platform names on social media. Figure 6 is our proposed Fintech supervision model with social media data and online news that can be used for further research. 

(p8.1) Based on the SLR, new ideas emerge to utilize this method in the era of technological and social media transformation. The digital economy can change society and business's economic activities, from what was originally manual to fully automated. This impacts the provision of financial services by startups and Fintech companies. Currently, Fintech practices in Indonesia are very developed, starting from payments, funding, and Robo-advisors. However, in its implementation, Fintech lending (online lending) received special attention because it caused several problems, namely the emergence of illegal fintech. Unreasonable billing processes, issues of personal data protection, and even moral hazards are the focus of the supervision. In Indonesia, a government website channel is available for illegal Fintech complaints, but people tend to use social media to submit their complaints [15]. With the NER concept described in the previous section and the basics of libraries, POS tagging, and named entities, this research becomes the basis for developing ML models in the early identification of platform names on social media. Figure 6 is our proposed Fintech supervision model with social media data and online news that can be used for further research. 
## (s21) INTRODUCTION
(p21.0) Named entity (NE) was introduced at the sixth message understanding conference (MUC-6). With the introduction of NE, the MUC conference has helped to advance the field of information extraction [1]. NE refers to a proper name that designates a person, location, or organization. For example, there are three NE in the following sentence: "James is a doctoral student in the Faculty of Computer Science at the University of Indonesia." James an NE insofar as it is the name of a person (P); Indonesia refers to a location (L); and the Faculty of Computer Science refers to the organization (O). Named entity recognition (NER) is a procedure that finds, extracts, and automatically classifies named entities from open domains and unstructured texts such as newspaper articles. It then categorizes these NE into predefined types [2]. There are four approaches to NER: i) a rule-based approach, which does not require annotated data because it relies on artificial rules; ii) an unsupervised learning approach; iii) a feature-based supervised learning approach that relies on supervised learning algorithms with careful feature engineering; and iv) a deep-learning-based approach, which automatically finds the required representation for detecting or classifying raw input in an end-to-end manner [3], [4]. NER is a straightforward process for humans because many named entities are self-names, and most of them have initial capital letters and can be easily recognized, but for machines, it is very difficult [5]. Information extraction often uses data available on social media, online news, and e-commerce [3]. Much information can thereby be obtained, including product reviews, analysis, and information extraction. For example, NER research is used for Indonesian news articles [6]. The use of NER is also carried out for the extraction of comments related to flood monitoring and traffic monitoring [7], [8]. On the other hand, the use of this method is also useful for quote identification [9]. The role of language in text-analysis often determines which model is used [10], because not all libraries are available for specific tasks [2].

(p21.1) NER has been applied to a wide variety of tasks [3], but a brief survey of the application of NER to texts in the Indonesian language reveals a total of only 241 documents (accessed December 2021). Meanwhile, the need to perform NER with Indonesian datasets is continuing to grow. Currently, there are libraries and tools available to facilitate machine learning (ML) as it pertains to the use of NE to extract information, but are there enough datasets? To what extent is NER used to extract information on social media and online news in an Indonesian-language context? Not all natural language processing (NLP) functions are available in Indonesian because, unlike in English, the functions that rely on the ML model mentioned above are not directly supported [11], [12].

(p21.2) In addition, another motivation for doing SLR is triggered by the emergence of illegal financial technology (Fintech) problems [13], [14]. Several previous studies on Fintech have been carried out and the main side that can be solved is by monitoring entities on social media [15]. But the challenge is that not all corpus (text set) is available in all languages.

(p21.3) This study looks at research trends in the application of NER to Indonesian datasets, including specific tasks, datasets, method/techniques, and entity labels. Therefore, this article will help facilitate the design of experiments to extract Fintech information on social media and online news. With the hope that it is not only a Fintech platform but can be a proposal for supervision of agencies or organizations based on social media data and online news.

(p21.4) Named entity (NE) was introduced at the sixth message understanding conference (MUC-6). With the introduction of NE, the MUC conference has helped to advance the field of information extraction [1]. NE refers to a proper name that designates a person, location, or organization. For example, there are three NE in the following sentence: "James is a doctoral student in the Faculty of Computer Science at the University of Indonesia." James an NE insofar as it is the name of a person (P); Indonesia refers to a location (L); and the Faculty of Computer Science refers to the organization (O). Named entity recognition (NER) is a procedure that finds, extracts, and automatically classifies named entities from open domains and unstructured texts such as newspaper articles. It then categorizes these NE into predefined types [2]. There are four approaches to NER: i) a rule-based approach, which does not require annotated data because it relies on artificial rules; ii) an unsupervised learning approach; iii) a feature-based supervised learning approach that relies on supervised learning algorithms with careful feature engineering; and iv) a deep-learning-based approach, which automatically finds the required representation for detecting or classifying raw input in an end-to-end manner [3], [4]. NER is a straightforward process for humans because many named entities are self-names, and most of them have initial capital letters and can be easily recognized, but for machines, it is very difficult [5]. Information extraction often uses data available on social media, online news, and e-commerce [3]. Much information can thereby be obtained, including product reviews, analysis, and information extraction. For example, NER research is used for Indonesian news articles [6]. The use of NER is also carried out for the extraction of comments related to flood monitoring and traffic monitoring [7], [8]. On the other hand, the use of this method is also useful for quote identification [9]. The role of language in text-analysis often determines which model is used [10], because not all libraries are available for specific tasks [2].

(p21.5) NER has been applied to a wide variety of tasks [3], but a brief survey of the application of NER to texts in the Indonesian language reveals a total of only 241 documents (accessed December 2021). Meanwhile, the need to perform NER with Indonesian datasets is continuing to grow. Currently, there are libraries and tools available to facilitate machine learning (ML) as it pertains to the use of NE to extract information, but are there enough datasets? To what extent is NER used to extract information on social media and online news in an Indonesian-language context? Not all natural language processing (NLP) functions are available in Indonesian because, unlike in English, the functions that rely on the ML model mentioned above are not directly supported [11], [12].

(p21.6) In addition, another motivation for doing SLR is triggered by the emergence of illegal financial technology (Fintech) problems [13], [14]. Several previous studies on Fintech have been carried out and the main side that can be solved is by monitoring entities on social media [15]. But the challenge is that not all corpus (text set) is available in all languages.

(p21.7) This study looks at research trends in the application of NER to Indonesian datasets, including specific tasks, datasets, method/techniques, and entity labels. Therefore, this article will help facilitate the design of experiments to extract Fintech information on social media and online news. With the hope that it is not only a Fintech platform but can be a proposal for supervision of agencies or organizations based on social media data and online news.
## (s22) METHOD 2.1. Systematic literature review
(p22.0) First, this article presents a SLR of the field of NER research. A SLR aims to collect all research on a particular topic, evaluates it critically, and reaches conclusions that synthesize that research. Then follows a discussion of how NER has been applied to Indonesian texts. SLR has been used in various research domains such as P2P lending [13], Fintech [14], Teaching and learning via webinars [16], supply chain management model [17], and software engineering [18].

(p22.1) A SLR was carried out in three stages: the planning stage, the implementation stage and the reporting stage (see Figure 1). In the first stage, the planning stage is carried out to identify the need for a systematic review of the use of the agile project management (APM) method. At this stage, a review protocol was also developed by setting research questions (RQ) and formulating a boolean search to determine search keywords. This study used the population, intervention, comparison, outcomes, and context (PICOC) strategy to determine the RQ, as shown in Table 1.  There follows the RQ that guided the following analysis: RQ. "What are the trends in the application of NER to extract information from Indonesian online news and social media?" In this study, the search string is ("named-entity recognition" OR NER OR "named entity recognition") AND ("online news" OR "social media") AND (Indonesia* OR Bahasa). According to the research question, the criteria for inclusion and exclusion in Table 2 were used to define the results. In the second stage, this research defines a search strategy, namely selecting a publication database, selection results for research, data extraction and the synthesis process. These processes are sequential processes where each process aims to find the right study to be used in this research. The search and selection process are an elimination process based on the criteria specified in each process.

(p22.2) The authors collected papers from relevant electronic databases such as SCOPUS, ACM, IEEEXplore, and Science Direct, then used Mendeley software to organize the data. Some irrelevant papers were omitted in the first stage of collection based on the title and abstract. The second stage of selection articles is a full-text selection. Figure 2 illustrates the procedure of text-selection. The total number of papers obtained from the four databases was initially 241. Upon completion of the selection procedure, however, only 20 papers remained. The low number of papers is both a challenge to and an opportunity for NER research in an Indonesian context, as few studies have used the "Bahasa" dataset. The third stage is reporting the results and analyzing the results of this review. We mapped research results from previous studies and examined how the experimental process in NER was, what libraries could be used for Indonesian language datasets, how to approach NER, and proposed future research. Table 2. Criteria of selection studies process Inclusion criteria Exclusion criteria The paper studied about NER The paper is not using English Studies published in the last 5 years, between 2016-2021

(p22.3) Not full-text paper The paper being studied is in the form of a journal or proceedings/conference Same papers from different database Papers discussing NER but not the Indonesian text dataset 

(p22.4) First, this article presents a SLR of the field of NER research. A SLR aims to collect all research on a particular topic, evaluates it critically, and reaches conclusions that synthesize that research. Then follows a discussion of how NER has been applied to Indonesian texts. SLR has been used in various research domains such as P2P lending [13], Fintech [14], Teaching and learning via webinars [16], supply chain management model [17], and software engineering [18].

(p22.5) A SLR was carried out in three stages: the planning stage, the implementation stage and the reporting stage (see Figure 1). In the first stage, the planning stage is carried out to identify the need for a systematic review of the use of the agile project management (APM) method. At this stage, a review protocol was also developed by setting research questions (RQ) and formulating a boolean search to determine search keywords. This study used the population, intervention, comparison, outcomes, and context (PICOC) strategy to determine the RQ, as shown in Table 1.  There follows the RQ that guided the following analysis: RQ. "What are the trends in the application of NER to extract information from Indonesian online news and social media?" In this study, the search string is ("named-entity recognition" OR NER OR "named entity recognition") AND ("online news" OR "social media") AND (Indonesia* OR Bahasa). According to the research question, the criteria for inclusion and exclusion in Table 2 were used to define the results. In the second stage, this research defines a search strategy, namely selecting a publication database, selection results for research, data extraction and the synthesis process. These processes are sequential processes where each process aims to find the right study to be used in this research. The search and selection process are an elimination process based on the criteria specified in each process.

(p22.6) The authors collected papers from relevant electronic databases such as SCOPUS, ACM, IEEEXplore, and Science Direct, then used Mendeley software to organize the data. Some irrelevant papers were omitted in the first stage of collection based on the title and abstract. The second stage of selection articles is a full-text selection. Figure 2 illustrates the procedure of text-selection. The total number of papers obtained from the four databases was initially 241. Upon completion of the selection procedure, however, only 20 papers remained. The low number of papers is both a challenge to and an opportunity for NER research in an Indonesian context, as few studies have used the "Bahasa" dataset. The third stage is reporting the results and analyzing the results of this review. We mapped research results from previous studies and examined how the experimental process in NER was, what libraries could be used for Indonesian language datasets, how to approach NER, and proposed future research. Table 2. Criteria of selection studies process Inclusion criteria Exclusion criteria The paper studied about NER The paper is not using English Studies published in the last 5 years, between 2016-2021

(p22.7) Not full-text paper The paper being studied is in the form of a journal or proceedings/conference Same papers from different database Papers discussing NER but not the Indonesian text dataset 
## (s26) SLR results
(p26.0) After investigating the VOSViewer results, we examined 20 articles collected from the ACM, IEEE, ScienceDirect, and SCOPUS portals. The articles were then extracted and mapped according on author, task,  Table 3). It is clear from the table above that several NER studies with Indonesian datasets have been carried out for the following tasks: complaint classification [19], quote identification [9], [20], flood monitoring extraction [7], traffic monitoring [8], [21], tourist attractions [22], zakat [23], lipstick product reviews [24], and various model combination tests for twitter [25]- [28], online news [6], [29]- [31], and Wikipedia [32], [33]. 

(p26.1) After investigating the VOSViewer results, we examined 20 articles collected from the ACM, IEEE, ScienceDirect, and SCOPUS portals. The articles were then extracted and mapped according on author, task,  Table 3). It is clear from the table above that several NER studies with Indonesian datasets have been carried out for the following tasks: complaint classification [19], quote identification [9], [20], flood monitoring extraction [7], traffic monitoring [8], [21], tourist attractions [22], zakat [23], lipstick product reviews [24], and various model combination tests for twitter [25]- [28], online news [6], [29]- [31], and Wikipedia [32], [33]. 
## (s29) Recommendations for illegal Fintech supervision strategies with the NER approach based on social media data and online news
(p29.0) Based on the SLR, new ideas emerge to utilize this method in the era of technological and social media transformation. The digital economy can change society and business's economic activities, from what was originally manual to fully automated. This impacts the provision of financial services by startups and Fintech companies. Currently, Fintech practices in Indonesia are very developed, starting from payments, funding, and Robo-advisors. However, in its implementation, Fintech lending (online lending) received special attention because it caused several problems, namely the emergence of illegal fintech. Unreasonable billing processes, issues of personal data protection, and even moral hazards are the focus of the supervision. In Indonesia, a government website channel is available for illegal Fintech complaints, but people tend to use social media to submit their complaints [15]. With the NER concept described in the previous section and the basics of libraries, POS tagging, and named entities, this research becomes the basis for developing ML models in the early identification of platform names on social media. Figure 6 is our proposed Fintech supervision model with social media data and online news that can be used for further research. 

(p29.1) Based on the SLR, new ideas emerge to utilize this method in the era of technological and social media transformation. The digital economy can change society and business's economic activities, from what was originally manual to fully automated. This impacts the provision of financial services by startups and Fintech companies. Currently, Fintech practices in Indonesia are very developed, starting from payments, funding, and Robo-advisors. However, in its implementation, Fintech lending (online lending) received special attention because it caused several problems, namely the emergence of illegal fintech. Unreasonable billing processes, issues of personal data protection, and even moral hazards are the focus of the supervision. In Indonesia, a government website channel is available for illegal Fintech complaints, but people tend to use social media to submit their complaints [15]. With the NER concept described in the previous section and the basics of libraries, POS tagging, and named entities, this research becomes the basis for developing ML models in the early identification of platform names on social media. Figure 6 is our proposed Fintech supervision model with social media data and online news that can be used for further research. 
