# WHAT ARE THE BARRIERS TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF ELECTRONIC MEDICAL RECORDS? A REVIEW OF RECENT STUDIES

CorpusID: 254707896 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8a9e5629a645999bf6e3b74d334a9f3b98d58f6f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8a9e5629a645999bf6e3b74d334a9f3b98d58f6f)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Information technology utilization in health sector is increasingly widespread. The information technology application in health facilities includes developing algorithms or doing analytical process in the management and control process, decision making, and medical aspects review (Khodambashi, 2013). One aspect that cannot be separated from information technology intervention is the medical records management through the implementation of electronic medical records (Zhu & Hou, 2018). Electronic-based medical records have the potential to improve the health service quality, especially through the producing of quality health information (Manca, 2015).
## (s5) Security concerns
(p5.0) In the implementation of electronic-based systems, aspects of data security and confidentiality are always an important aspect to be discussed. The risk of data loss and data access by unauthorized parties is a concern for users. It is necessary to make guidelines or protocols related to data access rights, for example by determining the level of access rights in hospitals and limiting access to patient information outside the hospital (Jahanbakhsh et al., 2011). Blockchain technology can also be used as an option to be integrated with electronic medical records to ensure privacy an security aspects (Santoso et al., 2020).
## (s6) Lack of technical supports
(p6.0) Technical support in the of electronic medical records implementation is a very important aspect. Lack of technical supporting team or slow response from the technical team regarding complaints from users will be a big obstacle in implementing electronic medical records (Kruse et al., 2016). Users who find difficulties or are dissatisfied with system performance will increasingly distrust the system's capabilities and consequently will no longer want to use the system if the technical team does not respond quickly. Therefore, preparing a reliable and responsive technical support team is a must before the implementation of electronic medical records begins. Ajami & Arab-Chadegani (2013) Cost and benefits misalignment, privacy and confidentiality concerns, system interoperability, data standardization, lack of expert that lead the process, as well as the number and availability of vendors in the market 2 AlSadrah (2020) Security breaches, loss of access to data in the event of a computer crash or power failure, time required to data entry and check its quality, technological complexity, potential for disruption of doctor-patient communication, lack of support and fast response from hospitals IT staff, and lack of training for health workers in using electronic medical records 3

(p6.1) Fennelly Jung et al. (2020) Lack of communication between government and health facilities, lack of system development environment, lack of infrastructure, poor implementation of standard terminology, user resistance, and poor system functionality 10

(p6.2) Khalifa (2013) Human resources aspects (lack of awareness about the benefits of using electronic medical records), financial aspects (high initial costs), legal and legal aspects, technical aspects (lack of technical support), organizational aspects (lack of management support), and professional aspects (records). electronic medicine is considered to reduce productivity) 11 Kruse et al. (2016) Initial cost, maintenance cost, technical concerns (difficulty, interoperability, complexity, errors, and inability to meet the user needs), technical support, and resistance to change 12 Palabindala et al. (2016) Lawsuit, medication error risk, and the cost of implementation.
## (s8) User resistance
(p8.0) Users who are used to using conventional paper-based systems will likely have resistance when the system is changed to electronic-based. This resistance can come from the reluctance to move from their comfort zone so far. Lack of literacy related to information technology and unclear fears of new systems must be addressed first (Jung et al., 2020). Intensive training and mentoring activities can be a solution to this problem, of course the design of electronic-based medical records must also be made as simple as possible to make it easier for users to use it.
