# Overview of the Penguin Visual System

CorpusID: 256127212 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cfefe4d5cf3559904bab3bb37125f476386705a5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cfefe4d5cf3559904bab3bb37125f476386705a5)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Evolutionary Considerations
(p1.0) Penguins evolved the basic features of their vision from birds, and those aspects that are shared with other birds probably represent the ancestral condition. However, the penguin lineage has been flightless for a prolonged period of time, around 70 million years [6,7]. Indeed, efficient swimming with a body mass over 1 kg may have necessitated the loss of flight [8]. This long period of flightless evolution is unique in birds and thus vestigial adaptions to flight are more likely to have been lost in penguins than in those lineages more recently flightless.
## (s2) Behavioural Repertoire and Light Intensity
(p2.0) Since penguins forage underwater, one must consider the attenuation of illumination in the underwater environment. In the clearest of natural waters, irradiance decreases 100× at 200 m [12]. Water also selectively absorbs short (ultraviolet, UV) and long wavelength light, with the greatest transmission around 420-430 nm [13], making it appear blue. However, most water also contains suspended matter, including living and dead organisms (notably plankton, which contain chlorophyll), coloured dissolved organic matter, suspended minerals and other detritus. This attenuates the light further and shifts the peak illumination to slightly longer wavelengths, between 420 nm and 500 nm. In the Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean, home to many penguins, light is primarily attenuated by chlorophyll and the water itself [14], although the amount of chlorophyll differs by depth, location, and season [15].
## (s3) Behavioural Repertoire and Light Intensity
(p3.0) Since penguins forage underwater, one must consider the attenuation of illumination in the underwater environment. In the clearest of natural waters, irradiance decreases 100× at 200 m [12]. Water also selectively absorbs short (ultraviolet, UV) and long wavelength light, with the greatest transmission around 420-430 nm [13], making it appear blue. However, most water also contains suspended matter, including living and dead organisms (notably plankton, which contain chlorophyll), coloured dissolved organic matter, suspended minerals and other detritus. This attenuates the light further and shifts the peak illumination to slightly longer wavelengths, between 420 nm and 500 nm. In the Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean, home to many penguins, light is primarily attenuated by chlorophyll and the water itself [14], although the amount of chlorophyll differs by depth, location, and season [15].
## (s11) Optics of the Globe
(p11.0) A schematic diagram of the Humboldt penguin eye was constructed by Martin and Young [47]. The posterior nodal distance was 13.29 mm in water, in which medium the anterior and posterior focal points of the eye were coincident. This equals the axial length (18.74 mm) multiplied by 0.71. They calculated the power of the lens to be 100.38 D dioptres (D) and that of the cornea to be 29.4 D in air and 0 D in water.
## (s12) Optics of the Globe
(p12.0) A schematic diagram of the Humboldt penguin eye was constructed by Martin and Young [47]. The posterior nodal distance was 13.29 mm in water, in which medium the anterior and posterior focal points of the eye were coincident. This equals the axial length (18.74 mm) multiplied by 0.71. They calculated the power of the lens to be 100.38 D dioptres (D) and that of the cornea to be 29.4 D in air and 0 D in water.
## (s13) Cornea
(p13.0) Birds generally have a much clearer cornea than do mammals. The range of refractive indices of the vertebrate cornea was summarised by Sivak and said to vary between 1.337 and 1.38 [50]. We feel that he may have misread an earlier paper by Gundlach et al. [51] who assumed a value of 1.334 for the cornea and vitreous together (as opposed to the cornea on its own, which they did not measure) in the pigeon (not stated, but presumably Columba livia). Were one to exclude this study, the range would have been 1.35 to 1.38. The little penguin cornea has a refractive index of 1.369 and the gentoo penguin has a refractive index of 1.371 [34], both within this range. In vivo corneal confocal microscopic images of avian (not penguin) corneas have been published [52]. In that study, it was found that 'the wing cells of the anterior epithelium exhibited much larger, irregularly shaped nuclei. Bowman's layer presented as an acellular layer with a homogenous reflectivity'. Furthermore, they noted that 'the keratocytes had radial nuclei and were located in a strictly parallel fashion. The endothelial cells were also of a uniform, hexagonal shape.' (Figure 6). Corneal accommodation, documented in some birds [51], has not been demonstrated in penguins. As with the globe, smaller penguins tend to have thinner and smaller corneas [34].

(p13.1) Vision 2023, 7, 6 9 of 24 it does not need to gather as much light, due to its diurnal nature and inability to dive as deeply as other penguins [16,49].
## (s14) Cornea
(p14.0) Birds generally have a much clearer cornea than do mammals. The range of refractive indices of the vertebrate cornea was summarised by Sivak and said to vary between 1.337 and 1.38 [50]. We feel that he may have misread an earlier paper by Gundlach et al. [51] who assumed a value of 1.334 for the cornea and vitreous together (as opposed to the cornea on its own, which they did not measure) in the pigeon (not stated, but presumably Columba livia). Were one to exclude this study, the range would have been 1.35 to 1.38. The little penguin cornea has a refractive index of 1.369 and the gentoo penguin has a refractive index of 1.371 [34], both within this range. In vivo corneal confocal microscopic images of avian (not penguin) corneas have been published [52]. In that study, it was found that 'the wing cells of the anterior epithelium exhibited much larger, irregularly shaped nuclei. Bowman's layer presented as an acellular layer with a homogenous reflectivity.' Furthermore, they noted that 'the keratocytes had radial nuclei and were located in a strictly parallel fashion. The endothelial cells were also of a uniform, hexagonal shape.' ( Figure 6). Corneal accommodation, documented in some birds [51], has not been demonstrated in penguins. As with the globe, smaller penguins tend to have thinner and smaller corneas [34]. The lowest corneal power in air yet reported was 10.2 D, which was observed in the king penguin [18], the largest penguin measured, although other studies have found higher powers in the same bird, namely 11.1 to 11.5 D [53] and 19.1 D [34]. Conversely, the highest power yet reported in a penguin, 41.3 D, was in the little penguin [34]-the smallest penguin. Mid-sized penguins tend to have corneal powers between these two. For instance, the anterior corneal power has been found to be 29.3 D in two Magellanic penguins [54], 33.19 D in the Humboldt penguin [47] and 21 to 22 D in the African penguin Spheniscus demersus [55].

(p14.1) There are some discrepancies between studies. Those in the king penguin have already been mentioned. Both 17.0 to 18.2 D [56] and 30.36 D [55] have been found for the The lowest corneal power in air yet reported was 10.2 D, which was observed in the king penguin [18], the largest penguin measured, although other studies have found higher powers in the same bird, namely 11.1 to 11.5 D [53] and 19.1 D [34]. Conversely, the highest power yet reported in a penguin, 41.3 D, was in the little penguin [34]-the smallest penguin. Mid-sized penguins tend to have corneal powers between these two. For instance, the anterior corneal power has been found to be 29.3 D in two Magellanic penguins [54], 33 recorded for the gentoo. We are unable to explain these discrepancies but would note that the methodology of each author was different. In a study in which these authors were involved [34], different methodologies also gave conflicting results. Furthermore, in all studies where more than one individual was examined there were differences between adults of the same species and greater differences if juveniles are included [34].

(p14.2) Nevertheless, there would seem to be a correlation between smaller penguin size, smaller eyes and greater corneal powers [34], not surprising given that eyes with shorter axial lengths require more power to focus an image.

(p14.3) Compared with other birds with eyes of similar lengths, the cornea of penguins is relatively flat and thus the focusing power in air is low. For instance, the corneal power of the bald eagle Haliaeetus leucocephalus in air is 40 D [56], which is much higher than that of the king penguin despite having a similar axial length of 27 mm. The corneal power of the South Island takahe Porphyrio hochstetteri is 74 D, which is much higher than that of the penguin despite having an only slightly shorter axial length, 14 mm, than the little penguin eye [57]. Having a low corneal power in air would aid the transition from air to water as it would reduce the difference in the overall refractive power of the eye (where the corneal power is essentially zero) in the two media. As a result, there would be a lesser accommodative burden during that transition.

(p14.4) The penguin cornea has also been noted to usually be steeper in the centre than in the periphery. Its similarity to the human cornea in this regard suggests compensation of negative lenticular spherical aberration [34].
## (s16) Iris and Pupil
(p16.0) In birds, the pupil is almost always round both when constricted and when dilated. An exception is the king penguin pupil which, when constricted, becomes square rather than circular-with an up to 300-fold change in illumination between full miosis and full mydriasis [18]. As demonstrated in Figure 7, the little penguin iris also appears somewhat octagonal when mid-dilated [36]. The iris can also become irregular when diseased. mydriasis [18]. As demonstrated in Figure 7, the little penguin iris also appears somewhat octagonal when mid-dilated [36]. The iris can also become irregular when diseased.

(p16.1) A larger pupil allows more light to enter, increasing vision in poor light (by reducing the f-number); however, it also reduces depth of focus. Conversely, smaller penguins have smaller pupils [33] and more blur as a result of diffraction.
## (s19) Retina
(p19.0) In many vertebrates, there is a defined central retinal area responsible for high spatial sensitivity. This can be a fovea, but it can also be a strip of highly sensitive retina. Some birds are bifoveate. A fovea was unable to be found in the Magellanic penguin [79] and was said to be absent in the African penguin [80]. However, histologically, a fovea was reported (although no photomicrograph was provided) in an Adélie penguin [70]. One of the authors (PWH) has been unable to find a fovea in an optical coherence tomogram of a gentoo penguin's central retina nor histologically in little, gentoo, or king penguin eyes (Figure 8).

(p19.1) Vision 2023, 7, 6 13 of 24 refractive state could be due to lenticular accommodation and, if so, the lens may be more aspheric when unaccommodated in vivo and have a greater potential to change shape than the reported measurements would suggest. Other possible methods of lenticular accommodation, such as antero-posterior movement of the penguin lens, have not been investigated.
## (s24) Intraocular Pressure
(p24.0) The intraocular pressure (IOP) of the African penguin was found to be 27-31 mmHg (dog setting, range 15-47 mmHg) and 25 mmHg (horse setting, range 12-40 mmHg), using rebound tonometry (Icare TonoVet, Jorgensen Laboratories, Loveland, Colorado) [98]. Using the same instrument, wild Humboldt penguins had an average intraocular pressure of 28 ± 9 mmHg (dog setting), higher than the 20.36 ± 4.1 mmHg found in captive Humboldt penguins. They speculated that this might be an adaptation to compressive forces at depth [99]. In macaroni penguins, the IOP was 21.9 ± 7.05 mmHg using the Tonopen XL applanation tonometry and 29.1 ± 7.16 mmHg (TonoVet, dog setting), thereby declining with age and cataract [48]. In the southern rockhopper penguin, the mean IOP was 20.0 ± 5.77 mmHg with the Tono-Pen XL (Reichert Inc., Buffalo, NY, USA) and 24.1 ± 5.09 mmHg with the TonoVet [48]. Neither correlated with age or cataract. In both macaroni and rockhopper penguins there was no sex or side difference, although the TonoVet read consistently higher [48]. Hadden et al. [34] found average intraocular pressures of 7 mmHg in the little penguin and 18 mmHg in the gentoo using the Tono-Pen Avia handheld tonometer, which was calibrated for humans (Reichert Inc., Buffalo, NY, USA).
## (s25) Tear Production
(p25.0) According to Bliss et al. [48], in macaroni penguins the mean modified phenol red thread test showed a tear production of 24.7 ± 6.37 mm/15 s and the mean Schirmer tear test showed 12.1 ± 5.43 mm/min. This did not change with age or lens status. In the same study, southern rockhopper penguins produced 25.1 ± 7.07 mm/15 s and 11.0 ± 3.96 mm/min tears with these same two tests. Neither changed with age or lens status. In the Humboldt penguin, mean tear production was 9 ± 4 mm/min with a Schirmer test [99].
## (s33) Other Future Directions
(p33.0) The visual field has only been determined for a few species. However, that of other species may be relatively easy to estimate, given that Iwaniuk [106] has shown good correlation between the bony orbital orientation and the binocular overlap of the visual field as measured by other methods. This would help resolve another bone of contention between different authors. Rarer species could be studied with relative ease by this method, as skulls are generally more accessible than fresh tissue or live animals.

(p33.1) Most research has been done on species that are relatively easy to access, namely those that are commonly kept in captivity, have large natural populations, or both. More work is required on rarer genera and species as it would help determine if the results obtained are generalisable across Spheniscidae. Furthermore, many published studies are of only a limited number of animals and often each anatomical location within the eye of a specific penguin species has only been the subject of one study, even for common species. This can lead to uncertainty. An example is the question of whether penguins have a fovea. As mentioned, no fovea was found in Magellanic and African penguins [79,80], nor have we identified one in little, gentoo, or king penguins. Furthermore, the ganglion cell densities in the Magellanic, little, and king penguins are consistent with being afoveate. However, Sivak and Vrablic reported the presence of a fovea in the Adélie penguin eye [70]. The question therefore arises as to whether the Adélie penguin has a fovea and the others do not, which seems unlikely, whether Sivak and Vrablic were mistaken when they thought they identified a fovea in the Adélie or whether the other penguins do have a fovea but to date it has been missed is unknown. No doubt, the examination of more species and more individuals of each species would help. More notably, the provision of raw data (i.e., a photomicrograph of the fovea), either in a linked repository or in supplementary material would have been helpful.

(p33.2) Further work also needs to be done to study the nature of cone photoreceptors within the retina, as there appear to be irreconcilable differences within the literature, and in the neural processing of images (such as the convergence of photoreceptors onto bipolar cells and measurements of stereoacuity in birds). Finally, optical transmission has not been measured in any penguin.
