# Asiatic acid: a review on its polypharmacological properties and therapeutic potential against various Maladies

CorpusID: 258652819 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f2f8ebececfc779b7ba7c1139473ef72af92248](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f2f8ebececfc779b7ba7c1139473ef72af92248)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Cancer incergence
(p4.0) Depending on dosage and time, asiatic acid substantially decreased cell viability, cell proliferation, and cell progression in U87-MG cells by causing cell apoptotic death and improving antiapoptotic proteins. [26] In different human glioblastoma cancer cells lines i.e. U87MG, LN18, and U118MG, AA supplementation (10-100 μM) lowered the cell viability whereas orally supplemented asiatic acid (10-100 μM) to mice markedly decreased tumor volume, orthotopic U87MG xenografts growth, induced apoptotic death by modulating the protein expression of several apoptosis regulators (Bcl2 family members, caspases, and survivin), induced ER stress (decreased Calnexin and IRE1α expression and increased GRP78 and Calpain), damaged cellular organization and increased free intracellular calcium. [27] Transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) promote tumor growth via a pathway correlated with hyperactive Smad3 and suppressed Smad7 signaling in the tumor microenvironment. The equilibrium between Smad3 and Smad7 AA (AA, a Smad7 inducer) and naringenin (NG, a Smad3 inhibitor) signaling has been documented to effectively inhibit tumor progression in mouse models of invasive melanoma (B16F10) and lung carcinoma (LLC) by encouraging the formation and cytotoxicity of natural killer (NK) cells against cancer. Mechanistically, we find that Smad3 physically binds Id2 and IRF2 to inhibit the development of NK cells and cytotoxicity against cancer induced by NK cells. Treatment with asiatic acid substantially inhibited Smad3 translation and phosphorylation while restoring Smad7 expression and, thus, via Id2/IRF2-associated pathways, largely promoted NK cell differentiation, maturation, and cytotoxicity toward cancer. In comparison, the beneficial effects of AA and NG on NK cell-dependent anticancer behaviors were blunted by silencing Id2 or IRF2. Thus, treatment with AA and NG developed an additive impact on the inactivation of TGF-β1/Smad3 signaling and thus suppressed the development of melanoma and lung carcinoma by fostering NK cell cancer tolerance via an Id2 and IRF2-associated process. [28] In another recently described by Guo and their fellows, [29] they investigated the anticancer role of AA against MDA-MB-231 cells of a xenografted tumor in nude mice. They found that supplementation of AA at the rate of (50 mg/kg) showed the following changes such as inhibition of cell viability, p-AKT, p53, p-PI3K, and other proteins levels induction of apoptotic cell death, and enhancement of WAVE3 expressions in the tissue of ductal carcinoma in situ.
## (s6) Liver fibrosis
(p6.0) The last widespread mechanism for nearly all chronic liver disorders is liver fibrosis. It is characterized by excessive aggregation of hepatic stellate cells (HSC) and extracellular matrix (ECM) triggered by myofibroblast transformation detected by de novo a-SMA expression. [92] A significant cause of liver disease is liver fibrosis, but therapy remains unsuccessful. The functions and anti-hepatofibrotic behaviors of asiatic acid have been studied in the current research in a rat model of carbon tetrachloride-induced liver fibrosis (CCl4) and in vitro in TGF-beta1-stimulated rat hepatic stellate cell line (HSC-T6). Treatment with AA substantially attenuated CCl4-induced liver fibrosis and dosedependent functional dysfunction, including blockade of HSC activation as calculated by inhibiting the expression of de novo alpha smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) and collagen matrix, and improved ALT and ASTT output (all p,0.01). Upregulation of hepatic Smad7, an inhibitor of TGF-beta signaling, was correlated with the hepatoprotective effects of AA on fibrosis, thus blocking upregulation of TGFbeta1 and CTGF and activation of TGF-beta/Smad signaling. In HSC-T6, the anti-fibrosis function and functions of asiatic acid have been further identified in vitro. The addition of AA to HSC-T6 cells substantially induced Smad7 expression, thus inhibiting dosage-dependent TGF-beta1induced Smad2/3 activation, myofibroblast transition, and collagen matrix expression. Smad7 knockdown in HSC-T6 cells, on the other hand, prevented AA-induced inhibition of HSC-T6 cell activation and fibrosis in reaction to TGF-beta1, showing that Smad7 played an important role in AA-induced anti-fibrotic behaviors during in vivo and in vitro liver fibrosis. [93] Asiatic acid administration effectively prevented CCl4-induced stimulation of HSC and liver fibrosis and significantly increased dosage-dependent liver functional damage in rats. Furthermore, we also observed that AA inclusion was able to inhibit TGF-beta1-induced HSC activation in a rat HSC-T6 cell line, such as a-SMA+ myofibroblast transformation and collagen matrix expression. More specifically, hepatic Smad7 upregulation, thus suppressing the signaling of TGF-beta/Smad, may be the underlying mechanism by which AA attenuates the liver caused by CCl4. [94] The identification that AA-induced upregulation of hepatic Smad7, thus inhibiting TGF-beta /Smad signaling, was a mechanism by which AA inhibits CCl4 or TGF-beta1-induced HSC activation and in vivo and in vitro liver fibrosis, was a novel and relevant finding in the present research. Indeed, induction of TGFbeta/Smad signaling in both experimental and human chronic liver diseases is a central function of liver fibrosis. [95,96] 
## (s8) Respiratory diseases
(p8.0) Asiatic acid has been successful in an animal model of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease by defending against pulmonary inflammation triggered by tobacco smoke. It reduced the development of ROS, norepinephrine involvement, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and inflammatory cell infiltration in the fluid of bronchoalveolar lavage in mice. In addition to increased development of HO-1 and SOD3 in lung tissues, it also reduced the overproduction of mucus, MCP-1 expression, and MAPKs as well as NF-uesB activation. [7] In rats caused by spinal cord injury, AA was observed to attenuate acute lung injury. AA reduced pulmonary edema and neutrophil penetration, myeloperoxidase activation, pro-inflammatory cytokines and oxidative stress attenuation regulated by Nrf2 enhancement and NLRP3 inflammasome attenuation favorably modulated histologic shifts. In addition, the lung wet-to-dry weight ratio and the index of pulmonary permeability were both attenuated. [105] LPS-induced acute lung damage was attenuated by AA in another report. [106] By inhibiting the TLR4/NF-μB signaling cascade, AA therapy blocked the activation of TLR4, pro-inflammatory cytokines and NF-kB. As shown by histological data, it prevented pathological changes in the lungs and showed a decline in myeloperoxidase production and neutrophil infiltration in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. [106] Asiatic acid was recently found to safeguard bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis, a life-threatening disease of bleomycin chemotherapy in humans. [5] A debilitating, life-threatening illness worldwide is acute lung injury (ALI) triggered by sepsis. However, ALI mortality remains elevated owing to the lack of adequate care. It has been demonstrated that Asiatic acid (AA) has anti-inflammatory effects. In the present research, we observed that by inhibiting TLR4 expression and NF-kB activation in mice, AA attenuated lung damage caused by LPS. Asiatic acid may be a valuable medication to manage ALI caused by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Gram negative bacteria's key membrane part, LPS, reaches the lung, causing systemic inflammation and contributes to lung injury. The challenge of LPS contributes to lung edema and invasion by inflammatory cells. Reactive oxygen species, inflammatory cytokines, and hydrolytic proteinase, resulting in lung damage, may be produced by the penetration of neutrophils. Inhibition of the penetration of neutrophils could therefore attenuate LPS-induced lung injury. In this research, we observed that treatment with AA greatly blocked penetration into the lungs of LPS-induced neutrophils. A marker for tissue neutrophil content was used for MPO, an abundant portion of neutrophils. [106] By guarding against tobacco smoke-induced pulmonary inflammation, asiatic acid has been successful in an animal model of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. [7] It decreased the production of ROS, norepinephrine function, proinflammatory cytokines, and inflammatory cell infiltration in the fluid of bronchoalveolar lavage in mice. It also decreased mucus overproduction, MCP-1 expression, and MAPKs, as well as NF-2B activation, along with increased HO-1 and SOD3 expression in lung tissues. [7] In rats caused by spinal cord injury, AA was observed to attenuate acute lung injury. Asiatic acid reduced pulmonary edema and neutrophil penetration, myeloperoxidase activation, proinflammatory cytokines and oxidative stress attenuation regulated by Nrf2 enhancement and NLRP3 inflammasome attenuation favorably modulated histologic shifts. It also attenuated the ratio of wet-to dry lung weight and pulmonary permeability index. [12 Clinical studies published on asiatic acid with findings against different diseases were shown in Table 1. Kavitha et al. [27] ; Thakor et al. [26] Siddique et al. [107] ; Siddique et al. [108] ; Hao et al. [109] Ren et al. [110] Wu et al. [111] Wu et al. [111] Asiatic acid Cancer Retard the growth of cancer cell lines of glioblastoma Reduce Lower down the inflamation and pave way to natural death of cancer colon cancer cells.
