# Clinical Experience Using Vitamin D and Analogs in the Treatment of Myelodysplasia and Acute Myeloid Leukemia: A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 2584272 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bb941d92a3a61e4efbd0521d49c877d128d985cc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bb941d92a3a61e4efbd0521d49c877d128d985cc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Despite significant progress over the past several decades in understanding the biology of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and despite important advances in treatment approaches, the majority of patients who develop acute myeloid leukemia will still die from their disease. A recent analysis by Southwest Oncology Group investigators of data from 1344 patients with newly diagnosed AML enrolled into SWOG studies between 1986 and 2009, excluding Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia, illustrated this point dramatically. In that study, overall survival at 4 years was only 49% for patients with favorable cytogenetics; overall survival was approximately 25% for those with intermediate-prognosis cytogenetics, and only 9% for those with unfavorable cytogenetics [1]. Among the most important advances made in recent decades in the treatment of AML was the recognition of the exquisite sensitivity of Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia (APL) to differentiation therapy using all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA).

(p0.1) This observation was, shortly thereafter, accompanied by the identification of the Retinoic Acid Receptor Alpha (RARA) gene as a partner in the balanced translocation that drives APL. The dual recognition of a novel mechanism of disease-in the case of APL, overexpression of RARA, a protein that participates in proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic cells-along with the identification of a compound, ATRA, that is a derivative of a vitamin, has provided a powerful paradigm for cancer therapy. This parallels the dramatic progress that has been made in the past fifteen years in the use of rationally designed, small molecules that target specific intracellular signal transduction pathways in cancer, best exemplified by the development of Imatinib, and followed by many new agents effective in a variety of solid tumors. The remarkable improvement in the rates of remission and survival for patients with APL has stimulated our laboratory, and many others to explore a similar approach for the treatment of non-APL subsets of AML, using vitamin D and analogs (collectively referred 2 Leukemia Research and Treatment to henceforth as vitamin D and Deltanoids-"VDD"). Investigations have focused on either VDD alone, or in combination with other compounds, in an effort to induce differentiation of leukemia cells, and allow for less toxic chemotherapy, as is the case now in the treatment of patients with APL. The observation that vitamin D can induce acute myeloid leukemia blast cells in vitro to differentiate along the monocytic lineage was made approximately 30 years ago [2]; however, it remains to translate this observation into a clinically meaningful strategy. The barriers to translating this observation from the bench to the bedside include the induction of hypercalcemia VDD, as well as the need to identify which, if any, subset of patients with AML will be sensitive to VDD. The current understanding of the biologic basis for VDD effects in AML in vitro and ex vivo has recently been reviewed in detail [3]. The following is a review of published clinical experience that has accumulated to date regarding the use of VDD either alone or in combination with cytotoxic agents, other differentiating agents, or both. In many of these reports, the investigators included patients with a diagnosis of myelodysplasia (MDS), as well as AML, in their treatment cohorts, and for this reason, the effects of VDD in MDS patients are included in the discussion below.
## (s2) Clinical Reports of VDD Combined with Other Agents
(p2.0) Several groups have reported the clinical use of VDD in combination with other agents intended to force differentiation of pathologic myeloid progenitor cells, in a few series without the inclusion of classical cytotoxic antineoplastic agents. Most commonly, a VDD has been combined with a retinoid, with or without, a third agent or even a fourth agent. In 1991, Blazsek and colleagues in France reported their experience in treating two patients; one patient had APL in relapse and responded to single-agent all-trans-retinoic acid (a relatively new observation as of that writing). However, the second patient that they described in that report carried a diagnosis of MDS, and experienced a sustained hematologic response to treatment using the combination of prednisone with 1 alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1 alpha,25D3) as well as 13-cis-retinoic acid [13]. In this paper, 1 alpha,25D3 was administered at a dose of 0.25 micrograms by mouth three times per day for 30 days, in combination with prednisone 40 mg per day for the first 15 days and cis-Retinoic Acid 20 mg by mouth daily for 30 days. This patient continued the vitamin D for an 8-month period and the retinoic acid for a total of two and one-half years, apparently with a sustained response.

(p2.1) In 2007, the Finnish Leukemia Group reported the results of a phase II clinical trial of the combination of valproic acid together with 13-cis-retinoic acid and 1,25dihydroxyvitamin D3 in the treatment of MDS, including several cases chronic myelomonocytic leukemia and several cases of refractory anemia with excess blasts-2 (RAEB-2). Valproic acid, an antiseizure medication, has pleotropic effects, including inhibition of the P-glycoprotein; however, it was chosen in this instance because of the observation that Valproic Acid can inhibit histone deacetylase activity. Oral Valproic acid was titrated to achieve serum concentrations between 500 and 700 micromolar, and 13-cisretinoic acid was administered at a dose of 10 mg by mouth twice daily. The VDD used in this study was Etalpha at a dose of 13 microgram by mouth daily. There were no episodes of hypercalcemia observed, although the majority of patients experienced the hypertriglyceridemia associated with the use of 13-cis-retinoic acid. Three of the nineteen patients experienced some hematologic improvement-a rise in hemoglobin and neutrophil count in one patient with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, an improvement in platelet count in one patient with RAEB-2, and an improvement in hemoglobin level in one patient with refractory cytopenias with multilineage dysplasia [14].

(p2.2) A number of groups have attempted to combine vitamin D or its analogs with low-dose conventional antineoplastic chemotherapy in an effort to improve blood counts in patients with either AML, MDS, or both. Most commonly, Cytarabine has been used in combination with a VDD, sometimes with additional agents added to the regimen. In 1988, Hellström and colleagues in Sweden reported a series of 62 evaluable patients with either MDS or AML who were treated with various combinations of lowdose Cytarabine, alpha-interferon (IFN), 1 alpha-hydroxyvitamin D3 (vit D3), and retinoic acid. The Cytarabine was dosed initially at 15 mg/meter squared body surface area subcutaneously daily, and the interferon was administered initially at 3 million units subcutaneously daily. The 1 alpha-hydroxyvitamin D3 was dosed at 1 microgram per day by mouth in two divided doses, escalated until mild hypercalcemia was noted, with the dose then adjusted to maintain a serum calcium below 2.90 millimoles/liter. The overall response rate was 44%. Of these, 50% responded favorably to the combination of IFN, vitamin D3, and retinoic acid, a combination that they termed IDR. This was felt by the authors to be comparable to the response rate of 43% for low-dose Cytarabine alone [15].

(p2.3) The same group then performed a prospective, randomized Phase III clinical trial, in which 63 evaluable patients with myelodysplastic syndromes and 15 with acute myeloid leukemia were randomized between low-dose Cytarabine (arm A) as a single agent, and low-dose Cytarabine in combination with 13-cis-retinoic acid (13-CRA) and 1 alphahydroxy-vitamin D3 (1 alpha D3) (arm B). The doses of these agents were the same as used in their prior report described above ( [15], op cit). The authors stated that 69 patients were evaluable and of these 18 (26.1%) responded to therapy [16]. The addition of 13-CRA and 1 alpha D3 had no significant favorable influence on neither survival of the patients, remission rates, nor duration of remissions. 12/27 patients (44%) in arm A and 6/29 patients (20%) in arm B progressed from MDS to AML during the course of the study (P = 0.0527). Arm B gave significantly more sideeffects than arm A (P = 0.005). The authors concluded that a clear cut therapeutic effect of the addition of 13-CRA and 1 alpha D3 to Cytarabine on MDS was not supported by this study. However, they also stated their interpretation that an inhibitory effect on AML development-that is, progression from MDS to AML-in some MDS subgroups could not be excluded by their data [16].

(p2.4) De Rosa and colleagues in Italy reported, in 1992, their experience treating forty-four patients with high-risk primary myelodysplastic syndromes. This cohort was treated with a combination of low-dose Cytarabine, retinoic acid, and vitamin D3 [17]. Morphological subtypes, using the FAB classification schema, were refractory anemia with excess of blasts (RAEB) in 16, RAEB in transformation (RAEB-T) in 20, and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) in eight patients. In this series, Cytarabine was administered at a dose of 10 mg per meter squared body surface area twice daily for 15 consecutive days. The 13-cis-retinoic acid was given at a dose of 20 mg per meter squared body surface area for 21 days by mouth, and vitamin D3 was given at 0.75 microgram per day in three divided doses of 0.25 microgram per oral dose, also for 21 days. Cycles were repeated every four to six weeks. The therapy was continued in responders until relapse or death. The results were compared to those of a matched control group of 44 patients given supportive care only. In the treated group the overall response rate was 50% (75% in RAEB, 50% in RAEB-T, and 0% in CMML) and the survival was significantly better in the control group (P < 0.025). Comparing separately each FAB subgroup suggested that the treatment prolonged the survival in the RAEB-T subgroup (P < 0.002), but not the other two groups. The median duration of response was 15 months and the survival in responders was statistically better than in nonresponders (P < 0.0001). Myelosuppression was the most important side effect; however, no deaths related to treatment were noted. These authors concluded that this approach was useful for treatment of patients with high-risk myelodysplasia.

(p2.5) Several years later, Ferrero and colleagues from Italy described their results in treating 53 MDS patients with a combination of cis-retinoic acid (cRA, 20 to 40 mg/day) and 1,25 alpha (OH)2 cholecalciferol [(OH)2D3, 1-1.5 micrograms/day] with or without intermittent 6thioguanine (30 mg/m 2 /day). The 6-thioguanine was administered only to patients with bone marrow blast counts greater than or equal to 5%. The authors reported that treatment was well tolerated, without major toxicity. Among 25 patients with bone marrow blasts less than 5%, they observed one complete response, eight partial responses, and four minor responses (overall response rate 52%) with a median response duration of 8 months (2 ± 24). Median survival, which did not correlate with response, was projected by the authors, as of the time of publication, to be 76 months overall [18]. Thirty-one patients with BM blast excess (> or = 5%), including three of the previous group who progressed to refractory anemia with excess of blasts (RAEB), were treated with the three-drug protocol. One complete, 12-partial, and six minor responses were obtained (response rate 61%) with a median response duration of 6 months (2-29+). A significant difference in survival (P < 0.005) was observed between the 19 responders (median 25 months) and the 12 nonresponders (median 9 months). A reduction in the transfusion need was observed in 41% of the transfusion-dependent patients with blast excess and in 53% of those without blast excess. Therefore, these authors did conclude that combined differentiating therapy seems more effective than single-agent treatments.

(p2.6) The same group subsequently reported their experience treating 26 patients with a diagnosis of AML, as well as 4 patients with MDS ineligible for standard chemotherapy. The regimen used was a combination of 13-cis-retinoic acid at 20 to 40 mg by mouth daily, together with dihydroxyvitamin D3 (Rocaltrol) 1 microgram by mouth daily, along with 6-thioguanine 40 mg by mouth daily, and Cytarabine 8 mg per meter squared body surface area twice weekly by subcutaneous injection. The Cytarabine was administered during the initial two to three weeks of treatment. The median age of this group of patients was 72.5 years, and they had been deemed ineligible for standard chemotherapy. The response rate was 50%, with 27% complete remission. The median survival of the whole group and responders was 7.5 (1−47+) and 16.5 months (3.5−47+), respectively [19].

(p2.7) In a somewhat similar approach, Slapek and colleagues at Tufts University Medical Center published their experience in treating a series of twenty-nine patients, ranging from 62 to 82 years of age, all with a diagnosis of AML, treated using a 21-day course of continuous infusion Cytarabine at 20 mg per meter squared body surface area per day, together with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (calcitriol) at a dose of 0.25 microgram by mouth twice daily. The calcitriol was continued until progression of disease or until the patient Leukemia Research and Treatment 5 went off study. Hydrea was also given daily by mouth at a dose of 500 mg, started one day prior to the initiation of the Cytarabine infusion, and continued for 21 days as well. Ten patients had an antecedent myelodysplastic syndrome. Calcitriol was continued as the only postremission therapy. Thirteen patients (45%) obtained a complete remission, and 10 patients (34%) had a partial response for an overall 79% response rate [20]. There were three early deaths. The median remission duration was 9.8 months. Overall median survival was 12 months for all patients and 14 months for responding patients. All responding patients had marked bone marrow hypoplasia. Twenty patients received part or all of their chemotherapy as outpatients. These authors concluded that this regimen had acceptable toxicity and can result in prolonged remissions in elderly, high-risk patients with AML.

(p2.8) Building upon work described above, Ferrero and colleagues in Europe recently reported on the use of recombinant human erythropoietin in combination with the previously investigated regimen of 13-cis-retinoic acid and dihydroxy-vitamin D3 in the management of anemia in MDS patients. They treated 63 MDS patients (excluding refractory anaemia with excess blasts, type 2 (RAEB2)) with the combination of 13-cis-retinoic acid and dihydroxy-vitamin D3 with, or without, the further addition of 6-thioguanine. Most patients were categorized as refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia and RAEB1, in the WHO classification scheme, with intermediate 1 International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) score [21]. All patients had, at baseline, a hemoglobin of <9.5 gm/dL, and 70% required regular erythrocyte transfusions prior to beginning this therapy. The treatment dosing schedule included 13-cis-retinoic acid at 20 mg/day by mouth, and 1,25 di(OH) vitamin D3 at 1 microgram/day by mouth. Eleven of the 16 RAEB1 patients also received intermittent, low-dose 6-thioguanine (40 mg/d for 21 days every 5 weeks). rHuEPO (alpha epoetin in the majority, beta epoetin in a minority of patients) was added at different dosages and schedules according to practices of the different participating institutions and different time periods of treatment. Until 2002, 10,000 unit formulations only were available, and patients received weekly doses ranging from 10,000 units subcutaneously three times weekly up to 10,000 units subcutaneously daily. From 2002 onwards, 40,000 unit formulations of alpha erythropoietin became available, and dosages ranged from 40,000 units/week to 40,000 U every 3 to 4 days. Median weekly dose overall was 60,000 units per week (range: 30,000-80,000 units/week). All patients were treated for at least 6 months, and in the case of response, until disease progression or death. The treatment started within 12 months from diagnosis in 52 patients and between 15 and 48 months (median: 21) from diagnosis in 11 patients was well tolerated, and erythroid response rate according to new International Working Group criteria [23] was 60%:50% in RAEB1 and 64% in non-RAEB patients. The weekly recombinant human erythropoietin dose administered ranged from 30,000 units per week to as much as 80,000 units per week. Median response duration was 16 months, and median survival reached 14 months for RAEB1 and 55 months for non-RAEB patients, with a significant difference in the latter between responders and nonresponders (median 82 months versus 44 months; P = 0.036). No patient experienced clinically significant hypercalcemia.
