# A roadmap for selection of metal welding process: a review and proposals ELECTRE ELimination Et Choix Traduisant la REalité EWM Entropy weight method FAQT Fuzzy-AHP-QFD-TOPSIS GRA Grey relational analysis GTMA Graph theory and matrix approach HHS Health-hazard scoring HRM Human resource management IPM Integrated process measure JIT Just-in-time production philosophy LCA Life cycle assessment LCCA Life cycle cost assessment LCIA Life cycle impact assessment LCSA Life cycle sustainability assessment MACBETH Measuring attractiveness by a categorical based evaluation technique MEL-CEGB Marchwood Engineering Laboratories of Central Electricity Generating Board, UK MCDM Multiple criteria decision making Min-Max A criterion used for decision-making under uncertainty NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology Recommended for publication by Commission XVIII -Quality Management in Welding and Allied Processes

CorpusID: 252527903 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf77ca76cc65c2d97811df738901bd77b1ea8b1b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf77ca76cc65c2d97811df738901bd77b1ea8b1b)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s7) Related studies and books
(p7.0) Some studies are found worthwhile to the current purpose even they did not explicitly focus on the problem of SWP or welding processes' comparison. For instance, Vimal et al. [100] proposed a methodology, which can be used to model, evaluate and implement sustainable manufacturing strategies, and then applied to a single welding process. Alkahla and Pervaiz [101] reviewed a single welding process for sustainability assessment based on a specific sustainability approach. Rivas et al. [102] presented a framework for selecting indicators, and assessing and enhancing the sustainability of manufacturing processes; that was demonstrated with a single welding process.
## (s9) Statistical analysis
(p9.0) The vital question is which approach can be adopted to solve a certain SWP problem? The answer depends on the problem complexity. Thus, it is preferred to implement an automated robust approach to accommodate all levels of the problem. However, Section 2 reviewed fifty-six articles on SWP and introduced essential findings for the problem. The current section yields additional findings through a simple statistical analysis (Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6).

(p9.1) This paper highly recommends the systems demonstrated in Fig. 2 based on their success that reported for SWP and other problems in addition to the experience of the paper authors in SWP and MCDM. The mutual integration between these systems can introduce more robust systems. For instance, better results can be expected by integrating fuzzy-AHP-TOPSIS system with sustainability methods-LCA, LCCA, SLCA, and LCSA-and/or quality tools such as QFD [47]. Figure 3a represents fairly recommended systems. Figure 3b embodies the systems that were popular in use for SWP-fuzzy, AHP, and TOPSIS in both states, single and integrated. (Because of its simplicity, AHP system is found most popular, but it is only recommended as a complementary part of integrated systems.) Figure 4 reveals the most upper criteria that have been considered in the literature for SWP. As seen, base metal (type and thickness) is the most determinant of the suitable welding process; that is a fact even if not mentioned. The GMAW process received attention more than other processes as shown in Fig. 5. Some welding processes each appeared only one time in the literature. Figure 6 shows the annual articles on SWP between years 1987-2022. The distribution of articles on SWP by publications is located at Appendix (Table 5) and the upper five are found journals as explored in Fig. 7.
