# Comparative efficacy and safety of adjuvant nivolumab versus other treatments in adults with resected melanoma: a systematic literature review and network meta-analysis

CorpusID: 255837862 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/943c1815d4a2611f3d7b9d0d31e722fc89601ba7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/943c1815d4a2611f3d7b9d0d31e722fc89601ba7)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Literature search
(p2.0) Our SLR included RCTs that reported the comparative efficacy and safety of pharmacologic interventions for the adjuvant treatment of patients with resected melanoma in terms of RFS/DFS, DMFS, all-cause grade 3/4 adverse events (AEs), discontinuations, and discontinuations due to AEs. Studies in patients with stage III/IV melanoma published through May 2019 were included; studies assessing patients with stage II melanoma were also included if this population was assessed in addition to the stage III/IV population. To assess the impact of studies assessing stage II melanoma patients, a subgroup (sensitivity) analysis was conducted in studies that included only patients with resectable stage III/IV melanoma or reported stage III/IV subgroup data. The quality of individual trials was assessed using the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool. Full details and results of the SLR are provided in Additional file 1: Appendix A.

(p2.1) A feasibility assessment was conducted to gauge the appropriateness of proceeding with an NMA. This process included the following steps: (1) determination of whether the RCT formed a single evidence network for each outcome of interest (RFS/DFS, DMFS, grade 3/4 AEs, discontinuations, and discontinuations due to AEs) and (2) assessment of the distribution of treatment, outcomes, study, and patient characteristics that affected treatment effects across direct comparisons of the evidence networks when head-to-head evidence existed. Network meta-analyses were conducted in a Bayesian framework for the RCTs identified in the SLR that formed part of a single evidence network and were deemed sufficiently similar for each population and outcome of interest. Consistency between direct and indirect estimates was evaluated for closed loops (see Additional file 2: Appendix B for results of consistency checks). For binary outcomes, such as grade 3/4 AEs, discontinuations, and discontinuations due to AEs, NMAs were performed based on the proportion of patients experiencing the event of interest using a regression model with a binomial likelihood and logit link.

(p2.2) For survival outcomes, specifically RFS/DFS and DMFS (reported either as HRs or Kaplan-Meier [KM] curves), NMAs were conducted based either on the assumption that HRs remained constant over time or that HRs varied over time. In a typical survival analysis, the ratio of the risk of an event occurring between two treatments was assumed to be constant over time (ie, proportional hazards assumption); however, this assumption did not hold for some comparative survival analyses, evidenced by overlapping KM curves or based on the results of the Grambsch and Therneau test. In such cases, an additional analysis that allowed for time-varying HRs was conducted using methods described previously [20,21]. For these methods, the hazard functions of the interventions in a trial were modeled using known survival functions (such as Weibull or Gompertz, generally referred to as fractional polynomials), and differences in the parameters were considered in the multidimensional treatment effects, which were synthesized and indirectly compared across studies in the NMA. Because of this approach, treatment effects were represented by multiple parameters, rather than a single parameter. In this study, the model introduced by Jansen [20] was used for NMAs of RFS/DFS and DMFS. Normal non-informative prior distributions were used for all parameters (mean of 0; variance of 10,000). Relative treatment effects were expressed as HRs for RFS/DFS and DMFS and odds ratios for AEs and discontinuations, with 95% credible intervals (CrIs).
## (s4) Evidence base
(p4.0) An SLR conducted through May 2019 identified 11 new studies in addition to the 41 studies identified in an earlier SLR, generating an evidence base of 52 studies (Additional file 1: Appendix A, Fig. A.1). These studies represent 26 RCTs. A feasibility assessment excluded seven trials, comprising two trials that assessed only patients with mucosal melanoma, two that included patients with stage I disease and did not provide data for the stage III/IV disease subgroup, one that pooled ipilimumab dosing groups, and two that were treated as single-arm trials due to aggregation of nodes (interventions of interest). Overall, 19 trials were included in the NMA. Among these trials, IFN was the most frequently assessed treatment (n = 13), followed by other chemotherapy (n = 4), and ipilimumab 10 mg/kg (n = 3). Ipilimumab 3 mg/kg, nivolumab, pembrolizumab, and dabrafenib plus trametinib were assessed in one trial each. The analysis of RFS/DFS included 18 trials assessing eight treatments (Fig. 1a), and the analysis of DMFS included five trials assessing five treatments (Fig. 1b).

(p4.1) Characteristics of the 26 RCTs included in the feasibility assessment for the NMA are provided in Table 1 [7,10,15,. The treatments included in this analysis were consistent across the network because the eligibility criteria for the interventions were restricted primarily to FDAapproved doses. Although ipilimumab 3 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg were used for the treatment of patients with resected melanoma in the studies included in this NMA, only the 10-mg/kg dose is approved in the adjuvant setting. The observation/placebo and other-chemotherapy nodes consisted of more than one treatment type. Among the 19 trials included in the observation/placebo node, observation was the control in 16 trials and placebo served as the control in three trials. In the other-chemotherapy node, four of the five chemotherapies were either dacarbazine or IFN; however, the treatment regimens were different.

(p4.2) Baseline patient characteristics were largely similar across the trials, including age and race (Additional file 1: Appendix A, Table A.11). However, differences in patient characteristics were observed in American Joint Committee on Cancer stage and BRAF mutation status at baseline. To assess whether differences in patient characteristics had an effect on the analysis, a subgroup analysis was conducted in patients with stage III/IV disease. However, a lack of available data and network connectivity precluded a subgroup analysis based on BRAF status, as only three trials reported this information.
