# Assessing the impact of caregiving on informal caregivers of adults with a mental disorder in OECD countries: A systematic literature review of concepts and their respective questionnaires

CorpusID: 250357218 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bcc377261e8560dc9e04015a522e3f6aa6924fc7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bcc377261e8560dc9e04015a522e3f6aa6924fc7)

Fields: Psychology, Sociology, Medicine

## (s15) Work productivity loss
(p15.0) Insurance-Medicine-All-Sweden (IMAS) study [82] Other -(Continued ) Non-specified mental disorder -Experienced challenges Self-developed questionnaire by Corsentino et al. [189] Non-specified mental disorder -Financial difficulty Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS) Survey [155] Other -Instrumental costs Self-developed questionnaire by Lohrer, Lukens, & Thorning [190] Non-specified mental disorder -Psychiatric patient's social behavior and its impact upon significant others Social Behavior Assessment Scale [191] Non-specified mental disorder -Subjective perception of negative and positive aspects of caregiving COPE Index [192,193] Other -Stress-related growth Stress-Related Growth Scale-Revised [194] Other https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0270278.t002  eating disorders (n = 3), mood disorders (n = 4), personality disorders (n = 4), and primary psychotic disorders (n = 15), and primary psychotic disorders and personality disorders (n = 2). A total of 20 non-validated questionnaires (13%) were identified that were specifically developed for the purpose of those studies.
## (s19) Methodological limitations
(p19.0) There are some limitations that should be explored. Firstly, the paper should be scrutinized for categorical bias. Categorical bias could have occurred during the generation of the concept clusters because the process required a degree of personal interpretation. Secondly, the transferability of our findings to other cultural settings is limited, due to the exclusion of non-English publications and non-OECD research. The cultural norms and perceptions concerning informal caregiving has been found to vary greatly across countries and could have impacted our identification of concepts [19]. Thirdly, studies and questionnaires could not be identified for some mental disorders. These factors may have affected the selection of concepts and their respective operationalization. Lastly, the generalizability of our study was limited to adult caregivers and care recipients. The age of the care recipient and caregiver is a factor that not only alters the caregiving experience, but also plays a role in the impact of caregiving. For example, concepts such as parentification are not relevant for adults and was not included in our concept list but should be considered for minors [218].
