# A selective literature review exploring the role of the nicotinic system in schizophrenia A selective literature review exploring the role of the nicotinic system in schizophrenia

CorpusID: 257497826 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e0cd18e71549576d2d9601b8de153b86a645958b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e0cd18e71549576d2d9601b8de153b86a645958b)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s2) pros And Cons of nICoTInE In psyChosIs
(p2.0) The relationship between smoking and antipsychotic medications is worth examining in detail. Some early reports state that smoking ameliorates previously noted psychomotor slowing seen with first-generation antipsychotics (FGA) such as haloperidol. 30 The basis of this association arises from nicotine's potential to increase dopaminergic activity and to compensate for the preferential D2 blockage caused by FGA. 2 Nicotine use has been associated with lower levels of antipsychoticinduced akathisia. 31 This could explain the increased propensity for smoking in patients exhibiting akathisia, although this is not a universal finding. 32 Clozapine has a higher affinity for D4 than D2 receptors, lowering the baseline risks of extrapyramidal side effects and akathisia. 33 As a result, smoking may confer little symptomatic relief in patients on clozapine, compared with those on FGA. 34 Nicotine induces cytochrome P450, thus increasing the metabolism of some antipsychotic drugs. This lowers their plasma levels and reduces the antipsychotic efficacy. 35 As such, continued nicotine consumption may have adverse effects on the efficacy of antipsychotic regimes. This may increase the risk of psychosis relapse, worsening disease progression and complications from antecedent pathology.
## (s8) pros And Cons of nICoTInE In psyChosIs
(p8.0) The relationship between smoking and antipsychotic medications is worth examining in detail. Some early reports state that smoking ameliorates previously noted psychomotor slowing seen with first-generation antipsychotics (FGA) such as haloperidol. 30 The basis of this association arises from nicotine's potential to increase dopaminergic activity and to compensate for the preferential D2 blockage caused by FGA. 2 Nicotine use has been associated with lower levels of antipsychoticinduced akathisia. 31 This could explain the increased propensity for smoking in patients exhibiting akathisia, although this is not a universal finding. 32 Clozapine has a higher affinity for D4 than D2 receptors, lowering the baseline risks of extrapyramidal side effects and akathisia. 33 As a result, smoking may confer little symptomatic relief in patients on clozapine, compared with those on FGA. 34 Nicotine induces cytochrome P450, thus increasing the metabolism of some antipsychotic drugs. This lowers their plasma levels and reduces the antipsychotic efficacy. 35 As such, continued nicotine consumption may have adverse effects on the efficacy of antipsychotic regimes. This may increase the risk of psychosis relapse, worsening disease progression and complications from antecedent pathology.
