# Comparative Study of Semiconductors for Terahertz Generation by Nonlinear Optical Process: An Overview Email address

CorpusID: 257482338 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83a3eae6640676ef854f136e2fbad04dc3ed7ab9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83a3eae6640676ef854f136e2fbad04dc3ed7ab9)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Terahertz (THz) radiation is an electromagnetic radiation in the frequency range from 0.3 THz to 3 THz, corresponding to wavelengths from 1 mm to 100 μm, although the boundary of these frequency range is not strict and sometimes narrower to only 1 THz. Terahertz band located between microwaves and infrared radiation frequency band, and it shares some properties with each of these other two electromagnetic radiation. THz radiation is non-ionizing radiation (unless on a very high intensity [1]). The THz band had been remained unexplored for a long time due to the lack of useful sources and detectors, making this spectral region often called THz-gap.
## (s7) Data Lacking and How to Determine It
(p7.0) Despite being an important key for alternative THz sources, some of intrinsic properties of most semiconductor crystals are remain unknown. For example, despite the established summary on theoretical models and experimental values of 2PA and 3PA coefficients for a few common materials, little is known about the four-photon absorption (4PA) and nonlinearities of even higher order in semiconductors and other important optical materials. The knowledge of 4PA and higher-order nonlinearities can be crucial for applications driven by infrared pulses. For example, in the newly developed very promising semiconductor THz generators, 4PA can be a major design issue [64]. There is even no report of even 2PA for Selenium and Tellurium.
## (s13) ZnTe
(p13.0) Valence electrons in Zinc Telluride with 2.26 eV direct band gap can be excited with minimum photon wavelength of 548.6 nm, in which we can effectively pump until 8PA with our chosen 3900 nm pump wavelength. Consequently, for pump wavelengths above 1.65 µm, the absorption edge is for 3PA, only 4PA and higher order MPA are effective.

(p13.1) But unfortunately, the MPA coefficient experimental measurement results for this material are only available until 4PA, which is 3.5 × 10 -4 cm 5 /GW 3 measured at 1750 nm. This value still corresponds to the same order of MPA with 2060 nm wavelength, so we also include it into data collection. For lower pump wavelength, ZnTe can be used in collinear alignment but with the higher MPA coefficient for 2PA makes the output efficiency would be small as the free-carrier absorption would be higher. The efficiency of THz generation in ZnTe could be increased by two orders of magnitude, from 3.1 × 10 −5 to as high as 0.7% [60]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for ZnTe are presented in table 2 below:  

(p13.2) Valence electrons in Zinc Telluride with 2.26 eV direct band gap can be excited with minimum photon wavelength of 548.6 nm, in which we can effectively pump until 8PA with our chosen 3900 nm pump wavelength. Consequently, for pump wavelengths above 1.65 µm, the absorption edge is for 3PA, only 4PA and higher order MPA are effective.

(p13.3) But unfortunately, the MPA coefficient experimental measurement results for this material are only available until 4PA, which is 3.5 × 10 -4 cm 5 /GW 3 measured at 1750 nm. This value still corresponds to the same order of MPA with 2060 nm wavelength, so we also include it into data collection. For lower pump wavelength, ZnTe can be used in collinear alignment but with the higher MPA coefficient for 2PA makes the output efficiency would be small as the free-carrier absorption would be higher. The efficiency of THz generation in ZnTe could be increased by two orders of magnitude, from 3.1 × 10 −5 to as high as 0.7% [60]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for ZnTe are presented in table 2 below:  
## (s14) GaP
(p14.0) GaP is another semiconductor nonlinear material of high interest for efficient THz generation, with 2.48 eV direct band gap. But no experimental data for higher order PA after 4PA coefficient are available. Thus, there is a clearly perceived lack of knowledge on important material data. The value of MPA coefficient for GaP at 4PA written here, 2.6 × 10 -4 cm5/GW3 was measured at 1750 nm cm5/GW3 measured at 1750 nm via indirect band gap absorption. The absorption edge is on 3PA as GaP, thus only 3PA and higher order are effective. The choice of the pump wavelength longer than the cut-off for 4PA ensured that no inter-band linear, as well as two-and three-photon absorptions had to be taken into account. GaP also have an indirect band gap mode, that shown to have a slightly different behavior compared to its direct band gap mode [92]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for GaP are presented in table 4. 

(p14.1) GaP is another semiconductor nonlinear material of high interest for efficient THz generation, with 2.48 eV direct band gap. But no experimental data for higher order PA after 4PA coefficient are available. Thus, there is a clearly perceived lack of knowledge on important material data. The value of MPA coefficient for GaP at 4PA written here, 2.6 × 10 -4 cm5/GW3 was measured at 1750 nm cm5/GW3 measured at 1750 nm via indirect band gap absorption. The absorption edge is on 3PA as GaP, thus only 3PA and higher order are effective. The choice of the pump wavelength longer than the cut-off for 4PA ensured that no inter-band linear, as well as two-and three-photon absorptions had to be taken into account. GaP also have an indirect band gap mode, that shown to have a slightly different behavior compared to its direct band gap mode [92]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for GaP are presented in table 4. 
## (s17) Se
(p17.0) Selenium crystal are rarely used for THz materials in the present time, even though the trigonal Selenium have a direct band gap energy in the same order of most common other zincblende materials (such as ZnTe and GaP). As far as our knowledge, no previous studies have been done to measure the MPA beyond 3PA. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium [95], thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far. The data related for MPA are shown in the table 7. 

(p17.1) Selenium crystal are rarely used for THz materials in the present time, even though the trigonal Selenium have a direct band gap energy in the same order of most common other zincblende materials (such as ZnTe and GaP). As far as our knowledge, no previous studies have been done to measure the MPA beyond 3PA. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium [95], thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far. The data related for MPA are shown in the table 7. 
## (s19) Electro-Optic Coefficient and Nonlinear Coefficient
(p19.0) Optical rectification (OR) can occur in the bulk of a material and has been studied in detail in various crystals. Complete expressions have been given for zincblende crystal faces of arbitrary orientation [97]. The terahertz generation in uniaxial birefringent crystals like LN or Se is similar in principle but differs in the important respect that the polarization of the pump beam rotates as it traverses the crystal. These processes directly related to the nonlinear susceptibility of the materials, which in tensor form have the non-vanishing term d14 called nonlinear coefficient (in pm/V). Smaller nonlinear coefficient means that longer effective interaction length for OR are needed for generating THz radiation, compared to the ones with higher nonlinear coefficient.

(p19.1) Another effect which may lead to a distortion of the THz pulse is the dependence of the electro-optic coefficient (r) on the THz frequency. The common description of the electro-optic (EO) effect is in terms of the inverse dielectric tensor ε −1 . Under the influence of an electric field, ε −1 changes from its zero-field value ε −1 (0) into ε −1 (E) with the following relation:

(p19.2) The EO tensor r is a third-rank tensor. Since the inverse dielectric tensor is symmetric , which means the components are not equal to zero which have all different indices [32]. For an effective detection, EO coefficient should be high. The clamped electro-optic coefficients r can be used to calculate the nonlinear optical coefficient for optical rectification deff as: 4   Values marked with * are calculated in this study.

(p19.3) As a well-known semiconductor for generating THz sources, there are already plenty of values obtained for ZnTe. While ZnTe shows a high effective nonlinear coefficient (around 68 pm/V), it also has high electro-optic coefficient. Tellurium on the other hand have a remarkably high nonlinear coefficient, but with its small EO coefficient makes it not quite effective for detection. ZnSe and GaP have the lowest value of nonlinear coefficient amongst the other materials chosen here, with GaP also have the tendency to be the most challenging material for EO sampling amongst the other zincblende-type semiconductors here. CdTe have surprisingly large EO coefficients due to its high degree of anisotropy amongst the other zincblende crystals and therefore, it has the highest detection response for small frequencies. However, for frequencies over 1 THz the response is limited by phase velocity mismatch and the phonon resonance. The spectral maximum of the detected THz pulse is around 0.5 THz [37].

(p19.4) Selenium on the other hand exhibit a promising result for being measured [62] to have both high EO coefficient and nonlinear coefficient. The phenomenon is explained by the fact that the two materials are helical chains and thus, possess a high degree of anisotropy. This point of view suggests that CdTe, Se, and Te are excellent materials and may find valuable applications in THz generation based on optical rectification.

(p19.5) Optical rectification (OR) can occur in the bulk of a material and has been studied in detail in various crystals. Complete expressions have been given for zincblende crystal faces of arbitrary orientation [97]. The terahertz generation in uniaxial birefringent crystals like LN or Se is similar in principle but differs in the important respect that the polarization of the pump beam rotates as it traverses the crystal. These processes directly related to the nonlinear susceptibility of the materials, which in tensor form have the non-vanishing term d14 called nonlinear coefficient (in pm/V). Smaller nonlinear coefficient means that longer effective interaction length for OR are needed for generating THz radiation, compared to the ones with higher nonlinear coefficient.

(p19.6) Another effect which may lead to a distortion of the THz pulse is the dependence of the electro-optic coefficient (r) on the THz frequency. The common description of the electro-optic (EO) effect is in terms of the inverse dielectric tensor ε −1 . Under the influence of an electric field, ε −1 changes from its zero-field value ε −1 (0) into ε −1 (E) with the following relation:

(p19.7) The EO tensor r is a third-rank tensor. Since the inverse dielectric tensor is symmetric , which means the components are not equal to zero which have all different indices [32]. For an effective detection, EO coefficient should be high. The clamped electro-optic coefficients r can be used to calculate the nonlinear optical coefficient for optical rectification deff as: 4   Values marked with * are calculated in this study.

(p19.8) As a well-known semiconductor for generating THz sources, there are already plenty of values obtained for ZnTe. While ZnTe shows a high effective nonlinear coefficient (around 68 pm/V), it also has high electro-optic coefficient. Tellurium on the other hand have a remarkably high nonlinear coefficient, but with its small EO coefficient makes it not quite effective for detection. ZnSe and GaP have the lowest value of nonlinear coefficient amongst the other materials chosen here, with GaP also have the tendency to be the most challenging material for EO sampling amongst the other zincblende-type semiconductors here. CdTe have surprisingly large EO coefficients due to its high degree of anisotropy amongst the other zincblende crystals and therefore, it has the highest detection response for small frequencies. However, for frequencies over 1 THz the response is limited by phase velocity mismatch and the phonon resonance. The spectral maximum of the detected THz pulse is around 0.5 THz [37].

(p19.9) Selenium on the other hand exhibit a promising result for being measured [62] to have both high EO coefficient and nonlinear coefficient. The phenomenon is explained by the fact that the two materials are helical chains and thus, possess a high degree of anisotropy. This point of view suggests that CdTe, Se, and Te are excellent materials and may find valuable applications in THz generation based on optical rectification.
## (s22) Comparison
(p22.0) From the data that has been presented in this study, we can see that even though ZnTe and GaP is the most popular semiconductors for THz generation, there are several other materials that are more superior in several aspect. Small FOM of GaP and ZnSe are a major drawback to setup a highly efficient THz sources. Furthermore, the high absorption at higher THz frequency also gives another challenge to consider this material further for THz generation. However, both GaP and ZnTe has a nice velocity matching condition at lower pump wavelength and makes them suitable for collinear configuration.

(p22.1) Gallium arsenide inversion zone lies between 0.8 and 1.0 µm indicating a high absorption for this wavelength. For 800 nm pumping wavelength, more energy should be significantly added. Having a large wavelength range of MPA for each order, GaAs also have a high absorption at lower pump wavelength for THz generation with absorption edge at 4PA. Making GaAs only effective pumped at 5PA order or higher. GaAs also inhibit a large nonlinear coefficient, but a relatively small EO coefficient compared to the others. With its small required-tilting-angle and small absorption at 1 THz as well, we can expect GaAs as the good material for THz generations.

(p22.2) On the other hand, CdTe have surprisingly large EO coefficients due to its high degree of anisotropy amongst the other zincblende crystals and therefore, it has the highest detection response for small frequencies. This material also exhibits the highest FOM amongst the other zincblende materials presented in this study and calculated tilting angle below 25°. But as far as our knowledge, we are not aware of any reported use of this material for optical rectification. The reason is that CdSe is strongly absorbing at the 800 nm output of the Ti:sapphire laser, which is the most commonly used ultrashort pulse source. This behaviour of CdTe also limiting its potential to be an efficient crystal for THz generation.

(p22.3) Tellurium despite having huge nonlinear coefficient and low THz absorption at 1 THz (making it have large FOM), are strictly required long pump wavelength and large tilting angle (45°). Due to its narrow bandgap, the corresponding lower limit wavelength of MPA for Te is 2755 nm. The high MPA coefficient at 4PA (20 cm/GW) shows a high free-carrier absorption even on the long-wavelength range.

(p22.4) Selenium crystal have surprisingly huge EO coefficient and nonlinear coefficient as well. Combined with the big FOM values, this material looks very interesting to be considered as the best material candidate for THz generation by OR. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium, thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far for the other materials chosen here. The only major drawback of Se is the high required tilting angle value which can reach 35° for 1030 nm pump wavelength. Not to mention that ordinary ray of Se shows disparity of index at 3900 nm pump, even though the extraordinary ray shows a very good velocity matching with only 7° tilting. But despite this drawback, Selenium is still superior from a lot of aspect compared to the other materials chosen here. Some results [61] also showing a spectrally intense, broadband THz source can be built with this crystal.

(p22.5) From the data that has been presented in this study, we can see that even though ZnTe and GaP is the most popular semiconductors for THz generation, there are several other materials that are more superior in several aspect. Small FOM of GaP and ZnSe are a major drawback to setup a highly efficient THz sources. Furthermore, the high absorption at higher THz frequency also gives another challenge to consider this material further for THz generation. However, both GaP and ZnTe has a nice velocity matching condition at lower pump wavelength and makes them suitable for collinear configuration.

(p22.6) Gallium arsenide inversion zone lies between 0.8 and 1.0 µm indicating a high absorption for this wavelength. For 800 nm pumping wavelength, more energy should be significantly added. Having a large wavelength range of MPA for each order, GaAs also have a high absorption at lower pump wavelength for THz generation with absorption edge at 4PA. Making GaAs only effective pumped at 5PA order or higher. GaAs also inhibit a large nonlinear coefficient, but a relatively small EO coefficient compared to the others. With its small required-tilting-angle and small absorption at 1 THz as well, we can expect GaAs as the good material for THz generations.

(p22.7) On the other hand, CdTe have surprisingly large EO coefficients due to its high degree of anisotropy amongst the other zincblende crystals and therefore, it has the highest detection response for small frequencies. This material also exhibits the highest FOM amongst the other zincblende materials presented in this study and calculated tilting angle below 25°. But as far as our knowledge, we are not aware of any reported use of this material for optical rectification. The reason is that CdSe is strongly absorbing at the 800 nm output of the Ti:sapphire laser, which is the most commonly used ultrashort pulse source. This behaviour of CdTe also limiting its potential to be an efficient crystal for THz generation.

(p22.8) Tellurium despite having huge nonlinear coefficient and low THz absorption at 1 THz (making it have large FOM), are strictly required long pump wavelength and large tilting angle (45°). Due to its narrow bandgap, the corresponding lower limit wavelength of MPA for Te is 2755 nm. The high MPA coefficient at 4PA (20 cm/GW) shows a high free-carrier absorption even on the long-wavelength range.

(p22.9) Selenium crystal have surprisingly huge EO coefficient and nonlinear coefficient as well. Combined with the big FOM values, this material looks very interesting to be considered as the best material candidate for THz generation by OR. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium, thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far for the other materials chosen here. The only major drawback of Se is the high required tilting angle value which can reach 35° for 1030 nm pump wavelength. Not to mention that ordinary ray of Se shows disparity of index at 3900 nm pump, even though the extraordinary ray shows a very good velocity matching with only 7° tilting. But despite this drawback, Selenium is still superior from a lot of aspect compared to the other materials chosen here. Some results [61] also showing a spectrally intense, broadband THz source can be built with this crystal.
## (s38) Introduction
(p38.0) Terahertz (THz) radiation is an electromagnetic radiation in the frequency range from 0.3 THz to 3 THz, corresponding to wavelengths from 1 mm to 100 μm, although the boundary of these frequency range is not strict and sometimes narrower to only 1 THz. Terahertz band located between microwaves and infrared radiation frequency band, and it shares some properties with each of these other two electromagnetic radiation. THz radiation is non-ionizing radiation (unless on a very high intensity [1]). The THz band had been remained unexplored for a long time due to the lack of useful sources and detectors, making this spectral region often called THz-gap.
## (s45) Data Lacking and How to Determine It
(p45.0) Despite being an important key for alternative THz sources, some of intrinsic properties of most semiconductor crystals are remain unknown. For example, despite the established summary on theoretical models and experimental values of 2PA and 3PA coefficients for a few common materials, little is known about the four-photon absorption (4PA) and nonlinearities of even higher order in semiconductors and other important optical materials. The knowledge of 4PA and higher-order nonlinearities can be crucial for applications driven by infrared pulses. For example, in the newly developed very promising semiconductor THz generators, 4PA can be a major design issue [64]. There is even no report of even 2PA for Selenium and Tellurium.
## (s51) ZnTe
(p51.0) Valence electrons in Zinc Telluride with 2.26 eV direct band gap can be excited with minimum photon wavelength of 548.6 nm, in which we can effectively pump until 8PA with our chosen 3900 nm pump wavelength. Consequently, for pump wavelengths above 1.65 µm, the absorption edge is for 3PA, only 4PA and higher order MPA are effective.

(p51.1) But unfortunately, the MPA coefficient experimental measurement results for this material are only available until 4PA, which is 3.5 × 10 -4 cm 5 /GW 3 measured at 1750 nm. This value still corresponds to the same order of MPA with 2060 nm wavelength, so we also include it into data collection. For lower pump wavelength, ZnTe can be used in collinear alignment but with the higher MPA coefficient for 2PA makes the output efficiency would be small as the free-carrier absorption would be higher. The efficiency of THz generation in ZnTe could be increased by two orders of magnitude, from 3.1 × 10 −5 to as high as 0.7% [60]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for ZnTe are presented in table 2 below:  

(p51.2) Valence electrons in Zinc Telluride with 2.26 eV direct band gap can be excited with minimum photon wavelength of 548.6 nm, in which we can effectively pump until 8PA with our chosen 3900 nm pump wavelength. Consequently, for pump wavelengths above 1.65 µm, the absorption edge is for 3PA, only 4PA and higher order MPA are effective.

(p51.3) But unfortunately, the MPA coefficient experimental measurement results for this material are only available until 4PA, which is 3.5 × 10 -4 cm 5 /GW 3 measured at 1750 nm. This value still corresponds to the same order of MPA with 2060 nm wavelength, so we also include it into data collection. For lower pump wavelength, ZnTe can be used in collinear alignment but with the higher MPA coefficient for 2PA makes the output efficiency would be small as the free-carrier absorption would be higher. The efficiency of THz generation in ZnTe could be increased by two orders of magnitude, from 3.1 × 10 −5 to as high as 0.7% [60]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for ZnTe are presented in table 2 below:  
## (s52) GaP
(p52.0) GaP is another semiconductor nonlinear material of high interest for efficient THz generation, with 2.48 eV direct band gap. But no experimental data for higher order PA after 4PA coefficient are available. Thus, there is a clearly perceived lack of knowledge on important material data. The value of MPA coefficient for GaP at 4PA written here, 2.6 × 10 -4 cm5/GW3 was measured at 1750 nm cm5/GW3 measured at 1750 nm via indirect band gap absorption. The absorption edge is on 3PA as GaP, thus only 3PA and higher order are effective. The choice of the pump wavelength longer than the cut-off for 4PA ensured that no inter-band linear, as well as two-and three-photon absorptions had to be taken into account. GaP also have an indirect band gap mode, that shown to have a slightly different behavior compared to its direct band gap mode [92]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for GaP are presented in table 4. 

(p52.1) GaP is another semiconductor nonlinear material of high interest for efficient THz generation, with 2.48 eV direct band gap. But no experimental data for higher order PA after 4PA coefficient are available. Thus, there is a clearly perceived lack of knowledge on important material data. The value of MPA coefficient for GaP at 4PA written here, 2.6 × 10 -4 cm5/GW3 was measured at 1750 nm cm5/GW3 measured at 1750 nm via indirect band gap absorption. The absorption edge is on 3PA as GaP, thus only 3PA and higher order are effective. The choice of the pump wavelength longer than the cut-off for 4PA ensured that no inter-band linear, as well as two-and three-photon absorptions had to be taken into account. GaP also have an indirect band gap mode, that shown to have a slightly different behavior compared to its direct band gap mode [92]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for GaP are presented in table 4. 
## (s55) Se
(p55.0) Selenium crystal are rarely used for THz materials in the present time, even though the trigonal Selenium have a direct band gap energy in the same order of most common other zincblende materials (such as ZnTe and GaP). As far as our knowledge, no previous studies have been done to measure the MPA beyond 3PA. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium [95], thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far. The data related for MPA are shown in the table 7. 

(p55.1) Selenium crystal are rarely used for THz materials in the present time, even though the trigonal Selenium have a direct band gap energy in the same order of most common other zincblende materials (such as ZnTe and GaP). As far as our knowledge, no previous studies have been done to measure the MPA beyond 3PA. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium [95], thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far. The data related for MPA are shown in the table 7. 
## (s57) Electro-Optic Coefficient and Nonlinear Coefficient
(p57.0) Optical rectification (OR) can occur in the bulk of a material and has been studied in detail in various crystals. Complete expressions have been given for zincblende crystal faces of arbitrary orientation [97]. The terahertz generation in uniaxial birefringent crystals like LN or Se is similar in principle but differs in the important respect that the polarization of the pump beam rotates as it traverses the crystal. These processes directly related to the nonlinear susceptibility of the materials, which in tensor form have the non-vanishing term d14 called nonlinear coefficient (in pm/V). Smaller nonlinear coefficient means that longer effective interaction length for OR are needed for generating THz radiation, compared to the ones with higher nonlinear coefficient.

(p57.1) Another effect which may lead to a distortion of the THz pulse is the dependence of the electro-optic coefficient (r) on the THz frequency. The common description of the electro-optic (EO) effect is in terms of the inverse dielectric tensor ε −1 . Under the influence of an electric field, ε −1 changes from its zero-field value ε −1 (0) into ε −1 (E) with the following relation:

(p57.2) The EO tensor r is a third-rank tensor. Since the inverse dielectric tensor is symmetric , which means the components are not equal to zero which have all different indices [32]. For an effective detection, EO coefficient should be high. The clamped electro-optic coefficients r can be used to calculate the nonlinear optical coefficient for optical rectification deff as: 4   Values marked with * are calculated in this study.

(p57.3) As a well-known semiconductor for generating THz sources, there are already plenty of values obtained for ZnTe. While ZnTe shows a high effective nonlinear coefficient (around 68 pm/V), it also has high electro-optic coefficient. Tellurium on the other hand have a remarkably high nonlinear coefficient, but with its small EO coefficient makes it not quite effective for detection. ZnSe and GaP have the lowest value of nonlinear coefficient amongst the other materials chosen here, with GaP also have the tendency to be the most challenging material for EO sampling amongst the other zincblende-type semiconductors here. CdTe have surprisingly large EO coefficients due to its high degree of anisotropy amongst the other zincblende crystals and therefore, it has the highest detection response for small frequencies. However, for frequencies over 1 THz the response is limited by phase velocity mismatch and the phonon resonance. The spectral maximum of the detected THz pulse is around 0.5 THz [37].

(p57.4) Selenium on the other hand exhibit a promising result for being measured [62] to have both high EO coefficient and nonlinear coefficient. The phenomenon is explained by the fact that the two materials are helical chains and thus, possess a high degree of anisotropy. This point of view suggests that CdTe, Se, and Te are excellent materials and may find valuable applications in THz generation based on optical rectification.

(p57.5) Optical rectification (OR) can occur in the bulk of a material and has been studied in detail in various crystals. Complete expressions have been given for zincblende crystal faces of arbitrary orientation [97]. The terahertz generation in uniaxial birefringent crystals like LN or Se is similar in principle but differs in the important respect that the polarization of the pump beam rotates as it traverses the crystal. These processes directly related to the nonlinear susceptibility of the materials, which in tensor form have the non-vanishing term d14 called nonlinear coefficient (in pm/V). Smaller nonlinear coefficient means that longer effective interaction length for OR are needed for generating THz radiation, compared to the ones with higher nonlinear coefficient.

(p57.6) Another effect which may lead to a distortion of the THz pulse is the dependence of the electro-optic coefficient (r) on the THz frequency. The common description of the electro-optic (EO) effect is in terms of the inverse dielectric tensor ε −1 . Under the influence of an electric field, ε −1 changes from its zero-field value ε −1 (0) into ε −1 (E) with the following relation:

(p57.7) The EO tensor r is a third-rank tensor. Since the inverse dielectric tensor is symmetric , which means the components are not equal to zero which have all different indices [32]. For an effective detection, EO coefficient should be high. The clamped electro-optic coefficients r can be used to calculate the nonlinear optical coefficient for optical rectification deff as: 4   Values marked with * are calculated in this study.

(p57.8) As a well-known semiconductor for generating THz sources, there are already plenty of values obtained for ZnTe. While ZnTe shows a high effective nonlinear coefficient (around 68 pm/V), it also has high electro-optic coefficient. Tellurium on the other hand have a remarkably high nonlinear coefficient, but with its small EO coefficient makes it not quite effective for detection. ZnSe and GaP have the lowest value of nonlinear coefficient amongst the other materials chosen here, with GaP also have the tendency to be the most challenging material for EO sampling amongst the other zincblende-type semiconductors here. CdTe have surprisingly large EO coefficients due to its high degree of anisotropy amongst the other zincblende crystals and therefore, it has the highest detection response for small frequencies. However, for frequencies over 1 THz the response is limited by phase velocity mismatch and the phonon resonance. The spectral maximum of the detected THz pulse is around 0.5 THz [37].

(p57.9) Selenium on the other hand exhibit a promising result for being measured [62] to have both high EO coefficient and nonlinear coefficient. The phenomenon is explained by the fact that the two materials are helical chains and thus, possess a high degree of anisotropy. This point of view suggests that CdTe, Se, and Te are excellent materials and may find valuable applications in THz generation based on optical rectification.
## (s60) Comparison
(p60.0) From the data that has been presented in this study, we can see that even though ZnTe and GaP is the most popular semiconductors for THz generation, there are several other materials that are more superior in several aspect. Small FOM of GaP and ZnSe are a major drawback to setup a highly efficient THz sources. Furthermore, the high absorption at higher THz frequency also gives another challenge to consider this material further for THz generation. However, both GaP and ZnTe has a nice velocity matching condition at lower pump wavelength and makes them suitable for collinear configuration.

(p60.1) Gallium arsenide inversion zone lies between 0.8 and 1.0 µm indicating a high absorption for this wavelength. For 800 nm pumping wavelength, more energy should be significantly added. Having a large wavelength range of MPA for each order, GaAs also have a high absorption at lower pump wavelength for THz generation with absorption edge at 4PA. Making GaAs only effective pumped at 5PA order or higher. GaAs also inhibit a large nonlinear coefficient, but a relatively small EO coefficient compared to the others. With its small required-tilting-angle and small absorption at 1 THz as well, we can expect GaAs as the good material for THz generations.

(p60.2) On the other hand, CdTe have surprisingly large EO coefficients due to its high degree of anisotropy amongst the other zincblende crystals and therefore, it has the highest detection response for small frequencies. This material also exhibits the highest FOM amongst the other zincblende materials presented in this study and calculated tilting angle below 25°. But as far as our knowledge, we are not aware of any reported use of this material for optical rectification. The reason is that CdSe is strongly absorbing at the 800 nm output of the Ti:sapphire laser, which is the most commonly used ultrashort pulse source. This behaviour of CdTe also limiting its potential to be an efficient crystal for THz generation.

(p60.3) Tellurium despite having huge nonlinear coefficient and low THz absorption at 1 THz (making it have large FOM), are strictly required long pump wavelength and large tilting angle (45°). Due to its narrow bandgap, the corresponding lower limit wavelength of MPA for Te is 2755 nm. The high MPA coefficient at 4PA (20 cm/GW) shows a high free-carrier absorption even on the long-wavelength range.

(p60.4) Selenium crystal have surprisingly huge EO coefficient and nonlinear coefficient as well. Combined with the big FOM values, this material looks very interesting to be considered as the best material candidate for THz generation by OR. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium, thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far for the other materials chosen here. The only major drawback of Se is the high required tilting angle value which can reach 35° for 1030 nm pump wavelength. Not to mention that ordinary ray of Se shows disparity of index at 3900 nm pump, even though the extraordinary ray shows a very good velocity matching with only 7° tilting. But despite this drawback, Selenium is still superior from a lot of aspect compared to the other materials chosen here. Some results [61] also showing a spectrally intense, broadband THz source can be built with this crystal.

(p60.5) From the data that has been presented in this study, we can see that even though ZnTe and GaP is the most popular semiconductors for THz generation, there are several other materials that are more superior in several aspect. Small FOM of GaP and ZnSe are a major drawback to setup a highly efficient THz sources. Furthermore, the high absorption at higher THz frequency also gives another challenge to consider this material further for THz generation. However, both GaP and ZnTe has a nice velocity matching condition at lower pump wavelength and makes them suitable for collinear configuration.

(p60.6) Gallium arsenide inversion zone lies between 0.8 and 1.0 µm indicating a high absorption for this wavelength. For 800 nm pumping wavelength, more energy should be significantly added. Having a large wavelength range of MPA for each order, GaAs also have a high absorption at lower pump wavelength for THz generation with absorption edge at 4PA. Making GaAs only effective pumped at 5PA order or higher. GaAs also inhibit a large nonlinear coefficient, but a relatively small EO coefficient compared to the others. With its small required-tilting-angle and small absorption at 1 THz as well, we can expect GaAs as the good material for THz generations.

(p60.7) On the other hand, CdTe have surprisingly large EO coefficients due to its high degree of anisotropy amongst the other zincblende crystals and therefore, it has the highest detection response for small frequencies. This material also exhibits the highest FOM amongst the other zincblende materials presented in this study and calculated tilting angle below 25°. But as far as our knowledge, we are not aware of any reported use of this material for optical rectification. The reason is that CdSe is strongly absorbing at the 800 nm output of the Ti:sapphire laser, which is the most commonly used ultrashort pulse source. This behaviour of CdTe also limiting its potential to be an efficient crystal for THz generation.

(p60.8) Tellurium despite having huge nonlinear coefficient and low THz absorption at 1 THz (making it have large FOM), are strictly required long pump wavelength and large tilting angle (45°). Due to its narrow bandgap, the corresponding lower limit wavelength of MPA for Te is 2755 nm. The high MPA coefficient at 4PA (20 cm/GW) shows a high free-carrier absorption even on the long-wavelength range.

(p60.9) Selenium crystal have surprisingly huge EO coefficient and nonlinear coefficient as well. Combined with the big FOM values, this material looks very interesting to be considered as the best material candidate for THz generation by OR. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium, thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far for the other materials chosen here. The only major drawback of Se is the high required tilting angle value which can reach 35° for 1030 nm pump wavelength. Not to mention that ordinary ray of Se shows disparity of index at 3900 nm pump, even though the extraordinary ray shows a very good velocity matching with only 7° tilting. But despite this drawback, Selenium is still superior from a lot of aspect compared to the other materials chosen here. Some results [61] also showing a spectrally intense, broadband THz source can be built with this crystal.
