# Carry-Over of Aflatoxin B1 from Feed to Cow Milk-A Review

CorpusID: 257383922 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8292a4886457ffad59b952bcc34d9b737d930356](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8292a4886457ffad59b952bcc34d9b737d930356)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Mycotoxins consumed by food-producing animals with their feed can be transferred into their tissues and occur in foods made of them for human consumption, e.g., in milk consumed daily. Aflatoxins are mycotoxins of great concern, with aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) produced by fungi on certain crops and converted into its metabolite aflatoxin M1 (AFM1) when ingested by cows with feed. AFB1 and AFM1 are both toxic and carcinogenic compounds.

(p0.1) Quantification of this transfer (carry-over) provides information about the relationship of the levels of contamination in feed and the resulting contamination in milk. Several studies have been published in the last few decades to determine the carry-over of aflatoxins from feed to milk. This transfer can be described, on the one hand, by the so-called bioconcentration factor (BF), showing AFM1 concentration in milk as a percentage of the AFB1 concentration in feed (1).
## (s1) Aflatoxin in the Cow's Body
(p1.0) A certain part of AFB1 consumed by ruminants via feed is degraded by the rumen microbiota and transformed into aflatoxicol (AFL) [10]. The remaining AFB1 is absorbed in the gut, first by passive diffusion in the small intestine, passing into the blood, where it is transported by red blood cells and plasma proteins to the liver.

(p1.1) Several aflatoxin metabolites are produced in the liver. In fact, they have been used as biomarkers of animal exposure, particularly for the evaluation of the effect of mycotoxinreducing interventions, the decreasing residue level in the liver demonstrating the efficiency of the adsorbent studied [10]. The main hydroxylated metabolite of AFB1 is AFM1, which is formed through mediation of the cytochrome P450 (Cyt P450) enzyme system in the liver, and finally shows up in blood, milk, tissues, and biological fluids [10,11].

(p1.2) In fact, the oxidation of AFB1 into AFB1-8,9-epoxide occurs in the liver, which can react with RNA and DNA or with liver proteins, thus leading to hepatocellular carcinomas or liver toxicity. The epoxide is then converted into less toxic metabolites by hydroxylation, such as AFM1, aflatoxin Q1 (AFQ1), or aflatoxin P1 (AFP1) [12].
## (s8) Source of Intake
(p8.0) Some articles highlight that the source of intake matters regarding the carry-over value. Applebaum et al. (1982) [18] studied aflatoxin transfer using 10 Holstein cows; 6 cows received pure aflatoxin for 7 days, while 3 cows received a preparation containing AFB1 and other aflatoxins and metabolites produced by an Aspergillus culture. One cow received a higher dose of pure aflatoxin. The effects on feed consumption and milk production were also studied during the treatment and for 5 days before and 8 days after it. While differences in total feed intake were not significant, milk production was significantly reduced and, consequently, AFM1 level was increased in the milk of cows consuming preparations containing impure (13 mg/day) AFB1 toxin. The authors hypothesized that this could be due to the effect of other metabolites produced by the mold, since the amount of AFB1 administered was the same as the amounts of pure AFB1 administered [18].
## (s15) Model Established by Veldman et al. (1992)
(p15.0) Veldman et al. (1992) [28] established a linear relationship between carry-over and milk yield, based on their observations (7). carry − over rate = 0.0013 kg milk per cow per day − 0.0026, (r = 0.99)
## (s16) AFM1
(p16.0) ng kgmilk = 1.19 AFB1 intake (µg per cow per day) + 1.9 , (r = 0.93) (8) They noted that carry-over studies had generally used a small number of animals and that there was a high degree of variability in milk AFM1 levels between individual animals. The animals used in the experiments came from different breeds, concentrates with different compositions were used in the experiments, aflatoxin was added from different sources, and supplementary feeds with different compositions were used [56].
## (s17) Model Established by Van
(p17.0) According to the model they established, part of daily consumed AFB1 is absorbed through the gut wall, metabolized into the AFM1 toxin, and eliminated via different pathways. The resulting AFM1 appears in milk and is eliminated via other routes. In the steady state of the model, the carry-over (the ratio of AFM1 excreted with milk and AFB1 ingested with feed daily) can be described, and the bioconcentration factor (the ratio of AFM1 concentration in milk and AFB1 concentration in feed) can be derived [56].
## (s21) Experience with the Carry-Over Equations
(p21.0) Hernandez and Navarro (2014) [51] cited different carry-over calculations [16,28,56] and used the formula published by Van Eijkeren et al. (2006) [56] to calculate theoretical AFM levels in milk based on measured AFB1 contents in different feedstuffs. Although, the theoretical concentration ranges they calculated suggested that the likelihood of AFM1 contamination in raw cow's milk at the studied farms was not very likely to occur, this fact could not be completely excluded in the case of changes in raw materials, intakes of concentrates, or the physiological changes that occur, particularly in high-yielding cows [51].

(p21.1) Van der Fels-Klerx et al. (2019) [72] modeled the entire production chain to study the effects of climate change on the aflatoxin B1 content of corn and the consequently appearing AFM1 level in milk. As a case study, considering the Eastern European contamination of 2013, an average Dutch milk-producing farm was studied, where the compound feed production was assumed to be based on corn imported from Eastern Europe (Ukraine).
## (s22) Carry-Over Studies Underpinning Calculations of Regulatory Limits
(p22.0) Knowledge of the carry-over formula may help to determine the maximum allowable contamination of the feed, which results in a given maximum milk contamination target value. In 1992, Veldman et al. [28] concluded that the average daily AFB1 intake for one cow in the herd should not reach a level of 40 µg/cow in order to keep the AFM1 level of the produced milk below the limit of 0.05 µg/kg. Therefore, a feed was considered safe in terms of AFB1 concentration if the concentration multiplied by the consumed amount gave a value below 40 µg AFB1 per day. Consequently, according to the authors, the legal limit of 5 µg/kg would not be a guarantee that the AFM1 content of the milk would be adequate [28].
## (s24) Directions for Future Carry-Over Research
(p24.0) Climate change and extreme weather conditions are increasingly taking place, which must be considered in the context of food safety challenges. Both unexpected mycotoxins and unusual contaminant levels may occur in the future. As the extent of carryover depends largely on the animal's health status, health changes seen during daily examinations (liver damage, mastitis, ruminal acidosis) should also be considered in carry-over research [52].

(p24.1) The fact that different mycotoxins can be detected side by side in different crops makes it necessary to investigate their combined (synergistic, cumulative, or antagonistic) effects [52]. All these directions may determine future research on the carry-over of aflatoxins.
## (s30) Appendix A. Carry-Over Studies with Adsorbents
(p30.0) Appendix A.1. Activated Carbons and HSCAS Galvano et al. (1996) [29] studied the effect of using two activated charcoals, CAC1 and CAC2, and hydrated sodium calcium aluminosilicate (HSCAS) on the aflatoxin carry-over values in 12 Friesian cows in late lactation. The applied adsorbents were effective. When adding CAC1, the AFM1 concentration in milk was reduced to a higher extent (45.3%) than with HSCAS (32.5%). On the other hand, CAC2 reduced AFM1 content in milk by only 22%. Pelleting was unsuccessful in the case of CAC2, which could explain the observed lower performance of CAC2.

(p30.1) Carry-over ranged between 0.45 and 0.55% during the first and third weeks (when no adsorbents were added), while in the second week, when adsorbents were added, between 0.27 and 0.41%. The carry-over values related to milk yield were lower compared to the values observed by other authors [29].

(p30.2) The AFM1 content in milk was significantly lower in the second week (when adsorbents were added), compared to the others. Omitting the adsorbent from feed during the third week resulted in the aflatoxin content in milk returning to at least the same level as in the first week. AFM1 secretion, on the other hand, remained constant during the 3 weeks due to decreasing milk yield. The authors noted that average AFB1 intake was higher (55 µg/day) than the 40 µg/day maximum intake established by Veldman et al. (1992) [28], which was calculated to result in acceptable AFM1 contents in milk; however, the contamination level of milk did not reach the regulatory maximum level set by EU.

(p30.3) Later publications mention the variable effectiveness of activated carbons. The reason for this may be that the specificity of activated carbon is relatively low, and it also binds essential nutrients in addition to mycotoxins [9].
## (s32) Appendix A.3. Addressing Potential Side Effects of Clay-Combined Addition of Clay and Yeast or Natural Compounds
(p32.0) Considering that clay products have not consistently prevented decreases in milk yield caused by AFB1 ingestion [42], later studies on the effects of adsorbents focus on combined applications, including clay and yeast. Saccharomyces cerevisiae fermentation products (SCFPs) were reported to have potential to improve animal performance parameters [42]. Jiang et al. (2018) [42] studied the effects of a bentonite clay added to the diet of cows, with or without a high level of Saccharomyces cerevisiae fermentation product, and found that both treatments reduced the AFM1 concentration in milk and the transfer of AFB1 into milk AFM1 (1.01% and 0.94% compared to 1.65%). Although the carry-over decreasing effect was comparable between the two treatments using clay with and without Saccharomyces cerevisiae fermentation product, the authors found that adding the yeast fermentation product along with clay was better at maintaining milk production during an aflatoxin challenge than using the clay alone [42].

(p32.1) On the other hand, Weatherly et al. (2018) [67] found no differences in AF transfer or excretion in milk, and the adsorbent neither hindered nor improved cow feed intake, milk production, or efficiency, when yeast cell wall and bentonite-based adsorbent were studied together. Xiong et al. (2015) [17], using Solis Mos, an adsorbent containing sodium montmorillonite with live yeast on cows in later stages of milk production, consuming low or high aflatoxin levels, found that in addition to improving the antioxidant status independently of aflatoxin intake, the addition of the adsorbent eliminated the AFM1 background contamination of milk in the case of animals consuming uncontaminated feed as well. AFM1 concentration in milk and carry-over were reduced by 16% and 17.9%, respectively, when the adsorbent was given to the animals consuming low amounts of aflatoxin. No change in AFM1 excretion caused by the adsorbent was observed in the case of animals consuming larger amounts of aflatoxins [17].

(p32.2) Testing the same adsorbent during a long-term aflatoxin challenge, Xiong et al. (2018) [44] observed a significant reduction in milk AFM1 concentrations and transfer rates. Rodrigues et al. (2019) [46] tested the efficacy of two additives composed of high adsorbent clay minerals and inactivated yeast, Toxy-Nil and Unike Plus, and found that both adsorbents reduced the AF transfer into milk significantly. Supplementation with these also reduced the time required for the AFM1 level in milk to drop below the FDA limit after AFB1 was withdrawn from the diet [46]. Cha et al. (2021) [24] experienced significantly lower milk AFM1 concentrations and AFB1-AFM1 transfer rates (0.57% and 0.63% compared to 1.16%) when a montmorillonitediatomite based patented adsorbent and a montmorillonite, diatomite, yeast cell wall and sodium-alginate-based adsorbent were fed to cows in addition to an aflatoxin challenge.
