# Emotional Arousal Impacts Physical Health in Dogs: A Review of Factors Influencing Arousal, with Exemplary Case and Framework

CorpusID: 256436737 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c8189461aeadb8f286e5d2b5a91b24fde3689d2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c8189461aeadb8f286e5d2b5a91b24fde3689d2)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s2) Temperament and Traits
(p2.0) Temperament can be difficult to assess objectively and there are a multitude of labels in the literature with variable interpretations [25]. Formal assessment of temperamental traits is possible via validated questionnaires such as the PANAS (Positive and Negative Activation Scale) [26,27] and DIAS (Dog Impulsivity Assessment Scale) [28] which facilitate numerical assessment of emotional bias and impulsivity in relation to a normal range. Tracking of progress via pre and post intervention use of the questionnaires can provide valuable progress data for clinicians. In addition, assessment via these tools in a large cohort of similar patients would provide useful information for future research into the aetiology and treatment of certain presenting problems.

(p2.1) Much is discussed regarding the impact of breed on temperament and certain breeds are portrayed in the media to show higher levels of certain traits [29]. There is some evidence to support breed characteristics [30], especially when considering breed groups such as "Herding dogs, Hounds, Working dogs, Toy dogs and Non-sporting dogs" [31] rather than specific individual breeds. However, the scientific study of this is very challenging [32] and conclusions should be drawn with caution. Some research suggests that there is more within-breed than between-breed variation in behavioural expression [33] and that this is particularly evident when considering working compared to show lines within a breed [34]. This is supported by the authors' experience, seeing individual patients where working line individuals of a variety of breeds are diagnosed with higher levels of generalised anxiety. Generalised anxiety can often be functional in working dogs where the presence of the resulting vigilance to both environment and handler can improve performance. The expression of fear and anxiety is a heritable trait and has been shown to be inadvertently selected for by breeders in some working dogs [22], increasing prevalence.
## (s4) Clinical Signs of Excessive or Inappropriate Emotional Arousal
(p4.0) The interplay between emotional health, physical health and expression of problem behaviours is complex. Fatjó and Bowen [4] state "the border between medically and nonmedically related behaviour problems is becoming less well defined as more information is available". Excessive emotional arousal can directly motivate certain behaviours and also have acute and chronic impacts on physiological health.
