# Why vaccines fail against Piscirickettsiosis in farmed salmon and trout and how to avoid it: A review OPEN ACCESS EDITED BY

CorpusID: 253598833 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0cb12cd42ce0b19d41f9493f31bea0eb405868ae](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0cb12cd42ce0b19d41f9493f31bea0eb405868ae)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s4) Farm-management factors
(p4.0) At least two management practices have been strongly associated with increased outbreaks of P. salmonis: the number of bath treatments used to combat sea lice and overcrowding. As previously mentioned, sea lice have been associated with increased mortality in vaccinated fish. If the load of sea lice is high, the number of antiparasite dip treatments carried out by the farming centers increases (52), and higher rates of bathing treatments are associated with a higher risk of mortality attributed to SRS (7,58), due to the acute stress generated by the bathing process. Another factor of farm management is the high number of fish per cage. Salmon overcrowding intensifies friction and fish aggressiveness which causes skin damage (7).

(p4.1) Other management practices that may contribute to infection include the movement of diseased fish between different farming areas, the resting time between the beginning and end of the fattening stage, and the in situ cleaning of nets. Aquaculture often involves the movement of large numbers of animals between farms, such as salmon from hatcheries move to freshwater production sites before being moved to marine growout sites (59, 60). The transfer of animals can cause a network of interactions between fish groups from different farms, increasing the probability of disease spreading if the site of origin is infected; therefore, coordinated cleaning between transfers reduces the transmission of the disease (59). On the other hand, the risk of developing SRS is also proportional to the time salmonids spend in seawater (42). On average, there was an increase in the possibility of SRS being reported after the fifth month in marine centers, with the rainbow trout and coho salmon species showing the greatest possibility of SRS reporting throughout the end of the production cycle (41). Additionally, the reduced resting time and occurrence of neighboring infected farms have been associated with high risk of SRS (42). Thus, a prolonged resting time without hosts in a farm is a good health strategy, particularly because P. salmonis cannot survive or replicate in salt water over a prolonged period of time (10). Recently, it has been found that the fouling of the cages may increase the stress in the fish due to reductions in the ventilation and the availability of oxygen (52). Thus, good cleaning of encrustations in fishing nets, the use of antifouling systems, and the properly coordination of resting time are essential factors to be considered for good management.
## (s6) Fish-related factors
(p6.0) Even under optimal conditions, some fish may not be protected after vaccination, which may be a direct consequence of the host's genetic variability (20). Natural variation in the resistance against P. salmonis in unvaccinated fish has been demonstrated between species (61), as well as within species, including Atlantic salmon, rainbow trout, and Coho salmon (62, 63). Recently, it has been described that vaccine efficacy is also influenced by heritable genetic variation among the hosts, and, as above, differences both between and within species have been observed (20). Results have shown that there are fish families in which the vaccine does not protect against P. salmonis and other family groups in which the vaccine-mediated protection is high (20). In Figure 6, we represent this phenomenon, while in some fish, the protection added by vaccination increased the survival and reduce the bacterial load (right fish) in other, there is no added protection by vaccination (left fish). Currently, the genes that control this genetic variation in vaccinated fish are unknown. Moreover, it is hypothesized that the genes involved in natural resistance in unvaccinated fish may not be the same genes involved in resistance in vaccinated fish (20).
## (s8) Vaccine-related factors
(p8.0) Contrary to the detailed information available from the public records regarding diagnosis, mortality, or the doses of vaccines/antibiotics provided by SERNAPESCA, little information is available to assess the efficacy and immunity conferred by commercial vaccines in Chile. However, some small pieces of information could be obtained from the information leaflet regarding 28/34 vaccines with provisional registration, as detailed in Supplementary Table 2. Of the 28 vaccines, 85.7% (24/28) are claimed to prevent Piscirickettsiosis, while only 10.7% (3/28) are declared able to reduce the mortality, clinical signs, or damage associated with this disease. In terms of the immunological properties, 46.4% (13/28) are claimed to be able to stimulate active immunity against Piscirickettsiosis, while 53.5% (15/28) do not have such claims in their leaflets. On the other hand, only 21.4% (6/28) clearly established the onset of protective immunity with a minimum of 456 accumulated thermal units (ATUs) and a maximum of 600 ATUs after vaccination. None of the vaccines with provisional registration that were analyzed provided information regarding the duration of protective immunity. A similar phenomenon can be observed for the relative percent survival (RPS): only five of 28 pharmaceutical companies provide information on the RPS 60 , which are greater than 80% in all cases. Nonetheless, we can assume that all the others must have reached the minimum values to obtain their provisional registrations. Regarding immunogenic compatibility, 57.15% (16/28) have no available information regarding the safety and efficacy of concomitant use with other pharmaceutical products. Moreover, 42.8% (12/28) do not have any information regarding compatibility (Supplementary Table 2). Finally, most of the vaccines are injectable 94% (31/34), 2 are administered orally, and only one is by immersion. Analysis of how these licensed vaccines are used in the field reveals that most vaccines used in the freshwater phase of production were administered by injection, while oral booster vaccinations predominated during the seawater phase (25).

(p8.1) Regarding the route of administration, the Chilean Agricultural and Livestock Service (SAG) requires a higher level of efficacy for oral and injectable vaccines than for immersion vaccines (Oral and injectable: RPS 60 greater than or equal to 70%; Immersion: RPS 60 greater than or equal to 60%) (28). Thus, it is tacitly assumed that oral and injection vaccines work better than immersion ones, perhaps because dip vaccines fail to capture antigens efficiently (101). Because most P. salmonis vaccines are administered via intraperitoneal injection, few studies have compared the efficacy of these vaccines with oral vaccines (102, 103). For example, Tobar and colleagues in 2011 demonstrated that an oral vaccination was able to protect fish against a P. salmonis challenge when administered either as a primary vaccination or as a booster for an injected vaccine (103). More recently, Sotomayor-Gerding and colleagues shown that an oral vaccine produced an acquired immune response (IgM) similar to the injectable vaccine (102). On the contrary, the most in-depth study of the efficacy of vaccines against P. salmonis in the field have not been able to demonstrate a beneficial effect of oral booster vaccinations (29), perhaps because of one of the extrinsic factors discussed above. The main challenge of oral immunization is to protect the antigens from the harsh environments in the gut so they can remain enough time to be absorbed and taken up by immune cells. Thus, the two oral vaccines previously described by encapsulate their antigens before being administered (102, 103). Tobar and and colleagues used a bioadhesive cationic polysaccharide formulation called MicroMatrix ™ by Advanced BioNutrition (103), while Sotomayor and colleagues encapsulated their P. salmonis antigens in alginate (linear unbranched polysaccharides isolated from brown alga) using the dispersion technique known as aerodynamically assisted jetting system (102). Interestingly, Sotomayor describes that only 3 times more doses of antigens than the injectable vaccine was needed to achieve similar levels of immune response. Finally, the main advantage of oral immunization over injectable vaccination is that it allows mass immunization without causing stress in the fish (101).
