# Post-discharge Thromboembolic Events in COVID-19 Patients: A Review on the Necessity for Prophylaxis

CorpusID: 255475933 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ae6d63ccae7a7402104f99c2147c4a6e5990729](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ae6d63ccae7a7402104f99c2147c4a6e5990729)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Prevention of COVID-19-Associated VTE (Thromboprophylaxis)
(p3.0) King's college hospitals have a protocol of intermediate-dose enoxaparin for patients who are admitted to critical care with COVID-19 from April 22, 2020; however, this is stopped at the time of discharge. 42 In addition, patients receive recommendations upon symptoms of VTE, at their discharge summary. Researchers have also mentioned that a short course of extended thromboprophylaxis could have decreased the incidence of post-discharge VTE by about 40% to 50%, as all the post-discharge events were occurred at early phase. 59 However, this may increase the risk of bleeding about 2 to 3 times and this is the reason that it has not been considered as a standard protocol so far. 60 Belgian society of Thrombosis and Hemostasis and the local guideline of the Leuven University hospitals, consider prophylaxis with 0.5mg/kg daily enoxaparin in the ward and 0.5mg/kg twice daily in the ICU setting. 61,62 As for the other healthcare facilities, the guidelines for post-discharge prophylaxis are lacking in Leuven. So, it was prescribed for patients with known risk factors, such as atrial fibrillation, obesity, VTE, heart failure, aged over 70 years, and mechanical heart valve, with 0.5mg/kg daily enoxaparin for 2 to 6 weeks. No major bleeding events were reported in patients who received postdischarge thromboprophylaxis. In the Iranian study, it was also concluded that the routine prescription of extended thromboprophylaxis may not lead to an evident clinical benefit. 44 American guidelines have already restricted the routine extended thromboprophylaxis for medically ill patients, and it seems that these recommendations can be also applied in postdischarge period of COVID-19 patients. 63 Giannis et al. attached to their local guideline on the extended thromboprophylaxis with direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC) (rivaroxaban 10 mg orally) or LMWH (enoxaparin 40 mg subcutaneous daily) in COVID-19 discharged patients. This regimen was prescribed for 30 days following discharge if the patient had an IMPROVE VTE score of higher than 3 or a D-dimer level of twofold as upper limit of normal. 45 Several studies have also compared the effects of thrombophylactic anticoagulation (low dose) and therapeutic anticoagulation (high dose). Generally, therapeutic doses of anticoagulation were seemed to decrease mortality. However, in some studies, there were no significant differences found. Furthermore, some studies that had found statistically significant differences in mortality rates between the 2 groups were not able to associate that mortality rate to thrombotic events. [64][65][66][67][68][69] Table 1 summarizes the studies comparing low-dose and high-dose anticoagulation in hospitalized COVID-19 patients.

(p3.1) Ramacciotti et al. conducted a study on hospitalized COVID-19 patients who were more at risk for post-discharge thromboembolism. All patients had received thromboprophylaxis with standard doses of heparin while they were hospitalized. Following discharge, patients randomly received rivaroxaban for 35 days or no anticoagulation following discharge. Patients who received extended thromboprophylaxis had better clinical outcomes in comparison to patients who didn't receive extended prophylaxis. 70 Moreover, in the severe stage of COVID-19, the utilization of intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) has been proposed in order to prevent VTE ( Figure 3). 46 IPC is described as a mechanical device that diminishes VTE by the elevation of blood flow speed and reduction of hypercoagulability by the IPC performance inducing fibrinolytic function of vessel walls 71 (Figure 3).
