# Overview of the Role of Spatial Factors in Indoor SARS-CoV-2

CorpusID: 252143778 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1c0a5402491b7f50b2b63f0e01ca24e7637b3997](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1c0a5402491b7f50b2b63f0e01ca24e7637b3997)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s4) The Emission of Infectious Respiratory Fluids
(p4.0) SARS-CoV-2 is the virus that causes COVID-19, and its genetic material is packaged in an outer layer (envelope) of proteins and lipids. The virions are spherical in outline, with diameters ranging from 60 to 140 nm [26]. SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted by exposure to infectious respiratory fluids, which are generated in the human respiratory system, and is the main carriers of respiratory infectious pathogens. Respiratory fluids can be produced in four parts of the respiratory tract, namely lungs [27], trachea [28], larynx [29] (close and open the vocal cords), and oral/nasal passages [30] (close and open the mouth/breath). People release respiratory fluids in the form of droplets across a spectrum of sizes along with the airflow during exhalation (breathing, speaking, singing, coughing, and sneezing). Severe expiratory events (coughing and sneezing) produce more large and 
## (s8) Exposure and Infection
(p8.0) There are generally four ways of virus exposure as follows: (1) respiratory fluid exchange between facial membrane, (2) RDs deposition by direct splash on exposed facial membrane, (3) touching facial membrane with hands contaminated with RDs or virusbearing surfaces, and (4) inhalation of fine RDs and droplet nuclei.

(p8.1) The virus can cause infections in different organs of the body, but the relationship between the location of virus deposition and the mechanism of infection remains unclear. In the first three exposures, the viral particles can trigger an infection once they meet the facial membrane. For the fourth, inhaled particles can deposit on the surface of the respiratory tract and cause infection. The nose is reportedly more sensitive to SARS-CoV-2 than the mouth and eyes [54]. Larger particles >10 µm generally settle in the nasopharynx and particles smaller than 5µm can be directly inhaled into the alveoli [55]. The infective dose, i.e., the number of particles that lead to an infection, is highly dependent on virus biological data, which is generally difficult to obtain early in an epidemic. Karimzadeh et al. [56] estimated that the minimum infective dose of COVID-19 in humans is higher than 100 particles. Additional studies are needed to complement epidemiological data that provide insights into the dose-response relationship between received doses and disease outcomes for different exposures.
## (s13) (S L -B HH /B HO -V S ) Spatial Layout Affects Human-To-Human and Human-To-Building Interactions
(p13.0) The impact of spatial layout on occupant interactions is critical to the spread of COVID-19 in buildings. For example, spatial arrangements based on open-office concepts can enhance collaboration and communication among workers but increase the opportunities for virus transmission. A proper spatial organization has a redistribution effect on pedestrian flow, allowing people of different identities to move independently of each other, reducing route interference, and avoiding congestion-prone nodes. Figure 4 shows five basic spatial organizations. The corridor-based combination, which separates the main space and traffic space so that the rooms do not interfere with each other, is commonly used in dormitories, office buildings, schools, and hospitals. The hall-based combination takes the hall as the crowd flow centre, and other spaces are directly connected with the hall without interfering with each other. It is suitable for public buildings such as libraries and railway stations. The tandem combination is to connect the space directly without using special transportation space, which has strong continuity and clear use procedures and is suitable for museums. The wraparound combination refers to the form of a large space as the centre, surrounded by small ancillary spaces, which is suitable for buildings with prominent main spaces, such as theatres, cinemas, and gymnasiums. The free combination means that a unified large space is separated into several parts flexibly, which have strong connectivity and no clear boundaries. Most exhibition halls adopt this combination. Large public buildings usually adopt more than one spatial combination form to accommodate complex functions and a large numbers of people. The different spatial configurations show differences in virus diffusion, and its effect on the diffusion of polluting gases is more pronounced than that on the diffusion of viruses on surfaces. Compared with linear structures and centralized structures, fractal structures exhibit higher diffusion efficiency [74].
## (s19) . (S O -E A -V S ) Opening Design Determines Airflow Field Due to Natural Ventilation
(p19.0) Spatial openings generally refer to windows and doors, both of which are related to indoor-airflow organization caused by natural ventilation. The position of the window openings in the horizontal and vertical directions is the main factor affecting the airflow pattern, which is usually studied through field measurements and numerical simulations. Zhou et al. [91] investigated the influence of the position of the window opening on the effective ventilation of the room and found that ventilation rates reached the minimum when the window opening was located at the centre of the windward face. Vertically, the further the window is from the centre of the windward side, the greater the ventilation [91].
## (s20) (S L -E A -V S ) Physical Layout Affects the Distribution of Virus Concentration
(p20.0) Changing the physical layout at room level has been shown to cause changes in indoorairflow fields, which, in turn, induce changes in ventilation effectiveness and distribution of pollutants in the air. Zhuang et al. [96] simulated the airflow fields of three furniture layouts of the office room ( Figure 15) and calculated their ventilation effectiveness under four ventilation modes according to changes in volatile organic compound concentrations ( Table 9). The results show that changing the position of the furniture can significantly improve the air quality in the breathing area under either mixed ventilation or displacement ventilation. Layout B has the best overall ventilation by keeping occupants away from pollution sources and closer to the air inlets [96]. path is established under VP1, providing ample fresh air to every room from inlet to outlet. In VP2, the four rooms are all ventilated on one side, and the indoor-airflow is very weak, which is the most likely to cause uneven air mixing. Under VP3, air flows from R4 to R3 and R2 with inflow rates of 62.2% and 37.8%, respectively. The higher velocity of the VP4 air outlet than VP5 is due to the opening of R1, which, in turn, leads to the difference in the airflow distribution of R3.  
## (s32) Infection Risk Calculation Model
(p32.0) Calculating the risk of infection involves estimating the dosage received by an individual and then calculating the probability of infection under a given dose. The dose-response model allows for a more complete and accurate assessment of infection risk from the multi-route transmission, including droplet, airborne and contact transmission. When the distribution of the virus in the accessible medium follows the Poisson probability distribution, the dose-response model can be expressed as [122]:

(p32.1) where P I (%) represents the infection probability, k is the number of virus species ingested and surviving in the host, r is the probability of a virus surviving in the body and causing an infection and N is the intake dose. This dose-response equation becomes an exponential equation through the simplification of the summation series:

(p32.2) It reflects the interaction between the human body and the virus and the infectivity of the virus. When there are multiple transmission routes and the infectivity of the virus varies with the deposition site, the total infection risk through multi-route transmission can be calculated by Equation (3):
