# Powders for powder bed fusion: a review

CorpusID: 256469677 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1229357e9489f2cd3dcaf61599c01bbadafea71](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1229357e9489f2cd3dcaf61599c01bbadafea71)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s3) Flowability: a key role
(p3.0) In the previous section, powder flowability has been identified as a bulk powder property with a distinguished position. However, flowability is not one comprehensive property of bulk powder. Rather, flowability is an umbrella term describing the complex behaviour of powder, when it is mobilized or subjected to stress. The following scheme (Fig. 2) illustrates the multiple aspects of powder flow and the fact that flowability is not an inherent powder property [15]. Prescott et al. define the term "flow property" as specific bulk characteristics and properties of a powder that affect flow and can in principle be measured. Flow properties themselves are influenced by the powder properties and the interaction between the smallest powder units, the particles. While flow properties are independent of the equipment in which they were determined, the term "flowability" always has to be connected with equipment and the way in which it was tested.
## (s22) Flowability: a key role
(p22.0) In the previous section, powder flowability has been identified as a bulk powder property with a distinguished position. However, flowability is not one comprehensive property of bulk powder. Rather, flowability is an umbrella term describing the complex behaviour of powder, when it is mobilized or subjected to stress. The following scheme (Fig. 2) illustrates the multiple aspects of powder flow and the fact that flowability is not an inherent powder property [15]. Prescott et al. define the term "flow property" as specific bulk characteristics and properties of a powder that affect flow and can in principle be measured. Flow properties themselves are influenced by the powder properties and the interaction between the smallest powder units, the particles. While flow properties are independent of the equipment in which they were determined, the term "flowability" always has to be connected with equipment and the way in which it was tested.
