# A Systematic Literature Review: Optimization Timetable in Education to Support Work-Life Balance (WLB) HIGHLIGHTS

CorpusID: 253322627 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c555d6e6a6afe78dd22cff32e4ff8ab598cde2ea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c555d6e6a6afe78dd22cff32e4ff8ab598cde2ea)

Fields: Education

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Due to their wide range of applications, timetabling problems have received a lot of attention, such as the flight timetable problem, employee timetabling problem, university, or high school timetabling problem. It is, however, more sophisticated than generic scheduling because it involves teachers, students, classrooms, and courses. Besides, due to the numerous constraints, resource constraints, and intricate human aspects involved, course scheduling has always been done manually and take a long time. Using a computer not only consolidates the preferences of the individuals involved, but it also allows for a high level of satisfaction despite the numerous constraints. Thus, this saves a significant amount of time and manpower. As a result, an automation scheduling timetable is required for algorithm selection.

(p0.1) Furthermore, academic staff timetable scheduling is critical to optimise and balance academic staff working hours. As a result, maintaining a work-life balance is essential. However, failure to reach a work-life balance when scheduling teacher timetables may result in poor teaching and learning quality. In this research, extension work by (Yusop, 2022) a review of existing works and tools supporting the optimization timetabling with WLB are presented. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the background of study; followed by Section 3 presents the Methodology to conduct this research; then Section 4 provides the overall findings and provides discussion of this study; and, lastly, Section 5 of this paper ends with a conclusion and recommendations of future work. Wren (1995) has defined timetabling as "Timetabling is the allocation, subject to constraints, of given resources to objects being placed in space-time, in such a way as to satisfy as nearly as possible a set of desirable objectives".
