# TherapeuTic advances in hematology Innovations in hematopoietic stem-cell mobilization: a review of the novel CXCR4 inhibitor motixafortide

CorpusID: 258879373 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3405e016d310de90b53fd01c7c14b142b1e3917](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3405e016d310de90b53fd01c7c14b142b1e3917)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Extended CXCR4 inhibition with motixafortide and HSPC mobilization
(p4.0) Preclinical and clinical data have demonstrated that CXCR4 expression varies across CD34+ HSPC subsets, with some of the highest levels of CXCR4 expression on lineage-committed CD34+ plasmacytoid dendritic cell precursors and relatively lower levels of CXCR4 expression A schema of the bone marrow niche and relevant pathways involved in regulating HSPC retention within the bone marrow and mobilization to the peripheral blood.

(p4.1) journals.sagepub.com/home/tah 5 on more primitive CD34+ HSCs and multipotent progenitors (MPPs). 31 Furthermore, the use of plerixafor, a relatively low-affinity (Ki: 652 nM), short-acting CXCR4i, has been shown to mobilize HSPC grafts with unique CD34+ subsets compared with G-CSF, including higher proportions of lineage-committed CD34+ progenitors, mature leukocytes, and lymphocytes. 31,32 These studies suggest that strongly CXCR4+ lineage-committed HSPC subsets and maturing leukocytes mobilize rapidly to PB in the presence of relatively transient CXCR blockade. These studies also suggest that optimizing CXCR4 blockade with more robust or longer acting CXCR inhibition may increase CD34+ HSPC mobilization effectiveness while mobilizing differential HSPC subsets, including primitive CD34+ HSCs and MPPs with lower baseline levels of CXCR4 expression. 31 Motixafortide (BL-8040, BKT140) is a novel, synthetic, cyclic-peptide that functions as a selective antagonist of CXCR4, with a high CXCR4binding affinity (Ki: 0.32 nM) and long receptor occupancy time resulting in extended clinical activity lasting >48 h following a single subcutaneous injection. [33][34][35] In preclinical mouse studies, a single injection of motixafortide resulted in rapid and robust HSPC mobilization to PB within 0.5-2 h after injection as well as a dose-dependent increase in mobilization of monocytes, B-cells, and T-cells. 36,37 Meanwhile, motixafortide mobilized significantly higher numbers of HSPCs (7.1fold over control) when compared with plerixafor alone (4.2-fold over control) (p < 0.05). When tested in combination, motixafortide plus G-CSF resulted in a synergistic increase in mobilized HSPCs to PB (76.8-fold over control), which was significantly higher than plerixafor plus G-CSF (46.4-fold) (p = 0.001). 36 Subsequent studies demonstrated that 100% of mice transplanted with motixafortide-mobilized HSPCs maintained engraftment for >4 months, as compared with only 73% of mice transplanted with plerixafor-mobilized HSPCs. Furthermore, these HSPCs were capable of successfully re-establishing complete hematopoiesis in 100% of mice on serial re-transplant in lethally irradiated and secondarily transplanted mice, indicating that BL-8040-mobilized HSPCs contain high numbers of primitive, multipotent HSCs capable of long-term self-renewal, and robust hematopoietic reconstitution. 36
## (s6) Motixafortide plus G-CSF HSPC mobilization for auto-HCT
(p6.0) The first study in humans using motixafortide in combination with G-CSF for HSPC mobilization was conducted as a single-arm, open-label, single administration, dose-escalation, phase I study (NCT01010880). In this study, a total of 18 MM patients underwent standard HSPC mobilization with chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide) plus G-CSF prior to auto-HCT. Following Volume 14 6 journals.sagepub.com/home/tah TherapeuTic advances in hematology administration of chemotherapy and G-CSF over a 10-day mobilization protocol, patients then received a single subcutaneous injection of motixafortide in escalating dose cohorts starting with 0.006 mg/kg in dose-level 1 and increasing to 0.9 mg/kg in dose-level 5. In this study, motixafortide in combination with G-CSF and chemotherapy was safe and well-tolerated, with the majority of adverse events (AEs) reported occurring during the chemotherapy and G-CSF period of mobilization. Whereas only 34.4% of treatment emergent adverse events (TEAEs) occurred after motixafortide administration, with all such TEAEs being graded as mild (76.9%) to moderate (23.1%) in severity. Meanwhile, motixafortide at the higher dose levels of 0.3-0.9 mg/kg when added to standard mobilization resulted in accelerated mobilization of HSCs and enabled an increased number of patients to reach their collection goal in a single leukapheresis. Furthermore, 100% of patients who ultimately underwent auto-HCT experienced durable multilineage engraftment.
## (s7) The GENESIS clinical trial
(p7.0) To confirm these early phase clinical trial results, a two-part, phase III study was performed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of motixafortide in combination with G-CSF to mobilize HSPCs in MM patients undergoing auto-HCT (NCT03246529). Part 1 of the study was a single-center, open-label, lead-in design, with each patient receiving motixafortide and G-CSF mobilization. Part 2 of the study was an international, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blinded design, in which patients were randomized 2:1 to motixafortide plus G-CSF or placebo plus G-CSF. The mobilization protocol for both part 1 and part 2 involved patients receiving G-CSF (10 mcg/kg, subcutaneous) on the morning of days 1-5, and days 6-8 if needed; motixafortide (1.25 mg/kg, subcutaneous) or placebo on the evening of day 4, and day 6 if needed; and starting leukapheresis on the morning of day 5. The primary endpoint was the proportion of patients collecting ⩾6 × 10 6 CD34+ cells/kg in up to two apheresis sessions.

(p7.1) In part 1 of the GENESIS study, a total of 11 patients were enrolled, with 82% (9/11) meeting the primary endpoint of collecting ⩾6 × 10 6 CD34+ cells/kg in up to 2 apheresis sessions and 64% (7/11) collecting to goal in just 1 leukapheresis procedure. Notably, 100% (11/11) of patients successfully met the collection goal within 4 leukapheresis procedures, with a median of 9 × 10 6 CD34+ cells/kg collected among all patients in part 1. The most common AEs reported were local injection site reactions occurring in 91% (10/11) of patients. Based on these data and prespecified safety and efficacy endpoints for part 1 of the study, the independent data monitoring committee recommended proceeding to part 2 of the study. 38 In part 2 of the study, a total of 122 patients from 18  proportion of patients who mobilized optimal HSPC numbers (5-6 × 10 6 CD34+ cells/kg) in one apheresis were 4.2-17.3% with placebo plus G-CSF, 27.9-54.2% with plerixafor plus G-CSF, and 88.8% with motixafortide plus G-CSF (Table 1). 25,26,39 As a correlative study in conjunction with the GENESIS Trial, immunophenotypic and transcriptional profiling via multicolor FACS and single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA seq) of CD34+ HSPCs from the patients mobilized on the GENESIS Trial as well as a prospectively enrolled cohort of demographically similar MM patients mobilized with plerixafor plus G-CSF and a cohort of allogeneic HSPC donors mobilized with single-agent motixafortide, plerixafor, or G-CSF alone. These studies revealed that motixafortide plus G-CSF mobilized significantly higher HSPC numbers in eight out of nine CD34+ HSPC subsets when compared with placebo plus G-CSF, including higher numbers of immunophenotypically primitive HSCs and MPPs. In addition, motixafortide plus G-CSF also mobilized significantly higher numbers of MPPs, common myeloid progenitors, and common lymphoid progenitors when compared with plerixafor plus G-CSF. Meanwhile, scRNA seq demonstrated that motixafortide-mobilized HSPCs expressed unique transcriptional profiles associated with self-renewal, regeneration, and quiescence, when compared with HSPCs mobilized with plerixafor or G-CSF. 40 In summary, motixafortide in combination with G-CSF for HSPC mobilization prior to auto-HCT was safe and effective, enabling significantly higher numbers of patients to mobilize optimal numbers of CD34+ HSPCs with less injections and leukapheresis procedures when compared with G-CSF alone. In addition, correlative data from these studies suggest that extended CXCR4 inhibition with motixafortide leads to differential mobilization of various HSPC subsets with increased numbers of immunophenotypically primitive stem cells and MPPs which express transcriptional programs associated with enhanced self-renewal, regeneration, and quiescence. 
## (s9) Motixafortide and HSPC mobilization for HSPC-based gene-edited cellular therapies
(p9.0) Recent technological and scientific advances have facilitated the development of HSPC-based gene transduction and gene-editing therapies as potentially curative treatments for a number of hematologic diseases arising from specific genetic alterations, such as thalassemia and sickle-cell disease (SCD). As with HCT, the effectiveness of HSPC-based gene transduction and editing therapies relies, in part, on the ability to collect sufficient CD34+ cells. The numbers of HSPCs needed for such gene therapies, however, are significantly higher than what is needed for standard HCT, with typically >10-15 × 10 6 CD34+ cells/ kg needed to reliably manufacture these geneedited cellular therapies due to a number of technical factors. 44 In addition, due to potential loss of long-term engraftment of ex vivo genetically manipulated HSCs following infusion, HSPC backup grafts are necessary as a safety mechanism to rescue patients in the event of such graft failure. The most effective FDA approved HSPC mobilizing regimen at this time is G-CSF in combination with plerixafor. 25,26 Yet, G-CSF is unsafe in patients with SCD due to the increased risk of life-threatening vaso-occlusive episodes. Meanwhile, non-SCD patients typically require numerous G-CSF injections and multiple leukapheresis procedures with HSPC yields that are often suboptimal. [45][46][47] In addition, single-agent plerixafor is a relatively weak HSPC mobilizer, requiring multiple injections and leukapheresis procedures while also yielding suboptimal HSPC numbers for gene-edited therapies. Recent data highlight this issue, reporting that the majority of SCD patients mobilized with plerixafor alone remained unable to collect ⩾5 × 10 6 CD34+ cells/kg after two mobilization and collection cycles, making this potentially curative therapy inaccessible to a large number of otherwise eligible SCD patients. 44 Therefore, the development of safe, effective and efficient 'G-CSF-free' HSPC mobilization regimens specifically for HSPCbased gene therapies remain an unmet need.
