# Disruptive human resource management technologies: a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 251488861 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a22fec85328cb491294511f496f677a243ddf548](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a22fec85328cb491294511f496f677a243ddf548)

Fields: Business

## (s5) Results of studies
(p5.0) This section reports the findings complying with research objectives. The findings were developed using keyword co-occurrence analysis. The two forms of "keyword co-occurrence; network visualisation" and "density visualisation" were utilised in the analysis. The keyword co-occurrence network visualisation, in particular, addressed the first objective: finding the current knowledge of disruptive HRM technologies. The keyword co-occurrence density visualisation addressed the second objective, finding the areas where empirical disruptive HRM technology research is lacking.

(p5.1) 3.3.1 The current empirical knowledge in disruptive HRM technologies. Using the minimum keyword occurrences functionality of VOSviewer software, we discovered that 19 keywords frequently occurred in the studies. It was achieved by gradually increasing the number of times a keyword occurred, starting with one, until the threshold keyword level reached a level that covered more keywords (Table 3). We chose 19 threshold keywords at the two minimum keyword occurrences since very few threshold keywords (e.g. three) were generated at a  Disruptive HRM technologies higher number of minimum keyword occurrences (e.g. five or six). We did so because we thought it was clear enough to understand the areas investigated in the studies. Figure 6 depicts those 19 keywords and their relationships, while Table 4 shows their frequency.

(p5.2) As shown in Table 4, the highest number of keyword occurrences was observed for E-HRM. A larger red node is shown in Figure 6 to demonstrate it further. Even though our focus was on disruptive HRM technologies in the empirical research landscape, we discovered that the current empirical research has focussed on E-HRM, implying that disruptive HRM technologies have not been empirically tested.

(p5.3) The keyword co-occurrence network visualisation in Figure 6 shows the connections of keywords shown in nodes. The connection represents the relationship between each keyword. Specifically, the strength of a relationship is characterised by the thickness of the line. Therefore, Figure 6 shows that E-HRM and the HRM are linked by a thicker line indicating that E-HRM is highly related to HRM. Moreover, the link of HRIS and information technology with HRM indicates their relationship to HRM.

(p5.4) The nodes in Figure 6 are in three clusters: red, green and blue. Those clusters have keywords which are denoted in Table 5. As shown in Figure 6, the different clusters indicate that disruptive HRM technologies varied by different areas of investigation. Grouping the keywords in one cluster means that the keywords are highly likely to represent the same topic. Hence, as shown in Table 5, the red, green and blue clusters reflect common themes as "adoption and outcomes of E-HRM," "use of E-HRM and HRM outcomes," and "intention to use the E-HRM," respectively.

(p5.5) 3.3.1.1 E-HRM adoption and outcomesred cluster. Adoption and E-HRM: The E-HRM adoption is determined by perceived usefulness, HRM strength (Wahyudi and Park, 2014), top management support, employee attributes, system complexity, IT infrastructure and industry pressure (Masum et al., 2015).
