# R E V I E W Open Access Mutations in the voltage-gated sodium channel gene of anophelines and their association with resistance to pyrethroids -a review

CorpusID: 255988296 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95838513ca50d47abb2a84502fba89d50575a411](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95838513ca50d47abb2a84502fba89d50575a411)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s3) Mode of action of pyrethroids
(p3.0) Pyrethroids, such as DDT and its analogues, belong to a group of neurotoxins that share a similar mode of action. They all target Na V , which is present in cells of the central and peripheral nervous systems (neurons, myocytes, endocrine cells and ovaries), changing the kinetics of propagation of nerve impulses [22]. Structurally, Na V is an integral transmembrane protein, composed of four homologous domains (I-IV), each of them composed of six helices (S1-S6) connected by loops. The segments S5, S6 and the S5-S6 P-loops form a central aqueous pore, and the S1-S4 helices of each domain unite to form four independent voltage-sensitive domains [30,31]. The A. gambiae Na V alpha subunit gene comprises an ORF (Open Reading Frame) with 6,417 nucleotides that encodes 2,139 amino acids, resulting in a protein with a molecular mass of 240 kDa. This gene, located at the para (paralysis) loco of the X chromosome, is composed of 35 exons, including two duplicated exons, and 32 introns, which transcribes for different messenger RNAs (mRNA) through alternate splicing [31].

(p3.1) The effects of pyrethroids are stereospecific and two different Na V binding sites were identified. The first was proposed by O'Reilly et al. [32], in which IIS5 and IIIS6 helices would play an important role in the interaction with the insecticide molecule and the additional link in the IIS4-S5 linker would explain the higher potency of pyrethroids compared with DDT. The second was suggested by Du et al. [33], where the binding site would be a type of "pocket" formed by the IS4-S5 linker and the helices IS5 and IIS6. For both models, the selective effect of the insecticide would be explained by the nonconservation of the amino acids of these regions between arthropods and other animals.

(p3.2) Pyrethroids, such as DDT and its analogues, belong to a group of neurotoxins that share a similar mode of action. They all target Na V , which is present in cells of the central and peripheral nervous systems (neurons, myocytes, endocrine cells and ovaries), changing the kinetics of propagation of nerve impulses [22]. Structurally, Na V is an integral transmembrane protein, composed of four homologous domains (I-IV), each of them composed of six helices (S1-S6) connected by loops. The segments S5, S6 and the S5-S6 P-loops form a central aqueous pore, and the S1-S4 helices of each domain unite to form four independent voltage-sensitive domains [30,31]. The A. gambiae Na V alpha subunit gene comprises an ORF (Open Reading Frame) with 6,417 nucleotides that encodes 2,139 amino acids, resulting in a protein with a molecular mass of 240 kDa. This gene, located at the para (paralysis) loco of the X chromosome, is composed of 35 exons, including two duplicated exons, and 32 introns, which transcribes for different messenger RNAs (mRNA) through alternate splicing [31].

(p3.3) The effects of pyrethroids are stereospecific and two different Na V binding sites were identified. The first was proposed by O'Reilly et al. [32], in which IIS5 and IIIS6 helices would play an important role in the interaction with the insecticide molecule and the additional link in the IIS4-S5 linker would explain the higher potency of pyrethroids compared with DDT. The second was suggested by Du et al. [33], where the binding site would be a type of "pocket" formed by the IS4-S5 linker and the helices IS5 and IIS6. For both models, the selective effect of the insecticide would be explained by the nonconservation of the amino acids of these regions between arthropods and other animals.
## (s7) Association between Plasmodium infection and insecticide resistance
(p7.0) Regardless of the extensive literature concerning kdr mutations and their association with resistance to insecticides, few reports have presented their impact on malaria transmission dynamics, i.e., on the ability of mosquitoes to transmit malaria. Infection rate and oocyst burden are two of the five factors that determine the vectorial capacity of mosquitoes [163]. The response to Plasmodium exposure in vectors is modulated by the mosquito's innate immune system. In A. gambiae, for example, changes in its global gene expression patterns are expressed upon Plasmodium infection [164]. Exposure to pyrethroids, in turn, induces metabolic changes that alters the immune response [165] and may therefore affect the outcome of Plasmodium infection.

(p7.1) An insecticide susceptible strain of A. funestus showed greater ability to become infected with Plasmodium berghei than its resistant counterpart [166]. In A. gambiae, infection with this same parasite increased the expression level of CYP6M2, a gene related with metabolic resistance [164]. In relation to the possible impacts of kdr mutation on vector competence, few records are available and are sometimes conflicting. For instance, neither positive or negative correlation was found between the occurrence of kdr and ace-1 R alleles with infection of Plasmodium falciparum in A. gambiae natural populations from Benin [109].

(p7.2) Other studies, however, showed that the presence of both resistant alleles could be associated with increased prevalence of Plasmodium infection in an A. gambiae resistant strain. Additionally, individuals carrying the kdr mutation had increased prevalence of sporozoites, which is likely to  Allele-Specific Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification (AS-LAMP) Turbidimeter and water bath L1014F [172] Polymerase Chain Reaction-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism assay (PCR-RFLP) PCR thermocycler L1014F/C [141] Primer Introduced Restriction Analysis-PCR assay (PIRA-PCR) PCR thermocycler, electrophoresis and imaging equipments L1014F/S [173] Multiplex Primer Introduced Restriction Analysis-PCR assay (mPIRA-PCR) PCR thermocycler and electrophoresis equipments L1014F/S [174] Amplification Refractory Mutation System (ARMS) PCR thermocycler, electrophoresis and imaging equipments L1014F [151] impact on parasite transmission [167]. Given the dissemination of kdr mutation in natural populations, similar studies should be conducted in order to better understand the impact of insecticide resistance on vector competence.

(p7.3) Regardless of the extensive literature concerning kdr mutations and their association with resistance to insecticides, few reports have presented their impact on malaria transmission dynamics, i.e., on the ability of mosquitoes to transmit malaria. Infection rate and oocyst burden are two of the five factors that determine the vectorial capacity of mosquitoes [163]. The response to Plasmodium exposure in vectors is modulated by the mosquito's innate immune system. In A. gambiae, for example, changes in its global gene expression patterns are expressed upon Plasmodium infection [164]. Exposure to pyrethroids, in turn, induces metabolic changes that alters the immune response [165] and may therefore affect the outcome of Plasmodium infection.

(p7.4) An insecticide susceptible strain of A. funestus showed greater ability to become infected with Plasmodium berghei than its resistant counterpart [166]. In A. gambiae, infection with this same parasite increased the expression level of CYP6M2, a gene related with metabolic resistance [164]. In relation to the possible impacts of kdr mutation on vector competence, few records are available and are sometimes conflicting. For instance, neither positive or negative correlation was found between the occurrence of kdr and ace-1 R alleles with infection of Plasmodium falciparum in A. gambiae natural populations from Benin [109].

(p7.5) Other studies, however, showed that the presence of both resistant alleles could be associated with increased prevalence of Plasmodium infection in an A. gambiae resistant strain. Additionally, individuals carrying the kdr mutation had increased prevalence of sporozoites, which is likely to  Allele-Specific Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification (AS-LAMP) Turbidimeter and water bath L1014F [172] Polymerase Chain Reaction-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism assay (PCR-RFLP) PCR thermocycler L1014F/C [141] Primer Introduced Restriction Analysis-PCR assay (PIRA-PCR) PCR thermocycler, electrophoresis and imaging equipments L1014F/S [173] Multiplex Primer Introduced Restriction Analysis-PCR assay (mPIRA-PCR) PCR thermocycler and electrophoresis equipments L1014F/S [174] Amplification Refractory Mutation System (ARMS) PCR thermocycler, electrophoresis and imaging equipments L1014F [151] impact on parasite transmission [167]. Given the dissemination of kdr mutation in natural populations, similar studies should be conducted in order to better understand the impact of insecticide resistance on vector competence.
## (s19) Mode of action of pyrethroids
(p19.0) Pyrethroids, such as DDT and its analogues, belong to a group of neurotoxins that share a similar mode of action. They all target Na V , which is present in cells of the central and peripheral nervous systems (neurons, myocytes, endocrine cells and ovaries), changing the kinetics of propagation of nerve impulses [22]. Structurally, Na V is an integral transmembrane protein, composed of four homologous domains (I-IV), each of them composed of six helices (S1-S6) connected by loops. The segments S5, S6 and the S5-S6 P-loops form a central aqueous pore, and the S1-S4 helices of each domain unite to form four independent voltage-sensitive domains [30,31]. The A. gambiae Na V alpha subunit gene comprises an ORF (Open Reading Frame) with 6,417 nucleotides that encodes 2,139 amino acids, resulting in a protein with a molecular mass of 240 kDa. This gene, located at the para (paralysis) loco of the X chromosome, is composed of 35 exons, including two duplicated exons, and 32 introns, which transcribes for different messenger RNAs (mRNA) through alternate splicing [31].

(p19.1) The effects of pyrethroids are stereospecific and two different Na V binding sites were identified. The first was proposed by O'Reilly et al. [32], in which IIS5 and IIIS6 helices would play an important role in the interaction with the insecticide molecule and the additional link in the IIS4-S5 linker would explain the higher potency of pyrethroids compared with DDT. The second was suggested by Du et al. [33], where the binding site would be a type of "pocket" formed by the IS4-S5 linker and the helices IS5 and IIS6. For both models, the selective effect of the insecticide would be explained by the nonconservation of the amino acids of these regions between arthropods and other animals.

(p19.2) Pyrethroids, such as DDT and its analogues, belong to a group of neurotoxins that share a similar mode of action. They all target Na V , which is present in cells of the central and peripheral nervous systems (neurons, myocytes, endocrine cells and ovaries), changing the kinetics of propagation of nerve impulses [22]. Structurally, Na V is an integral transmembrane protein, composed of four homologous domains (I-IV), each of them composed of six helices (S1-S6) connected by loops. The segments S5, S6 and the S5-S6 P-loops form a central aqueous pore, and the S1-S4 helices of each domain unite to form four independent voltage-sensitive domains [30,31]. The A. gambiae Na V alpha subunit gene comprises an ORF (Open Reading Frame) with 6,417 nucleotides that encodes 2,139 amino acids, resulting in a protein with a molecular mass of 240 kDa. This gene, located at the para (paralysis) loco of the X chromosome, is composed of 35 exons, including two duplicated exons, and 32 introns, which transcribes for different messenger RNAs (mRNA) through alternate splicing [31].

(p19.3) The effects of pyrethroids are stereospecific and two different Na V binding sites were identified. The first was proposed by O'Reilly et al. [32], in which IIS5 and IIIS6 helices would play an important role in the interaction with the insecticide molecule and the additional link in the IIS4-S5 linker would explain the higher potency of pyrethroids compared with DDT. The second was suggested by Du et al. [33], where the binding site would be a type of "pocket" formed by the IS4-S5 linker and the helices IS5 and IIS6. For both models, the selective effect of the insecticide would be explained by the nonconservation of the amino acids of these regions between arthropods and other animals.
## (s23) Association between Plasmodium infection and insecticide resistance
(p23.0) Regardless of the extensive literature concerning kdr mutations and their association with resistance to insecticides, few reports have presented their impact on malaria transmission dynamics, i.e., on the ability of mosquitoes to transmit malaria. Infection rate and oocyst burden are two of the five factors that determine the vectorial capacity of mosquitoes [163]. The response to Plasmodium exposure in vectors is modulated by the mosquito's innate immune system. In A. gambiae, for example, changes in its global gene expression patterns are expressed upon Plasmodium infection [164]. Exposure to pyrethroids, in turn, induces metabolic changes that alters the immune response [165] and may therefore affect the outcome of Plasmodium infection.

(p23.1) An insecticide susceptible strain of A. funestus showed greater ability to become infected with Plasmodium berghei than its resistant counterpart [166]. In A. gambiae, infection with this same parasite increased the expression level of CYP6M2, a gene related with metabolic resistance [164]. In relation to the possible impacts of kdr mutation on vector competence, few records are available and are sometimes conflicting. For instance, neither positive or negative correlation was found between the occurrence of kdr and ace-1 R alleles with infection of Plasmodium falciparum in A. gambiae natural populations from Benin [109].

(p23.2) Other studies, however, showed that the presence of both resistant alleles could be associated with increased prevalence of Plasmodium infection in an A. gambiae resistant strain. Additionally, individuals carrying the kdr mutation had increased prevalence of sporozoites, which is likely to  Allele-Specific Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification (AS-LAMP) Turbidimeter and water bath L1014F [172] Polymerase Chain Reaction-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism assay (PCR-RFLP) PCR thermocycler L1014F/C [141] Primer Introduced Restriction Analysis-PCR assay (PIRA-PCR) PCR thermocycler, electrophoresis and imaging equipments L1014F/S [173] Multiplex Primer Introduced Restriction Analysis-PCR assay (mPIRA-PCR) PCR thermocycler and electrophoresis equipments L1014F/S [174] Amplification Refractory Mutation System (ARMS) PCR thermocycler, electrophoresis and imaging equipments L1014F [151] impact on parasite transmission [167]. Given the dissemination of kdr mutation in natural populations, similar studies should be conducted in order to better understand the impact of insecticide resistance on vector competence.

(p23.3) Regardless of the extensive literature concerning kdr mutations and their association with resistance to insecticides, few reports have presented their impact on malaria transmission dynamics, i.e., on the ability of mosquitoes to transmit malaria. Infection rate and oocyst burden are two of the five factors that determine the vectorial capacity of mosquitoes [163]. The response to Plasmodium exposure in vectors is modulated by the mosquito's innate immune system. In A. gambiae, for example, changes in its global gene expression patterns are expressed upon Plasmodium infection [164]. Exposure to pyrethroids, in turn, induces metabolic changes that alters the immune response [165] and may therefore affect the outcome of Plasmodium infection.

(p23.4) An insecticide susceptible strain of A. funestus showed greater ability to become infected with Plasmodium berghei than its resistant counterpart [166]. In A. gambiae, infection with this same parasite increased the expression level of CYP6M2, a gene related with metabolic resistance [164]. In relation to the possible impacts of kdr mutation on vector competence, few records are available and are sometimes conflicting. For instance, neither positive or negative correlation was found between the occurrence of kdr and ace-1 R alleles with infection of Plasmodium falciparum in A. gambiae natural populations from Benin [109].

(p23.5) Other studies, however, showed that the presence of both resistant alleles could be associated with increased prevalence of Plasmodium infection in an A. gambiae resistant strain. Additionally, individuals carrying the kdr mutation had increased prevalence of sporozoites, which is likely to  Allele-Specific Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification (AS-LAMP) Turbidimeter and water bath L1014F [172] Polymerase Chain Reaction-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism assay (PCR-RFLP) PCR thermocycler L1014F/C [141] Primer Introduced Restriction Analysis-PCR assay (PIRA-PCR) PCR thermocycler, electrophoresis and imaging equipments L1014F/S [173] Multiplex Primer Introduced Restriction Analysis-PCR assay (mPIRA-PCR) PCR thermocycler and electrophoresis equipments L1014F/S [174] Amplification Refractory Mutation System (ARMS) PCR thermocycler, electrophoresis and imaging equipments L1014F [151] impact on parasite transmission [167]. Given the dissemination of kdr mutation in natural populations, similar studies should be conducted in order to better understand the impact of insecticide resistance on vector competence.
