# Clinical applications of gene therapy for rare diseases: A review

CorpusID: 258677712 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad7c526080b645dfc566f2130f34aa737bda3afd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad7c526080b645dfc566f2130f34aa737bda3afd)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s6) | Ex vivo gene therapy benefits and challenges
(p6.0) Ex vivo gene therapy is the genetic modification of cells outside the body, followed by transplantation. These cells could be differentiated somatic cells or stem/progenitor cells. 62 The main advantages of this ex vivo approach include the selective targeting of the cell population of interest, the avoidance of immune defences and the implementation of quality control systems before the genetically modified cells are reimplanted. In this section, we will focus on differentiated somatic cells that retain sufficient replicative capacity to allow extraction, modification outside the body and re-implantation.
## (s11) IN STEM CELLS, PRIOR TO REIMPLANTATION
(p11.0) An alternative ex vivo approach targets stem/progenitor cells, 62 which underpin the natural maintenance of organs. This strategy is particularly suited to correction of genetic defects of the blood, which builds on the clinical experience of bone marrow transplantation. [108][109][110][111] To illustrate the effectiveness of this approach, we will look at two clinically approved treatments for genetic diseases affecting blood cells, Strimvelis for ADA-SCID and Zynteglo for β-thalassaemia.
## (s12) | Severe combined immunodeficiency: Strimvelis HSC gene therapy
(p12.0) Severe combined immunodeficiency is a heterogenous group of genetic disorders that cause complete or nearly complete impairment of T-lymphocyte function, combined with primary or secondary dysfunction in other immune cell types. 112 The SCID spectrum is very rare, with a prevalence of approximately 1 in 60,000 live births. 113 The complexity of T-lymphocyte ontogenesis explains the extensive genetic heterogeneity of SCID. There are currently 16 known causative genes and over 20 separate defects. 114,115 The most common mutations are in X-linked IL2 receptor components (SCID-X1).

(p12.1) Adenosine deaminase-severe combined immunodeficiency is another common form and one of the most damaging. 116 The Adenosine Deaminase enzyme is essential for the purine salvage pathway that regulates the purine nucleotide balance. ADA activity is important in preventing adenine nucleotide accumulation. Lack of ADA results in a marked imbalance in the dNTP pool, compromising DNA polymerase function. [117][118][119] In rapidly or continuously proliferating cells the result is genotoxic shock and apoptosis, 120,121 and the lymphoid cell differentiation pathway is particularly sensitive to ADA deficiency. 116,122,123 ADA deficiency also impacts cAMP synthesis, disrupting general cell signalling and giving rise to a more diffuse pathology, in most other tissues including the brain. 124 Adenosine deaminase-severe combined immunodeficiency can be treated by allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell (HSC) transplantation 10,125 and PEGylated ADA (PEG-ADA). 10,126 PEG-ADA has a long plasma half-life and can help reduce intracellular adenine build-up, by keeping extracellular levels low and facilitating transporter-mediated efflux, alleviating some of the worst symptoms. 10 Bone marrow transplantation is limited by the availability of HLA-matched donors and by the risk of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) with allogeneic donors. 127 A gene therapy option for ADA-SCID has been licenced by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in the European Union (EU). Strimvelis is a preparation of autologous HSCs, engineered to express functional ADA. [128][129][130][131] CD34-positive HSC cells are isolated from the person affected and expanded using a cocktail of soluble mediators: FLT3L, KITL/SCF, THPO, IL3, and IL6 (FKT36). In this proliferative state, the cells are transduced with a functional ADA copy using an amphotropic Murine Moloney Leukaemia virus vector, 132 whose 4070A envelope gene, targets Pit-2 and mediates efficient transduction of HSCs. 133 The transduced HSC pool is re-infused after nonmyeloablative conditioning with anti-proliferative agents such as busulfan to suppress the proliferation of endogenous HSCs.

(p12.2) Strimvelis has performed exceptionally well in clinical trials. 131,134,135 A follow-up of 18 people treated with Strimvelis at a very early age revealed that all of them survived (follow-up 2-13 years, median 7 years), and they were well enough to resume normal social interactions. Several of the patients were able to return to school. In those who could be evaluated ADA expression reached or exceeded 10% normal and remained stable in all myeloid and lymphoid cells, immune function was successfully reconstituted and a response to antigen challenge could F I G U R E 9 The chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) design. The artificial T-cell receptor (TCR) is made in a modular manner by combining the following parts: the CD3ζ signalling domain from the TCR, a transmembrane and hinge region and co-stimulatory domains from receptors that are needed for TCR signalling, such as CD8, CD28 and 4-1BB (CD137), and a single chain variable fragment (scFv) targeted against the protein of interest. This creates a receptor capable of generating a full TCR signal upon binding of the scFv target. The CAR is thought to become activated by dimerization or multimerization allowing cross-interaction between the signalling domain of one CAR molecule with the co-stimulatory domain of another. This drives CAR activation, creating a CD3 signal and activating other accessory receptors, particularly the IL2 receptor. be observed. The rate of infection decreased dramatically, and the recipients managed to resolve infections in most cases. In almost all cases PEG-ADA treatment could be discontinued. Intervention-free survival remained above 80%. These results match autologous HSC transplantation and compete very favourably with all other treatments.

(p12.3) Successful reconstitution of the T-cell population does not eliminate the complete health impact of ADA-SCID, since it does not replace ADA function in cells of a nonhaematopoietic linage, but it effectively provides (via expression in red blood cells) a ready pool of plasma ADA that can serve the same function as PEG-ADA. At the same time, it eliminates the supply issues with donor-matched HSC transplantation and the risks associated with allogeneic transplantation (e.g. GvHD).
## (s15) MANIPULATION OF POST-TRANSCRIPTIONAL RNA PROCESSING AND TRANSLATION
(p15.0) Gene expression levels can be modulated after transcription using synthetic nucleic acid molecules able to interfere with splicing, translation or RNA degradation, without directly altering the cell's genetic material ( Figure 10). 148 Diseases resulting from gain-of-function mutants are particularly amenable to this intervention method.

(p15.1) Control of RNA levels within the cell occurs through RNA interference, [148][149][150] which uses endogenous (e.g. miRNA) or exogenous (e.g. siRNA) double-stranded RNA templates, to target specific mRNA sequences for degradation. Artificially produced RNA molecules (short hairpin RNAs, which are artificial miRNA mimics 151,152 ) can be used to hijack this system and selectively target mRNA molecules for degradation 153,154 (Figure 11).

(p15.2) Antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) are short nucleic acid sequences designed to base pair with a specific RNA target within the cell. 148 Typically, ASOs consist of modified nucleotides with increased stability, and frequently include artificial nucleotide analogues, such as morpholinos 155 and locked/bridged nucleic acids. 156 ASOs can manipulate the post-transcriptional fate of mRNA in various ways, 157 but here we will mostly focus on RNase H targeting ( Figure 11). Splice-switching oligonucleotides (SSO) are designed to base pair with splicing sites, or splicing enhancers/suppressors within a pre-mRNA sequence and direct alternative splicing of the target gene. 158 RNA ASOs designed to base pair with sequences within the 5′ or 3′ untranslated region (UTR) can suppress or enhance mRNA translation. 159,160 Here, we will discuss some key examples of RNA interference and SSO-based therapeutics that have recently cleared clinical trials and are now being used to treat rare diseases. In particular, we will look at familial transthyretin amyloidosis (FTA) and spinal muscular atrophy (SMA).
## (s17) Onpattro RNAi and Tegsedi ASO
(p17.0) Familial transthyretin amyloidosis is a rare genetic disease of the Transthyretin (TTR) gene that causes the protein to misfold. [161][162][163] The misfolded protein forms amyloids that deposit into and damage tissues. This is a slow gradual process, so the symptoms typically begin in adulthood. The exact onset age is variable and correlates with disease progression. The peripheral nervous system is particularly vulnerable, so neuropathies are among the earlier symptoms, but as the disease progresses, eyes, kidney, heart, and CNS typically become involved. FTA is eventually fatal on average 10 years after the onset of symptoms, with a younger onset being associated with more aggressive disease. The prognosis in patients presenting with early cardiac involvement is extremely poor. Few patients survive for longer than 5 years.

(p17.1) Genetically, FTA mutations are autosomal dominant, but progression and penetrance vary depending on the exact genetic defect. 161 Most patients are heterozygotes. The global prevalence of FTA is of the order of 1 in 10,000, 164 though clusters have been observed within certain ethnic groups or populations, such as in certain areas of Portugal, Sweden, Japan, and West Africa. 162,164 The current gold standard treatment for FTA is liver transplantation [161][162][163] since the liver is a major source of TTR. Liver transplantation arrests the development of polyneuropathies and slows but does not prevent progressive degeneration of the eyes, heart, and kidney.
