# OPEN ACCESS EDITED BY The role of brain oscillations in post-stroke motor recovery: An overview

CorpusID: 251139330 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/420a6cb73861ebd1ae1cd5fa94127f1e224f24fc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/420a6cb73861ebd1ae1cd5fa94127f1e224f24fc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Intervention protocols
(p2.0) We analyzed the RCT discussing rehabilitative interventions on motor impairment after stroke and the applied innovative NIBS and BCI systems. We grouped the studies considering the impaired involved limb/site and the applied techniques as follows: a) Upper limb involvement applying theta burst stimulation (TBS) or repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation rTMS or tDCS.

(p2.1) Four out of thirteen articles investigated upper limb functions through transcranial stimulation (Nicolo et al., 2018;Ding et al., 2021;Dionísio et al., 2021;Kuzu et al., 2021). Dionísio et al. (2021) compared cTBS vs. placebo stimulation, finding that contralateral inhibitory stimulation led to a significant excitatory impact on the cortical oscillatory beta band patterns of the contralateral affected hemisphere. In Ding's (2021) study, the authors found that iTBS modulates brain network functioning in stroke survivors, normalizing brain connections, re-gaining the natural oscillation frequency, and promoting motor function recovery. Kuzu et al. (2021) showed improvements in upper extremity motor function and activities of daily living by combining physical therapy and cTBS or rTMS. However, these treatments showed limited evidence of improving spasticity (Kuzu et al., 2021). Nicolo et al. (2018) demonstrated that stimulation treatments combined with physical therapy did not enhance clinical motor gains in a heterogeneous sample of patients with sub-acute stroke.

(p2.2) Other studies have shown that tDCS enhanced perilesional beta-band oscillation coherence compared with cTBS and the sham groups (Carmichael, 2006;Murphy and Corbett, 2009). Moreover, tDCS produces and modulates the ongoing Preferred reporting items flowchart resuming the paper's selection process.

(p2.3) synaptic activity during motor activation determining a weak polarization of large assemblies of neurons (Carmichael, 2006;Murphy and Corbett, 2009). The modulation of interhemispheric driving and peri-lesional beta-band connectivity was related to functional recovery across all the patients (Carmichael, 2006;Murphy and Corbett, 2009). One of the potential mechanisms explaining these results could lie in the functional connectivity that increases with adaptive cortical plasticity induction caused by tDCS (Carmichael, 2006;Murphy and Corbett, 2009). b) Upper limb involvement applying different kinds of stimulation.
## (s5) Anodal tDCS +
(p5.0) After intervention, there were significant differences between two groups in FMA-UE, WMFT, MAL and MBI and the results of EEG including alpha power, beta power, concentration and activation. AOT plus BCI-FES can enhance motor function of upper extremity and cortical activation in patients with stroke. Within-group differences were significant in the Berg balance scale for both groups, in the Fugl-Meyer assessment and overall stability index of Biodex balance system of iTBS group. No significant between-group differences were found iTBS - Thus, in stroke recovery, changes in beta oscillations across the brain may be not congruent. -An increase in gamma power in the affected hemisphere is a good recovery target associated with improved clinical outcomes (Tecchio et al., 2007).
## (s7) Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience
(p7.0) To date, neuromodulation approaches, i.e., FES-NIBS, are valid tools to improve stroke rehabilitation outcomes. In addition, BCI systems could support motor function enhancement by providing visual/somatosensory feedback (Pillette et al., 2020), whereas EEG could provide real-time brain rhythms feedback (Enriquez-Geppert et al., 2017). The high reproducibility of ERD/ERS could be considered a promising predictive outcome measure for evaluating patients with stroke recovery after rehabilitation.

(p7.1) The core articles included in this review are shown in Table 1. Specifically, it has been shown that the above-reported techniques are more effective in the chronic stroke phase, whereas in the acute/post-acute phase, their effectiveness should be better explored. However, these data need to be cautiously taken because of several study limitations. First, this review was conducted as a broad overview of a topic-related research area. Moreover, the search method depends on a non-predefined protocol, which may involve subjective selection bias. Many of these studies have been plagued by methodological problems (i.e., the heterogeneity of the population, the rehabilitation sessions and duration, the ischemic areas involved, timing from the acute event, and the different EEG-BCI-FES-NIBS applied). The Inclusion criteria of studies for review also rely on researchers' experiences. Finally, the selected studies reported different functional outcomes and the scarcity of the data prevented performing systematic review. However, devising novel clinical trials, which consider such limitations, may be helpful to define proper treatment settings, integrating motor system modulation and rehabilitation techniques, to shed new light on the role of brain oscillations in patients with poststroke rehabilitation.
