# R E V I E W Dispersal of aquatic and terrestrial organisms by waterbirds: A review of current knowledge and future priorities

CorpusID: 256495808 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ba154b4a3a6252d3ab4874dd2fc8265a0b4ecc2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ba154b4a3a6252d3ab4874dd2fc8265a0b4ecc2)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology

## (s0) | INTRODUC TI ON
(p0.0) Waterbirds are now recognised as vital vectors of dispersal for all kinds of organisms, and their dispersal capacity constitutes one of the most important ecosystem services provided by these birds (Green & Elmberg, 2014). The importance of waterbirds as vectors for zoochory (dispersal via animals) was initially reviewed two decades ago by , who identified many research gaps that have since largely been filled. Here, we review the last two decades of progress on waterbird-mediated dispersal.
## (s1) | THE VARIE T Y OF ORG ANIS MS K NOWN TO D IS PER S E BY WATERB IRDS CONTIN UE S TO G ROW
(p1.0) The capacity of waterbirds to disperse plants and invertebrates with obvious resistant propagules such as seeds or resting eggs has long been well-established, notably by V.W. Proctor's numerous feeding experiments to demonstrate endozoochory of different organisms (e.g., Proctor, 1959Proctor, , 1968; see review by .
## (s5) | Comparison with fish and other aquatic vectors
(p5.0) In freshwater systems, fish are major alternative biotic dispersal vectors to birds. Plant dispersal studies have been biased towards frugivorous fish in tropical regions in a similar manner to studies of avian frugivores (Horn et al., 2011). In temperate regions, where fleshy-fruited plants are less abundant, there has been less research into ichthyochory, but omnivorous fish are clearly important vectors of seeds of aquatic plants in a manner comparable to waterbirds (Horn et al., 2011). Seed retention times in cyprinids may reach 15 hr, leading to potential dispersal distances of up to 16 km (Mulder et al., 2021).
## (s7) | Comparison with aquatic and terrestrial mammals
(p7.0) It has become clear that there is extensive overlap in the range of terrestrial plants dispersed by waterbirds and by herbivorous mammals, as well as in the seed traits that favour endozoochory by either group . Since aquatic and terrestrial mammals move through waterbodies or visit them to drink, they also disperse aquatic invertebrate propagules, mainly by epizoochory (Vanschoenwinkel et al., 2008(Vanschoenwinkel et al., , 2011Waterkeyn et al., 2010).
## (s8) | UNDER S TUDIED ROLE OF WATERB IRDS A S VEC TOR S FOR MICROB E S
(p8.0) Microbial biogeography has been studied mainly in relation to environmental filtering (e.g., by lake chemistry), yet dispersal has become an increasingly popular topic for microbial research (Custer et al., 2022). Despite early work with microscopic algae, the lack of studies of microbial dispersal by waterbirds was clear in the earlier review of , and the relative lack of recent research is evident from the resulting citations ( Figure 2).

(p8.1) Although many microbes can disperse inter-continentally through dust storms (Custer et al., 2022), such airborne dispersal becomes increasingly unlikely as microbial size increases above a threshold of around 20 μm (Wilkinson et al., 2012). Waterbirds provide a way for microbes to colonise new sites and is likely to become increasingly important as microbial size increases. Birds may be particularly important for dispersing microbes across the equator, for which airborne dispersal is inhibited by atmospheric circulation (Wilkinson et al., 2012). Many species of shorebirds undergo migrations that cross the equator, as well as some Anatidae.
## (s11) | Invertebrate traits
(p11.0) There have been no systematic attempts to assign dispersal syndromes to invertebrate propagules based on their morphology, and experimental studies testing their ability to disperse via waterbirds are much scarcer than for plants ( van Leeuwen, van der Velde, van Groenendael, et al., 2012;van Leeuwen et al., 2020). However, they are sufficient to suggest that propagule size and hardness are key traits. The survival rate after gut passage is higher for hard, resistant structures such as Artemia cysts than for softer propagules such as Corixidae eggs (Carbonell et al., 2021;Sánchez et al., 2012). Studies on snails indicate greater survival for smaller operculated species and those with greatest resistance to external stressors such as desiccation (Simonova et al., 2016; van Leeuwen, van der Velde, van Lith, et al., 2012). In general, retention times of invertebrate propagules are shorter than those of plant seeds (Viana et al., 2013), as expected from their smaller size, which facilitates passage through the gizzard.

(p11.1) When ingested at later development stages, invertebrates with an ability to protect themselves from the hostile gut environment are more likely to survive gut passage. Ostracods can do so by closing their valves and are repeatedly recorded as alive in waterfowl faeces . More experiments are needed comparing gut passage for a diversity of invertebrates with different traits such as propagule size, structure, shape and hardness.
## (s13) Variation in gut retention times is influenced less by differences in
(p13.0) intestine length than by the period for which propagules are kept in the gizzard (Kleyheeg, Nolet, et al., 2018). This may explain why seeds had a longer retention time when fed to the smaller mallard compared to the greylag goose (García-Álvarez et al., 2015), whereas the opposite occurred when comparing the smaller red-billed teal with the Egyptian goose (Reynolds & Cumming, 2016a) --seeds probably were retained in the mallard gizzard for relatively longer than in the teal.
## (s16) Most plants (including most of those dispersed by waterbirds)
(p16.0) are considered to have "physiological seed dormancy", whilst many of the others are classified as having "physical dormancy", with the assumption that only the latter require gut passage to induce germination (Penfield, 2017). Despite detailed research into a range of factors (e.g., temperature, light, water, chemical concentrations) that stimulate entry into, and exit from, physiological dormancy, the role of gut passage in such plants has so far received insufficient attention (Soltani et al., 2018). However, recent evidence suggests that dormancy type (physical or physiological) is not a strong predictor of seed survival or degree of damage during avian gut passage, or of the influence of gut passage on germinability (Bravo et al., 2020;Costea et al., 2019). More research is needed to study the interactions between gut passage and other variables driving physiological dormancy, and how that determines germination patterns.
## (s17) | PROPAG ULE E S TAB LIS HMENT AF TER ZO O CH O RY
(p17.0) Dispersal is only successful if displacement is followed by propagule growth to maturity, and ultimately the production of offspring . The term "effective dispersal" includes this establishment phase, the success of which is strongly linked to dispersal distance and spatial heterogeneity. Propagule establishment is an important part of the quality component of the Seed Dispersal Effectiveness framework, with which the fitness benefits of zoochory can be compared among different vectors ( van Leeuwen, Villar, et al., 2022). Although originally conceived for plants, this framework is applicable to dispersal of invertebrates and other organisms, and can be used to identify knowledge gaps in our current understanding of effective dispersal.
## (s18) | G ENE TI C ANALYS E S A S TOOL S TO UNDER S TAND WATERB IRD ZOOCHORY
(p18.0) Genetic analyses have revolutionised our capability to study effective dispersal through waterbird vectors, by detecting colonisation routes and quantifying gene flow. In many genetic studies of aquatic plants and invertebrates, high levels of gene flow are detected which support an influence of bird movements. For example, van Leeuwen et al. (2013) demonstrated high rates of genetic interchange for Spanish populations of the alien aquatic snail Physella acuta, for which waterbird endozoochory has since been confirmed (Martín-Vélez et al., 2022). Martin et al. (2020) found that the population structure of the gastropod Planorbella trivolvis suggested LDD along a migratory flyway. Likewise, variation in mitochondrial clades of brine shrimp Artemia franciscana across the Americas is related to shorebird flyways (Muñoz et al., 2013). For cladocerans and the bryozoan Cristatella mucedo, Figuerola et al. (2005) found that waterfowl movements explained a significant amount of gene flow across North America.

(p18.1) Repeated studies of bryozoans have provided progressively more evidence of a high zoochory capacity from propagule morphology, field sampling and feeding experiments, combined with genetic analyses supporting effective dispersal (Okamura et al., 2019). The importance of waterbird vectors varies between bryozoan genera in relation to the likelihood of propagule ingestion or attachment.

(p18.2) Genetic divergence between populations was smallest for genera that release statoblasts with hooks and positive buoyancy ("floatoblasts"), and greatest for species with "sessoblasts" that remain quiescent in the maternal microhabitat.
## (s19) | UNDER S TANDING WATERB IRD MOVEMENTS AND MODELLING ZOOCHORY
(p19.0) It is vital to be able to predict the spatial distribution of propagules dispersed by waterbirds in order to understand the likely consequences for the spatial structure and population dynamics of the vectored organisms, as well as resulting changes in their distribution (Jeltsch et al., 2008;Russo et al., 2006).

(p19.1) Dispersal kernels (Nathan et al., 2012), demonstrate the scale(s) at which propagules are dispersed, as well as the frequency and extent of LDD events. Mechanistic models predict the spatial patterns of propagule dispersal and typically require data on two interacting subcomponents: (1) the retention time of the propagule in the digestive tract and (2) the displacement of the vector over that time (Côrtes & Uriarte, 2013). Sensitivity analysis for wintering waterbirds suggests that maximum gut retention times have less influence on seed dispersal kernels than the nature of bird movements per se, reinforcing the need to include quality tracking data to obtain valid predictions (Martín-Vélez, Leeuwen, et al., 2021). Some studies of endozoochory have made unrealistic estimates of the scale of dispersal, as they fail to accurately account for waterbird movement, and make simple extrapolations from a retention time curve by assuming propagule ingestion is followed by non-stop flights (e.g., Manning et al., 2021;Raulings et al., 2011). However, ringing recoveries have been used to make general predictions for kernels during seasonal migration, and have shown that migrating ducks can facilitate dispersal on a very large scale, predicting dispersal of over 3.5% of seeds to be over 100 km and up to 1,600 km, although maximum dispersal distances
## (s20) | MORE RE S E ARCH IS NEEDED OUTS IDE EUROPE
(p20.0) Despite considerable progress in our understanding of waterbird zoochory over the last two decades, there is still much bias in the location of studies, with the focus largely on waterbirds in Europe.

(p20.1) For example, 10 of the 16 papers included in the accompanying virtual issue of Freshwater Biology are from Europe. Historical research reviewed by  was largely conducted in North America, notably by V.W. Proctor and colleagues.

(p20.2) This may be partly a result of the huge cultural value that Anatidae and other waterbirds have in these two continents, where birdwatching or hunting provide important economic benefits (Green & Elmberg, 2014). Hunting has facilitated the study of gut contents, helping to establish what propagules are dispersed by waterbirds (Almeida et al., 2022;Soons et al., 2016). Although some waterfowl species are shared between North America and Europe, there are important differences in their migratory behaviour, and maximum dispersal distances for propagules are predicted to be greater in the former (Viana et al., 2013). This underlines the importance of studying intercontinental variation in the future.

(p20.3) Waterbird zoochory in the Southern Hemisphere and Asia is relatively unexplored, which makes this an important focus for future research. In China, India and the rest of Asia, there are still no detailed studies of waterbird zoochory (Corlett, 2017). Many bird species migrating along the East Asian flyway also occur on European flyways, so the dispersal processes for plants and invertebrates in both continents are likely to be related. By contrast, research in temperate regions may be less relevant to tropical and subtropical ecosystems of the Southern Hemisphere. Much of Africa and Australia is arid or semiarid with unpredictable rainfall, temporary wetlands and dry-downs.

(p20.4) In arid and semi-arid regions, waterbirds are nomadic rather than strictly migratory, making movements at different times of the year in relation to water availability, and being relatively flexible in terms of when they breed. There is a need for more studies of waterbird zoochory from African and Australian arid zones (Green et al., 2008;Raulings et al., 2011;Reynolds & Cumming, 2016a, 2016b.

(p20.5) There are even fewer studies of waterbird zoochory in the permanent and temporary wetlands of South America, despite recent pioneering work (Silva et al., , 2022. The role as dispersal vectors of intercontinental migratory waterbirds moving between Nearctic and Neotropical wetlands, with some shorebirds covering up to 30,000 km annually (Niles et al., 2008), are particularly worthy of future attention. Indeed, shorebirds are often cited as likely vectors to explain bipolar and other amphitropical plant distributions in the Americas (Hancock & Prince, 2022).
## (s22) | CON CLUS IONS
(p22.0) Exciting advances have been made over the past 20 years in many aspects of the role of waterbirds as dispersal vectors, and key priorities for more research have been identified. New technologies, particularly through bird tracking and eDNA analysis, have opened excellent opportunities for future work. Disparities in the geographical and taxonomic distribution of research effort need to be addressed.

(p22.1) Terrestrial and global change ecologists should pay more attention to the major influence of waterbirds, particularly given their fundamental role in allowing plants to shift their distribution to keep pace with climate change (mainly plant species assigned to classical dispersal syndromes that imply no LDD capacity), thus maintaining ecosystem functionality. We particularly highlight the involvement of waterbirds in the dispersal of organisms within and across terrestrial and aquatic landscapes. The importance of waterbirds as dispersal vectors makes it vital to take measures to increase the resilience of waterbird populations against human impacts (Amano et al., 2020;Breiner et al., 2021).
