# Cardioprotective Effects of Vitex negundo: A Review of Bioactive Extracts and Compounds

CorpusID: 259098425 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ff54c1325d2eb6f147438741eb5c4cf54dc15a2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ff54c1325d2eb6f147438741eb5c4cf54dc15a2)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Anti-Inflammatory Effects
(p3.0) Inflammation plays a central role in the pathogenesis of many CVDs. Therapeutic strategies which target to limit inflammation may be promising in protecting and treating CVDs. Cardiovascular inflammation involves cells such as cardiomyocytes, macrophages, endothelial cells and fibroblasts and mediators such as acute phase reactants, soluble adhesion molecules, pro-inflammatory cytokines and transcription factors such as nuclear factor erythroid-like 2 (Nrf2) and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kB). 89-92 C-reactive protein (CRP) is as example of acute phase protein which is increased in many CVDs including hypertension. CRP impacts endothelial vasodilation by down regulating eNOS expression through various mechanisms hence reducing NO bioavailability and upregulating vascular NADPH oxidase activation leading to increased ROS formation. 93,94 Figure 4 shows the mechanisms mediated by CRP to promote eNOS inhibition and eventually endothelial dysfunction. A variety of medicinal plants or components such as genistein 95 crocin 96 and Chinese herbal medicine 97 exert anti-inflammatory effects hence protecting against cardiovascular diseases. Majority of the herbal plants have flavonoids which induce anti-inflammatory effects that are useful in exerting cardioprotection. 98 Previous studies have demonstrated cardioprotective effects of V. negundo and its bioactive compounds through limiting inflammation. Corosolic acid, a component of V. negundo has been shown in mouse BMDMs to regulate interleukin receptor associated kinase (IRAK)-2 phosphorylation through NF-κB signaling. 99 This positions corosolic acid as a potential pharmacologic agent that can prevent inflammation. Chrysophenol has been demonstrated to reduce cardiac fibrosis by exerting antiinflammatory effects through Nrf2 regulation. 87 Another V. negundo bioactive compound, Tris (2,4-di-tert-butylphenyl) phosphate (TDTBPP), has been shown to exert anti-inflammatory activity in a Carrageenan induced rat paw edema model. 100 Figure 4. CRP-mediated mechanisms of eNOS inhibition and vascular dysfunction. Firstly, CRP upregulates NADPH oxidase. This leads to superoxide production and not NO. Secondly, CRP downregulates GTPCH1 enzyme activity leading to reduced levels of Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4). The eNOS uncoupling (as demonstrated by reduced dimer: monomer ratio) leads to an alteration in the phosphorylation of Ser1177 (Phospho-eNOS) and Thr 495 hence downregulating the eNOS functional activity. Downregulation of eNOS leads to reduced NO bioavailability. Also, upregulation of vascular NADPH oxidase increases ROS formation and eventually upregulation of NF-κB, AP1 and Nrf2 which are involved in exacerbating inflammation. Reduced NO bioavailability and activated NF-κB, AP1 and Nrf2 transcription factors promote endothelial dysfunction which is a characteristic of many cardiovascular pathologies.
## (s4) Anti-Oxidative Effects
(p4.0) Oxidative stress is a deleterious state due to the disproportionate imbalance between oxidative species and antioxidants in the body. Reactive oxidative species (ROS) production is mainly initiated through the activation of NADPH oxidase and is critical in promoting CVDs. For example, oxidative stress associated damage such as vascular/endothelial dysfunction promotes progression of hypertension. 106 Nitric oxide (NO) contributes in maintaining the health of the vascular endothelium and as a result, NO synthesis has been observed to be decreased in some CVDs. 107 Therefore, therapeutic agents that aim to inhibit ROS production or to increase NO bioavailability may be important and reliable in the development of novel therapies against hypertension and other CVDs. Medicinal plants or components reduce oxidative stress in endothelial cells. 108 For example, genistein inhibit ROS hence contributing to the control of CVDs. 95 V. negundo also has strong antioxidant activity. 109,110 Betulinic acid was shown to reduce oxidative stress by inhibiting ROSs production and increasing NO, SOD activity and eNOS activity in rat aortas induced by pyrogallol-derived superoxide production. 49 In myocardial oxidative tissue damage and cardio-toxicity induced by cyclophosphamide treatment in Wistar rats, ursolic acid has been demonstrated to increase tissue antioxidants (SOD, catalase & GSH). 58 In experimental hypertension, ursolic acid has also been shown to exert antioxidant effects by increasing SOD and GPx. 60 Vitexin, a component of V. negundo and a flavonoid, inhibits ox-LDL-induced oxidative stress by downregulating malondialdehyde (MDA) and ROSs production and promoting SOD expression. Vitexin inhibits overexpression of proinflammatory cytokines and cell adhesion molecules induced by ox-LDL. 77 Chrysophenol reduces cardiac fibrosis by exerting antiinflammatory and anti-oxidant effects through Nrf2 regulation. 87 Protocatechuic acid also exerts antioxidant effects in DOCA salt induced hypertension in male Wistar rats by reducing sodium and elevating potassium levels. 73 Cardio-protective effects of protocatechuic acid through preventing oxidative damage, increasing antiapoptotic protein and attenuating cardiac mitochondrial dysfunction has also been reported hence attenuating diabetes-induced cardiac dysfunction. 76 The antioxidant capacity of V. negundo extracts has been demonstrated in various studies. 15,101,111,112 Reduction of lipid peroxidation is one major mechanism by which V. negundo exerts its anti-oxidant activity. 19,101,112 Another anti-oxidant mechanism of V. negundo is by inhibition of xanthine oxidase. 40,113 Polar fractions of V. negundo also exhibit anti-oxidant properties through free radical scavenging and metal chelation which also down regulate the free radical mediated inflammatory pathways. 114 There are limited studies that demonstrate anti-oxidant capacity of V. negundo in the context of in vivo or in vitro models of many cardio-vascular diseases. Therefore, it is needed to validate the anti-oxidant effect of V. negundo and its components in vivo or in vitro models of many CVDs.
## (s5) Anti-Hyperlipidemic Effects
(p5.0) Hyperlipidemia refers to high levels of plasma cholesterol, plasma lipoproteins and triglycerides. 115 Elevated low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol levels is associated with hyperlipidemia-related pathological conditions which include CVDs while high density lipoprotein (HDL)-cholesterol mediates reverse cholesterol transport which is the elimination of excess cholesterol from body cells through the liver. 116 The LDL effects on endothelial function have been extensively reviewed previously. 117 Also, therapies aimed at increasing HDL-cholesterol levels in the body have been reviewed 116 such as those targeting to lower LDL-cholesterol levels in plasma. 118 Many medicinal plants have been reported to inhibit dyslipidemia. 119 For example, garlic has been shown to decrease hypercholesterolemia. 6 Curcumin, an active component of Curcuma longa L, has been reported to have anti-hyperlipidemic effects. 120 Other reviews have explored the cardioprotective potential of certain medicinal plants, nutraceuticals and omega-3 fatty acids by reducing small dense low-dense lipoprotein (sdLDL) levels, LDL particle numbers or increasing LDL particle size hence preventing or managing the risk of CVDs. 121 Studies on V. negundo and some of its bioactive compounds have demonstrated antihyperlipidemic potential. Betulinic acid, a component of V. negundo exerts anti-obesity effects through direct inhibition of pancreatic lipase hence preventing lipids absorption from the small intestine. Betulinic acid also enhances lipolysis in adipose tissues hence further accelerating fat mobilization. 51 Ursolic acid, another derivative of V. negundo has been shown to reverse drug induced hyperlipidemia by reducing total cholesterol (TC) and triglycerides (TG) in Wistar rats treated by Cyclophosphamide 58 and to exhibit antihyperlipidemic effects by decreasing LDL-cholesterol and TG on Dahl salt-sensitive (DSS) hypertensive rat model. 60 Ursolic acid also exerts antihyperlipidemic effect in hyperlipidemic rats by reducing plasma triglycerides, suppressing dyslipidemia-induced monocyte priming, reducing lactase dehydrogenase (LDH), TG, TC, LDL-cholesterol, VLDL-cholesterol, free fatty acids (FFA), HDL-cholesterol and phospholipids 54,61,62 Protocatechuic acid exerts antihyperlipidemic effects by reducing hepatic TC, TG and serum lipid levels in coronary artery disease induced in rat models. 74 Oleanolic Acid ameliorates hyperlipidemia by reducing TC and TG. 81 Aqueous and ethanolic leaf extracts of V. negundo lower plasma TC and LDL-cholesterol and increase HDL-cholesterol hence preventing coronary artery disease. 122 Vitexin, a V. negundo bioactive constituent, exerts anti-apoptotic effects in ox-LDL-treated HUVECs and inhibits ox-LDL-induced overexpression of proinflammatory cytokines and cell adhesion molecules. It also ameliorates endothelial injury induced by ox-LDL, through induction of autophagy via AMPK signaling. 77 Corosolic acid is another V. negundo compound which has been shown to ameliorate abnormal lipid metabolism in vivo in SHR-cp rats. 69 
## (s7) Anti-Atherosclerotic Effects
(p7.0) Anti-atherosclerotic and anti-thrombotic effects of V. negundo and its compounds have been studied previously. Betulinic acid has been shown to modulate vascular inflammation and protect against atherosclerosis by promoting cholesterol efflux, suppressing IκB phosphorylation, downregulating NF-κB activation, reducing atherosclerotic lesion size, suppressing nuclear translocation and phosphorylation of p65 and increasing expression of ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) via miR-33 s down-regulation. 48 ABCA1 is important in promoting cholesterol efflux from macrophages hence exerting antiatherosclerotic role. 48 Betulinic acid also exhibits anti-thrombotic effects by exerting antiplatelet activities. 50 However, further investigations need to be done to validate this effect.

(p7.1) Dietary ursolic acid has shown to have atheroprotective effects by reducing atherosclerotic plaque size in atherosclerosis-prone mice. 62 Ursolic acid also inhibits resistin-induced atherosclerosis 64 and inhibits hepatic synthesis of CRP hence protecting endothelial cells from being injured by CRP. By this, UA has been demonstrated to prevent athero-  (4), which leads to reduced IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α hence inhibiting inflammation (5). Pretreatment with VNE also upregulates p21 activated kinase 1 (PAK1) that eventually protects against myocardial necrosis by increasing cell survival, cell proliferation and cytoskeleton remodeling (6). Therefore, VNE regulates PAK1 and NF-κB signaling pathways hence offering protection against MI. (Created with BioRender.com).
