# A Survey of Automatic Text Classification Based on Thai Social Media Data

CorpusID: 252929693 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ccd7a3a39a0d649f196aeb94a72533310f7b64e4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ccd7a3a39a0d649f196aeb94a72533310f7b64e4)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s17) TeCHNIQUeS FoR CLASSIFyING TeXT AND eVALUATING PeRFoRMANCe
(p17.0) Text classification technique is a procedure used to indicate the group that the message belongs. For example, messages are classified as the expression of opinions to the Thai government, whether positive or negative. Text classification methods are divided into two methods (Suwanpipob, 2019), lexicon-based approach and machine learning approach.
## (s18) Lexicon-Based Approach (LB Approach)
(p18.0) The LB classification method establishes rules or requirements for classifying text. The algorithm searches for polarity words like "bad," "nasty," "tasty," or "good." Expressions in the text are calculated by algorithm and scored from -1 to +1. After combining the scores of all the words, it uses the mathematical and statistical methods to determine the final scores to identify the sentiment of the text (Taboada et al., 2011), as shown in Figure 3. The scores and classifications of texts depend on the vocabulary in the dictionary for the analysis and classification of English sentiments (Suwanpipob, 2019).

(p18.1) Jaihuek and Mungsing (2018) used an automatic scoring program to create a dictionary for the keywords of answers. The individual received points if the answer that matched the keyword was found  Table 2). Saensuk et al. (2019) developed a method for characterization and classifying opinions on smartphone features into positive and negative statements. Different types of words ("pretty" or "bad") can be positive and negative, respectively. Nouns (N) or noun phrases (NP) ("camera," "battery," and "color") are represented by various numbers (see Table 3). For example, machine was represented by 13, camera was represented by 1, and screen was represented by 14. Then, the words in the comment text were compared with the comments to create rules for classifying the message based on the comment terminal. If the comment terminals in a message were positive (+) or negative (-), they were all evaluated as positive or negative, respectively. However, if a message contained both polarized words, both positive (+) and negative (-) comments were evaluated as negative.
## (s20) Naïve Bayes (NB)
(p20.0) The NB algorithm is a learning method to create classifiers based on probability theory and on Bayes' theory (Thangaraj & Sivakami, 2018). It aims to find the probability of the emergence of an event by guessing from events that already took place. NB, a ML algorithm, can be processed quickly. NB uses mathematical principles to classify the data; therefore, the data to be analyzed and classified  (2017) 
## (s36) Sentiment Analysis and Classification
(p36.0) Sentiment classification research is the classification of messages according to the feelings or intentions of the writer. Its purpose is to explore and develop businesses and services. The research can be divided into two categories. First, the text classification uses feelings toward a product, service, person, place, or event (positive, negative, and neutral). The second is the classification of messages based on the emotion or feeling that the writers want to communicate and express (happy, sad, lonely, shocked, and fear). Messages can be classified based one's feelings about a product, service, person, place, or event. Pugsee and Niyomvanich (2015) developed a system to determine the choice of recipes using comments. A total of 7,222 texts from blogging sites about food were analyzed and categorized based on users' feelings about a recipe. It consisted of 6,620 positive texts, 54 negative texts, and 548 neutral texts. The researchers developed an automatic text classification based on the SentiWordNet dictionary comparison, with an accuracy of 93.08%. Masdisornchote (2016) collected 1,090 texts expressing opinions about mobile phones via the Siamphone Website. The texts were segmented by the LexTo word tokenization and compared with the sentiment dictionary to classify into positive and negative statements. An overall efficiency (F-Measure) was 86.1%. Songram (2016) used a Graph API tool to collect 467 texts from Facebook during the Coup d'état in Thailand. Three experts classified the texts, which can be divided into 259 positive texts and 208 negative texts. A classification based association (CBA) was used to create rules to classify the texts. The result showed an accuracy of 77.75%. Vateekul and Koomsubha (2016) collected 3,813,173 texts from Twitter. They brought them into the word segmentation process via Kucut to consider the emoticons. A positive emoticon was identified as a positive emotion and feeling. A negative emoticon indicated a negative emotion and feeling. A random sample of 22,000 texts were used to create a model for classification by extracting the embedded feature using the word2vec. This study used CNN, NB, and SVM. The accuracy was 75.35%, 74.05%, and 74.71%, respectively. Sanguansa (2016) used 55,539 texts to express customer opinions in the field of business (positive, negative, and neutral texts). The researchers extracted TF, TF-IDF, and word-embedding attributes. They used NB, LR, and SVM to create a text classification model. It was found that the embedding attribute classification using the LR model yielded the highest accuracy at 85.12%.   Kuhamanee et al. (2017) collected 10,000 opinion texts about traveling in Thailand. Twitter data was analyzed to formulate guidelines for promoting the tourism industry of Bangkok. The researchers used the obtained data to divide the text into positive and negative feelings, as well as a sense of neutrality. TF-IDF attributes were then extracted. The performance of the text classification models by NB, DT, SVM, and artificial NN was compared. It found that the accuracy of each was 55.06%, 79.83%, 80.11%, and 80.33%, respectively.

(p36.1) Inplang and Thongkam (2020) studied the comments on games. PlayerUnknown's Battlegrounds (PUBG) on Google Play used WebHarvy to retrieve 3,798 texts. The texts were prepared by deleting non-Thai text, cutting words, and removing stop words. There were 3,123 texts left after going through the text preparation process (1,875 positive texts, 299 negative texts, and 949 neutral texts). The number of texts per type was balanced with a new synthetic method, the oversampling technique called SMOTE. This method added a small group of classes to the same level as the other. To model the text classification in this research, RapidMiner was used with various algorithms, including DT, NB, k-NN, and SVM. It was found that the k-NN algorithm had the highest accuracy at 99.87%. Tanantong et al. (2020) collected 4,608 texts from social media platforms (Facebook, Instagram, and Pantip) to classify opinions on the mobile network operator. The texts were divided into negative and positive. The research team used LB approaches to create a dictionary of terms on topics related to mobile network service. They calculated text scores, finding that the accuracy was the highest at 87.7%.

(p36.2) The research for categorizing text by sentiment varies in terms of data and issues. The purpose of text analysis often identifies and classifies opinions on social media (positive or negative) toward a product, service, person, place, or event. Another interesting way to analyze and categorize text is a classification based on the direct emotions or feelings of the writers. Sarakit et al. (2015) classified 5,848 comments on YouTube videos by categorizing according to the mood of the messages (anger, confusion, fear, happiness, sadness, and surprise). LexTo was used as word segmentation. TF and TF-IDF were used to extract attributes. NB, DT, and SVM were used to create a model for text classification. It was found that the TF-based NB algorithm had the highest accuracy (84.48%).
