# Understanding public service supply chain management: a systematic literature review management · Service supply chain · Public service logic · Relationship management · Public service supply chain management (PSSCM) · Systematic literature review JEL Classification H4 · H7 · R5

CorpusID: 258849668 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad15945fb5f39de0d64edab5f83ceefd9977dfd0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad15945fb5f39de0d64edab5f83ceefd9977dfd0)

Fields: Business, Political Science

## (s3) The basis of public service logic theory
(p3.0) Until recently, the public sector was the main provider of public services, and research in this area assumed an orientation towards internal costs and good-dominant logic (Osborne 2018;Hodgkinson et al. 2017). This approach may lead to increased transparency in decision-making and efficiency in public service delivery. However, its practical disadvantages limit accountability, sustainable development and equality while increasing the gaps between public services, social needs and the opportunism of public service providers (Li and Qiu 2020), by failing to consider external efficiency and co-creation of public value (Powell and Osborne 2020).

(p3.1) Currently, public service providers postulate user orientation and relationship management in intersectoral networks with the inseparability and heterogeneity of public services (Li and Qiu 2020;Vargo and Lusch 2008). The development of value creation theory in the public sector is consistent with service-dominant logic, where the value creation process arises through mutual interactions and resource integration. According to this approach, skills and knowledge are key resources exchanged within collaborative networks Payne et al. 2008). Value creation results from the coordinated actions of entities that are both the suppliers and the users of a service. This process does not focus on implementing individual organisations' basic processes but results from the dynamic exchange of values between them, the foundation on which public service logic theory develops (Engen et al. 2020;Osborne 2018).
## (s8) The definition and model of the public service supply chain
(p8.0) The authors of the identified publications note that the need to apply supply chain management (SCM) in the public sector results from the necessity of public service delivery for cross-sectoral collaboration and the need to meet growing social expectations (Gianakis and McCue 2012;Aronsson et al. 2011;Mafini 2016). SCM allows decision-makers to address the problems of functional divisions and smooth the flow of processes. This approach can improve public services delivery by synchronising and integrating resources and coordinating actors' activities (Akhtar et al. 2012;Radnor and Noke 2013;Aitken et al. 2021;Seepma et al. 2020). The value of public service delivery could be higher. However, the issue of PSSCM involves the implementation of various types of public services (e.g. health care or humanitarian relief) and governance mechanisms (e.g. public-private partnerships or public procurement), primarily occurring at the organisational level (e.g. dyads). Therefore, this paper draws on the public services logic lens and focuses on the most common public services in supply chain literature. According to this perspective, PSSCM can mean a synchronised process of co-creating value in public administrative networks and ecosystems, in which each actor can function as both a supplier and an end-user, within legal regulations and following the rules of transparency, accountability, equality and publicness. It includes the flows of information, knowledge, activities and tasks between the entities that co-create public services. The needs of society are of key importance, and they determine the scope and manner of providing public services. The basis of the flows between entities in PSSCM is the fundamental processes of the service supply chain: capacity and skills management, demand management, customer relationship management, supplier relationship management, service delivery management and cash flow management (Ellram et al. 2004). PSSCM does not encompass flows of goods, e.g. the supply of hospital equipment or office supplies. The flow of goods is complementary and supports service delivery in PSSCM. In addition, due to its interorganisational and intersectoral nature and political and social embedding, behavioural factors play a significant role in PSSCM.

(p8.1) Researchers indicate that processes implemented in PSSCM are complex and uncertain and occur under dynamic conditions with limited resources, affecting their performance (Aronsson et al. 2011;Callender 2011;Day et al. 2012;Oloruntoba Kovács 2015;Kunz et al. 2017;Fan et al. 2017;Dolinskaya et al. 2018;Chorfi et al. 2018). These supply chains constitute multidimensional structures of relationships in which actors are autonomous units, with specific management principles and organisational culture that use various technical systems. These actors have different but complementary competencies and are responsible for implementing various processes in the supply chain. Each process proceeds differently, depending on the type of service and the influence of political accountability and public scrutiny (Callender 2011).

(p8.2) The model that Baltacioglu et al. (2007) developed was derived from the Supply Chain Operation Reference (SCOR) model; the model by Ellram et al. (2004) indicates that the service provider is central to the supply chain that supports the service in creation. The supplier delivers supplementary services to the service provider or the recipient, e.g. the materials necessary to perform the service, maintain relevant infrastructure, conduct laboratory tests or maintain computer applications, including web and mobile applications. Thus, the supplier indirectly contributes to the creation of the service. Service provision occurs when a service provider offers the service to a recipient who consumes it. The recipient also participates in creating the service. Figure 4 shows the model of the supply chain structure and functioning conditions in the public sector.

(p8.3) Based on Baltacioglu et al. (2007), the public service supply chain model in Fig. 4 consists of public service suppliers, providers and customers. Suppliers provide support services for core services. They can provide services directly to the customers if the services are indispensable at the place and time of delivering core services, e.g. nursing services during surgery. Providers directly implement core public services, and customers are all stakeholders who use these services.

(p8.4) Both suppliers and providers can simultaneously be customers of a public service. For example, a person working in a water and sewage company is also a customer of that company, as is a person who tests the quality of the water supply. These three basic units engage in relationships that motivate them to produce the highest quality public services. In addition, customers participate in public service co-creation through (among other things) information about needs, ideas for implementation and resources to design services. The previously described service type, activity context and political, legal, organisational and social conditions also condition the Fig. 4 Public service supply chain model. Source: Elaboration based on Baltacioglu et al. (2007) and Ellram et al. (2004) possibilities of the jointly generated value. As part of the management of the public service supply chain, researchers explore many issues. The analyses conducted within the framework of the research presented in this paper identify these issues and divide them into eight major research streams (Appendix 1).
## (s9) Research streams in PSSCM
(p9.0) The content analysis of 71 publications was based on a thorough study of the issues they discussed. On this basis, the authors established the main PSSCM research streams (see Appendix 1). By relating them to the work of Lambert and Enz (2017), the division of these publications into research streams appears as follows:

(p9.1) • Structural management components: the structure of PSSCM, interorganisational coordination, cross-sectoral implementation of public tasks, agility-based resilience and digital technologies; • Behavioural management components: interorganisational collaboration, community-based public service delivery and PSSCM professionals.

(p9.2) The identified research streams complement and influence each other. The structure of PSSCM creates a framework in which public service delivery processes, such as interorganisational coordination and collaboration, operate. Importantly, this structure is cross-sectoral, which is one of the identified research streams. In PSSCM, the public service logic approach highlights two types of actors, public professionals and the community, as those who play a special role in these chains. Moreover, considering the uncertainty and complexity of implementing public services, the research thus far has drawn attention to the concepts of leanness, agility and resilience. Recently, increasing research on the use of digital technologies in PSSCM has appeared. Detailed characteristics of the identified research streams follow.
## (s12) Public service supply chain coordination
(p12.0) The structural and organisational complexity of PSSCM makes coordination crucial for delivering public services and, therefore, is a popular research subject (Durugbo et al. 2022;Okdinawati et al. 2019;Nagurney et al. 2016). Coordination harmonises mutual relations, eliminates problems of shortage or oversupply and maintains a proper flow of information. At the same time, it is a challenging area that requires significant work, time and resources (Seepma et al. 2020;Namagembe 2020;Dobrzykowski 2019;Fu et al. 2006). As a result, many public supply chains struggle to coordinate flows between organisations from different sectors.
## (s14) Collaboration in PSSCM
(p14.0) The division of competencies of the public organisations responsible for the implementation of specific tasks causes these organisations to combine various relations (e.g. communication, coordination, cooperation and collaboration) (Quarshie and Leuschner 2020). As a result, their activities are interdependent, and they emphasise collaboration that leads to supply chain integration (Balcik et al. 2010;Eckerd and Eckerd 2017).
## (s15) Community-based PSSCM
(p15.0) Researchers devote a significant part of the research into PSSCM to the co-production and co-creation of public value. This orientation results from how supply chain management favours the creation of appropriate structures and strategies to satisfy the end customer (Pillitteri et al. 2021;Obaze 2019). From this perspective, managing relationships within supply chains to support the development of interactions with local communities and the possibility of exchanging services for services is beneficial. It encourages the beneficiaries to adapt to changes and learn and develop coping skills. According to Dobrzykowski (2019), the need to involve beneficiaries in value-creation processes is apparent in health care, where information is constantly shared between the patient and the doctor for diagnosis and treatment. Experience in humanitarian logistics shows that co-production improves the identification of needs and the development of the local economy (Kovács et al. 2010). Therefore, greater community involvement in providing public service allows the transparency and transformation of these processes to increase, better serving beneficiaries' needs (Obaze 2019;Kovács et al. 2010).

(p15.1) Obaze (2019, p. 419) emphasises that 'services become transformational when embedded into systems, promote relational benefits, service design, service practices and social structures'. Contextual knowledge from consultations, social participation and the development of relational and communication skills with local communities fosters this embedding (Pillitteri et al. 2021;Kovács et al. 2010). In addition, designing supply chains around them can facilitate beneficiaries' active role (Kovács et al. 2010). Therefore, the authors made another assumption:
## (s16) PSSCM professionals
(p16.0) PSSCM professionals fulfil many functions, including serving as coordinators, integrators, facilitators and leaders (Pillitteri et al. 2021;Atkinson et al. 2020;Gianakis and McCue 2012;Akhtar et al. 2012). However, their primary role in PSSCM is to develop and maintain relationships with beneficiaries to co-create public value (Pillitteri et al. 2021). Achieving this requires professionals to persuade and guide beneficiaries beyond simply involving them in public service delivery processes based on standard operating procedures (Pillitteri et al. 2021).

(p16.1) Professionals implementing tasks in the public sector is challenging. Gianakis and McCue (2012) state that accountability increases public professionals' risk aversion beyond what private-sector professionals experience. According to Atkinson et al. (2020), political conditions may drive professionals to surround themselves with flatterers rather than experts. In addition, differences in culture and organisational structure, financial constraints or coordination problems can significantly limit interorganisational relationships and the co-creation of public value (Akhtar et al. 2012). This situational complexity requires PSSCM professionals to have high-level social competencies, particularly in soft skills. Pillitteri et al. (2021) emphasise that trust-based relationships for value co-creation can develop based on professionals' knowledge, beneficiaries' orientation and effective communication. McKone-Sweet et al. (2005) and Getele et al. (2020) also indicate the need for professionals with social competencies, including communication skills and the ability to collaborate. These findings lead to this conclusion:

(p16.2) Proposition 6 Public professionals with high-level social competencies who are focused on developing interorganisational and intersectoral relationships and motivating beneficiaries to participate in public service delivery processes are necessary to co-create public value in PSSCM.

(p16.3) The changing role of professionals in PSSCM is a significant research challenge (Pillitteri et al. 2021;Atkinson et al. 2020). They are no longer only public managers but also public servants who work interorganisationally and cross-sectorally to provide the highest quality public services. Previous research on this topic emphasises However, this research topic is still in its infancy, and the need persists for in-depth research on highly skilled professionals (Pillitteri et al. 2021;Getele et al. 2020). Such actors can significantly affect supply chains' organisational capacity to prevent and/or respond to dynamically changing contexts of operation.
## (s20) Discussion
(p20.0) PSSCM is becoming an increasingly popular and desirable research area. The analyses on this topic indicate that this approach increases the effectiveness of the actions taken (Atkinson et al. 2020;Mafini 2016;McLachlin and Larson 2011;Aronsson et al. 2011). Both supply chain and public governance researchers share this view. However, the relative scarcity of analyses undertaken from the PSSCM perspective (Harland et al. 2019) and the dispersion of previous research across various areas of public governance (COFOG 2019) leave PSSCM underdeveloped (Mafini 2016). By merging knowledge from the most-investigated areas of public governance in the SCM field, this paper attempts to close that research gap. This paper defines PSSCM as a synchronised process of co-creating value in public administrative networks and ecosystems, during which each actor can be both a supplier and an end-user, within legal regulations and the rules of transparency, accountability, equality and publicness. It includes the flows of information, knowledge, activities and tasks that must occur among the entities co-creating public service. Societal needs are of key importance; they determine the scope and manner of providing public services. The foundation of this definition is a general understanding of the service supply chain as a network of actors performing different transactional functions, aiming to configure services that meet the expectations of their beneficiaries, as Arlbjørn et al. (2011) and Baltacioglu et al. (2007) emphasise. It refers to the intangible values developed through interorganisational and cross-sector interactions, in which the flows of goods support service configurations. This definition also incorporates the crucial role of society's needs when determining the types of public services and the means of offering them, considering the rules of process management in these administrative networks and public value co-creation, as Osborne (2021), Petrescu (2019) and Ellram et al. (2004) emphasise. Therefore, it combines the basics of service SCM with public value and public service logic theories.
