# Applications of collaborative robots in agile manufacturing: a review

CorpusID: 259371948 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c50735d088ee8ef6c351fcb6613afbf0fc01885e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c50735d088ee8ef6c351fcb6613afbf0fc01885e)

Fields: Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Over the past few years, the inclination towards industrial robots has increased tremendously. Traditional industrial robotic systems require heavy fence guarding and peripheral safety equipment, reducing flexibility while increasing costs and necessary space. Due to this, the requirement for flexible solutions has escalated. Hence, the introduction of collaborative robots has played an important role. Collaborative robots (cobots) are a type of robots that engage with humans closely, sharing the same workspace [1], [2]. The current market demands reduced lead time and operating costs. Cobots represent a natural evolution that can solve existing challenges in manufacturing and assembly tasks, as they allow for physical interaction with humans in a shared workspace; moreover, they are designed to be easily reprogrammed even by non-experts to be repurposed for different roles in a continuously evolving workflow [3]. They can solve complex manufacturing challenges and are seen as a promising way to achieve an increase in productivity [4]. The importance of cobots to today's robotics society has been discussed by many researchers. For example, Lloyd argued that conventional robots tended to be evolved into cobots; the market share of cobots would be increased from 3 % in 2018 to 34 % in 2025. The total market value of cobots would increase from $9 to 12 billion at an annual growth rate of 57 % [5].

(p0.1) It's been more than thirteen years since collaborative robots have been introduced in the industrial sector. Issues with traditional robots are being solved by using cobots and they are proving to be advantageous. The concept of these types of robots for manufacturing has been widely accepted to deal with human-robot interactions in open, unguarded, and unsaturated workspaces [6], [7]. Therefore, it's an appropriate time to study and review the applications in this area. It has been observed that very negligible amount of papers highlight the maximum number of applications under one paper. This paper tries to solve this gap by giving a glimpse of various applications of cobots in the manufacturing sector. It also discusses the most recent developments in human-robot interactions, their benefits, and how the manufacturing industry finds them to be a valuable asset. Additionally, it highlights the cobots that are now available for various manufacturing applications, compares the number of versions offered by various cobot manufacturers, and identifies the market leader for each manufacturing application. This study covers eight different types of cobot-using manufacturing operations, ten different cobot manufacturing enterprises, and their various cobot models. Conclusions are drawn regarding which industrial applications lack collaborative robot technology, which companies lead which manufacturing applications, and which applications they should concentrate on for cobot development.

(p0.2) Here, what is collaborative robots, their history, and various types of human-robot interactions are explained in Section 2. Section 3 of the paper provides a detailed discussion of the various application of cobots in the manufacturing sector. Section 4 will give a brief overview of the future of cobots. Section 5 provides various discussions and results that are obtained from the study. The conclusion and future scope are provided in Section 6.
