# Mechanisms of diabetic foot ulceration: A review

CorpusID: 257425673 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ccd3a97f05df54bea6e160958de401625cfb315b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ccd3a97f05df54bea6e160958de401625cfb315b)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Changes in the primary cellular biological functions in patients with DFUs
(p3.0) Immune cells, keratinocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and different cytokines are involved in the healing of DFUs. In the inflammatory stage, infiltrating monocytes/macrophages in the wound are essential for the transformation of the wound from a proinflammatory to an anti-inflammatory environment. 38 In the later stage of normal wound inflammation, macrophages change from the proinflammatory to the anti-inflammatory phenotype. 39 However, in individuals with DFUs, the macrophage function/phenotypic transition is impaired and macrophages continue to maintain a proinflammatory state. 40 Clinical and experimental evidence shows that, contrary to that observed in normal tissue, healing of DFUs is characterized by leukocyte recruitment, macrophage activation, and the production of proinflammatory cytokines, showing a chronic proinflammatory state. 41 In addition, the phagocytic ability of macrophages in DFU wounds is significantly impaired and ineffective in removing necrotic tissue from the wound. 42 In addition to macrophage response, the inflammatory response is enhanced by neutrophils and can adversely affect the healing of diabetic wounds. In diabetic wounds, phagocytosis, neutrophil degranulation, and the anti-infective effects of ROS are disrupted. 43 Excessive infiltration and activation at the site of tissue injury mediate tissue damage by releasing cytokines and proteases and regulating the adaptive immune response. 44 Moreover, the expression of neutrophil protein arginine deiminase (PAD)-4 is upregulated by hyperglycemia. When neutrophils invade the wound, their ability to secrete NETs is inhibited, resulting in delayed wound healing. 45,46 Macrophages and neutrophils secrete proteases in the form of zymogen, which is activated outside the cell and degrades ECM proteins (elastin and interstitial collagen). For example, MMP degrades fibronectin into fragments and further activates MMPs. These fibronectin fragments cause leukocyte infiltration, tissue damage, and persistent inflammation. 47 Therefore, different cells will play a therapeutic role with unique functions in diabetic wound healing ( Figure 2).

(p3.1) In the healing stage of DFUs, reepithelialization and dermal repair play a vital role in skin tissue regeneration. 48 Studies have shown that during wound reepithelialization, keratinocytes migrate to the wound site and proliferate and differentiate into different structures to restore the integrity of the structure and function of the epidermis. 49 The order followed from the inside to the outside is skin epidermis, basal cell layer, spinous cell layer, granular cell layer, and stratum corneum. In the early stage of wound healing, keratinocytes can directly kill invasive pathogens by secreting cytokines, chemokines, antimicrobial peptides, and extracellular vesicles

(p3.2) The process of wound healing generally needs to go through the stages of coagulation, inflammation, proliferation and remodeling. Different cells are involved in each stage. In addition, cells at different stages secrete a variety of cytokines to speed up the healing process. CCN-1, cellular communication network factor-1; DFU, diabetic foot ulcer; ECM, extracellular matrix; EGF, epidermal growth factor; FGF, fibroblast cytokine; ICAM, intracellular adhesion molecule; IL, interleukin; iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1; MMP-9, matrix metalloproteinase-9; NET, neutrophil extracellular trap; NGAL, neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; TGF-β1, transforming growth factor beta-1; VCAM, vascular cell adhesion molecule; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor. to mediate the interaction between keratinocytes and circulating immune cells, thereby promoting wound healing. 50 However, the high glucose environment of diabetic wounds disrupts the normal functioning of keratinocytes, resulting in delayed wound reepithelialization. Dermal repair is mainly achieved by the proliferation, differentiation, and secretion of ECM components of fibroblasts. 51 Special fibroblasts in the upper (papillary) layer can form hair papillae and regulate hair follicle growth and hair regeneration. Lower layer (reticular) fibroblasts are primarily involved in maintaining the morphological structure of the dermis, providing a stable environment for angiogenesis, nerve regeneration, and immune-clearance activities. 52 Additionally, fibroblasts can differentiate into myofibroblasts that promote wound contraction, secrete proteases and MMPs to degrade the inflammatory matrix, and secrete collagen and other ECM proteins to participate in the formation of granulation tissue. Collagen III in the ECM is replaced by collagen I, which has a higher tensile strength. 53 However, hyperglycemia and the accumulation of AGEs lead to impaired fibroblast function, such as decreased proliferation, accelerated apoptosis, and inhibition of migration to the wound site, all of which lead to impaired dermal repair and delayed healing of diabetic wounds. 54,55 Endothelial cell quality and neovascularization play a vital role in wound healing. Endothelial cells are generally arranged on the inner surface of the vascular lumen and regulate vasoconstriction and dilatation by modulating the levels of vasoactive factors such as eNOS. 56 In wound healing, endothelial cells at different stages of angiogenesis are mainly regulated by VEGF. In the inflammatory stage, VEGF increases vascular permeability, affects the expression of selectin and intercellular adhesion molecules in endothelial cells, and promotes the recruitment of leukocytes to the injured site. In the proliferation stage, VEGF strongly stimulates the proliferation and migration of endothelial cells, whereas, in the remodeling stage, it induces endothelial cell assembly to promote vascular lumen formation. 57 In vivo studies have shown that arterial endothelial cells in a hyperglycemic environment lose their integrity. They are more prone to apoptosis and to shedding and entering the blood circulation, leading to angiogenesis disorders. 58 This damage is mainly attributed to the following five pathways: (a) polyol pathway, (b) increase of intracellular AGEs, (c) upregulation of RAGE, (d) activation of various subtypes of protein kinase C, and (e) overactivation of the hexosamine pathway. 59 In diabetes, the decrease in NOS due to peripheral neuropathy and peripheral arterial disease leads to a decrease in peripheral blood flow by vasoconstriction. The lack of endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) in the wound inhibits the formation of new blood vessels and delays wound healing. 60 Stem cells are the critical cells in postinjury and routine homeostasis skin repair in the healing of DFU. Stem cells have the characteristics of asymmetric replication, the potential of strong self-renewal, and multidifferentiation. 61 In particular, the functional state of EPCs and epidermal stem cells (ESCs) critically influences the process of wound healing. EPC functions such as migration, differentiation, adhesion, and tube formation are impaired in the hyperglycemic state of diabetes, 62 which causes long-term wound nonhealing, particularly in chronic wounds like diabetic wounds. 63 As the precursor of endothelial cells, EPCs migrate from bone marrow to peripheral blood under the action of hypoxia inducible factor-1, stromal cell derived factor-1α, and VEGF and are recruited to the ischemic site to form new blood vessels through adhesion, proliferation, differentiation, and tube formation to repair wounds. 64 Moreover, ESCs also play an indispensable role in process of wound healing.
## (s6) | Role of Notch signaling pathway in the healing of DFUs
(p6.0) The Notch pathway plays a key role in cell differentiation, proliferation, and angiogenesis and participates in the regulation of tissue homeostasis in humans. In diabetic wounds, Notch pathway dysfunction can lead to inhibition of cell differentiation, proliferation disorders, and reduced angiogenesis, all of which interfere with diabetic wound healing. 87 Some studies report that Notch1 activation leads to impaired proliferation of keratinocytes, whereas a defect in Notch1 signaling in keratinocytes leads to excessive epidermal proliferation in mice that may even result in skin tumors. 88 Hyperglycemia directly promotes the pathological activation of Notch1 signals in the skin of diabetic individuals by activating the positive feedback loop between the Dll4 ligand and Notch1 receptor, which inhibits diabetic wound healing. 89 Moreover, Notch signaling is closely related to the development and differentiation of monocytes and macrophages. 90 In DFUs, high levels of kallikrein binding protein activate the Notch signal pathway, promote macrophage polarization to M1, increase the number of macrophages in the wound, and lead to a pronounced inflammatory response, which slows down wound healing in patients with diabetes. 91 2.1.7 | Role of Janus kinase and signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) signaling pathway in the healing of DFUs
## (s8) | Epigenetic regulation of inflammatory cells
(p8.0) Some studies have shown the effects of DNA methylation and demethylation on the function of inflammatory cells in diabetic wounds. For example, H3K27 demethylase and Jumonji-domain-containing protein D3 (JMJD3) have been shown to play a role in the activation of proand anti-inflammatory macrophage phenotypes. In mouse macrophages, JMJD3 can be upregulated by lipopolysaccharide and IL-4 to promote the expression of proinflammatory genes or IL-4 target genes. 106 It has been reported that the inhibition of DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1) by 5-azacytidine promotes the formation of M2 macrophages and inhibits the inflammation of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs). 107 DNMT1 in BMDMs increase and enhance the production of proinflammatory macrophage phenotype in a type 2 diabetes mouse model of genetically modified and diet-induced obesity. 108 Wound healing in knockout DNMT1 and db/db mice has shown significant improvement. In the inflammatory stage of wound healing, mixed leukemia gene (MLL)1 has been shown to promote the deposition of H3K4me3 in macrophages and reduce the inflammatory response in diabetic wounds. Thus, MLL1 plays an important role in regulating macrophage-mediated inflammation in wound healing. 109 In the diet-induced obesity model of diabetes, macrophages promote the methylation expression of JMJD and H3K4, which in turn reduces the methylation of H3K27. Among them, the increase in JMJD3 levels has been indicated as the likely reason for the decrease in H3K27 methylation. 110 JMJD3 stimulates IL-12 expression in wound macrophages, which can delay wound healing. 106 Neutrophil activity in the healing of DFUs is also regulated by epigenetics. During NETosis, neutrophils are activated by PAD-4 and undergo histone citrullination, resulting in exocytosis and apoptosis of the complex formed by NETs. Although this process protects against infection by engulfing the bacteria, the release of NETosis can interfere with wound tissue healing. In fact, the typical granule components of NETs such as neutrophil protease3, neutrophil elastase, and myeloperoxidase; and nuclear components such as histones H2A, H2B, and H3 increase in nonhealing diabetic wounds. Thus, the epigenetic regulation of neutrophils is closely related to the interference with wound healing. 111 2.1.10 | Epigenetic regulation of keratinocytes and fibroblasts Abnormal DNA methylation has been confirmed in keratinocytes and fibroblasts in DFUs in humans and is closely related to reepithelialization, angiogenesis, and extracellular matrix precipitation. 112 For example, JMJD3 promotes the migration of keratinocytes to the wound site by increasing Notch1 expression. 113 Tumor necrosis factor-α promotes MMP9 expression in keratinocytes, depending on the specific demethylation of MMP9 promoter, thereby delaying the migration and proliferation of keratinocytes, which is closely related to the nonhealing of diabetic wounds. 114 In addition, ASH1L-targeting histone H3 is related to the methylation of K4, K9, K20, and K36 at the active gene promoter. 115 The absence of Ash1l hinders the reepithelialization of normal wounds. 116 Expression of the miR-197-3p target caveolin-1 in fibroblasts is significantly upregulated in unhealed DFU tissues. Inhibiting caveolin-1 expression and activating the EGFR pathway can stimulate the migration and proliferation of fibroblasts and accelerate wound healing. 117 Therefore, reprogramming the diabetic fibroblasts inhibits the expression of negative regulatory factors through the regulation of miR; thus, mature fibroblasts can promote the epigenetic characteristics of wound healing. 118 
## (s9) | Epigenetic regulation of vascular endothelial cells
(p9.0) In DFU wounds, an increase in cellular ATP can stimulate wound healing by increasing angiogenesis and collagen production. 119 Human mammary epithelial cells cultured in high glucose conditions show epigenetic changes that increase the expression of the NF-κBsubunit p65 gene, induce the secretion of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, mediate leukocyte-endothelial cell adhesion, and finally promote the development of atherosclerotic lesions of the vascular wall. 120 This epigenetic change is due to H3K4 methylation and H3K9 demethylation of lysine-specific demethylase-1 in the NF-κB-p65 promoter, which leads to the continuous open state of NF-κB-p65 transcriptional activity. 121 In addition, the increased transcription of NF-κβ-p65, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, and IL-6 in the aortic endothelial cells of patients with DFUs can lead to the overexpression of miR-125b and downregulation of miR-146a-5p, which is a regulator of endothelial dysfunction in metabolic memory. Thus, miR-125b and miR-146a-5p may be explored as novel targets to promote wound healing in diabetic individuals. 122 During wound healing, endothelial cells secrete a large amount of miR-191. As a downstream effect, the miRNA targets the silencing small band-1 gene, which encodes a multidomain functional protein that regulates cell adhesion, tissue structure maintenance, angiogenesis, and cell migration during tissue repair, resulting in difficulties in wound healing in individuals with diabetes. 123 
## (s10) | Future perspectives
(p10.0) Currently, there is great potential and significant room for improvement with respect to the pathogenesis and treatment of DFUs. First, it is necessary to clearly understand the pathogenesis of DFUs as it is the cornerstone of curing this condition. Only by accurately comprehending the regulation of the pathogenesis of DFUs can new drugs or interventions for relevant targets be developed.

(p10.1) Additionally, the use of stem cells to treat DFUs is emerging as a promising treatment. Embryonic and mesenchymal stem cells can be induced to differentiate into myofibroblasts, keratinocytes, and endothelial cells, which are components of wound healing. 124 At the same time, stem cells synthesize and secrete several cytokines to promote cell recruitment, immune regulation, ECM remodeling, angiogenesis, and nerve regeneration. 125 However, unlimited cloning and proliferation of stem cells pose great challenges, such as the formation of skin tumors, in clinical treatment. We always firmly believed that based on the unremitting efforts of researchers worldwide, stem cell proliferation and differentiation will eventually be accurately regulated and streamlined.

(p10.2) However, reverse differentiation of cells also shows promise in the clinical treatment of DFUs. Our research team found that keratinocytes can reverse-differentiate into embryonic progenitor cells when induced by basic fibroblasts and can participate in angiogenesis, reepithelialization, and ECM precipitation. 126,127 These findings have been partially verified in cell-based experiments as well as in mice.

(p10.3) To summarize, we need to devote ourselves to research on the pathogenesis of DFUs at different levels, constantly explore new key regulatory targets, develop novel products for use in a clinical setting, and identify measures that could promote the healing of DFUs.  
