# A Review on Optical Character Recognition and Text to Speech Conversion

CorpusID: 26731262 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37f7967893117c2e3732a9349c16ad5ecd920c17](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37f7967893117c2e3732a9349c16ad5ecd920c17)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s1) Traditional Methods
(p1.0) Traditionally, pen scanners were accessed that were designed for simple background images, standard font styles and small font sizes. The drawback of this system was that the scanner could not handle scene images with complex facilities or other than the specified points. KReader Mobile activates on a handset and allows user to access email, messages and other documents. The short coming of this unit the data must be only on a messed up background also it cannot recognize text with colored background, but the application produces better results for dark colour background with light colour text. KReader cannot access text on cylindrical objects [1].

(p1.1) When the stick is scanned over the printed letters, OCR makes out the text and transforms the information into voice. The voice is then read back and thus helps visually challenged. The unit consists of optical character recognition and text to speech technology and headphones. The system takes a longer time to read, limited publication accessibility, expensive device, also cannot handle huge data [2].
## (s4) Review on isolation of non text and textual regions
(p4.0) Vandana Gupta et.al proposed a system based on region identification of script from an image. This implies division and classification of the parts of the document into blocks of text and graphics. Separation of the document components into blocks of text and graphics increases the performance of the document investigation system. They used variance property of feature extraction that reduces the dimensionality. Transformation of input data into the set of features is called feature extraction.

(p4.1) Step variance based approach is implemented, variance is calculated for each row of entire image and it is stored in one array of dimension number of row *1. The difference is found out between two calculated consecutive variance values of array and it is stored in new array. A graph is drawn between number of Same process is applied to calculate column wise variance. Then a common threshold value is calculated from these two graphs (row wise graph and column wise graph) such that all pixel variance values those are greater than and equal to this threshold value i.e text part and those pixel variance values are lower than threshold value i.e non-text part [9].

(p4.2) Ankush Gautam et.al proposed text segmentation method to segregate text from embedded images. He employed SVM let wavelet and 2-mean classification for segmentation of text from image document. He has used morphology operation like as dilation and erosion in post processing.
