# Theoretical Perspectives of Hands-On Educational Practices -From a Review of Psychological Theories to Block Magic and INF@NZIA DIGI.Tales 3.6 Projects

CorpusID: 2623268 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/94a3dcb3842e124a2cc133d12dccfb6d14c04aa4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/94a3dcb3842e124a2cc133d12dccfb6d14c04aa4)

Fields: Education, Psychology, Sociology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Digital learning games have become a reference point in the educational field, in terms of positive effect of their use on learning and motivation [1,2]. However, why they are used in education is an interesting issue to be investigated from a broad perspective including, on one hand, the psychological processes underlying learning and, on the other, the potential new technologies offer. In this chapter, we will try to describe both mentioned perspectives and to illustrate how they may concretely interact through two project descriptions.

(p0.1) Since their birth and maybe even before, children start learning about the world around them. Day by day they can count on wider sensorimotor functions that open their cognitive development in new ways.

(p0.2) In the period of their life that goes from few months to 3-4 years, the hands are fundamental in conveying knowledge. A child points something and he/she handles, touches, tastes and manipulates while understanding an object's features and functions.
## (s6) From TEL to STELT: Technology-enhanced learning becomes smart technologies to enhanced learning and teaching
(p6.0) The review proposed in the previous section highlights the fundamental role played by learning theories for building effective educational tools. Technology can be a powerful weapon in this battle, provided that we conceive it as an empty bin whose sense is given by the reference theory. In Dror's words [42], 'learning means that the cognitive system acquires information and stores it for further use...regardless whether the objective is learning new information, acquiring new skills, or knowledge sharing and transfer within or across organisations -the processes of acquiring, storing and applying the information are critical. The question is how to achieve these cornerstones of learning and whether technology can enhance them. The answer is clear: learning must fit human cognition...the difficult and tricky challenge is how to translate this theoretical and academic research into practical ways to utilise technology so as to enhance learning'. An entire area of research, known with the acronym TEL, developed in recent decades.

(p6.1) Technology can obviously enhance learning if it mirrors how cognition works. This can be achieved through the appropriate design. Design is indeed fundamental to the successful development of any technology-enhanced learning scenario and requires input from many diverse areas of expertise and multiple perspectives [43].
