# Peruvian nudibranchs (Mollusca, Gastropoda, Heterobranchia): an updated literature review-based list of species

CorpusID: 261133079 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0436d4f38a63db71138604cdb270836f8a6da442](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0436d4f38a63db71138604cdb270836f8a6da442)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s4) Overview
(p4.0) A total of 31 species, encompassing two suborders, ten superfamilies, 20 families, and 28 genera (Table 1), has been confirmed within Peruvian waters.The suborder Cladobranchia comprises 16 species, spanning five superfamilies and 13 families.The suborder Doridina consists of 15 species, distributed among five superfamilies and seven families (Table 1).Notably, the families Chromodorididae and Discodorididae, both belonging to the suborder Doridina, exhibit remarkable species richness with five and four species, respectively (Fig. 1).Additionally, potentially occurring species (n = 9) are distributed across five superfamilies, eight families, and nine genera (Table 2).A chronological overview of articles documenting nudibranch species in the Peruvian sea can be found in Table 3, revealing the progressive increase in reported species and the latest updates in scientific nomenclature.Regarding the distribution of species along the Peruvian coast, according to the coastal marine biogeographical classification proposed by Spalding et al. (2007), 23 species inhabit within the Warm Temperate Southeastern Pacific province, 18 species are found within the Tropical Eastern Pacific province, and ten species are common to both provinces (Table 4, Fig. 2).Peru's inventory of nudibranch species is comparatively modest in comparison to other South American countries, such as Chile, Colombia, and Brazil (Fig. 3A).Concerning species shared with these countries, of the 31 species that have been conclusively documented in Peruvian waters, 19 species are found  in Chilean waters, four species in Colombian waters, and four species in Brazilian waters (Fig. 3B).The recorded collection/reporting sites of nudibranch species found in Peruvian waters, limited to South America, within the framework of the coastal-marine biogeographical classification proposed by Spalding et al. (2007), are illustrated in Fig. 4.
## (s13) Superfamily
(p13.0) Sampling/reporting sites.In Peru, it was reported in Paita (Piura) (Dall 1909).Baez reported a Peruvian specimen (USNM 805043 South Pacific Ocean, Peru) but lacks geographic reference.It was also reported in Alaska (Central Aleutian Islands), Canada (Scott Islands), United States (California), Mexico (Isla Tortuga, Baja California, Socorro Island), and Panama (Islas Ladrones) (see Báez et al. 2011).
## (s24) Superfamily
(p24.0) Remarks.It bears resemblance to Tritonia odhneri (common in Chile) in terms of its external morphology, while displaying similarities to Tritonia festiva (found in Alaska, Baja California, and Japan; Uribe et al. 2013).Anatomical and molecular analyses are necessary to describe this species (Uribe et al. 2013).Sampling/reporting sites.In Peru, two specimens were collected (MHNURP, specimens currently lost) in Playa Las Ninfas (Pucusana, Lima, 12°28'49"S) on 23 October 2019, at 1.5-2.0m depth, 55-60 mm length (Fig. 9) (Fabián Avilés pers.comm.).In Peru, this species was also reported in San Juan de Marcona (Ica, 15°21′S) and Isla Blanca (Arequipa, 17°00'S) (Uribe et al. 2013).In Chile, it was reported in Caleta Obispito (Caldera, Atacama, 26°45'51"S) (Araya and Valdés 2016) and in several points (occurrences) such as Reserva Nacional Pingüino de Humboldt (29°15′S), Playa El Francés (Coquimbo, 30°05'S), Pichicuy (32°20′S), Caleta Cocholgüe-Tomé (36°35'S), Caleta Chome (Península de Hualpén, 36°48'S), Caleta Chaihuín (39°56'S), Faro San Isidro (Strait of Magellan, 53°28′S) (iNaturalist 2023a).It was also reported in San Juan Fernández Islands (33°38′S) (Araya and Valdés 2016).In Argentina it was observed (occurrences) in Baliza Davison (Tierra del Fuego, 54°56'S), Grand Jason (Ja- son Islands, 51°04'S), La Tranquera (46°02'S), Golfo San Jorge (46°00'S), Punta del Marqués (Rada Tilly, 45°57'S), Parque Interjurisdiccional Marino Costero Patagonia Austral (PIMCPA, 45°02'S), Camarones Bay (44°46'S), Golfo Nuevo (42°47'S), and Golfo San José (42°24'S) (iNaturalist 2023c).
