# Promising Highly Targeted Therapies for Cholangiocarcinoma: A Review and Future Perspectives

CorpusID: 260035251 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c96243a4c2f155a405f81ae2d35d4c47fa27d733](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c96243a4c2f155a405f81ae2d35d4c47fa27d733)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Human Studies of ADCs for CCA
(p3.0) Seven ADCs have been approved for solid tumors worldwide. Among these, three are approved for breast cancer targeting HER2, two for gastric cancer targeting HER2, and one each for head and neck cancers targeting EGFR/tissue factor and urothelial cancer targeting nectin-4 (including duplicate indications). In addition, there have been three clinical trials specifically focused on CCA ( Table 1). Two of them target HER2, and one targets FGFR2 on CCA cells.

(p3.1) Mondaca et al. showed one case with a 30% partial response of the primary lesion after trastuzumab (anti-HER2 antibody)-DM1 treatment [38]. Additionally, Tsurutani et al. demonstrated confirmed objective responses in HER2-expressing (IHC ≥1+) nonsmall cell lung cancer, salivary gland cancer, endometrial cancer, and biliary tract cancer following trastuzumab-DXd treatment. Among these cases, two showed tumor shrinkage of ≥60% [39]. Based on its promising results, a multicenter phase II trial of trastuzumab deruxtecan for HER2-positive unresectable or recurrent biliary tract cancer (HERB trial) is ongoing in Japan [40].
## (s6) Light Sources for PDT
(p6.0) Light sources for PDT have evolved over time. Initially, non-laser light sources such as conventional lamps were used, which involved water-cooled incandescent lamps with output defined by filters. However, these light sources had limitations, such as a significant thermal component, making it challenging to accurately calculate the delivered light dose [71]. In recent years, there has been a shift towards more efficient lasers that can produce monochromatic light of a known wavelength and easily perform light dosimetry. Laser light can also be supplied via an optical fiber for localized treatment. The appropriate wavelength for PDT is determined according to the photosensitizer used: 630 nm for HpD, 635 nm for 5-ALA-induced protoporphyrin IX, and 652 nm for tetra (m-hydroxyphenyl) chlorin (Table 2). Moreover, recent advances in semiconductor diode technology have enabled laser systems to be more compact and cheaper [45]. Thus, at present, lasers might be the first choice for a PDT light source. Meanwhile, it has been reported that the use of light emitting diodes (LEDs) of specific wavelengths (610 nm) is effective for PDT of CCA [72,73] and gastrointestinal cancers [74]. Therefore, LEDs can be another light source because of their smaller batteries and lower cost compared to conventional lasers.
## (s7) Human Clinical Studies on PDT
(p7.0) Despite ingenuity and improvements in the above-mentioned modalities, PDT monotherapy has limitations, such as incomplete tumor killing or recurrence, and has not replaced existing antitumor therapies. In the field of biliary tract cancer, PDTs mainly for ECC have been clinically performed worldwide since the 1990s (Table 2) [75][76][77]. However, since the 2000s, some RCTs and one meta-analysis have revealed that PDT could yield significantly longer survival/higher survival rates than supportive care with biliary drainage [78][79][80][81][82][83][84]. The 1-year survival rate of the PDT with stent group was 56% (range: 39-75%), and that of the control group was 25% (range: 12-38%). The 2-year survival rate of the PDT with stent group was 16% (range: 14-21%), and that of the control group was 7% (range: 3-10%). Meanwhile, PDT has not shown superiority over conventional systemic chemotherapy in many clinical trials [85,86].

(p7.1) Alternatively, some PDTs combined with systemic chemotherapy (chemophototherapy, CPT) have been shown to be effective treatment options preclinically and clinically [86,87]. During in vitro and in vivo experiments, PDT with novel cancer drugs, such as DMXAA (ASA404: flavone acetic acid analog with TNF-α synthesis), PD166285 (synthetic RTK inhibitors), and TNP-470 (synthetic anti-angiogenesis agent), has demonstrated good outcomes for murine sarcoma, breast, colon, and prostate cancer cells, although CCA cells were not included [85].

(p7.2) There have been several clinical comparative studies that have examined the effectiveness of PDT vs. CPT or chemotherapy vs. CPT for CCA. [86,87]. Regarding PDT vs. CPT, two studies, including one RCT, revealed that CPT had superior outcomes (median overall survival  [87]. Meanwhile, according to a meta-analysis of chemotherapy versus CPT or PDT vs. CPT, CPT had significantly better overall survival than chemotherapy or PDT alone (CPT vs. chemotherapy, hazard ratio (HR): 0.69, p = 0.02; CPT vs. PDT, HR: 0.36, p < 0.01) [86]. Therefore, for unresectable CCA, PDT with systemic chemotherapy (CPT) is expected to yield the most favorable outcomes, although the standard PDT or combined chemotherapy regimen is yet to be determined.  
## (s9) Antibody and Low Molecular Weight (LMW) Compound for Targeting Cancer Cells with IR700
(p9.0) IR700 can covalently bind to any kind of antibody (IR700:antibody = approximately 3:1), forming a highly flexible theranostic platform [90]. The selected antibody or low-weight molecule for PIT depends on the cell surface antigen or molecules on the target cancer cell. Various agents, including many APCs and some LMW compound-IR700 conjugates, have been reported in preclinical and clinical settings. EGFR is a representative target on cancer cells for antibodies, followed by HER2, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), VEGFR2, cadherin-17, and ICAM-1 in PIT [97]. In addition to the antibody, a partner of IR700 for a conjugate of PIT that has been reported so far includes an affibody (a small protein mimetic [6-7 kDa]) for HER2-overexpressing breast cancer [92], an LMW ligand composed of Glu-Urea-Lys for prostate cancer with prostate-specific membrane antigen [98], and a lection for CEA-expressing pancreatic cancer [99,100]. For CEA, a novel approach with affimer proteins and cubosomes has also been reported in colorectal cancer cell lines [89]. For PIT of CCA, there have been two preclinical reports: one used anti-EGFR and HER2 antibodies [88], while another used an antibody against trophoblast cell surface antigen 2/tumor-associated calcium signal transducer 2 (TROP2), which is overexpressed in trophoblast cancer and many epithelial cancers, including pancreatic cancer and CCA [101]. In both studies, PIT specifically killed the target-expressing CCA cells in vitro and significantly suppressed the growth of CCA in murine xenograft models after NIR irradiation.
## (s10) Human Clinical Studies on PIT
(p10.0) In 2020, PIT for unresectable locally advanced/recurrent head and neck cancer was publicly approved and initiated as a clinical modality in Japan ahead of the rest of the world. In the U.S., a phase 3 trial of PIT for the same cancer has been performed. The first in-human PIT for head and neck cancer conducted in the U.S. in 2015 revealed tumor volume reduction with complete remission (13.3%), partial remission (30%), and stable disease (36.7%), which is a promising but somewhat insufficient result [102]. Thereafter, in Japan, a few clinical trials have been performed or initiated for unresectable advanced/recurrent gastric cancer or esophageal cancer (one for gastric cancer or esophageal cancer is completed; another for esophageal cancer is suspended) and advanced or recurrent solid tumors with one or more hepatic metastases (recruitment) (https://jrct.niph.go.jp/search?language=en& page=1, accessed on 1 June 2023). The former used cetuximab-IR700 conjugate targeting cancer cells with anti-PD antibody (nivolumab), while the latter used anti-CD25 antibody-IR700 conjugate targeting regulatory T-cells with anti-CTLA-4 antibody (pembrolizumab). The initial PIT with an APC on a cancer cell alone has some limitations, such as (1) insufficient attainment of an APC to a cancer cell and penetration depth of NIR light into the tissue; (2) lack of a dedicated light device for a deeply located tumor, such as CCA and pancreatic cancer; and (3) non-universality of a single APC for various tumors. Based on these findings, PIT with another anticancer drug, such as an immune check inhibitor (ICI), is ongoing, as described above. Unfortunately, there has been no clinical trial of PIT for CCA. However, recent molecular and immunological investigations and treatments for CCA, including EGFR and FGFR inhibitors (pemigatinib/infigratinib/futibatinib), neurotrophic receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (entrectinib/larotrectinib), and ICIs (durvalumab, a PD-L1 inhibitor), will promote and accelerate the use of PIT in the near future.
## (s11) Conclusions and Future Directions
(p11.0) The basic premises of highly targeted therapies for CCA involve the identification of specific targets on CCA cells and directing therapeutic interventions towards those targets. Although several targets have been identified or investigated as described above, they are not universally applicable and are limited to certain types of CCA. Overcoming the discrepancy between the universality of the target and the localization of the attack in cancer therapy is partially controversial. However, it is not an insurmountable challenge, as we can visually differentiate CCA cells from non-CCA cells and select them in vitro using our own judgment. Currently, artificial intelligence (AI) plays an important role in various fields, including clinical diagnosis of cancer through endoscopy and pathology, as well as preclinical analysis using multi-omics approaches [103]. Therefore, the collabo-ration between human observation and AI has the potential to overcome the obstacles in identifying universal targets in CCA cells, paving the way for the development of highly targeted therapies for CCA, such as in ADC, PDT, and PIT.

(p11.1) Author Contributions: M.K. reviewed previous reports and drafted the manuscript. N.S. supervised and advised on the contents of this paper. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
