# Characterization and potential of periosteum-derived cells: an overview

CorpusID: 260153974 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cae29a41c97dcc5c9d276ce5e7f95b4d3b77a434](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cae29a41c97dcc5c9d276ce5e7f95b4d3b77a434)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The periosteum, a thin fibrous layer covering the bone surface, consists of an inner cambium layer and an outer fibrous layer, both of which hold significant potential in tissue engineering. In addition, the periosteum is of great significance in bone physiology during growth, development, and remodeling. The osteogenic potential of periosteum was proposed firstly by Duhamel in 1742, followed by Ollier who confirmed that new bone formation could be induced through transplanted periosteum a century later (1). Extensive studies have examined the crucial influence of the periosteum on blood supply over the past decades, resulting that nearly 80% of the blood supply to the bone cortex is provided by the blood vessels of the periosteum (2).

(p0.1) In addition to the vascular system, the periosteum has demonstrated extraordinary osteogenic, chondrogenic and adipogenic potential under physical and chemical stimulation. The activated PDCs have been found to proliferate and differentiate into chondrocytes, osteoblasts and adipocytes. As a primary source of MSCs, PDCs have garnered significant scientific attention for regenerative approaches. Researchers have investigated the osteogenic and chondrogenic potential of PDCs in tissue engineering as well as the signals that regulate their differentiation (3). However, there is limited literature systematically summarizing the role of PDCs about their isolation, culture, characterization and potential in tissue engineering. Furthermore, the differences between PDCs and other common sources of MSCs remain controversial. Therefore, the study aims to provide an overview of current evidence, summarizing the isolation approaches, characterization of PDCs, and outlining their osteogenic, chondrogenic and adipogenic capacities. This information serves as a reference for their potential therapeutic applications in various clinical scenarios, with a particular focus on comparing them with other common sources of MSCs.
## (s5) Chondrogenic capacity
(p5.0) As a highly specialized tissue helping synovial joints articulate under low friction, articular cartilage presented limited potential due to its avascular, aneural and lymphatic nature (47). Allografts may be applied for larger cartilage defects, but this method displayed the potential to trigger an immune response (48). Accordingly, there is growing interest in cell-based approaches used to repair or regenerate cartilage. Current studies have demonstrated the chondrogenic capacity of the periosteum (49-53). Using two different animal models, Mendes et al. indicated that stable cartilage can be formed when combined with PDCs, which can form ectopic cartilage (49). Another study concluded that the cartilage formation capacity of the periosteum for repairing cartilage defects can be enhanced with a pre-treatment of PDCs cultures with TGFβ3 in vitro (50). In addition, culture coatings comprising decellularized cartilage extracellular matrix drive robust and rapid chondrogenic differentiation of human PDCs (51). Although the numbers and potential of PDCs may decline with age, periosteum obtained from elderly samples still exhibits cartilage formation capacity and remains a promising source in cartilage regeneration (52). Furthermore, PSCs have been shown to have an impact not only on intramembranous bone formation but also on growth plate maintenance and prolonged longitudinal bone growth (53).

(p5.1) Several scaffolds were also used in cartilage regeneration. For example, Casper et al. demonstrated that PDCs can infiltrate polyepsilon-caprolactone (PCL) nanofiber scaffolds in 6-month-old rabbits and subsequently form cartilage in vitro (54). PDCs combined with poly (ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA) tethered with PEG and BMP2 were introduced in another study to promote tendon-bone healing (55). In addition, human PDCs combined with enzymatically degradable poly (ethylene glycol) hydrogels functionalized with Combination of periosteum-derived cells (PDCs) and various types of scaffolds used in bone (A-E) and cartilage formation (F-J). The New bone formation has been demonstrated after the co-cultured BMSC and PDCs combined with β-TCP (A) or PLGA (C) scaffolds. PDCs and PDO/Pluronic F127 scaffold with pre-seeded CD146 positive cells can be used to restore the bony defects of the maxillofacial region (B). Collagraft (D) and HA (E) are other two scaffolds used for bone regeneration. Regarding cartilage formation, PDCs combined with PEGDA tethered with PEG and BMP2 can be applied to promote tendon-bone healing (F). PDCs can infiltrate PCL scaffolds and form cartilage in vitro (G). RGD-PEG hydrogels also support the proliferation and in vitro chondrogenesis of PDCs (H). HA-P (I) and DBM (J) have also been used for cartilage formation.
## (s6) Adipogenic capacity
(p6.0) Compared with studies investigating the osteogenic and chondrogenic capacity of PDCs, there is a paucity of research specifically focusing on their adipogenic potential. Adipogenic stimulation of PDCs resulted in the expression of the adipogenic marker genes aP2 and APM1 and the formation of lipid droplets (19). Another study also investigated the adipogenic differentiation of PDCs and observed the presence of lipid droplets on the cell monolayer (63). Both mitochondrial DNA contents and mitochondrial proteins were increased during the process of adipogenic differentiation of PDCs (21).

(p6.1) In contrast to the consensus regarding the osteogenic and chondrogenic capacity, studies have not led to an agreement on the adipogenic capacity of PDCs. Some studies suggest that fibroblasts and PDCs exhibit similar propensities for adipogenic differentiation when cultured in an adipose-inductive medium for 7 days (64). However, another study concluded that PDCs presented lower adipogenic capacity than BMSCs based on Nile red, which revealed the lower adipogenic potential of PDCs (65). Stich et al. (18) evaluated 51 different clonal cultures of human PDCs and found that only 52.9% could be stimulated to adipogenesis with histological and immunochemical staining. In contrast, 100 and 94.1% of the clonal cultures demonstrated the capacity for bone and cartilage formation, respectively (66). In addition, it seems that the adipogenic capacity of PDCs presents a high relationship with hyperglycemic conditions. The adipogenic differentiation of PDCs was altered by hyperglycemic conditions, and increased PPARγ expression in hyperglycemic conditions demonstrated the observed increase in differentiated adipocytes (67). However, there is currently a lack of relevant research investigating the signaling pathways associated with the adipogenic capacity of PDCs, as well as studies focusing on adipose tissue regeneration.

(p6.2) Accordingly, there were many challenges to drawing conclusions from the available literature in terms of the adipogenic capacity of PDCs due to the limited number of relevant studies and inconsistent conclusions. Further research is necessary to clarify the adipogenic capacity of PDCs and the underlying regulatory pathways.
## (s7) Other potential applications of PDCs
(p7.0) In addition to the osteogenic, chondrogenic and adipogenic capacity of PDCs, other potential applications for PDCs have also been demonstrated in current studies due to their stem cell attributes including self-renewal and multipotency. For example, researchers evaluated the influence of PDCs in ischemia-reperfusion-mediated renal fibrosis and concluded that PDCs presented stronger renoprotection and immunoregulation compared to BMSCs due to the promotion of PDCs for Treg differentiation through inhibiting the mTOR pathway (68). In addition, the potential application of the periosteum in combination with other tissues such as the epidermis and dermal papilla for tissue regeneration has also been demonstrated in previous studies (69). Recently, the antler-lineage periosteum also supplements the characteristics of the periosteum, which is capable of initiating ectopic organ formation upon transplantation and full mammalian organ regeneration when interacting with the covering skin (70). Moreover, the clinical investigations utilizing PDCs in maxillary sinus floor augmentation have shown lamellar bone formation within 3 months after transplantation, which provides a reliable basis for simultaneous or secondary insertion of dental implants and proves the therapeutic potential of PDCs (71). However, further trials are necessary to provide more comprehensive evidence for the efficacy of PDCs in different clinical settings.
