# Histopathological significance of necrosis in oral lesions: A review

CorpusID: 260637756 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c94496ced6264c900a90c579f99de2ce7ecdcfa5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c94496ced6264c900a90c579f99de2ce7ecdcfa5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s15) Necrosis in neoplasms
(p15.0) Necrosis occurs in neoplasms may be due to I. Inadequate nutrient supply to tumor cells as a result of an imbalance between tumor growth and angiogenesis.II.The host's cytotoxic immune response to the tumor.III.Downregulation of programmed (apoptotic) cell death by the tumor itself. [15] epithelial malignancy, it is postulated that vascular collapse, high interstitial pressure, and/or rapid tumor development exceeding its blood supply result in persistent ischemia (i.e., hypoxia, low pH, low glucose, and high lactate) within tumors, which leads to tumor necrosis.

(p15.1) The most prevalent cancer-related illness, anemia, further diminishes the blood's ability to transport oxygen.Mitosis failure or dysregulation, which results in cell death, is thought to cause mitotic catastrophe.Researchers suggested that the tumor necrosis seen in high-grade carcinomas may be caused by a mitotic catastrophe brought on by hypoxic stress. [16]
## (s19) Mucormycosis
(p19.0) Extensive necrosis with numerous large (6-30 μm in diameter), branching, and non-septate hyphae at the periphery are seen upon histopathologic examination of the lesional tissue. [24]The hyphae typically branch at 90-degree angles.Without a doubt, the propensity of fungi for invasion of small blood vessels accounts for the significant tissue damage and necrosis associated with this disease.Due to the disruption of the normal blood flow to the tissue, infarction, and necrosis occur.Thus, angioinvasion with vessel thrombosis and tissue necrosis is the pathological hallmark of mucormycosis. [25]
## (s21) Osteonecrosis
(p21.0) Presence of necrotic bone, osteocyte loss, and empty lacunae are the hallmarks of osteonecrosis of the jaws. [28] typical pattern of cell death and the complex process of bone production and resorption defines osteonecrosis. [28]
## (s22) Aspergillosis
(p22.0) Black or yellow necrotic tissue on an ulcer base over the palate or in the posterior tongue is the characteristic feature of oral aspergillosis. [29]Invasive aspergillosis tissue sections display a variety of branching, septate hyphae that range in size from three to four µm.These hyphae have the propensity to infiltrate nearby tiny blood arteries (arterioles) branch out at an acute angle. [30]Aspergillosis hyphae toxins aid in blood vessel wall penetration and cause thrombosis, which causes infarction and necrosis.Vascular occlusion frequently causes the distinctive pattern of necrosis that is associated with this disease.In addition to necrosis, a granulomatous inflammatory response might be anticipated in the immunocompetent host. [30]
## (s23) Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
(p23.0) The characteristic clinical feature is painful necrosis of the interdental papillae and the gingival margins, and the formation of craters covered with a gray pseudo membrane. [31]The clinical presentation of ANUG reflects its histopathology. [31]From the surface to the deeper levels of the lesion, four distinct layers have been described by (Listgarten et al. 1965). [32]They include 1.A bacterial area of fibrous mesh made up of epithelial cells, leukocytes, and a variety of bacterial cells, such as rods, fusiform bacteria, and spirochetes, are the most superficial.2. There is a neutrophil-rich zone that is deeper and contains more leukocytes, spirochetes, and bacterial cells.3. Necrotic zone with spirochetes, fusiform bacteria, and fragmented cells.4. Spirochetes have infiltrated the deepest layer. [32].Wegener's granulomatosis Wegener's granulomatosis appears as a pattern of mixed inflammation centered around the blood vessels.Transmural inflammation is seen in involved vessels, and there are frequent areas of strong neutrophil infiltration, necrosis, and nuclear dust as well (leukocytoclastic vasculitis). [33]A variable mixture of histiocytes, lymphocytes, eosinophils, and multinucleated giant cells make up the inflammatory cellular infiltrate in the connective tissue adjacent to the vessel. [33]
## (s25) Clear cell odontogenic carcinoma (CCOC)
(p25.0) The recurrence cases of CCOC demonstrated localized tumor necrosis, indicating its tumor grade advancement.According to this finding, histological necrosis in CCOC may serve as a sign of aggressive behavior. [38]
## (s29) Ewing's sarcoma and Osteosarcoma
(p29.0) The correlation of the histopathologic tumor response with clinical outcome is a well-established routine investigation in patients with osteosarcoma and Ewing's sarcoma.The Huvos grading system provides a semi-quantitative histological evaluation of the tumor response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in which the amount of necrosis relative to the remaining viable tumor is reported.

(p29.1) The four grades included were  The necrosis of tumor resection, especially when >90%, is regarded as a powerful positive prognostic indicator for survival in patients with high-grade bone sarcomas. [49]Thus, effective stratification of these patients using a histological scoring system is useful and plays an important role in the management of these patients. [49]
## (s30) Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma.
(p30.0) Tumor necrosis is associated with a worse prognosis in several solid cancers.The degree of tumor necrosis influenced outcome in NK/T-cell lymphoma patients. [50]umor necrosis and complete resection are concluded to be novel independent prognostic factors in patients with upper aerodigestive tract. [50]
## (s31) Steven-johnson syndrome and Toxic epidermal necrolysis
(p31.0) There are few apoptotic keratinocytes in the epithelium in the early stages of Steven-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermolysis necrosis, which quickly progress to full-thickness necrosis with subepidermal detachment. [51]atients with Steven-Johnson syndrome have a mortality rate of five to ten %, while those with toxic epidermal necrolysis have a mortality rate of 30-40%, depending on the extent of mucocutaneous necrosis. [51]
