# Methods for determination of biomethane potential of feedstocks: a review

CorpusID: 26425201 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5491973efaea54653e95d8503685816d9b7649d0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5491973efaea54653e95d8503685816d9b7649d0)

Fields: Chemistry, Environmental Science

## (s2) MSW and food waste
(p2.0) The food industry and municipal authorities produce various types of organic wastes. These include food wastes (FW) and MSW. The wastes consist of several different fractions of organic and inorganic nature. MSW is traditionally sorted into six categories, which are: food residue, wood waste, paper, textiles, plastics, and rubber as shown in Table 2 (Zhou et al., 2014).
## (s4) Sewage sludge
(p4.0) Worldwide the anaerobic stabilization of sewage sludge is probably the most prevalent AD activity. Sewage sludge is produced in large quantities in urban areas all over the world. It is a vast resource that has high  biodegradability. Wastewater treatment facilities use anaerobic digesters to break down sewage sludge and eliminate pathogens in wastewater (Scaglia et al., 2014). The AD of sewage sludge provides significant benefits as it leads to the production of energy in the form of biogas and help waste management. In the Europe, typically between 30% and 70% of sewage sludge is treated by AD (IEA, 2009). Most developing countries lack sanitation facilities, therefore, AD is in most cases the only treatment of wastewater (Noyola et al., 2006).
## (s5) Factors affecting BMP
(p5.0) The biogas yield of the individual substrates varies considerably depending on their origin, content of organic substance, and substrate composition (Weiland, 2010). Chemical constituents of biomass resources include carbohydrates, proteins, fats, cellulose, and hemicelluloses as main components. Feedstocks differ markedly in their chemical composition. As such, the amount and the composition of biogas vary from one substrate to another (Mayer et al., 2014).
## (s6) Raw material composition
(p6.0) Methane yield vary for different chemical constituents of the same feedstock. Basegra (1998) cited by Weiland (2010), provided maximal gas yield and theoretical methane contents for carbohydrates, fats, proteins , and lignin that are shown in Table 4. Fats and proteins produce more methane than carbohydrates and lignin is not biodegradable under AD.
## (s8) Chemical and biological oxygen demand
(p8.0) COD is used to quantify the amount of OM in feedstocks and predicts the potential for biogas production (des Mes et al., 2003). Theoretical methane yield can be calculated from the COD of a substrate (Kwietniewska and Tys, 2014). Biogas production in relation to COD is about 0.5 L g -1 COD removed, corresponding to a methane production of approximately 0.35 L g -1 of COD removed (Angelidaki and Sanders, 2004).

(p8.1) Another widely used parameter is the BOD which is a measure of the oxygen used by microorganisms to decompose OM. BOD is similar to COD in that both measure the amount of OM. Examples of typical BOD values are: pig slurry 20,000 -30,000, cattle slurry 10,000 -20,000 and wastewater 1000 -5000 mg L -1 (Korres et al., 2013).
## (s10) Inhibitory substances
(p10.0) Feedstocks may contain substances that can inhibit AD. The levels of inhibitory substances in feedstocks need to be managed and guidelines are available. A material may be judged inhibitory when it causes an adverse shift in the microbial population or inhibition of bacterial growth (Chen et al., 2008).
## (s11) A gronomic practices
(p11.0) Nowadays there are efforts to improve the biomethane yield from cropbased feedstocks. In order to optimise biomethane yield from crops, factors that influence BMP and biomass yield should be identified and managed (Mayer et al., 2014). Factors such as agro-climatic conditions, soil characteristics, plant varieties, and agronomic practices influence both the composition and yield of crops. The biomass composition then influences the ABP and the methane content in the biogas leading to various BMP values (Schittenhelm, 2008 The utility of Equation 1 will be shown later with regard to use of ABP values to calculate BMP values as presented by Mayer et al. (2014).

(p11.1) In their study with maize, Mayer et al. (2014) achieved an average biomethane yield per hectare of 7,266 m 3 ha -1 . It was concluded that the cropping environment was responsible for most of the variation of the biomethane yield per hectare. They also reported a decrease in biomethane yield with stage of maturity of the maize crop. This can be ascribed to increased content of structural carbohydrates and lignin in the plants.

(p11.2) Stage of maturity of a crop affects its chemical composition, which in turn affects BMP. However, Schittenhelm (2008) reported that despite substantially different nutrient concentration among some maize hybrids used in a trial, no clear-cut association existed between chemical composition and specific methane yield. This variation could be due to variation in chemical content within critical limits to affect BMP.
## (s21) The Envital ® kit
(p21.0) Recently Bellaton et al. (2016) introduced a rapid assay based on fluorescence, the Envital ® kit, to estimate anaerobic biodegradability of sewage sludge. This is a tool still in early stages of development. The assay produces results in 48 h. It uses a fluorescent redox indicator.
## (s22) Theoretical methods
(p22.0) Regression models have also been used to estimate BMP (Triolo et al., 2011). These methods are fast. Theoretical studies are significant, especially in cases where access to laboratory facilities is limited (Thomsen et al., 2014).
## (s24) Chemical composition analyses
(p24.0) The feedstock chemical characteristics such as the chemical composition (lignin, cellulose, hemicelluloses, starch, total soluble sugars, proteins, and lipids) can determine the gas generation by AD (Godin et al., 2015). The method is applicable in cases where elemental composition of the substrate is unknown. This can be done economically within a short period of time. The chemical composition analysis is a more rapid and cheaper method than the BMP test, provided appropriate models are developed and applied (Godin et al., 2015). Rath et al. (2013) has provided empirical evidence to show that the chemical composition of corn (lignin, total soluble sugars, hemicelluloses, and lipids) gives a consistent model for estimation of BMP. At least two variables are required to build a reliable model (Godin et al., 2015). The chemical composition of fruit and vegetable wastes, sorghum and napier grass (carbohydrate, protein, acid detergent fibre, lignin and cellulose contents of substrate) were used to predict the ultimate methane yield (Gunaseelan, 2007).
