# Analysis Resilience, Competence, and Motivation to Increasing Performance Management: Mini Study Literature Review JURNAL MULTIDISIPLIN MADANI (MUDIMA)

CorpusID: 261588330 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c0edbb39ba99eb2bd31fdea1c05349eaf3f8a17b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c0edbb39ba99eb2bd31fdea1c05349eaf3f8a17b)

Fields: Business, Psychology

## (s2) RESULT AND DISCUSSION
(p2.0) Changes in work styles and working environments also affect employees' expectations of the company. The changing working environment naturally requires special strategies for performance evaluation in management. By implementing performance management, companies can provide their employees with a better experience in terms of development and organization. For example, companies can find skills and developments to improve the skills of their employees. Additionally, performance management can be used to build a competitive and agile organization. Performance management is more than just a tool for creating and measuring employee goals and outcomes. His presence in the organization does not end there. The reason is that performance management helps managers and employees have a clear understanding of expectations, goals and career development. These weigh on employees' personal performance expectations and company goals, in line with research ; .

(p2.1) There is no denying that some employees are willing to take on any task to improve their performance while impressing their managers. Additionally, leaders don't know how to give employees constructive feedback on their performance. By implementing performance management, the company is helping its assets focus on building a healthier working environment. Of course, you can also improve performance according to your company's goals. A successful performance management strategy is sustainable and provides managers with many opportunities to correct and reward team members. It also provides team members with many opportunities to improve their work. Effective performance management impacts all day-to-day operations and processes, enabling teams to thrive in the short and long term. Performance measures, on the other hand, are data points that teams can use to assess their progress. These include key metrics on sales, quotas, or daily activity metrics. Overall, performance management is the process of evaluating the feasibility and effectiveness of these measurement goals, in line with research ; (Muhammad & Tahir, 2023) Employees are important capital of a company. No company can achieve its desired goals without the cooperation of its employees. Therefore, many companies want their employees to perform at their best, or to be their best performers. However, employee performance can fluctuate. This poses a challenge for HR departments when managing employee performance. One way to manage employee performance is through the use of a performance management system. A performance management system, or performance management system, is one of the human resource management (HR) systems for setting, monitoring, evaluating, and tracking company goals. Performance is the performance delivered by an employee or company over a period of time. An individual's performance is understood to be the performance that an individual has achieved over a period of time (usually her year). Purpose of Performance Management System, Generally, performance management systems are created with the goal of monitoring and controlling the performance of employees in an enterprise. However, a closer look reveals that performance management systems serve several purposes: Give your employees targeted and effective feedback. This will serve as a reference for setting salary increases and allowances. Improve two-way communication between management and employees. Improve employee performance through employee empowerment and reward mechanisms. Therefore, we have introduced a performance management system to evaluate employee performance and improve future performance, in line with research ; (Pahrudin et al., 2018); (Nikkhoo et al., 2018).
