# The Influence of COVID-19 in Endocrine Research: Critical Overview, Methodological Implications and a Guideline for Future Designs

CorpusID: 260322891 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6d138d8a870afb94d8ef0608b8df797ed256c23d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6d138d8a870afb94d8ef0608b8df797ed256c23d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Coronavirus, an RNA virus from the Coronaviridae family is the responsible agent for the COVID-19 pandemic. 1 An epigenetic change influences the immunological response to infections, including COVID-19. The gender-based influence has been observed in several respiratory and autoimmune disorders. 2 The propensity of mortality rate due to COVID-19 was significantly higher in females than in males. Notably, social norms, financial and non-financial barriers to women's access to healthcare have proposed to negatively impact women's testing for COVID-19 and access to adequate care, resulting in underreporting of female cases and deaths due to COVID-19. 3 It has been suggested that sex differences in immunopathogenesis may be suggestive of mechanisms of COVID-19 based on the available sex-disaggregated epidemiological data from the COVID-19 pandemic. This could help identify points for improved vaccine design and therapeutics to increase the efficacy of the vaccine.
## (s2) Respiratory responses
(p2.0) In numerous circumstances throughout the COVID-19 era, N95 respirators were utilized often. A significant number of studies discussed issues brought on by the prolonged use of respirators, with mixed results. A recent systematic review and meta-analysis (which was based on 13 studies) was able to determine the effects of the N95 respirator. While oxygen saturation did not change during low-to moderate-intensity physical activity, borderline lower oxygen saturation and higher carbon dioxide partial pressure were noted. According to this study, using N95 respirators while performing high-intensity physical exercise may statistically affect, but not necessarily have a clinically meaningful impact on, the physiological changes in oxygen, and carbon dioxide. The emphasis was on the user's susceptibility to clinical signs of hypoxia and hypercarbia for the early diagnosis of negative effects of N95 respirators if they had certain medical conditions, such as respiratory issues. 13 To assess the direct relevance of this subject, additional shreds of evidence are required pertaining to the physiological aspect. Although these connections may appear insignificant at first look, they undoubtedly confound the studies and taint the outcomes. When exposed to acute normobaric hypoxia, the blood glucose level in healthy persons remains constant. 40 Additionally, combined resistance and aerobic training in normoxia or normobaric hypoxia have no effect on metabolic control in men with type 1 diabetes 41 ; however, physical training in hypoxic conditions may partially enhance the favorable effects of exercise alone on myocellular insulin sensitivity in obese men with metabolic syndrome through changes in VEGF levels. 42 It's interesting to note that patients with diabetic foot ulcers (DFU) have an inverse relationship between miR-210 and HIF-1 (hypoxia associated gene) expression, suggesting that miR-210 may control HIF-1 expression. 43 In a recent study, which included 2 groups of tissue samples (control and type 2 diabetes mellitus ie, T2DM with DFU) and three groups of circulation samples (50 in each group of healthy volunteers, T2DM patients, and T2DM patients with DFU), it was discovered that HIF-1 expression decreased in DFU patients while miR-210 expression increased in both tissue biopsies and circulation. In comparison to T2DM patients and healthy controls, the expression of the inflammatory genes TNF-and IL-6 in the blood was higher in DFU. VEGF expression remained unchanged, while anti-apoptotic BCL2 was downregulated and BAX and caspase 3 were elevated in DFU tissues compared to control. 43 We can wonder if the results of the latter study, which was undertaken during the COVID-19 epidemic, would have been the same if it had been done under more typical circumstances, that is, before the pandemic.

(p2.1) During the COVID-19 pandemic, Hajhosseini et al carried out a study in which they proposed that a favorable early reaction to hyperbaric oxygen therapy, that is, improved perfusion, would be an early indicator of eventual response to the treatment, that is, wound healing. They enrolled two groups: patients with chronic wounds (n = 14), and healthy controls without wounds (n = 10). Adults with only one active Wagner grade III diabetic foot ulcer or soft-tissue radionecrosis would were also included. In contrast to their controls (who underwent two consecutive sessions), patients with chronic wounds received 30 to 40 consecutive sessions of hyperbaric oxygen therapy administered once daily, 5-days/week. Before and after the sessions, they performed indocyanine green angiography and examined the perfusion patterns. Healing was determined clinically and defined as full skin epithelialization with no clinical evidence of wound drainage. Unlike unwounded healthy controls, a significant increase (p < .03) in indocyanine green 4 Clinical Medicine Insights: Endocrinology and Diabetes angiography perfusion was seen in chronic-wound patients right after the therapy. A total of 100% of the wounds that demonstrated improved perfusion from sessions 1 to 2 went for healing within 1 month of completion of hyperbaric oxygen therapy, compared with none in the subgroup that did not demonstrate improved perfusion (p< .01). 44 This study indicated a beneficial effect of hyperbaric oxygen therapy on perfusion in chronic wounds through improving angiogenesis and ameliorating hypoxia.

(p2.2) As there is no information available regarding the compliance with facemask wearing among participants of similar studies, 13,40-44 the literature review clearly indicates that face mask wearing practice (i.e., type of face mask, duration of wearing a face mask, etc.) can confound the results if proper methodological precautions are not taken.

(p2.3) The research with designs merits the same criticisms. For instance, it has been suggested that aerobic exercise may help older persons with their cognition and cerebrovascular control. Guadagni et al recruited 206 healthy, low-active middle-aged and older individuals (mean SD age 65.9 6.4 years) to participate in a supervised Six-month aerobic exercise intervention in order to test the hypothesis. Patients were evaluated both during and following the intervention. 45 This study used a single-group pre/post-intervention quasi-experimental design. Numerous tests were employed, including transcranial doppler ultrasound and neuropsychological tests, to measure the cerebral blood flow velocity and cognition before and after the intervention. It was determined that improvements in cerebrovascular control and some cognitive areas were linked to the six-month aerobic exercise intervention. In addition, their subsequent investigations revealed a unique relationship between cognitive alterations and adjustments in cerebrovascular control during euoxic hypercapnia and in response to submaximal exercise. 45 The use of a facemask would affect the study's interest parameters. A crossover design, in which each participant serves as his or her own control, may be a more effective way to learn the influence of such variability given the lack of a validated questionnaire to determine the extent of facemask use. 45 
## (s4) Neurophysiologic responses
(p4.0) Abnormal EEG waves are very commonly seen in COVID-19 patients and survivors. [68][69][70] Face mask wearing practice could create a substantial influence in neurophysiological studies. It is very important to notice the unrecognized role of face mask wearing practice and their potential confounding effect on such studies. Although controversial, 71,72 face masks may exert influence through other pathways. 73 For instance, they can further induce hypoxia and hypercapnia, 74 which drastically alters brain EEG patterns, 75 to mention a few. Based on it, one can argue that this very issue can create partiality in many neurophysiological studies carried out during or after the COVID-19 pandemic. For a short mechanistic explanation, see Rastmanesh. 73 One might wonder how these issues interact with endocrine research. Based on the literature-based evidence, one can find a connection after a short critical appraisal, in a scenario if the study is/was to be conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic:

(p4.1) • • Obstructive sleep apnea is a risk factor for insulin resistance in non-diabetic adults 76 • • Longer or short-term sleep deprivation may negatively affect glucose homeostasis 77 • • The salivary microbiome is altered in the presence of a high salivary glucose concentration 78 • • Hyperglycemia is associated with simultaneous alterations in electrical brain activity in youths with type 1 diabetes mellitus 79 • • Melatonin synthesis impairment as a new deleterious outcome of diabetes-derived hyperglycemia 80 We also suggest that threshold-free cluster enhancement and polysomnography methods be urgently reviewed in settings and events whenever/wherever yawning behavior is altered for any reason, including but not limited to wearing a face mask, in order to control this type of confounding effect. The COVID-19 pandemic has led to changes in many aspects of our daily lives, including the widespread use of face masks. While it is difficult to predict exactly how the abandonment of face mask wearing will impact sleep EEG signatures or other measures in patients with COVID-19, it is possible that there could be some changes in the post-pandemic period. It is important for future studies to carefully consider any potential confounding factors that may arise due to changes in behavior or other factors related to the pandemic. This may include adjusting study design or analysis methods to account for any differences that may be present between pre-and postpandemic periods.
