# Exposure to Agrochemicals and Cardiovascular Disease: A Review

CorpusID: 260555102 - [None](None)

Fields: 

## (s4) Results
(p4.0) In study by Weichenthal et al. [4] statistical analysis hazard ratios (HR) and their 96% Confidence interval (CI) were estimated using Cox proportional hazard model. Three separate models (minimal, moderate and fully adjusted) were used to evaluate the relationship between ambient PM 2.5 and non-accidental and cardiovascular mortality. Potential confounding factors included in the abovementioned models were added at different models. Simple models were examined without any confounding factors first-minimal model. This was followed by moderately models including potential important behavioural/personal factors, and finally adjusted models included socioeconomic and educational background. Sensitivity analyses resulted in stronger relationship between ambient PM 2.5 concentration and cardiovascular mortality among men. There were significant positive association between PM 2.5 and cardiovascular mortality in all three models for men as compared with women (Adjusted model-HR = 1.66; 95% CI: 1.04, 3.36; minimal model-HR = 1.32; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.76 and moderately model-HR = 1.41; 95% CI: 1.00, 2.02) ( Table 2).

(p4.1) Each agrochemical concentration was log-transformed to improve the level of normality in a study conducted in United State. The adjusted concentration was used to calculate the association. For each agrochemical both lipid standardized and wet-weight concentration age, sex, race, education, family income, smoking, alcohol use, diabetes, serum cotinine and BMI were adjusted as potential confounders. Additional, logistic regression analyses were conducted to estimate the odd ratio of the agrochemicals in peripheral arterial disease (PAD) against subjects without PAD. Subjects with obesity added as confounder of PAD had significant increased mean lipids standardization value of p,p'-DDE (OR = 1.47; 95% CI: 1.08, 1.99) ( Table 2). Most wet-weight concentration of agrochemicals also showed significant association that were similar to those of the lipid standardized concentration.  

(p4.2) In study by Weichenthal et al. [4] statistical analysis hazard ratios (HR) and their 96% Confidence interval (CI) were estimated using Cox proportional hazard model. Three separate models (minimal, moderate and fully adjusted) were used to evaluate the relationship between ambient PM 2.5 and non-accidental and cardiovascular mortality. Potential confounding factors included in the abovementioned models were added at different models. Simple models were examined without any confounding factors first-minimal model. This was followed by moderately models including potential important behavioural/personal factors, and finally adjusted models included socioeconomic and educational background. Sensitivity analyses resulted in stronger relationship between ambient PM 2.5 concentration and cardiovascular mortality among men. There were significant positive association between PM 2.5 and cardiovascular mortality in all three models for men as compared with women (Adjusted model-HR = 1.66; 95% CI: 1.04, 3.36; minimal model-HR = 1.32; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.76 and moderately model-HR = 1.41; 95% CI: 1.00, 2.02) ( Table 2).

(p4.3) Each agrochemical concentration was log-transformed to improve the level of normality in a study conducted in United State. The adjusted concentration was used to calculate the association. For each agrochemical both lipid standardized and wet-weight concentration age, sex, race, education, family income, smoking, alcohol use, diabetes, serum cotinine and BMI were adjusted as potential confounders. Additional, logistic regression analyses were conducted to estimate the odd ratio of the agrochemicals in peripheral arterial disease (PAD) against subjects without PAD. Subjects with obesity added as confounder of PAD had significant increased mean lipids standardization value of p,p'-DDE (OR = 1.47; 95% CI: 1.08, 1.99) ( Table 2). Most wet-weight concentration of agrochemicals also showed significant association that were similar to those of the lipid standardized concentration.  
## (s6) Epidemiological Studies
(p6.0) A study that was conducted in Naivash which is situated 80 km North West of the Kenyan rift valley showed that most of the farmworker complain of health issues related to agrochemical. Most farms were green house, floriculture and horticulture with an extensive usage of wide variety of agrochemicals throughout the year to control the development of plants and weeds [6]. The large proportions of farmworkers were predominant spraying agrochemicals most of the time. Also, farmworkers that perform removal of weeds, planting and harvesting reported the highest proportion of symptoms potentially related to pesticide exposure over a period of time. The total number of 247 (34.5%) farmworkers showed cardiovascular symptoms (palpitation, chest pain and leg swelling) [6] (Table 2). There was an indication that a higher proportion of flower farm labours that continuously using the agrochemicals exhibited high incident of cardiovascular disease during their lifetime. These findings had been linked with handling and usage of agrochemical over time.

(p6.1) The following: edema, pallor and tachycardia were some of the common symptoms related to cardiovascular disease of agrochemicals exposure. There was a total of 26 (23 males and 3 females) farmworkers responsible for spraying duties in the flower section. The total of 13 (50.0%) of these farmworkers complain of palpitation, chest pain and leg swelling. The mean comparison complainant and non-complainants of the spray user was significantly different with p-value < 0.05 [5] ( Table 2). The over exposure to agrochemicals and health consequences needs to be taken into consideration by the farmers and government sectors to reduce the rate of mortality due to cardiovascular diseases.

(p6.2) A study conducted in North Carolina and Iowa reported that the use agrochemicals were positively associated with either myocardial infarction (MI) mortality or incidence among farm workers [4] (Table 2). Farmers were also exposed to several types of particulates matter, including diesel exhaust and high level of dust containing endotoxin and mold. A study in Sweden found an elevated risk of ischemic heart diseases mortality among those who experienced occupational exposure to due agrochemical exposure [8]. In North Carolina and Iowa the occurrence of mortality and incidence among farmworkers were due to agrochemicals as the risk factor for MI development.

(p6.3) The participants of older age, white race and those with family history of MI, cigarette smokers, obesity, hypertension and diabetes were also associated with an increased risk of MI (Table 2). Also alcoholic drinkers were more likely to experience MI if compared to nondrinkers [4]. Currently, there is an extensive literature that showed that confounders in Table 2 might have the negative impacts farmworkers. In all the study the baseline was established that to exclude the farmworkers with risk factors that might cause cardiovascular conditions. An ecological study in Montana, Minnesota and North and South Dakota found that those living in the countries with wheat production and exposed to agrochemicals were more likely to die from acute myocardial infarction over a period of time [9]. The pathophysiological mechanisms of particulate matter exposure and MI have been well characterized. Allon et al. [10] hypothesized that the pathophysiology of particulate matter (PM) occurs through an inflammation leading to the increase of plasma fibrinogen. There are lot of unreported case of dead or sick farmworkers due to agrochemical exposure without knowing the cause of that might cause death.
## (s19) Results
(p19.0) In study by Weichenthal et al. [4] statistical analysis hazard ratios (HR) and their 96% Confidence interval (CI) were estimated using Cox proportional hazard model. Three separate models (minimal, moderate and fully adjusted) were used to evaluate the relationship between ambient PM 2.5 and non-accidental and cardiovascular mortality. Potential confounding factors included in the abovementioned models were added at different models. Simple models were examined without any confounding factors first-minimal model. This was followed by moderately models including potential important behavioural/personal factors, and finally adjusted models included socioeconomic and educational background. Sensitivity analyses resulted in stronger relationship between ambient PM 2.5 concentration and cardiovascular mortality among men. There were significant positive association between PM 2.5 and cardiovascular mortality in all three models for men as compared with women (Adjusted model-HR = 1.66; 95% CI: 1.04, 3.36; minimal model-HR = 1.32; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.76 and moderately model-HR = 1.41; 95% CI: 1.00, 2.02) ( Table 2).

(p19.1) Each agrochemical concentration was log-transformed to improve the level of normality in a study conducted in United State. The adjusted concentration was used to calculate the association. For each agrochemical both lipid standardized and wet-weight concentration age, sex, race, education, family income, smoking, alcohol use, diabetes, serum cotinine and BMI were adjusted as potential confounders. Additional, logistic regression analyses were conducted to estimate the odd ratio of the agrochemicals in peripheral arterial disease (PAD) against subjects without PAD. Subjects with obesity added as confounder of PAD had significant increased mean lipids standardization value of p,p'-DDE (OR = 1.47; 95% CI: 1.08, 1.99) ( Table 2). Most wet-weight concentration of agrochemicals also showed significant association that were similar to those of the lipid standardized concentration.  

(p19.2) In study by Weichenthal et al. [4] statistical analysis hazard ratios (HR) and their 96% Confidence interval (CI) were estimated using Cox proportional hazard model. Three separate models (minimal, moderate and fully adjusted) were used to evaluate the relationship between ambient PM 2.5 and non-accidental and cardiovascular mortality. Potential confounding factors included in the abovementioned models were added at different models. Simple models were examined without any confounding factors first-minimal model. This was followed by moderately models including potential important behavioural/personal factors, and finally adjusted models included socioeconomic and educational background. Sensitivity analyses resulted in stronger relationship between ambient PM 2.5 concentration and cardiovascular mortality among men. There were significant positive association between PM 2.5 and cardiovascular mortality in all three models for men as compared with women (Adjusted model-HR = 1.66; 95% CI: 1.04, 3.36; minimal model-HR = 1.32; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.76 and moderately model-HR = 1.41; 95% CI: 1.00, 2.02) ( Table 2).

(p19.3) Each agrochemical concentration was log-transformed to improve the level of normality in a study conducted in United State. The adjusted concentration was used to calculate the association. For each agrochemical both lipid standardized and wet-weight concentration age, sex, race, education, family income, smoking, alcohol use, diabetes, serum cotinine and BMI were adjusted as potential confounders. Additional, logistic regression analyses were conducted to estimate the odd ratio of the agrochemicals in peripheral arterial disease (PAD) against subjects without PAD. Subjects with obesity added as confounder of PAD had significant increased mean lipids standardization value of p,p'-DDE (OR = 1.47; 95% CI: 1.08, 1.99) ( Table 2). Most wet-weight concentration of agrochemicals also showed significant association that were similar to those of the lipid standardized concentration.  
## (s21) Epidemiological Studies
(p21.0) A study that was conducted in Naivash which is situated 80 km North West of the Kenyan rift valley showed that most of the farmworker complain of health issues related to agrochemical. Most farms were green house, floriculture and horticulture with an extensive usage of wide variety of agrochemicals throughout the year to control the development of plants and weeds [6]. The large proportions of farmworkers were predominant spraying agrochemicals most of the time. Also, farmworkers that perform removal of weeds, planting and harvesting reported the highest proportion of symptoms potentially related to pesticide exposure over a period of time. The total number of 247 (34.5%) farmworkers showed cardiovascular symptoms (palpitation, chest pain and leg swelling) [6] (Table 2). There was an indication that a higher proportion of flower farm labours that continuously using the agrochemicals exhibited high incident of cardiovascular disease during their lifetime. These findings had been linked with handling and usage of agrochemical over time.

(p21.1) The following: edema, pallor and tachycardia were some of the common symptoms related to cardiovascular disease of agrochemicals exposure. There was a total of 26 (23 males and 3 females) farmworkers responsible for spraying duties in the flower section. The total of 13 (50.0%) of these farmworkers complain of palpitation, chest pain and leg swelling. The mean comparison complainant and non-complainants of the spray user was significantly different with p-value < 0.05 [5] ( Table 2). The over exposure to agrochemicals and health consequences needs to be taken into consideration by the farmers and government sectors to reduce the rate of mortality due to cardiovascular diseases.

(p21.2) A study conducted in North Carolina and Iowa reported that the use agrochemicals were positively associated with either myocardial infarction (MI) mortality or incidence among farm workers [4] (Table 2). Farmers were also exposed to several types of particulates matter, including diesel exhaust and high level of dust containing endotoxin and mold. A study in Sweden found an elevated risk of ischemic heart diseases mortality among those who experienced occupational exposure to due agrochemical exposure [8]. In North Carolina and Iowa the occurrence of mortality and incidence among farmworkers were due to agrochemicals as the risk factor for MI development.

(p21.3) The participants of older age, white race and those with family history of MI, cigarette smokers, obesity, hypertension and diabetes were also associated with an increased risk of MI (Table 2). Also alcoholic drinkers were more likely to experience MI if compared to nondrinkers [4]. Currently, there is an extensive literature that showed that confounders in Table 2 might have the negative impacts farmworkers. In all the study the baseline was established that to exclude the farmworkers with risk factors that might cause cardiovascular conditions. An ecological study in Montana, Minnesota and North and South Dakota found that those living in the countries with wheat production and exposed to agrochemicals were more likely to die from acute myocardial infarction over a period of time [9]. The pathophysiological mechanisms of particulate matter exposure and MI have been well characterized. Allon et al. [10] hypothesized that the pathophysiology of particulate matter (PM) occurs through an inflammation leading to the increase of plasma fibrinogen. There are lot of unreported case of dead or sick farmworkers due to agrochemical exposure without knowing the cause of that might cause death.
