# A comprehensive overview of eco-friendly bio-fertilizers extracted from living organisms

CorpusID: 264286905 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0de85cc43601e790ab0a93382021632aacc66ead](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0de85cc43601e790ab0a93382021632aacc66ead)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s7) Macro fungi as biofertilizers
(p7.0) A collection of microbiomes that interact with plant roots affects plant development and defense.Numerous bacteria, fungi, actinomycetes, and other eukaryotic microorganisms can be cultivated in microbiomes.Rhizobacteria are the bacteria that live in the rhizosphere and improve plant development and crop yield.The most essential plant growth-promoting fungi are Penicillium, Trichoderma, Fusarium, and Phoma.The cucumber has developed systemic resistance to many diseases due to the presence of many plant growthpromoting fungi species (Romera et al. 2019).These fungi are non-pathogenic saprophytes that live in soil and aid crop plants by protecting them from disease as well as boosting plant growth (Begum et al. 2019) (Table 7).
## (s10) Glomus intraradices Glomus mosseae
(p10.0) Potassium solubilizing Promotes growth of cotton, rape, pepper, cucumber, khella, sorghum, wheat, tomato, chili, Sudan grass, and tobacco Mącik et al. (2020) oxysporum strains controlling Fusarium wilt in various crops (El-Maraghy et al. 2020).Phoma sp. and P. simplicissimum are fungi that encourage plant growth and successfully stimulated cucumber systemic resistance to the anthracnose-causing organism Colletotrichum orbiculare.
## (s11) Plant residues as biofertilizers
(p11.0) Plants are like all living organisms can be used as biofertilizers by using the unused parts of them (plant residues) for manufacturing of ecofriendly biodegradable fertilizers.Plant residues are used as soil biofertilizers and include banana peels.Banana is a popular fruit, because of its taste and nutritional value.As a result, large quantities of banana peel by-products are obtained.Studies have shown that the content of bananas, such as the peel and bloom, is rich in macroand micronutrients and promotes good health through its anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative stress properties.Research to transform banana peels into unique new items due to their benefits like increasing soil fertility is ongoing (Kraithong and Issara 2021) (Table 8).According to the international biochar initiative (2012), banana peel biochar is a carbon-rich product that is described as "a solid compound generated through the thermo-chemical conversion of biomass in an oxygen-constrained environment" (Novak et al. 2012), (Islam et al. 2019), (Comino et al. 2020).Due to its distinctive characteristic, which enhances soil quality, banana peel biochar has recently taken center stage in research (Novak et al. 2012), (Islam et al. 2019), (Comino et al. 2020) (Table 8).
