# Uterine Sarcomas: An Updated Overview. Part 2: Endometrial Stromal Tumors Uterine Sarcomas: An Updated Overview Part 2: Endometrial Stromal Tumors

CorpusID: 260428493 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6f85348e37ab9dc678015439c9787d0a712603d0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6f85348e37ab9dc678015439c9787d0a712603d0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESSs) are mesenchymal malignancies mainly occurring in uterine corpus. Alternative origins, such as ovary and peritoneum, have been described. Pathogenesis of ESSs has been widely debated. The rarity of this neoplasia contributed to the difficulty in classifying them into clinically meaningful categories. All started in 1966 with Norris and Taylor, who classified ESS into low-grade and high-grade neoplasia, basing on the degree of mitotic activity [1]. Following studies demonstrated the irrelevant value of mitotic activity as prognostic factor. In 1982, Evans understood the importance of separating tumors with endometrial stromal differentiation from poorly differentiated endometrial sarcoma [2]. Studies from Chang et al. demonstrated that a combined assessment of cytological/nuclear atypia and mitotic index could better provide prognostic information than either feature alone [3].
## (s6) Molecular features
(p6.0) ESN is characterized by the chromosomal translocation t(7,17) (p15;q21), resulting in the formation of JAZF1-SUZ12 fusion gene. JAZF1-SUZ12 gene has been found in about 50% of ESNs and in LGESS [10].

(p6.1) ESN is characterized by the chromosomal translocation t(7,17) (p15;q21), resulting in the formation of JAZF1-SUZ12 fusion gene. JAZF1-SUZ12 gene has been found in about 50% of ESNs and in LGESS [10].
## (s8) Low-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma (LGESS)
(p8.0) This neoplasia is composed of cells resembling those of endometrial stroma during proliferative phase, associated with a broad network of arteriolar-like vessels. The tumor shows infiltrative "tongue-like" growth into the myometrium, with or without lymph vascular invasion.

(p8.1) Accounting for about 0.2-1% of all uterine malignancies, LGESS represents the second most common uterine sarcoma. It is more common than ESN. The age range is similar to that of ESN, more often occurring in perimenopause. The median age is 52 years. No race is favorite [10]. Being a slow-growing tumor with an indolent clinical course, LGESS shown no-specific signs; they include vaginal bleeding and pelvic pain.

(p8.2) LGESS most frequently occurs in the uterine corpus, even if extra uterine locations such as ovary pelvis, abdominal cavity, vulva, and vagina are possible. Association with endometriosis has been described [11].

(p8.3) This neoplasia is composed of cells resembling those of endometrial stroma during proliferative phase, associated with a broad network of arteriolar-like vessels. The tumor shows infiltrative "tongue-like" growth into the myometrium, with or without lymph vascular invasion.

(p8.4) Accounting for about 0.2-1% of all uterine malignancies, LGESS represents the second most common uterine sarcoma. It is more common than ESN. The age range is similar to that of ESN, more often occurring in perimenopause. The median age is 52 years. No race is favorite [10]. Being a slow-growing tumor with an indolent clinical course, LGESS shown no-specific signs; they include vaginal bleeding and pelvic pain.

(p8.5) LGESS most frequently occurs in the uterine corpus, even if extra uterine locations such as ovary pelvis, abdominal cavity, vulva, and vagina are possible. Association with endometriosis has been described [11].
## (s15) Therapeutic approaches
(p15.0) Patients with LGESS are usually treated with hysterectomy plus bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, the latest to avoid the secondary stimulation of the tumor by ovarian hormones. Younger patients desiring to preserve fertility can be treated with hormonal therapy or aromatase inhibitors. The adjunct of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) may reduce ovarian synthesis of estrogens [25]. Since low-grade ESSs show low response rates to conventional CT, there is no evidences supporting its use ex adiuvantibus. On the other hand, the presence of estrogens and progesterone receptors in about 80% of the LGESS would give the opportunity to reduce the recurrence rate and risk of relapse using adjuvant endocrine therapy. Hormone therapy with progestin, aromatase inhibitors, and analogues of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone has become an effective post-surgical treatment in patients with low-grade ESS [26].

(p15.1) Particularly, aromatase inhibitors are becoming the treatment of choice, since progestin is poorly tolerated due to side effects. The duration of hormonal therapy should be protracted for 3-5 years after surgery [26]. Tumors with t(10;17) translocation, typically not responding to conventional treatment, should be treated with a more aggressive therapy such as RT and CT combination [23]. Finally, in LGESS showing immunohistochemical positivity for PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β, the PDGF signaling pathway may be considered as a useful therapeutic target for imatinib [26].

(p15.2) Patients with LGESS are usually treated with hysterectomy plus bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, the latest to avoid the secondary stimulation of the tumor by ovarian hormones. Younger patients desiring to preserve fertility can be treated with hormonal therapy or aromatase inhibitors. The adjunct of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) may reduce ovarian synthesis of estrogens [25]. Since low-grade ESSs show low response rates to conventional CT, there is no evidences supporting its use ex adiuvantibus. On the other hand, the presence of estrogens and progesterone receptors in about 80% of the LGESS would give the opportunity to reduce the recurrence rate and risk of relapse using adjuvant endocrine therapy. Hormone therapy with progestin, aromatase inhibitors, and analogues of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone has become an effective post-surgical treatment in patients with low-grade ESS [26].

(p15.3) Particularly, aromatase inhibitors are becoming the treatment of choice, since progestin is poorly tolerated due to side effects. The duration of hormonal therapy should be protracted for 3-5 years after surgery [26]. Tumors with t(10;17) translocation, typically not responding to conventional treatment, should be treated with a more aggressive therapy such as RT and CT combination [23]. Finally, in LGESS showing immunohistochemical positivity for PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β, the PDGF signaling pathway may be considered as a useful therapeutic target for imatinib [26].
## (s25) Molecular features
(p25.0) As previously shown, genetic fusion YWHAE-FAM22 is characteristic of ESS with highgrade histological features. FISH analysis demonstrated the absolute specificity of YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement in HGESS, since fusion gene has been detected neither in other uterine sarcomas nor in extra-uterine mesenchymal tumors [34]. FISH demonstrated higher sensitivity than RT-PCR in detecting YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement. Croce et al. established that the cut-off of rearranged cells to consider FISH as positive should be 30%; they also recommended to add RT-PCR in borderline cases [35]. Such molecular evidences surely will have diagnostic and therapeutic implications [35].

(p25.1) As previously shown, genetic fusion YWHAE-FAM22 is characteristic of ESS with highgrade histological features. FISH analysis demonstrated the absolute specificity of YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement in HGESS, since fusion gene has been detected neither in other uterine sarcomas nor in extra-uterine mesenchymal tumors [34]. FISH demonstrated higher sensitivity than RT-PCR in detecting YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement. Croce et al. established that the cut-off of rearranged cells to consider FISH as positive should be 30%; they also recommended to add RT-PCR in borderline cases [35]. Such molecular evidences surely will have diagnostic and therapeutic implications [35].
## (s26) Therapeutic approaches
(p26.0) Due to the lack of ER and PR receptors, anti-estrogenic therapy seems to be inappropriate in controlling HGESS growth. Adjuvant CT may provide survival benefit, although experiences are limited [35]. Overexpression of EGFR and Erbb2 has been reported in both HGESS and UUSS. In these cases, treatment with imatinib or trastuzumab may be an option [36]. Recently, overexpression of c-kit has been reported in HGESS carrying the YWHAE/FAM22A/B gene fusion. In these cases, a response to imatinib was also described [36].

(p26.1) Due to the lack of ER and PR receptors, anti-estrogenic therapy seems to be inappropriate in controlling HGESS growth. Adjuvant CT may provide survival benefit, although experiences are limited [35]. Overexpression of EGFR and Erbb2 has been reported in both HGESS and UUSS. In these cases, treatment with imatinib or trastuzumab may be an option [36]. Recently, overexpression of c-kit has been reported in HGESS carrying the YWHAE/FAM22A/B gene fusion. In these cases, a response to imatinib was also described [36].
## (s27) Prognosis
(p27.0) Patient with HGESS typically present with advanced stage disease (stages II-IV). Moreover, in comparison to LGESS, patients with HGESS have earlier (within 1 year after initial surgery) and more frequent recurrences. Particularly, in terms of prognosis, YWHAE-rearranged HGESS is intermediate between LGESS and UUS [37].

(p27.1) Patient with HGESS typically present with advanced stage disease (stages II-IV). Moreover, in comparison to LGESS, patients with HGESS have earlier (within 1 year after initial surgery) and more frequent recurrences. Particularly, in terms of prognosis, YWHAE-rearranged HGESS is intermediate between LGESS and UUS [37].
## (s32) Immunohistochemistry
(p32.0) Being undifferentiated by definition, the immunohistochemical characterization of UUS it sometimes hard and reflects the heterogenicity of this category of tumors. USSs are typically CD10, p53, and cyclin D1 positive ( Figure 4E); ER and PR usually stain negative or weakly positive [42]. Desmin, EMA, and keratins may show focal positivity ( Figure 4F). Smooth muscle actin may be focally positive, although the presence of positive stain for more than one smooth muscle marker should drive to a suspect of LMS [42]. On the other hand, a positive  stain for keratin and EMA should lead to the suspicion of undifferentiated endometrial carcinoma [42]. MIB1 index is usually high (Figure 4G).

(p32.1) Being undifferentiated by definition, the immunohistochemical characterization of UUS it sometimes hard and reflects the heterogenicity of this category of tumors. USSs are typically CD10, p53, and cyclin D1 positive ( Figure 4E); ER and PR usually stain negative or weakly positive [42]. Desmin, EMA, and keratins may show focal positivity ( Figure 4F). Smooth muscle actin may be focally positive, although the presence of positive stain for more than one smooth muscle marker should drive to a suspect of LMS [42]. On the other hand, a positive  stain for keratin and EMA should lead to the suspicion of undifferentiated endometrial carcinoma [42]. MIB1 index is usually high (Figure 4G).
## (s34) Molecular features
(p34.0) Genetically, little is known about UUS. In the vast majority of the cases, it has been demonstrated a genetic pathways that is different from those of LGESS and HGESS, although it is not specific (i.e., complex karyotypes, genomic gains, and losses). Particularly, gains of 2q, 4q, 6q, 7p, 9q, 20q and losses of 3q, 10p, and 14q have been detected. A subset of USSs also demonstrated a missense TP53 mutation [15].

(p34.1) Genetically, little is known about UUS. In the vast majority of the cases, it has been demonstrated a genetic pathways that is different from those of LGESS and HGESS, although it is not specific (i.e., complex karyotypes, genomic gains, and losses). Particularly, gains of 2q, 4q, 6q, 7p, 9q, 20q and losses of 3q, 10p, and 14q have been detected. A subset of USSs also demonstrated a missense TP53 mutation [15].
## (s42) Hormonal therapy
(p42.0) The high rate of positive results for hormones receptors has led to interest in using adjuvant hormonal therapy for both early stage and advanced LGESS. Hormonal therapies are generally well tolerated, even if several questions remain controversial, such as doses, regimens (i.e., progestins, gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonists, and aromatase inhibitors), and duration of therapy. In general, the lack of significant adverse effects would allow the administration for longer periods. Hormonal therapies seem to be effective for metastatic disease also. Conversely, the frequent lack of ER and PR in HGESS and UUS makes the hormonal therapy ineffective in controlling tumor growth [42].

(p42.1) The high rate of positive results for hormones receptors has led to interest in using adjuvant hormonal therapy for both early stage and advanced LGESS. Hormonal therapies are generally well tolerated, even if several questions remain controversial, such as doses, regimens (i.e., progestins, gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonists, and aromatase inhibitors), and duration of therapy. In general, the lack of significant adverse effects would allow the administration for longer periods. Hormonal therapies seem to be effective for metastatic disease also. Conversely, the frequent lack of ER and PR in HGESS and UUS makes the hormonal therapy ineffective in controlling tumor growth [42].
## (s43) Chemotherapy
(p43.0) Findings regarding the ESS response to CT are scarce, since data from high-grade and lowgrade ESS are pooled. In general, the rate of response to CT is low; thus, it should only be used when hormonal therapies have become ineffective [42]. Anthracycline and/or ifosfamide are presently considered in the first-line therapeutic regimen [41].

(p43.1) Findings regarding the ESS response to CT are scarce, since data from high-grade and lowgrade ESS are pooled. In general, the rate of response to CT is low; thus, it should only be used when hormonal therapies have become ineffective [42]. Anthracycline and/or ifosfamide are presently considered in the first-line therapeutic regimen [41].
## (s44) Radiotherapy
(p44.0) Although postoperative RT demonstrated some benefits in controlling loco-regional disease, overall survival is rarely improved, since ESSs typically recur distantly. In recurrent or metastatic ESS, palliative radiotherapy is usually used to reduce symptoms [41].

(p44.1) Although postoperative RT demonstrated some benefits in controlling loco-regional disease, overall survival is rarely improved, since ESSs typically recur distantly. In recurrent or metastatic ESS, palliative radiotherapy is usually used to reduce symptoms [41].
## (s46) JAZF1-LGESSs and
(p46.0) LGESSs with no demonstrable genetic rearrangements (wild LGESSs) generally show stage 1 at presentation. Their prognosis is excellent with a low risk of recurrence [41]. In comparison, YWHAE-NUTM2 ESSs typically present in advanced stages (stages 2-4); they frequently recur within a few years after the initial surgery [42].

(p46.1) LGESSs with no demonstrable genetic rearrangements (wild LGESSs) generally show stage 1 at presentation. Their prognosis is excellent with a low risk of recurrence [41]. In comparison, YWHAE-NUTM2 ESSs typically present in advanced stages (stages 2-4); they frequently recur within a few years after the initial surgery [42].
## (s52) Conclusions
(p52.0) The in-depth investigations of US biology have certainly improved the therapeutic approaches to these malignancies. Presently, a great number of agents are under investigation. TKI, mTOR inhibitors, growth factors/growth factor receptor inhibitors and antiangiogenic agents, represent the most promising drugs. SARC028 and the anti-PD1 antibody pembrolizumab (also called MK.3475) for advanced sarcomas, and nivolumab plus ipilimumab for patients with unresectable sarcoma, are in phase II trials [43]. Pazopanib (a selective multi-targeted inhibitor of tyrosine kinase receptors), trabectedin, and eribulin have been recently approved. On the other side, immunotherapy did not show potential benefits for US. It is our opinion that future genetic research will significantly allow a better identification of the molecular signatures of US, in order to provide the optimal treatment strategy for these malignancies [43][44][45][46][47][48].

(p52.1) At the end of the present work, which represents the effort to synthesize all of the updated findings on US, we need to emphasize the importance of interdisciplinary approach to achieve the correct diagnosis and the optimal management for this neoplasia.

(p52.2) The availability of clinical and laboratory information, as well as pharmacological anamnesis, would allow pathologist to put the correct diagnosis of US. Moreover, the continuous research of novel therapeutic approaches would guarantee the updated management of these malignancies.

(p52.3) The in-depth investigations of US biology have certainly improved the therapeutic approaches to these malignancies. Presently, a great number of agents are under investigation. TKI, mTOR inhibitors, growth factors/growth factor receptor inhibitors and antiangiogenic agents, represent the most promising drugs. SARC028 and the anti-PD1 antibody pembrolizumab (also called MK.3475) for advanced sarcomas, and nivolumab plus ipilimumab for patients with unresectable sarcoma, are in phase II trials [43]. Pazopanib (a selective multi-targeted inhibitor of tyrosine kinase receptors), trabectedin, and eribulin have been recently approved. On the other side, immunotherapy did not show potential benefits for US. It is our opinion that future genetic research will significantly allow a better identification of the molecular signatures of US, in order to provide the optimal treatment strategy for these malignancies [43][44][45][46][47][48].

(p52.4) At the end of the present work, which represents the effort to synthesize all of the updated findings on US, we need to emphasize the importance of interdisciplinary approach to achieve the correct diagnosis and the optimal management for this neoplasia.

(p52.5) The availability of clinical and laboratory information, as well as pharmacological anamnesis, would allow pathologist to put the correct diagnosis of US. Moreover, the continuous research of novel therapeutic approaches would guarantee the updated management of these malignancies.
## (s60) Introduction
(p60.0) Endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESSs) are mesenchymal malignancies mainly occurring in uterine corpus. Alternative origins, such as ovary and peritoneum, have been described. Pathogenesis of ESSs has been widely debated. The rarity of this neoplasia contributed to the difficulty in classifying them into clinically meaningful categories. All started in 1966 with Norris and Taylor, who classified ESS into low-grade and high-grade neoplasia, basing on the degree of mitotic activity [1]. Following studies demonstrated the irrelevant value of mitotic activity as prognostic factor. In 1982, Evans understood the importance of separating tumors with endometrial stromal differentiation from poorly differentiated endometrial sarcoma [2]. Studies from Chang et al. demonstrated that a combined assessment of cytological/nuclear atypia and mitotic index could better provide prognostic information than either feature alone [3].
## (s66) Molecular features
(p66.0) ESN is characterized by the chromosomal translocation t(7,17) (p15;q21), resulting in the formation of JAZF1-SUZ12 fusion gene. JAZF1-SUZ12 gene has been found in about 50% of ESNs and in LGESS [10].

(p66.1) ESN is characterized by the chromosomal translocation t(7,17) (p15;q21), resulting in the formation of JAZF1-SUZ12 fusion gene. JAZF1-SUZ12 gene has been found in about 50% of ESNs and in LGESS [10].
## (s68) Low-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma (LGESS)
(p68.0) This neoplasia is composed of cells resembling those of endometrial stroma during proliferative phase, associated with a broad network of arteriolar-like vessels. The tumor shows infiltrative "tongue-like" growth into the myometrium, with or without lymph vascular invasion.

(p68.1) Accounting for about 0.2-1% of all uterine malignancies, LGESS represents the second most common uterine sarcoma. It is more common than ESN. The age range is similar to that of ESN, more often occurring in perimenopause. The median age is 52 years. No race is favorite [10]. Being a slow-growing tumor with an indolent clinical course, LGESS shown no-specific signs; they include vaginal bleeding and pelvic pain.

(p68.2) LGESS most frequently occurs in the uterine corpus, even if extra uterine locations such as ovary pelvis, abdominal cavity, vulva, and vagina are possible. Association with endometriosis has been described [11].

(p68.3) This neoplasia is composed of cells resembling those of endometrial stroma during proliferative phase, associated with a broad network of arteriolar-like vessels. The tumor shows infiltrative "tongue-like" growth into the myometrium, with or without lymph vascular invasion.

(p68.4) Accounting for about 0.2-1% of all uterine malignancies, LGESS represents the second most common uterine sarcoma. It is more common than ESN. The age range is similar to that of ESN, more often occurring in perimenopause. The median age is 52 years. No race is favorite [10]. Being a slow-growing tumor with an indolent clinical course, LGESS shown no-specific signs; they include vaginal bleeding and pelvic pain.

(p68.5) LGESS most frequently occurs in the uterine corpus, even if extra uterine locations such as ovary pelvis, abdominal cavity, vulva, and vagina are possible. Association with endometriosis has been described [11].
## (s75) Therapeutic approaches
(p75.0) Patients with LGESS are usually treated with hysterectomy plus bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, the latest to avoid the secondary stimulation of the tumor by ovarian hormones. Younger patients desiring to preserve fertility can be treated with hormonal therapy or aromatase inhibitors. The adjunct of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) may reduce ovarian synthesis of estrogens [25]. Since low-grade ESSs show low response rates to conventional CT, there is no evidences supporting its use ex adiuvantibus. On the other hand, the presence of estrogens and progesterone receptors in about 80% of the LGESS would give the opportunity to reduce the recurrence rate and risk of relapse using adjuvant endocrine therapy. Hormone therapy with progestin, aromatase inhibitors, and analogues of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone has become an effective post-surgical treatment in patients with low-grade ESS [26].

(p75.1) Particularly, aromatase inhibitors are becoming the treatment of choice, since progestin is poorly tolerated due to side effects. The duration of hormonal therapy should be protracted for 3-5 years after surgery [26]. Tumors with t(10;17) translocation, typically not responding to conventional treatment, should be treated with a more aggressive therapy such as RT and CT combination [23]. Finally, in LGESS showing immunohistochemical positivity for PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β, the PDGF signaling pathway may be considered as a useful therapeutic target for imatinib [26].

(p75.2) Patients with LGESS are usually treated with hysterectomy plus bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, the latest to avoid the secondary stimulation of the tumor by ovarian hormones. Younger patients desiring to preserve fertility can be treated with hormonal therapy or aromatase inhibitors. The adjunct of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) may reduce ovarian synthesis of estrogens [25]. Since low-grade ESSs show low response rates to conventional CT, there is no evidences supporting its use ex adiuvantibus. On the other hand, the presence of estrogens and progesterone receptors in about 80% of the LGESS would give the opportunity to reduce the recurrence rate and risk of relapse using adjuvant endocrine therapy. Hormone therapy with progestin, aromatase inhibitors, and analogues of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone has become an effective post-surgical treatment in patients with low-grade ESS [26].

(p75.3) Particularly, aromatase inhibitors are becoming the treatment of choice, since progestin is poorly tolerated due to side effects. The duration of hormonal therapy should be protracted for 3-5 years after surgery [26]. Tumors with t(10;17) translocation, typically not responding to conventional treatment, should be treated with a more aggressive therapy such as RT and CT combination [23]. Finally, in LGESS showing immunohistochemical positivity for PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β, the PDGF signaling pathway may be considered as a useful therapeutic target for imatinib [26].
## (s85) Molecular features
(p85.0) As previously shown, genetic fusion YWHAE-FAM22 is characteristic of ESS with highgrade histological features. FISH analysis demonstrated the absolute specificity of YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement in HGESS, since fusion gene has been detected neither in other uterine sarcomas nor in extra-uterine mesenchymal tumors [34]. FISH demonstrated higher sensitivity than RT-PCR in detecting YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement. Croce et al. established that the cut-off of rearranged cells to consider FISH as positive should be 30%; they also recommended to add RT-PCR in borderline cases [35]. Such molecular evidences surely will have diagnostic and therapeutic implications [35].

(p85.1) As previously shown, genetic fusion YWHAE-FAM22 is characteristic of ESS with highgrade histological features. FISH analysis demonstrated the absolute specificity of YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement in HGESS, since fusion gene has been detected neither in other uterine sarcomas nor in extra-uterine mesenchymal tumors [34]. FISH demonstrated higher sensitivity than RT-PCR in detecting YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement. Croce et al. established that the cut-off of rearranged cells to consider FISH as positive should be 30%; they also recommended to add RT-PCR in borderline cases [35]. Such molecular evidences surely will have diagnostic and therapeutic implications [35].
## (s86) Therapeutic approaches
(p86.0) Due to the lack of ER and PR receptors, anti-estrogenic therapy seems to be inappropriate in controlling HGESS growth. Adjuvant CT may provide survival benefit, although experiences are limited [35]. Overexpression of EGFR and Erbb2 has been reported in both HGESS and UUSS. In these cases, treatment with imatinib or trastuzumab may be an option [36]. Recently, overexpression of c-kit has been reported in HGESS carrying the YWHAE/FAM22A/B gene fusion. In these cases, a response to imatinib was also described [36].

(p86.1) Due to the lack of ER and PR receptors, anti-estrogenic therapy seems to be inappropriate in controlling HGESS growth. Adjuvant CT may provide survival benefit, although experiences are limited [35]. Overexpression of EGFR and Erbb2 has been reported in both HGESS and UUSS. In these cases, treatment with imatinib or trastuzumab may be an option [36]. Recently, overexpression of c-kit has been reported in HGESS carrying the YWHAE/FAM22A/B gene fusion. In these cases, a response to imatinib was also described [36].
## (s87) Prognosis
(p87.0) Patient with HGESS typically present with advanced stage disease (stages II-IV). Moreover, in comparison to LGESS, patients with HGESS have earlier (within 1 year after initial surgery) and more frequent recurrences. Particularly, in terms of prognosis, YWHAE-rearranged HGESS is intermediate between LGESS and UUS [37].

(p87.1) Patient with HGESS typically present with advanced stage disease (stages II-IV). Moreover, in comparison to LGESS, patients with HGESS have earlier (within 1 year after initial surgery) and more frequent recurrences. Particularly, in terms of prognosis, YWHAE-rearranged HGESS is intermediate between LGESS and UUS [37].
## (s92) Immunohistochemistry
(p92.0) Being undifferentiated by definition, the immunohistochemical characterization of UUS it sometimes hard and reflects the heterogenicity of this category of tumors. USSs are typically CD10, p53, and cyclin D1 positive ( Figure 4E); ER and PR usually stain negative or weakly positive [42]. Desmin, EMA, and keratins may show focal positivity ( Figure 4F). Smooth muscle actin may be focally positive, although the presence of positive stain for more than one smooth muscle marker should drive to a suspect of LMS [42]. On the other hand, a positive  stain for keratin and EMA should lead to the suspicion of undifferentiated endometrial carcinoma [42]. MIB1 index is usually high (Figure 4G).

(p92.1) Being undifferentiated by definition, the immunohistochemical characterization of UUS it sometimes hard and reflects the heterogenicity of this category of tumors. USSs are typically CD10, p53, and cyclin D1 positive ( Figure 4E); ER and PR usually stain negative or weakly positive [42]. Desmin, EMA, and keratins may show focal positivity ( Figure 4F). Smooth muscle actin may be focally positive, although the presence of positive stain for more than one smooth muscle marker should drive to a suspect of LMS [42]. On the other hand, a positive  stain for keratin and EMA should lead to the suspicion of undifferentiated endometrial carcinoma [42]. MIB1 index is usually high (Figure 4G).
## (s94) Molecular features
(p94.0) Genetically, little is known about UUS. In the vast majority of the cases, it has been demonstrated a genetic pathways that is different from those of LGESS and HGESS, although it is not specific (i.e., complex karyotypes, genomic gains, and losses). Particularly, gains of 2q, 4q, 6q, 7p, 9q, 20q and losses of 3q, 10p, and 14q have been detected. A subset of USSs also demonstrated a missense TP53 mutation [15].

(p94.1) Genetically, little is known about UUS. In the vast majority of the cases, it has been demonstrated a genetic pathways that is different from those of LGESS and HGESS, although it is not specific (i.e., complex karyotypes, genomic gains, and losses). Particularly, gains of 2q, 4q, 6q, 7p, 9q, 20q and losses of 3q, 10p, and 14q have been detected. A subset of USSs also demonstrated a missense TP53 mutation [15].
## (s102) Hormonal therapy
(p102.0) The high rate of positive results for hormones receptors has led to interest in using adjuvant hormonal therapy for both early stage and advanced LGESS. Hormonal therapies are generally well tolerated, even if several questions remain controversial, such as doses, regimens (i.e., progestins, gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonists, and aromatase inhibitors), and duration of therapy. In general, the lack of significant adverse effects would allow the administration for longer periods. Hormonal therapies seem to be effective for metastatic disease also. Conversely, the frequent lack of ER and PR in HGESS and UUS makes the hormonal therapy ineffective in controlling tumor growth [42].

(p102.1) The high rate of positive results for hormones receptors has led to interest in using adjuvant hormonal therapy for both early stage and advanced LGESS. Hormonal therapies are generally well tolerated, even if several questions remain controversial, such as doses, regimens (i.e., progestins, gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonists, and aromatase inhibitors), and duration of therapy. In general, the lack of significant adverse effects would allow the administration for longer periods. Hormonal therapies seem to be effective for metastatic disease also. Conversely, the frequent lack of ER and PR in HGESS and UUS makes the hormonal therapy ineffective in controlling tumor growth [42].
## (s103) Chemotherapy
(p103.0) Findings regarding the ESS response to CT are scarce, since data from high-grade and lowgrade ESS are pooled. In general, the rate of response to CT is low; thus, it should only be used when hormonal therapies have become ineffective [42]. Anthracycline and/or ifosfamide are presently considered in the first-line therapeutic regimen [41].

(p103.1) Findings regarding the ESS response to CT are scarce, since data from high-grade and lowgrade ESS are pooled. In general, the rate of response to CT is low; thus, it should only be used when hormonal therapies have become ineffective [42]. Anthracycline and/or ifosfamide are presently considered in the first-line therapeutic regimen [41].
## (s104) Radiotherapy
(p104.0) Although postoperative RT demonstrated some benefits in controlling loco-regional disease, overall survival is rarely improved, since ESSs typically recur distantly. In recurrent or metastatic ESS, palliative radiotherapy is usually used to reduce symptoms [41].

(p104.1) Although postoperative RT demonstrated some benefits in controlling loco-regional disease, overall survival is rarely improved, since ESSs typically recur distantly. In recurrent or metastatic ESS, palliative radiotherapy is usually used to reduce symptoms [41].
## (s106) JAZF1-LGESSs and
(p106.0) LGESSs with no demonstrable genetic rearrangements (wild LGESSs) generally show stage 1 at presentation. Their prognosis is excellent with a low risk of recurrence [41]. In comparison, YWHAE-NUTM2 ESSs typically present in advanced stages (stages 2-4); they frequently recur within a few years after the initial surgery [42].

(p106.1) LGESSs with no demonstrable genetic rearrangements (wild LGESSs) generally show stage 1 at presentation. Their prognosis is excellent with a low risk of recurrence [41]. In comparison, YWHAE-NUTM2 ESSs typically present in advanced stages (stages 2-4); they frequently recur within a few years after the initial surgery [42].
## (s112) Conclusions
(p112.0) The in-depth investigations of US biology have certainly improved the therapeutic approaches to these malignancies. Presently, a great number of agents are under investigation. TKI, mTOR inhibitors, growth factors/growth factor receptor inhibitors and antiangiogenic agents, represent the most promising drugs. SARC028 and the anti-PD1 antibody pembrolizumab (also called MK.3475) for advanced sarcomas, and nivolumab plus ipilimumab for patients with unresectable sarcoma, are in phase II trials [43]. Pazopanib (a selective multi-targeted inhibitor of tyrosine kinase receptors), trabectedin, and eribulin have been recently approved. On the other side, immunotherapy did not show potential benefits for US. It is our opinion that future genetic research will significantly allow a better identification of the molecular signatures of US, in order to provide the optimal treatment strategy for these malignancies [43][44][45][46][47][48].

(p112.1) At the end of the present work, which represents the effort to synthesize all of the updated findings on US, we need to emphasize the importance of interdisciplinary approach to achieve the correct diagnosis and the optimal management for this neoplasia.

(p112.2) The availability of clinical and laboratory information, as well as pharmacological anamnesis, would allow pathologist to put the correct diagnosis of US. Moreover, the continuous research of novel therapeutic approaches would guarantee the updated management of these malignancies.

(p112.3) The in-depth investigations of US biology have certainly improved the therapeutic approaches to these malignancies. Presently, a great number of agents are under investigation. TKI, mTOR inhibitors, growth factors/growth factor receptor inhibitors and antiangiogenic agents, represent the most promising drugs. SARC028 and the anti-PD1 antibody pembrolizumab (also called MK.3475) for advanced sarcomas, and nivolumab plus ipilimumab for patients with unresectable sarcoma, are in phase II trials [43]. Pazopanib (a selective multi-targeted inhibitor of tyrosine kinase receptors), trabectedin, and eribulin have been recently approved. On the other side, immunotherapy did not show potential benefits for US. It is our opinion that future genetic research will significantly allow a better identification of the molecular signatures of US, in order to provide the optimal treatment strategy for these malignancies [43][44][45][46][47][48].

(p112.4) At the end of the present work, which represents the effort to synthesize all of the updated findings on US, we need to emphasize the importance of interdisciplinary approach to achieve the correct diagnosis and the optimal management for this neoplasia.

(p112.5) The availability of clinical and laboratory information, as well as pharmacological anamnesis, would allow pathologist to put the correct diagnosis of US. Moreover, the continuous research of novel therapeutic approaches would guarantee the updated management of these malignancies.
