# Outcome-Based Assessment in The Evaluation of Education Programs Through a Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 261038608 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48fe5a91900207d8b5eaccd10dc7ddffd562f4fe](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48fe5a91900207d8b5eaccd10dc7ddffd562f4fe)

Fields: Education

## (s2) Methodology
(p2.0) A literature review is important when initiating and conducting research to prepare and expose researchers to various techniques to analyze ideas, find relationships between different ideas, and understand the nature and use of arguments in research. It also screens and summarizes the search for quality research using a scientific methodology (Cronin, 2013). The literature review provides explanations, discussions, and examples of how to analyze the ideas of others and ideas that make up the body of knowledge on the research topic. Systematic literature review (SLR) differs from traditional narrative reviews because it collects all publications and related documents that are appropriate to the criteria required, in order to answer specific research questions, whilst using clear and systematic procedures to find, identify, evaluate, synthesize, and analyze studies (Hart, 1998). The systematic literature review method also helps provide in-depth results and solutions while suggesting a reasonable and ideal solution in the field of interest (Masapanta-Carrión & Velázquez-Iturbide, 2018).
## (s5) Research Trends and Years of Publication
(p5.0) The SLR research results for Outcome-Based Assessment in Figure 2 show the trends for the publication years of Outcome-Based Assessment studies where 2019 recorded the highest number of studies conducted and related to Outcome-Based Assessment. The average accreditation-based assessment research in the last 5 years is seen to be decreasing over the past two decades, where Outcome-Based Assessment has become the focus in all areas of higher education through the search for SLR 15 years back (Tam, 2014). The decline in trends suggests that assessment and accreditation research require new issues and studies that need to be explored and expanded in the latest and current assessment research.
## (s9) Assessment Development
(p9.0) Assessment development is the main theme that is extensively discussed in SLR research. It covers the methods for developing assessment instruments and the aspects of assessment as the focus of latest research. Student development in three learning domains or learning taxonomy is guided by the level of hierarchy or complexity in each domain. The development of assessment instruments and tasks used to gather evidence must be in line with the achievement of the learning outcomes to be measured. Violante et al (2020) revealed the use of Bloom's Taxonomy to determine assessment questions and QR codes to help manage large class scales; their study presents a result-based learning methodology to produce summary assessments used in multi-level education assessments that refer to international qualification standards for determining learning outcomes.
## (s13) Conclusion
(p13.0) SLR studies allow the researchers to know the progress and trends of Outcome-Based Assessment. The design of the latest assessment tools allows the learning of students about advanced pedagogy and effective andragogy. Outcome-Based Assessment is not only focused on student grades but also the overall potential of students in various aspects, especially in professional achievement and soft skills. The appropriate implementation of the Outcome-Based Assessment methods serves as the basis of reliable assessment results that determine whether a student is on the right track towards achieving the results or has already achieved the desired results at the course or program level (Jonathan, 2017). Information from the SLR study provides feedback to researchers on the effectiveness of teaching and learning practices undertaken by previous researchers. This constructively introduces the development of more responsive and effective teaching techniques to be tailored in the latest teaching to help students achieve the desired educational outcomes.
