# (online) Integration of Artificial Intelligence in Education: Opportunities, Challenges, Threats and Obstacles. A Literature Review

CorpusID: 261413770 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f468af724a9a269172e5e617830c8aa6ac40e99d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f468af724a9a269172e5e617830c8aa6ac40e99d)

Fields: Education, Computer Science

## (s0) B. Research Method
(p0.0) The research method used in this study is semy-systematic literature review. This study is designed to analyze a number of research results that are in accordance with the topic being analyzed. This study analyzes the development of a topic over time from various aspects. This research also analyzes the relevant potential and has implications for the topic being studied. The analysis used in this study tends to be similar to qualitative research in general, which uses a metanarrative approach that includes the process of identifying, analyzing, recognizing patterns and themes from various research results relevant to the topic [11], [12]. The data analyzed in this study is a type of secondary data in the form of research results that have been published and detected on the Google Scholar web. The keyword used in the search process is "challenges and opportunities of AI in education". The research data that has been collected is then selected based on several criteria such as theme, title, content, and quality of research. The technical stages of selection of this study can be observed as follows: The opportunities offered by AI in education are vast, flexible and can be utilized practically. The opportunities provided by AI can be applied in various aspects of education both from technical teaching which includes the process of delivering learning materials, evaluating learning and managing learning systems, and other aspects of education. Some of the opportunities that AI provides to education are as follows:
## (s1) a. Delivery of Learning Materials
(p1.0) The first opportunity that can be taken from the implementation of AI in education relates to the novelty of ways in delivering learning materials. AI implemented in learning provides new concepts and nuances that make it easier for teachers to deliver material more effectively and make it easier for students to absorb learning material, increase student understanding, and strengthen students' confidence levels in adapting to the digital world [13], [14]. The implementation of AI is also not fixed on certain scientific fields, but can be implemented in all fields of learning such as science, psychology, health education, language, art, mathematics and others [14].
## (s3) d. Other Aspects of Education
(p3.0) The collaboration of AI and education in fact not only provides changes to the technical learning and management, but also has an impact on several other aspects related to education. Some other aspects are the process of determining education policy. In this case, education policymakers can consider several AI features that can act as Policy maker advisors. Some of the materials and information presented by AI can make appropriate and accurate education policies according to learning needs [8].

(p3.1) Other aspects that are also affected by the development of AI in education include the development of educational markets. The current state of educational markets is largely determined by the role of AI in education [22]. The next aspect that is also an important aspect of achieving the big goal of education is student literacy. In this information technology era, AI offers the concept of AI literacy which is designed to improve the quality of student literacy through three components, namely AI concepts, AI evaluation concepts, and AI understanding concepts [14].
## (s6) Obstacles
(p6.0) The implementation of AI in education is inseparable from several obstacles that must be faced. These barriers are related to several fundamental aspects of education. Obstacles to implementing AI in education include the large costs required, limited teacher training schemes in preparing AI competencies for teachers and professionals, and slow changes in curriculum and structural levels of education in accordance with AI development [10].
