# The value of advanced MRI techniques in the assessment of cervical cancer: a review

CorpusID: 27918340 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/191d8eb554e3a9b9e1473eca852e2f40852384b3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/191d8eb554e3a9b9e1473eca852e2f40852384b3)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Tumour recurrence and therapeutic response
(p6.0) Differentiating residual tumour tissue or tumour recurrence from post-therapeutic tissue changes, such as inflammation and fibrosis, remains challenging using conventional MRI, as both scar tissue and residual tumour tissue can have similar signal intensities. The ideal time to predict therapy response is not yet defined. Some authors advocate early assessment 2 weeks after radiochemotherapy [98]. In difficult cases, functional imaging, including DWI and DCE, can be a useful addition. Mahajan et al. [99] examined 30 patients after hysterectomy with suspected local tumour recurrence. Additional multiparametric sequences, including DWI and DCE, increased the diagnostic accuracy to 100% compared to 70% accuracy with conventional MRI alone. Similarly, another study reported that a combination of T2-weighted images and DWI had a higher diagnostic accuracy in the detection of post-treatment tumour recurrence versus T2-weighted images alone (92.1% vs 73.6%, p = 0.016) [100].
## (s7) Limitations
(p7.0) There are limitations to DWI and DCE-MRI in that there are some technical issues and, most importantly, a lack of standardisation. The technical limitations include differences in modelling and the choice of b values for diffusion-weighted MRI, plus there are a large variety of pharmacokinetic models and sequences/contrast agent injection protocols used for DCE-MRI. Moreover, continuous technical advances and constant optimisation of MRI protocols according to the newest technical standards inadvertently reduce the comparability of MRI studies, as changes in resolution or the introduction of new advanced MRI techniques might allow for more precise tumour depiction. This had led to limited reproducibility and, since ADC values differ between various centres and with different MRI scanners, there are currently no established ADC cut-off values that allow for precise differentiation between, for example, tumour subtypes or grades [95]. Standardisation of MRI techniques is therefore considered critical for improving comparisons between studies.

(p7.1) Regarding the assessment of lymph node metastases, several studies excluded lymph nodes smaller than 5 mm, leading to selection bias. Node-by-node correlations between preoperative MRI and histopathological specimens present another problem. Lymph node position is generally labelled according to lymph node region, which limits the correlation between suspicious MRI findings and histopathological samples. In addition, the small size of some lymph nodes makes it difficult to precisely position a region of interest in order to measure, for example, ADC in a single lymph node.
