# Adaptive Control Strategies for Interlimb Coordination in Legged Robots: A Review

CorpusID: 28134753 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1170d18d8b6e7b2a1904289ed66b51b1faad0cea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1170d18d8b6e7b2a1904289ed66b51b1faad0cea)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s3) Environment-Dependent Adaptation
(p3.0) The advantage of using legs in mobile motion for animals and machines is to gain high traversability even in complex environments by manipulating the foot contact positions. However, the traversability of legged robots is still far from reaching the level of animals. During locomotion, the leg motion consists of the stance phase, in which the foot is in contact with the ground, and the swing phase, in which the foot is lifted off the ground. In the stance phase, the leg supports the body against gravity and produces propulsive and decelerating forces to move the body through the interaction between the foot and the ground. Geometric properties of the ground vary. These properties include being flat terrain, sloped terrain, or irregular and rough terrain. The physical properties of the ground also change. These properties include hard and slippery ground like stone, soft ground like loose soil, and flowable and penetrable ground like sand. The interaction between the foot and the ground is crucial to create locomotion, and real-time adaptation of motor behavior is required according to the ground situation. Animals actually show adaptive interlimb coordination depending on the environmental situation. To control legged robots, it is crucial to clarify and apply the dynamical principles of animals.

(p3.1) Manoonpong and his colleagues developed a series of modular neural CPG-based locomotion control for legged robots (Manoonpong et al., 2008Steingrube et al., 2010;Goldschmidt et al., 2014;Xiong et al., 2014Xiong et al., , 2015Dasgupta et al., 2015;Grinke et al., 2015). They showed that using this control approach leads to adaptive interlimb coordination that allows the robots to deal with complex environments, such as walking over difficult terrain (Steingrube et al., 2010;Manoonpong et al., 2013;Goldschmidt et al., 2014;Xiong et al., 2014Xiong et al., , 2015Dasgupta et al., 2015) and avoiding obstacles in an unknown cluttered area (Manoonpong et al., 2008;Grinke et al., 2015), as observed in insects. For example, they implemented modular neural control with an adaptive chaotic CPG-based network and sensory feedback on a hexapod robot (Figures 4A,B; Steingrube et al., 2010). Due to the intrinsically chaotic dynamics of the CPG similar to that observed in certain biological CPGs (Rabinovich and Abarbanel, 1998), the dynamics were exploited to generate various walking patterns depending on the environmental condition. In their setup, the robot showed a tetrapod gait for standard walking, a wave gait for up-slope walking, a mixture gait between wave and tetrapod gaits for down-slope walking, and a tripod gait for fast walking to perform fast phototaxis ( Figure 4C). However, this implementation of discrete gaits does not necessarily correspond to the situation found in insects. In addition to these multiple gaits, the chaotic dynamics especially contributed to self-untrapping of a leg from a hole in the ground ( Figure 4B) and thereby enhanced foothold searching behavior. In Dasgupta et al. (2015), Goldschmidt et al. (2014), and Manoonpong et al. (2013) integrating forward models into the modular neural control enabled the robot to effectively predict its walking state in order to extend or elevate its legs during the swing and stance phases while walking on complex terrains. With this setup, the robot walked on uneven terrain by using a tetrapod gait and climbed over high obstacles as well as up a flight of stairs by using a wave gait. Moreover, it successfully crossed a large gap by using a caterpillar gait, where each left and right pair of legs moved simultaneously. In this situation, however, stick insects show more complex behavior than caterpillar coordination, which is adopted only rarely, if at all (Blaesing and Cruse, 2004). In Xiong et al. (2014), modular neural control was extended by introducing muscle models based on virtual agonist-antagonist mechanisms (VAAM), and neuromechanical control was produced to achieve leg compliance. Combining neuromechanical control with sensorimotor learning results in energy-efficient walking using different gaits with corresponding leg compliances (Xiong et al., 2015). The robot efficiently walked on different surfaces including sponge, gravel, fine gravel, and grass. For adaptation to the avoidance of obstacles in a cluttered environment, an adaptive neural sensory processing network with synaptic plasticity was introduced to the modular neural control (Grinke et al., 2015). The adaptive processing network could drive different turning behaviors with short-term robot memory. As a consequence, the robot walked around and adapted its turning behavior to avoid obstacles in different situations and to avoid sharp corners or deadlocks ( Figure 4D). In addition to the modular neural control approach, Schneider et al. (2012) developed bio-inspired control, which combines Walknet (mentioned above) with higher level control and planning (Figures 5A,B), for adaptive interlimb coordination of the hexapod robot HECTOR. By using this control technique, versatile behaviors (e.g., gap crossing, obstacle crossing, and global planning to avoid or attack obstacles) can be generated to deal with complex environments (Figure 5C). Furthermore, Schilling and Cruse (2017) expanded Walknet to invent new behaviors and test them by internal simulation before using them in reality. Arena et al. (2017) proposed multilayered CPG-based locomotion control with insect inspired motor-skill learning. It can adaptively coordinate the limbs of a Drosophila-like hexapod robot for stable walking and obstacle climbing.
## (s5) Task-Dependent Adaptation
(p5.0) Animals often encounter a situation in which they have to change locomotor behavior. For example, when an obstacle appears in a walking path, they step over the obstacle, or turn to the right or the left to avoid collision with the obstacle (this is also related to environment adaptation). Such a task is mainly generated by modulating the leg movements, and thus adaptive control of intralimb coordination is important. However, also important is adaptive control of interlimb coordination. To step over an obstacle, the leading limb first clears the obstacle and then the trailing limb follows it. The foot of the leading limb must be raised higher than usual to avoid collision with the obstacle, and this motion delays foot contact. Especially for bipedal and FIGURE 6 | Adaptation to deal with leg malfunction of a hexapod robot under modular multiple CPG-based locomotion control. (A) Implementation of multiple chaotic CPGs on a hexapod robot. In the setup, the connections between CPGs are predefined. (B,C) Two example scenarios of real robot experiments with disabled legs. In (B), the robot walked with the R1 leg disabled and in (C) it walked with the R1 and R3 legs disabled. For each subfigure, the upper panel shows one snapshot of a fail situation (before learning) and three snapshots of a success situation (after learning). The lower panel shows the gait (i.e., suitable leg frequencies) after learning. A black area means that the leg touched the ground, and a white area indicates that the leg was in the air. In this setup, the robot learned to find a proper combination of oscillation frequencies of different legs for malfunction compensation. (D) Implementation of multiple CPGs with foot contact feedback on a hexapod robot. This setup does not have predefined coordination between the CPGs. Intralimb coordination emerges from the interactions between the body dynamics and the environment through foot contact feedback of each leg. (E) Example of the robot experiment dealing with a temporary handicapped situation. The ground reaction forces during movement of the robot with middle legs temporarily disabled show that the robot quickly adapted to a new gait (i.e., trot gait) and was able to continue walking properly. These figures were modified from Barikhan et al. (2014) and Ren et al. (2015). quadrupedal animals, the foot of the trailing limb must be raised after foot contact of the leading limb; otherwise, the obstacle avoidance task will fail because the contralateral limb does not support the body at the onset of raising the trailing limb (Aoi et al., 2013c).
## (s7) Hysteresis in Gait Transition
(p7.0) As discussed in Section 2.1, animals change their walking patterns depending on their locomotion speed. In general, locomotion speed has a large sudden change at gait transition in overground walking. However, using treadmills, which can control gait speed, we can investigate the speed-dependent gait transition mechanism by smoothly and continuously changing the belt speed of the treadmills. It has been reported in humans and some quadruped animals that the gait changes at different speeds depending on whether the speed is increasing or decreasing, and that a speed range exists in which different gaits are used. In other words, gait transitions may exhibit hysteresis (Diedrich et al., 1998;Heglund and Taylor, 1998;Raynor et al., 2002;Griffin et al., 2004). Figure 10A shows the relative phase between the right front and hind legs of a dog walking on a treadmill for walk-to-trot and trot-to-walk transitions induced by changing the belt speed . This figure shows hysteresis in the walk-trot transition. Such a phenomenon is difficult to explain by triggering the gait transition based on metabolic and biomechanical factors. The dynamical system approach might provide useful insights into such a gait transition mechanism (Diedrich et al., 1998).

(p7.1) Quadruped robots controlled by simple phase oscillators with local sensory foot contact information, as introduced in Section 2.1, showed hysteresis in the walk-trot transition induced by changing the locomotion speed ( Figure 10B; Aoi et al., 2011Aoi et al., , 2013b. Because walking and trotting gaits are mainly distinguished by the relative phases of the ipsilateral legs, a stability analysis using the return maps of the relative phases clarified the stability structure of the gaits. Figure 10C shows the return maps obtained at three different speeds. While only one stable relative phase exists in the left and right figures, two stable and one unstable relative phases exist in the middle figure. The stable and unstable relative phases explain that hysteresis is generated through two saddle-node bifurcations induced by changing the locomotion speed ( Figure 10D). From this result, a potential function is derived, as shown in Figure 10E. It suggests that gait transition is explained by switching the stability of self-organized patterns in the complex dynamical system.

(p7.2) Gait transition hysteresis also appears in other legged robots controlled by CPG models with sensory feedback, e.g., in the walk-run transition of a biped model (Taga and Shimizu, 1991) and the metachronal-tripod gait transition of hexapod robots (Kimura et al., 1993;Fujiki et al., 2013a; note that insects do not clearly show abrupt transitions, but a continuum of locomotion patterns).
