# Clinical trials using the Shang Ring device for male circumcision in Africa: a review

CorpusID: 2853821 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6a97df393ec59f888260de91ad06af4d6c88bb49](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6a97df393ec59f888260de91ad06af4d6c88bb49)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) MC reduces other STIs, including human papillomavirus (HPV) and herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2)
(p2.0) MC also provides protection against transmission of other STIs, making men less susceptible to acquiring or transmitting genital ulcer disease, trichomonas and gonorrhea (8,(13)(14)(15)(16). Data also show that MC provides significant protection against both HPV and HSV-2, reducing the risk of infection by about one-third for both viruses (13,(17)(18)(19), in addition to reducing the risk of cervical cancer in female sex partners of circumcised men (20)(21)(22).
## (s9) Study of delayed removal of the Shang Ring
(p9.0) A small RCT was conducted in Kenya to explore what would happen if men did not return for Shang Ring removal and determine if the Shang Ring would spontaneously detach if removal was delayed beyond the current label instructions of seven days (40). Fifty HIV-negative men seeking MC at the Homa Bay District Hospital were randomly assigned to device removal at 7, 14 or 21 days after Shang Ring circumcision. Scheduled follow-up visits were at 7, 14, 21, 28, and 42 days after circumcision, as well as 2 days after Shang Ring removal. Clinical outcome measures included adverse events, degree of detachment, and time to complete healing.

(p9.1) Shang Ring circumcisions in all 50 men were successfully completed without complications. Nine (18.0%) men required a small slit (median 15 mm) in the foreskin to facilitate eversion of the foreskin over the inner ring.

(p9.2) Complete detachment of the Shang Ring occurred in 22 men (66.7% of those wearing the ring >7 days); most (81.8%, 18/22) of these complete detachments occurred between 10 and 16 days after circumcision. In some men experiencing complete detachment, the ring fell off the penis, while in others it slid back towards the base of the penis and was removed by a provider at follow-up. Among men still wearing the device on the day of planned removal, the cumulative probability of at least partial detachment was 26.0%, 94.1%, and 100.0% on days 7, 14, and 21, respectively. Cumulative probabilities of complete spontaneous detachment were 0.0%, 56.1%, and 93.7% at 7, 14, and 21 days, respectively.

(p9.3) A total of seven men in 14-and 21-day groups requested early ring removal due to pain/discomfort from the partially detached ring contacting the healing wound. Rings were removed as requested and healing proceeded normally. There were six moderate AEs including three that were pain related (one postoperatively and two approximately one week after circumcision) and three wound disruptions. Four of the six AEs were among the men who requested early ring removal. Although not considered moderate or severe AEs, there were nine instances of the minor cutaneous injuries to the penile shaft similar to what was seen in the proof of concept study noted above. Based on the location of the injuries and the experiences of the circumcision providers, study investigators hypothesized that these injuries occurred when a small fold of skin from the penis was trapped between the inner and outer rings as the outer ring was closed during the circumcision procedure. No significant differences (P=0.86) in cumulative probability of compete healing were seen by randomization group. Overall, the cumulative probability of complete healing by 42 days was 94.5%. There were no problems with healing and excellent cosmetic results among the 46 men in which complete wound healing was observed, irrespective of presence of an AE, day device was removed, occurrence of spontaneous detachment, or request for early removal.
## (s11) RCT in Kenya and Zambia
(p11.0) An RCT enrolled HIV-negative men 18 to 54 years old who were seeking MC in Homa Bay, Kenya, and Lusaka, Zambia (41). Men were randomized to Shang Ring or conventional circumcision (forceps-guided method in Kenya and dorsal slit method in Zambia). Shang Rings were removed at the 7-day visit. Outcomes measures included: (I) safety (e.g., adverse events rates, time to complete wound healing by clinical assessment); (II) pain and acceptability among study participants (e.g., post-operative pain using a VAS, participant acceptability); and (III) ease of use and provider preferences (e.g., duration of surgery, surgical difficulties, provider preferences).

(p11.1) A total of 400 men were enrolled and randomized, 200 at each site with 197 and 201 contributed to the Shang Ring and conventional surgery analyses, respectively. Over 80% of the procedures in both arms were performed by nurses or clinical officers. Results are summarized in Table 2.
## (s12) Comparative study in Uganda
(p12.0) HIV-negative men 18 years and older seeking MC in Rakai, Uganda were provided detailed information on the Shang Ring and dorsal site methods of MC (43). Those interested in participating in the study were asked to choose their preferred procedure. Circumcisions were conducted by clinical officers trained in the Shang Ring technique in Kenya. Participants returned for follow-up at 7 and 28 days post-circumcision (Shang Rings were removed at the 7-day visit).

(p12.1) A total of 621 men were enrolled in the study, with the majority (508/621, 81.8%) choosing the Shang Ring over the dorsal slit procedure (113/621, 18.2%). Reasons men gave for choosing the Shang Ring included shorter procedure time and the belief that it was safer and would be a less painful procedure. Men who chose dorsal slit circumcision did so because it was the standard procedure, they believed it was safer, and it did not require a removal procedure. In four cases (4/508, 0.8%) the Shang Ring procedure failed, and the circumcision needed to be completed with sutures; the ring slipped off after the foreskin was removed in three cases and there was damage to the foreskin after the Shang Ring had been placed in the other case. All of the device failures occurred early in the study and were attributed by study investigators to provider inexperience.

(p12.2) The two self-selected groups were comparable, with no significant differences in socio-demographic variables or selfreported behaviors between the men receiving Shang Ring and dorsal slit circumcisions. Results were similar to those from the randomized study described above. Shang Ring circumcisions took approximately 1/3 the time of conventional ones (mean ± SD =6.1 minutes ±2.7 vs. 17.7 minutes ±7.3). There was no difference in the rate of moderate and severe adverse events between the groups; 5/500 (1.0%) in the Shang Ring group vs. 1/117 (0.9%) in the dorsal slit group. AEs included post-operative pain, bleeding, infection, wound dehiscence, and insufficient skin removal. Significantly (P<0.001) more men in the dorsal slit group (111/113, 100%) demonstrated complete wound healing at four weeks follow-up compared to the Shang Ring group (408/486, 84.0%). There was no difference between the two groups in the proportion of men reporting they were satisfied or very satisfied with the circumcision procedure they chose or the cosmetic outcome of their circumcision.
