# Role of Nanotechnology in Cosmeceuticals: A Review of Recent Advances

CorpusID: 29160171 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e984b775edc55485335763abe34a84279d854651](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e984b775edc55485335763abe34a84279d854651)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s1) Novel Nanocarriers for Cosmeceuticals
(p1.0) For the delivery of nanocosmeceuticals, carrier technology is employed which offers an intelligent approach for the delivery of active ingredients. Various novel nanocarriers for delivery of cosmeceuticals are depicted in Figure 3 [18,19].
## (s4) Solid Lipid
(p4.0) Nanoparticles. An unconventional carrier system, solid lipid nanoparticle (SLN), was developed at the beginning of the 1990s, over the conventional lipoidal carriers like emulsions and liposomes. 50 to 1000 nm is the size range of solid lipid nanoparticles [50].
## (s6) Dendrimers. The term "dendrimer" arises from two
(p6.0) Greek words: namely, "Dendron" that means tree and "Meros" meaning part. Dendrimers are highly branched, unimolecular, globular, micellar nanostructure, and multivalent nanoparticles whose synthesis theoretically affords monodisperse compounds. A dendrimer is typically built from a core on which one or a number of successive series of branches are engrafted in an arborescent way and often adopts a spherical three-dimensional morphology [108]. Generation of the dendrimer is determined by total number of series of branches: if it has one series of branches, then it is first-generation dendrimer; if it has two series, then it is second generation and so on. They are extremely small in size, having diameters in the range of 2-20 nm [109]. Its other properties like monodispersity, polyvalence, and stability make it an ideal carrier for drug delivery with precision and selectivity. To attach biologically active substances for targeting purpose terminal groups are modified. Dendrimers provide controlled release from the inner core and drugs are incorporated in interior as well as being attached on the surface [110]. Dendrimers are new class of macromolecular architecture and are also being used as nanotechnology based cosmeceuticals for various applications like in hair care, skin care, and nail care. Dendrimers have utility in various cosmetic products like shampoos, sunscreen, hair-styling gels, and antiacne products [111]. Companies like L'Oreal, The Dow Company, Wella, and Unilever have several patents for application of dendrimers in cosmeceuticals. Descriptions of advantages of dendrimers are represented in Figure 11.
## (s7) Carbon Nanotubes.
(p7.0) In the field of nanotechnology, carbon nanotubes are represented as one of the most unique inventions. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) can be described as the rolled graphene with SP 2 hybridization. These are seamless cylindrical hollow fibers, comprised of walls formed by graphene as hexagonal lattice of carbon, which are rolled at specific and discrete "chiral" angles. Individual carbon nanotubes align themselves naturally into "ropes" held together by pi-stacking. The diameter ranges from 0.7 to 50 nm with lengths in the range of 10's of microns [112,113]. Carbon nanotubes are extremely light in weight. These are further of 3 types: namely, single-walled CNTs, doubled-walled CNTs, and multiwalled CNTs. Single-walled CNTs are made up of single graphene sheet which is rolled upon itself with diameter of 1-2 nm, double-walled CNTs are made of two concentric carbon nanotubes, and multiwalled CNTs consist of multiple layers of graphene tubes having diameter ranging from 2 to 50 nm [114]. Major production methods of carbon nanotubes consist of arc discharge method, laser ablation, chemical vapor deposition method, flame synthesis method, and silane solution method [115]. Various patents of carbon nanoparticles have been filed in the field of cosmeceuticals like hair coloring and cosmetic compositions comprising carbon nanotubes and peptide-based carbon nanotube hair colorants and their use in hair colorant and cosmetic compositions [116, 117].
## (s9) Cubosomes.
(p9.0) Cubosomes are the advanced nanostructured particles which are discrete, submicron, and selfassembled liquid crystalline particles of surfactants with proper ratio of water that provides unique properties. Cubosomes are formed by self-assembled structures of aqueous lipid and surfactant systems when mixed with water and microstructure at a certain ratio [125]. Cubosomes are bicontinuous cubic liquid phase, which encloses two separate regions of water being divided by surfactant controlled bilayers and wrapped into a three dimension, periodic, and minimal surface, forming a strongly packed structure [126]. They consist of honeycombed (cavernous) structure and they appear like dots which are slightly spherical in structure. They exhibit size range from 10 to 500 nm in diameter. They have ability to encapsulate hydrophilic, hydrophobic, and amphiphilic substances. Cubosomes have relatively simple preparation methods; they render bioactive agents with controlled and targeted release, possess lipid biodegradability, and have high internal surface area with different drugloading modalities [127,128]. Cubosomes are an attractive choice for cosmeceuticals, so for this reason a number of cosmetic giants are investigating cubosomes. Various patents have been filed regarding the cosmetic applications of cubosomes.
## (s11) Skin
(p11.0) Care. Cosmeceuticals for skin care products ameliorate the skin texture and functioning by stimulating the growth of collagen by combating harmful effect of free radicals. They make the skin healthier by maintaining the structure of keratin in good condition. In sunscreen products zinc oxide and titanium dioxide nanoparticles are most effective minerals which protect the skin by penetrating into the deep layers of skin and make the product less greasy, less smelly, and transparent [129]. SLNs, nanoemulsions, liposomes, and niosomes are extensively used in moisturizing formulations as they form thin film of humectants and retain moisture for prolonged span. Marketed antiaging nanocosmeceutical products assimilating nanocapsules, liposomes, nanosomes, and nanospheres manifest benefits such as collagen renewal, skin rejuvenation, and firming and lifting the skin [130].
## (s12) Hair
(p12.0) Care. Hair nanocosmeceutical products include shampoos, conditioning agents, hair growth stimulants, coloring, and styling products. Hair follicle, shaft targeting, and increased quantity of active ingredient are achieved by intrinsic properties and unique size of nanoparticles. Nanoparticles subsuming in shampoos seals moisture within the cuticles by optimizing resident contact time with scalp and hair follicles by forming protective film [131]. Conditioning nanocosmeceuticals agents have purposive function of imparting softness, shine, silkiness, and gloss and enhance disentangling of hair. Novel carriers like niosomes, microemulsion, nanoemulsion, nanospheres, and liposomes have major function of repairing damaged cuticles, restoring texture and gloss, and making hair nongreasy, shiny, and less brittle [132].
## (s15) Toxicity of Nanoparticles Used in Cosmeceuticals
(p15.0) Number of workforce and customers exposed to nanoparticles are escalating because of increasing production and application of the wide diversity of cosmeceuticals products that contain nanomaterials. Despite their huge potential benefit, little is known about the short-term and long-term health effects in the environment and organisms. Due to health hazards, product functionality, and environmental concerns, there may be possible constrains. Concerns have been raised on the possible dangers which may arise on the skin penetration of nanomaterials after their application to the skin [136]. Toxicity of nanoparticles immensely depends on variety of factors like surface properties, coating, structure, size, and ability to aggregate and these factors can be altered and manipulated in the manufacturing process. Nanoparticles having poor solubility have been shown to cause cancer and can exhibit more pronounced toxicity [137]. Health hazard may arise due to the surface area of nanoparticles when compared with the same mass concentration of large particles. Toxicity also depends on the chemical composition of nanoparticles which is absorbed on the skin [138]. There is a relationship between particle size and toxicity: the smaller the size of the nanoparticles, the greater the surface area to volume ratio, due to which there is higher chemical and biological reactivity. Health hazard caused by nanoparticles to the humans depends on the degree of exposure and the route through which they access the body. Inhalation, ingestion, and dermal routes are the possible routes by which humans can get exposure to the nanoparticles [139]. Routes of exposure of nanoparticles are given in Figure 13.
## (s17) 4.2.
(p17.0) Ingestion. Nanomaterials may be ingested in the body from unintentional to intentional transfer from hand to mouth. Nanoparticles can be ingested from cosmeceuticals that are applied on lips or mouth like lipsticks, lip balms, lip gloss, and so on [143].

(p17.1) According to the studies, after ingestion, nanomaterials rapidly pass out of the body but sometimes some amount may be taken up that can migrate to the organs. Studies conducted on the layers of pig skin show that certain nanomaterials can penetrate in the layers of the skin within 24 hours of exposure [144]. When mice were orally ingested with zinc oxide nanoparticles with 20 nm and 120 nm at different doses, as a result spleen, heart, liver, bones, and pancreas became the target organs. Copper nanoparticles are found in variety of commercially available cosmeceuticals. Mice exhibited toxicological effects and heavy injuries to internal organs when exposed to copper nanoparticles [145]. Silver nanoparticles are widely used in wound dressing and antimicrobial formulations and now are being used in cosmeceuticals like soaps, face creams, and toothpaste. Silver nanoparticles are used for their antimicrobial activity in the cosmeceuticals. The silver concentration that is lethal for bacteria is the same concentration which is lethal for both fibroblasts and keratinocytes [146]. Various studies conducted on rats suggest that silver nanoparticles when exposed to rat neuronal cells led to size decrease and irregularities in shape and also demonstrated that mouse germline stem cell even at low concentrations of silver nanoparticles reduced drastically the function of mitochondria and cell viability. When mice were exposed to gold nanoparticles of 13.5 nm by ingestion, significant decrease in the RBCs, body weight, and spleen index was observed [147].
## (s18) Dermal
(p18.0) Routes. Intracellular, transcellular, and transfollicular are the three pathways by which infiltration across the skin occurs. The dermal exposure of lesser size particles <10 nm can penetrate more easily and are disastrous than greater ones >30 nm. There are possibilities that nanoparticle penetration could be affected by skin barrier alterations such as scrapes, wounds, and dermatitis conditions [148]. Prolonged erythema, eschar formation, and oedema were reported with nanoparticles less than 10 nm. Fullerenes are currently being used in cosmeceuticals like moisturizers and face creams but the toxicity related to them remains poorly understood. Report by Professor Robert F. has identified that face creams which have fullerenes incorporated are found to cause damage in the brain of the fish and have toxic effects in the liver cells in humans [149]. Some studies demonstrated that fullerene-based peptides had the capability of penetrating intact skin and their traversal into dermis could be easy due to mechanical stressor. Quantum dots taken intradermally could penetrate regional lymph nodes and lymphatics. There are proven studies that engineered nanoparticles like single or multiwall carbon nanotubes, quantum dots with surface coating, and nanoscale titania are able to alter gene or protein expression and have lethal effects on epidermal keratinocytes and fibroblast [150]. Currently there are few issues regarding the impact of nanoparticles of titanium dioxide and zinc oxide in sunscreens on health, safety, and environment. Increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), including free radicals, is due to greater surface area, greater chemical reactivity, and smaller size. Free radical and reactive oxygen species production is the primary mechanism for toxicity of nanoparticles. Titanium dioxide and zinc oxide generate ROS and free radical when exposed to ultraviolet (UV) radiations, which have potential in inflammation and oxidative stress and can significantly damage membranes, proteins, RNA, DNA, and fats within cells [151]. A research on TiO 2 nanoparticles toxicity demonstrated that when these nanoparticles subcutaneously given to the pregnant mice, they were transferred to the offspring and there was a reduced sperm production in male offspring and brain damage as well. Nanoparticles of cobalt-chromium have potential that they can cross the skin barrier and damage fibroblast in humans [152].
