# Comprehensive Approach to Infections in Dermatology Chander Grover MD DNB MNAMS 2YHUVHDV 2I¿FHV Contributors CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS Chander Grover MD DNB MNAMS Keshavmurthy A Adya MD Comprehensive Approach to Infections in Dermatology Sunil Dogra MD DNB FRCP Vinay Gopalani MBBS DVD DNB Consultant Dermatologist DISHA Skin and Laser Institute Mumbai Minty Jambhore MD DDV Consultant Dermatologist DISHA Skin and Laser Institute Resident Physician Dermatology and Venereology National Skin Centre Singapore Hemanta K Kar MD MNAMS Contributors ix Sacchidanand A Sarvajana Murthy MD DVD Sidharth Sonthalia MD DNB MNAMS Consultant Dermatologist and Dermatosurgeon Skinnocence-The Skin Clinic Contents Section 1: Normal Flora 1. Normal Flora of Skin 3 Section 2: Bacterial Infections 2. Gram Positive Bacterial Infections 15 Section 3: Fungal Infections 4. Superficial Fungal Infections 85 5. Subcutaneous Mycoses 116 Vikram K Mahajan 6. Deep Fungal Infections 158 Section 4: Viral Infections 7. Overview of Dermatologic Viral Infections 187 10. Poxviruses, Rubella, Coxsackie, and Other Viruses 260 Section 5: Mycobacterial Infections 11. Leprosy 281 12. Cutaneos Tuberculosis 310 13. Nontuberculous Mycobacterial Infections 341 Section 6: Parasitic and Protozoal Diseases 14. Human Helminthic Infections (Nematodes, Cestodes, and Trematodes) 355 15. Protozoal Diseases 395 Section 7: Infestations, Bites, and Stings 16. Infestations 421 17. Bites and Stings 448 Section 8: Sexually Transmitted Infections 18. Sexually Transmitted Diseases 469

CorpusID: 31568002 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b3b8dccd026140fc6ec36294537ed3d4fbab145](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b3b8dccd026140fc6ec36294537ed3d4fbab145)

Fields: Medicine

## (s14) EPIDEMIOLOGY
(p14.0) Defining the epidemiology of NTM is challenging for several reasons. 2 First, humans are thought to contract the infection directly from environmental sources. There has been no published report of direct or indirect ABSTRACT Cutaneous infections caused by nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) that used to be considered unusual have become frequent nowadays, particularly in immunocompromised individuals. Based on the growth rate of these organisms in culture, these are classified into rapid growing and slow growing mycobacteria. M. fortuitum, M. chelonae among the rapidly growing mycobacteria and M. marinum, M. ulcerans among slow growing mycobacteria, commonly cause cutaneous infections. It is important for a dermatologist to know the varied clinical spectrum and laboratory findings of NTM, since the diagnosis can be easily missed unless there is strong clinical suspicion supported by laboratory confirmation. In this chapter, we have tried to elucidate important NTM causing skin and soft tissue infection, their diagnosis and management.
## (s17) 13
(p17.0) Chapter J a y p e e B r o t h e r s patient-to-patient respiratory spread of NTM with the sole exception of an outbreak of respiratory M. abscessus disease in inpatient population with cystic fibrosis. 3 Second, exposure to the omnipresent NTM is likely extremely common. Third, NTM that colonize the respiratory tract can be isolated in respiratory samples in the absence of disease. Lastly, in most regions of the world, NTM disease is not reportable to public health authorities; therefore, epidemiological and surveillance data are not readily available. Despite obstacles in the study of the epidemiology of pulmonary NTM, available evidence suggests that the prevalence of pulmonary NTM disease has increased dramatically globally over the past three decades. 2 Infections with NTM are not limited to immunocompromised patients. Before AIDS-associated disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) disease, the most common presentation of atypical mycobacteria in the developed world was lung infection in relatively immunocompetent individuals with chronic lung diseases.

(p17.1) The distribution of NTM species worldwide varies by geographic region. 4 In a modern registry of 20,182 patients, from 30 countries across 6 continents, M. avium predominated in North and South America and Europe, while M. intracellulare was most frequently isolated in South Africa and Australia. M. kansasii is relatively more common in the middle USA, Brazil, England and Wales, Eastern Europe and the metropolitan centers of Paris, London and Tokyo, and the Johannesburg region of South Africa; M. xenopi is more common in the northern USA, Ontario-Canada, UK, and some European countries including Hungary, Croatia, and Northern Italy; M. malmoense is common in UK and northern Europe but is uncommon in the USA and M. simiae is more common in arid regions of the south-western USA, Cuba, and Israel. 4 Finally, RGM accounting for 10-20% of all NTM isolates worldwide in 2008, proved more prevalent in East Asia. 4 M. ulcerans is limited primarily to warmer climates in Africa, Central America, Southeast Asia, and Australia.

(p17.2) The most common NTM that cause disease in the United States are MAC, M. fortuitum complex, and M. kansasii. 5 In the United States, the southern coastal saltwater areas of the Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic Ocean are areas of common infection by M. marinum.
## (s22) ENVIRONMENTAL SOURCE OF NTM
(p22.0) Nontuberculous mycobacteria are ubiquitous in the environment and are frequently isolated from soil or water. Isolates have also been recovered from samples of animals, plant material, and birds. A few species that are known to cause disease, such as M. hemophilum and M. ulcerans, have rarely been recovered from the environment.  Although an association with an environmental source may be present, a direct link to the environment has not been proven except for healthcare-associated disease and pseudo-outbreak, and no evidence of person-to-person spread has been reported, presumably due to the lower virulence of environmental species. Tap water is considered the major reservoir for most common human NTM pathogens and as such is of increasing public health interest. Species from tap water include M. gordonae, M. kansasii, M. xenopi, M. simiae, MAC, and RGM, especially M. mucogenicus. 10 Biofilms, which are the filmy layers at the solid and liquid interface, are recognized as a source of growth and possibly a mode of transmission for mycobacteria. 11 Moreover, biofilms may serve to render mycobacteria less susceptible to disinfectants and antimicrobial therapy. Biofilms appear to be present in almost all collection and piping systems, so mycobacteria may often be recovered from these sites. The persistence of pathogenic NTM in water and biofilms has important implications in the epidemiology of infections related to water.
## (s26) Clinical Findings
(p26.0) The lesions are most often a single small violaceous papule usually involving upper extremity that may progress to shallow, crusty ulcerations and scar formation. Lesions are painful in less than one half of cases. 12 However, multiple ascending lesions resembling sporotrichosis (sporotrichoid disease) can occasionally occur (Fig.1). Among NTMs, M. marinum is the most common etiology of this pattern. Regional lymph nodes are, as a rule, not involved and lymphadenopathy is rare and typically mild, and systemic symptoms are unusual. The infection resolves spontaneously in some cases, although complete resolution may take up to 2 years.
## (s31) Treatment
(p31.0) Treatment options have been enumerated in Table 3. A retrospective study of 16 cases that were culture-positive for M. marinum showed that clarithromycin, both on in vitro testing and on clinical response, was the drug of choice. 13 Authors also pointed out that clarithromycin seems to be superior to other drugs due to lack of significant side effects. A reasonable treatment approach would be to treat with two active agents (in the largest 
## (s59) J a y p e e B r o t h e r s Epidemiology
(p59.0) These organisms are commonly isolated from municipal tap water. M. chelonae was found as a contaminant in a gentian violet solution and M. abscessus has been isolated from contaminated lidocaine (xylocaine) and histamine solutions. Pseudo-outbreaks are most commonly related to contaminated bronchoscopes and endoscopic cleaning machines, and to contaminated hospital water supplies. The M. chelonae/abscessus group is responsible for approximately 95% of disseminated cutaneous infections caused by the RGM. In contrast, localized infections with M. chelonae are seen primarily in patients who are immunosuppressed, especially on long-term corticosteroids. Autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus are often predisposing factors. In a study by Wallace and colleagues, 35% of the M. chelonae with nonpulmonary infections were seen in localized wound infections. 16 Disease due to M. abscessus is somewhat intermediate, as it causes disease in normal hosts and those with immune suppression. Examples of localized wound infection with M. abscessus include soft tissue infection of the cheek following an insect bite and vertebral osteomyelitis.

(p59.1) The M. fortuitum group accounts for 60% of community-acquired, localized cutaneous infection caused by RGM. Unlike infections with the M. chelonaeabscessus group, the patient with M. fortuitum localized infection usually has no predisposing immunosuppression. Cutaneous and subcutaneous infections by M. fortuitum are caused by colonization of the tissue following accidental trauma, injection of drugs (cortisone), mesotherapy, surgical procedures, or domestic animal bites.
## (s66) IATROGENIC NTM
(p66.0) Sporadic cases of healthcare-associated skin and soft tissue disease have also been described. These cases J a y p e e B r o t h e r s include infections of long-term intravenous or peritoneal catheters, postinjection abscesses, surgical wound infections, such as after cardiac bypass surgery, and augmen tation mammoplasty. These include M. fortuitum and M. porcinum in postaugmentation mammoplasty surgical site infections and outbreaks or pseudo-outbreaks of mycobacterial skin, soft tissue, or bone infections resulting from contaminated fluids, such as ice made from tap water, irrigation or exposure to tap water, injectable medicines, and topical skin solutions or markers.

(p66.1) The contamination of benzalkonium chloride (a quaternary ammonium commonly used as an antiseptic) with M. abscessus was responsible for a serious outbreak of M. abscessus following steroid injections and this report serves to emphasize the limitations of disinfectants against mycobacteria. 19 Recently, there have been reports of eye disease due to RGM following keratoplasty and laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) surgery for correction of myopia.

(p66.2) Other recent outbreaks involving NTM have involved contamination of liposuction equipment with M. chelonae, with the same disease strain found in tap water used for rinsing suction tubing. 20 Most of the skin and soft tissue disease outbreaks have involved the rapidly growing species M. fortuitum and M. abscessus. However, an outbreak of four patients with alcoholresistant mycobacterial species (two with M. chelonae and two with M. nonchromogenicum) was reported in Hong Kong after acupuncture treatments from 1999 to 2000. 21 Additionally, between 2003 and 2004, an outbreak of M. abscessus occurred in patients from the United States who visited the Dominican Republic for cosmetic surgery for fat removal (known as "lipotourism"). 22 Although no water samples or environmental samples were available for testing in this outbreak, the reservoir for these types of outbreaks has historically been municipal or hospital water supplies.

(p66.3) Since 2002, several outbreaks of lower-extremity folliculitis due to RGM (M. fortuitum, M. abscessus, and M. mageritense disease), associated with nail salons (footspa disease), have been reported. Leg hair removal by wax stripping followed by NTM-contaminated foot baths was followed by indolent folliculitis. 23
