# Bovine Viral Diarrhea-an Emerging Disease in Camelids a Review

CorpusID: 32295636 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b2b46bedc0d51d4ee106261b5383c577756da785](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b2b46bedc0d51d4ee106261b5383c577756da785)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s7) Diagnosis
(p7.0) Diagnosis of BVD and MD requires laboratory support in the form of virus isolation, virus antigen detection and serum antibody determination. Skin biopsies are the tissues of choice for the diagnosis of BVDV, using immunohistological techniques and are always positive in persistently infected animals (Braun et al., 1999). This method should also be applied in the diagnosis of this disease in camelids (Evermann et al., 1993). Goyal et al. (2002) stressed multiple test systems should be applied for arriving a proper diagnosis because their immunhistochemical examination of Science Publications AJV various tissues were negative although a ncp type 1b was isolated from the tissues.

(p7.1) Diagnosis of BVD in cattle must be carried out at two levels. Firstly, the serological status of the herd must be determined either by serum neutralization tests or by ELISAs. Competitive ELISAs have been developed and are ideal for serodiagnosis of camelids. If no reactor is found in a herd, the herd is considered free of BVD. On the other hand, if one or several animals are detected with BVDV antibodies, it is essential to search for PI animals. The presence of PI animals may gradually contaminate the entire herd and therefore, the identification and elimination has the highest priority. For the detection of PI animals, capture ELISAs and PCR assays are nowadays used. PCR assays can also differentiate between strains of type 1 and type 2. Antibody ELISAs will not detect PI animals that are immunotolerant.
