# Impediments for software test automation: A systematic literature review

CorpusID: 32631031 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d02c961d2727880c9424f84837bee7652a9c9854](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d02c961d2727880c9424f84837bee7652a9c9854)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s31) Lack of time, people, and funding
(p31.0) Damm et al. [IP17] note that projects in time-pressure tend to prioritize near-time goals and neglect activities that are important for the long-term success. This is reported for testing in general, where design organizations down-prioritize testing or remove test activities to meet delivery dead-
## (s42) SUT speed
(p42.0) One of the primary expectations on automation compared to manual work is increased speed. However, automated test execution speed cannot be faster than the reaction time of the system under test. This means that if the system under test is slow, the automated test execution will also be slow [IP22], and the perceived value of the automation risk becoming lower due to high expectations on speed.
## (s46) Construct validity
(p46.0) Recall is the percentage of all relevant document in the searched databases that have been retrieved, and the precision is the percentage of retrieved documents that are relevant [20]. Having low recall corresponds to a failure to retrieve all or most relevant papers.
## (s48) External validity
(p48.0) One readily identifiable challenge with performing a systematic literature review in this field of research is the lack of evidence. In total, 39 relevant publications were included after screening, of which 18 are experience reports. This is on par with the 25 publications analyzed by Rafi et al. [6] in their review of benefits and limitations of automated software testing.
## (s51) Implications for researchers
(p51.0) A related literature review on automated software testing was undertaken by Rafi et al. [6]. While some of the impediments of automated software testing identified pointed out in our work were also identified as limitations in that review, our work extends the work of Rafi et al. in the following ways: First, instead of only listing limitations or impediments that may arise in automated software testing, we elaborate on how these impediments manifest and why they do so. Second, we describe an explanatory socio-technical system model of how the impediments affect each other in Figure 4.

(p51.1) Third, while the review by Rafi et al. was presented in a very summarized form (the search process, analysis and results were presented in less than two pages), we describe the our review and analysis process in depth.

(p51.2) For researchers, the categorization, the publication overview, and the synthesized results are useful as a basis for future research and to understand the state-of-the-art and the state-of-the-practice as of the time of the review.

(p51.3) Terminology is a known issue in software engineering research [4,23-28] and a threat to the reliability of empirical research. Our categorization, presented in Tables 5 and 6, provide a framework for classification of test automation impediments that can be used during future research in the area.

(p51.4) The publication overview reveals that there is a shortage of empirical evidence in the research area. There are few research publications, 18 of 39 of the analyzed publications are experience reports. This indicates that there is both a need for, and a clear opportunity to perform, industry-relevant research in the area: There is a high practitioner interest and a lack of research publications.

(p51.5) Our interpretation of the collected evidence, based on our experiences from industry and research, is presented in the synthesis and the model in Figure 4. The synthesized narrative together with the system can be used both to quickly gain an understanding for the area and to direct future research.
## (s53) Meta-observations on the review process
(p53.0) A meta-conclusion from the review is that conducting systematic literature reviews in software engineering are difficult. Many challenges were encountered during the review process: unclear terminology [28], influential databases did not provide machine readable search results, and a large number of irrelevant documents were returned by the searches which required extensive screening. These impediments need to be removed to enable more high-quality reviews in a shorter time in the future.
## (s55) CONCLUSIONS
(p55.0) In this paper, we report on a systematic literature review, searching for publications providing information on impediments related to automated software testing. The retrieved publications were analyzed to propose a categorization of impediments and to perform a qualitative synthesis of the collected evidence.

(p55.1) The qualitative synthesis is based on the evidence collected through the review and presents our interpretation of the state of the practice as described by the publications included in the review. The synthesized results as presented by the narrative in Section 3.3, and the model in Figure 4, builds on the collected evidence and our experience from industry and research.

(p55.2) This study proposes an explanatory model for the impediments and their interaction in Figure 4. The explanatory model relates the impediments to each other, and to the business of software development and testing in the large. The explanatory model highlights areas of interest for future research and enables a deeper understanding of how to manage impediments in an automation project.

(p55.3) It is important to make software engineering research useful and available to practitioners [2]. One way to make research more available to practitioners is to create assessment and improvement models that can be used to guide the daily work in a software development business. We propose that there is a need for an assessment and improvement model specifically aimed at software test automation. Hence, we propose further research to turn the explanatory model in Figure 4 into an assessment and improvement model for software development organizations working with test automation.
