# A Survey on the Application of Evolutionary Algorithms for Mobile Multihop Ad Hoc Network Optimization Problems

CorpusID: 33413610 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9444234623466118dfae0512bbb58de591a27929](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9444234623466118dfae0512bbb58de591a27929)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Mobile wireless multihop ad hoc networks have attracted the attention of the scientific community for more than two decades [1][2][3][4]. The basic idea of communicating electronic devices using a wireless multihop path, without the necessity of a central system or a fixed infrastructure, has evolved since its origin and it is still an active focus of research. The proliferation of portable electronic devices with wireless communication capabilities like smartphones and tablets has made possible a world of wireless devices that can exchange information ubiquitously. This concept is also called the Internet of Things since not only can people communicate with each other but also many sensors can generate information autonomously.
## (s2) MANETs.
(p2.0) MANETs represent the original idea of the multihop paradigm [1]. That is, the establishment of an ad hoc network formed by wireless devices without requiring a central system. The original idea was to replicate the wired communications such as TCP/UDP and IP based protocols in MANETs. However, this original idea was not possible due to the intrinsic characteristics of MANETs in terms of mobility and limited node's transmission ranges. Both features make the topology of MANETs extremely changeable. Consequently, the protocols originally designed for static network like the Internet cannot be easily adapted to MANETs. This fact led to a high research on new protocols tailored for MANETs [2]. The routing layer has been by far the most studied one [8]. There are some good surveys on routing protocols in the literature [8,9]. The basic objective is to find the suitable communication path between a mobile source node and one or several mobile destination nodes. In addition, a good routing protocol must be able to deal with route and link breakages. The basic mechanism to find routes is, namely, broadcasting. This is an all-to-all communication procedure by which each node in the network retransmits the incoming packets at least once. Broadcasting algorithms for MANETs have also been widely studied [10,11].
## (s3) VANETs.
(p3.0) VANETs represent an evolution of multihop paradigm [17]. The idea is to incorporate wireless transceiver into vehicles so that they can communicate with each other. These types of communication are named Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V) communications and they represent the main communications in VANETs. However, there exist communications between the vehicle and the road infrastructure that are called Vehicle to Infrastructure (V2I) communications. In VANETs both routing protocols and broadcasting algorithm have been widely studied [18]. Broadcasting algorithms have attracted more attention due to the fact that collision avoidance is one of the main applications of VANETs. In this scenario, a car tries to inform another incoming car by transmitting a broadcast packet. Therefore, an efficient broadcasting algorithm is primordial in VANETs. Another important feature of VANETs is that power consumption is not a design parameter in VANETs since vehicles can recharge their batteries on the fly.

(p3.1) WAVE technology based on IEEE 802.11p is the main wireless technology envisioned to be used in VANETs [19]. It is still on the development phase but it is expected International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks 3 to be included in every commercial vehicle shortly. IEEE 802.11p defines different levels of prioritizing the transmitting packets. One important feature of WAVE technology is the consideration of Road Site Units (RSUs) that act as static access points, improving the global performance of the network. Consequently, a VANET can be seen as hybrid network that combines both properties of mobile networks like MANETs and static network like the Internet.

(p3.2) Regarding the mobility of nodes in VANETs, it is much higher than the mobility of MANETs. However, the mobility of cars is constrained by the road lines. Consequently, the mobility of nodes in a VANET is more predictable. Mobility models for VANETs are a very hot research topic since a realistic mobility model for VANET is essential to analyze VANETs in simulation-based studies [20].

(p3.3) The main applications of VANETs range from safety traffic applications like collision avoidance and road obstacle warning to traffic information and infotainment services such as games and multimedia streaming [1].
## (s4) DTNs.
(p4.0) Another type of wireless multihop mobile network that has been deeply researched in recent years is represented by DTNs (delay tolerant networks). They are dynamically built when mobile devices collaborate to form communication paths while users are in close proximity. They are based on a store-carry-and-forward paradigm [1], which means that a node that wants to relay a message begins by storing it, then carries it around the network until the carrier encounters the destination or a node that is more likely to bring the data close to the destination, and then finally forwards it.

(p4.1) Regarding communications in DTNs, we can distinguish between forwarding algorithms and data dissemination algorithms [21]. In the former, the objective is to find a suitable forwarding policy to transmit a piece of information between a source and a destination node. On the contrary, in data dissemination algorithms, the main objective is to spread out certain information throughout the entire network or several destination nodes. Moreover, DTN algorithms are not developed at the routing later; they run in an upper level, namely, bundle layer.

(p4.2) Mobility in DTNs has attracted a lot of attention in recent years [22]. The main idea is to model the mobility of people carrying portable devices. These people encounter each other in controlled environments such as scientific conferences and university campuses. Most mobility models for DTNs are based on real-life traces that are collected through developed applications for smartphones. In this line of work, the Community Resource for Archiving Wireless Data at Dartmouth (CRAWDAD) [23] is an open project aimed to archive data collected from real-life experimentation, so many traces are available.

(p4.3) With regard to the wireless technologies used for DTNs, again WiFi and Bluetooth are the main candidates because they are incorporated in the majority of portable devices. In addition, WiFi direct is expected to gain further momentum as soon as it is included in the new generations of smartphones and other portable devices.

(p4.4) There are many real-life scenarios where DTNs may be employed. One such scenario is represented by disaster management [22]. DTNs have an important use in situations where the contacts between mobile devices happen often and for longer periods of time. Such a situation occurs in crowded places, like a music concert or an amusement park. In these cases, DTNs may be used to broadcast the location of mobile device owners to interested receivers. Another potential practical use of DTNs is in regard to floating content in areas such as open city squares [24], where mobile nodes enter a geographical zone (called an anchor zone), spend some time in it, and then leave. While in the anchor zone (which gives the physical boundaries of the network), the mobile devices produce content and opportunistically replicate it to other nodes. These nodes may copy the data either if they need it for themselves or if they transport it for the benefit of other nodes. A node that exits in the anchor zone deletes the data, so the availability of the floating content is probabilistic. We also believe that a platform for supporting generic context-aware mobile applications such as CAPIM [25] can fully benefit from DTN integration. CAPIM (Context-Aware Platform using Integrated Mobile services) is a solution designed to support the construction of nextgeneration applications.
## (s7) Application of Evolutionary Algorithms to Problems in
(p7.0) Mobile Multihop Ad Hoc Networks. Evolutionary algorithms can be applied for solving different problems in ad hoc networks in many ways. We classify the optimization process in terms of the execution mode, information needed, and platform used [41].
## (s12) MANETs.
(p12.0) In [41], authors categorize the main research topics in which evolutionary algorithms have been used as topology management, broadcasting algorithms, routing protocols, clustering approaches, protocol optimization, mobility models, selfish behaviors, security issues, and other applications. We follow a similar taxonomy but in this case we focus on the main research topics of MANETs in the last two decades such as topology management, broadcasting, and routing protocols. We refer the readers to [41] for further information on the research topics not covered in this section.
## (s14) Broadcasting Algorithms.
(p14.0) Broadcasting is basic all-toall communication mechanism widely used in MANETs [69]. The main objective of a broadcasting algorithm is to efficiently disseminate a message throughout the network. Despite its simplicity, the design of broadcasting algorithms has drawn the attention of the ad hoc community for the last two decades [69,70]. The simplest broadcasting algorithm called flooding has been demonstrated many times to be inefficient, causing the well-known broadcast storm problem [71]. Many broadcasting algorithms mostly based on topological parameters can be found in the literature [69,70] such as the density of nodes, relative distance, and counterbased mechanisms. Recently, evolutionary algorithms like genetic algorithms have been used to optimize the design of broadcasting algorithms. In [31], the authors solve the wellknown minimum energy broadcast NP-hard problem using a hybrid evolutionary algorithm. The idea determines the set of forwarder nodes in a MANET that guarantees maximum dissemination with the minimum energy consumption.

(p14.1) In [32], the authors use the widely used NSGA-II multiobjective algorithm [72] to optimize the design of a broadcasting algorithm based on similarity/dissimilarity coefficients. They maximize the reachability and minimize the number of retransmissions and the delay of the broadcasting algorithm. They simulate their approach in a realistic disaster scenario like the disaster area mobility model [73].

(p14.2) In [33], the design of the AEDB broadcasting algorithm [74] is optimized by using parallel multiobjective optimization algorithm. The AEDB algorithm is based on the relative Euclidean distance between the sender and the receiver of the packet. The idea is to favor nodes located at higher distances from the sender to reduce the number of retransmissions. The objectives for the broadcasting algorithm are to maximize the reachability and to minimize the energy used, the retransmissions, and the delay. They use AEDB-MLS, a multistart population-based local search algorithm that maintains several distributed populations. It is a massively parallel algorithm in which every solution in every population is simultaneously improved by the parallel application of an iterative local search procedure.
## (s20) Mobility Models.
(p20.0) In [41], the authors optimize five parameters of a mobility model generator for VANET urban scenarios. The idea is to generate realistic mobility for VANET scenarios. The parameters optimized are the level of attraction of certain zones in order to be selected as destination zones. The authors defined up to three parameters that determine such level of attraction. The two other parameters are the inner traffic ration, which is a ratio that represents the amount of traffic originating from residential zones as a percentage of the outer ratio, and the shifting ration that defines the percentage of vehicles whose trip starts at hour ℎ but ends at hour ℎ + 1. The fitness function considered is the comparison of the mobility generated by the proposed mobility generator and real data that has been previously obtained in the city of Luxemburg. They used the macromobility model VehILux that is based on OpenStreetMap.
## (s21) 4.3.
(p21.0) DTNs. DTN research has been gaining steam in recent years, due to the great increase in the number of existing mobile devices and their ubiquitousness. A thorough analysis of DTNs was done by Conti et al. [81], where functions such as message forwarding, security, data dissemination, and mobility models are analyzed. Several dissemination algorithms are also reviewed, among them BUBBLE Rap [82], PROPICMAN [83], or HIBOp [84]. A taxonomy for data dissemination algorithms [21] splits them based on network infrastructure, node properties, content characteristics, and social awareness. In [85] the authors classify routing protocols in DTNs as context-oblivious, partially context-aware, and fully context-aware protocols. In this classification, the level of context information that nodes have available is the key component to make the distinction among the routing approaches.
## (s22) Data Dissemination.
(p22.0) Genetic algorithms have also been employed for optimizing DTNs. Bitaghsir and Hendessi [42] proposed one such solution, which performs data dissemination in vehicular-based DTNs. A node decides whether to forward a message to another node it has a contact with by assigning weights to four node properties and comparing the weighted sum with a threshold. The four properties are the encountered node's speed, its direction, the distance between the node and the message destination, and the probability of network disconnectivity (which is computed from a message's hop count). Based on the four weights (one for each of the above parameters), a first generation of chromosomes is randomly created, each being composed of five genomes: the four weights and the threshold (all values between 0 and 1). For the selection phase, a fitness function that takes into account a message's delivery latency is used. Then, one-point crossover is employed for the reproduction phase, while the termination condition is achieved after four generations.

(p22.1) Another data dissemination technique for DTNs that uses genetic algorithms is GAER [43]. In this algorithm, a node that wants to relay a message (either created by itself or transported on behalf of another node) applies a genetic algorithm for all the nodes it is currently in contact with, in order to decide to which node the data will be relayed. The initial chromosomes are generated randomly, and they represent an array containing a node's home, office, and leisure locations (i.e., its home locations), as well as the home locations of the neighboring nodes. A fitness function used for determining the capability of a node to be the next hop is applied, as well as the other genetic operations, that is, selection and crossover, until a limited number of generations are computed. The fitness function is the measure of the capability of a node to deliver a message to the final destination and is composed of two factors (called Mean and Place). However, the main drawback of this method is that it requires the computation of genetic algorithms on the fly, when two nodes are in contact. Since we are dealing with DTNs composed of mobile nodes such as smartphones, this 8 International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks might cause some problems, due to the limited computation capabilities of a node. Moreover, if the nodes are highly mobile, the two encountering nodes might not even be in contact anymore when the genetic algorithm finishes. In addition, GAER assumes that a node is connected to multiple other nodes at the same time, but this is not the case in sparse networks (typical situation in DTNs). The advantage of the proposed solution is that the computations are done offline and are used as guidelines for correctly selecting the parameters of the dissemination function that is computed when a contact occurs. This function is easy to compute, so time and computation resources will not be wasted.

(p22.2) A genetic algorithm for routing in DTNs is also proposed by Da Silva and Guardieiro [44,86]. The authors assume that the network's topology is known in advance and is represented as a series of evolving graphs. Thus, chromosomes (generated randomly at the start of the genetic algorithm) are composed of genes that represent the nodes located on the route to the destination. The fitness function is computed based on the delivery probability of a message, also taking into consideration the storage capacity of each potential next hop. The genetic operators used are crossover and mutation, and the algorithm is applied for a predefined number of generations. Similarly to GAER, this solution also has the drawback of being computed at every contact. Moreover, it assumes that the topology is known in advance, which is not true in highly mobile DTNs.

(p22.3) In all the cases, the main advantage of using evolutionary computation is dealing with complex optimization problems where other alternatives cannot provide a global optimum. As a summary of all the reviewed optimization problems, Table 1 contains their main features such as the type of mobile multihop network, the evolutionary algorithm used, the type of optimization problem, and the main challenge/s addressed.
## (s23) Open Challenges
(p23.0) Evolutionary algorithms have been applied to mobile multihop ad hoc networks for the last decade. However, there are still many optimization problems in these complex networks that can be solved using a suitable evolutionary algorithm. New architectures of evolutionary algorithms are continuously proposed such as coevolutionary algorithms and parallel evolutionary algorithms. Since evolutionary algorithms demand high computational resources, the parallelization of the tasks related to the evolution procedure will allow executing genetic algorithms using multiple processors and cores, reducing the computation time. For example, the DEAP Python [87] module allows users to easily parallelize the execution of evolutionary algorithms through the SCOOP module.

(p23.1) Another open challenge is the application of evolutionary algorithms in real testbeds so the simulation results obtained can be corroborated and validated. This can also be an interesting alternative for reducing the amount of time required by simulations, which is probably the main bottleneck when applying evolutionary algorithms to multihop ad hoc networks. For instance, a simulation in NS-2, which is the most popular event-based network simulator for mobile multihop ad hoc network, can take up to several minutes (depending on the computational power of the computer used to run the simulations). Notice that this time can be prohibitive in some cases.

(p23.2) Genetic programming is also a field that can be further investigated in mobile multihop ad hoc networks. Genetic programming does the same as genetic algorithms but using computer programs. With genetic programming, it is theoretically possible to find the best broadcasting algorithms or the best deployment strategy. However, genetic programming has also some disadvantages such as the computation time or the excessive growth of its individuals.

(p23.3) Another important common open challenge is the use of completely distributed implementation of evolutionary algorithms. Most of the studies presented in this survey used centralized implementations. However, obtaining global information in a mobile multihop network is very costly in terms of message exchanges. In addition, the mobility of nodes makes it a must that the information be exchanged continuously in order to have updated information about the current state of the network. Furthermore, distributed implementation of evolutionary algorithm should lead with scarcity of resources since mobile wireless portable devices have generally lower resources compared with laptops or PCs. The main advantage of a distributed implementation is that the algorithm is run online, so the nodes can adapt to the local varying conditions of the network.

(p23.4) In general the performance of mobile wireless multihop networks is conducted by using a set of performance metrics that determine the quality of the algorithms under development. For example, when evaluating routing protocols for VANETs and MANETs the performance metrics most used are the Packet Delivery Fraction (PDF) that accounts for the ratio of received and transmitted packets, the Normalized Routing Load (NRL) that measures the routing load, and the End-to-End (E2E) Delay that calculates the time elapsed since a packet is sent until it is received by the destination. These performance metrics are counterbalanced. For example, increasing the PDF, which is desirable, by sending more routing packets will also increase the NRL and E2E metrics, which is not desirable. Using a multiobjective optimization algorithm will allow the designers to have all the possible solutions and to determine which parameters affect the performance metrics at a glance (Pareto Front). Similarly, in DTNs the most used performance metrics, such as the hit rate, delivery cost, and delivery latency, are also counterbalanced. It is worth mentioning that the application of a multiobjective optimization algorithm is more suitable than weighting the performance metric in just one expression. This is because in such case one performance metric can dominate the solution, hiding the influence of the other performance metrics on the fitness function.

(p23.5) Most of the work done in DTNs has been related to data dissemination. However, forwarding algorithms and mobility models are also two topics that pose many challenges. Forwarding algorithms differ from data dissemination algorithms. In forwarding algorithms, the objective is to send a piece of information to a destination node. On the contrary, in data dissemination algorithm the objective is to disseminate the information throughout the network or a set of nodes in the network. Evolutionary algorithms can be used to optimize forwarding algorithms in a similar way of that done for data dissemination algorithms. Regarding mobility models, the objective is to model the mobility of people considering both geographical and social context based information.

(p23.6) Moreover, there is an emergent field in the area of ad hoc networks related to the tactical movements of nodes, especially when nodes represent UAVs (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles). In this case, multihop ad hoc networks can be used to share information and plan a movement law according to the collected information. This new type of mobile multihop ad hoc network will pose new challenges in the design of mobile networks since they present particular features like high and free mobility in 3D. In addition, currently the autonomy of UAVs is very short. Consequently, new communication protocols tailored for UAVSs should take into consideration such limitation.

(p23.7) Finally in some cases the use of local search algorithms like simulated annealing, hill climbing, and tabu search algorithms after applying an evolutionary algorithm can improve the global solution. The idea is to explore the surrounding areas of the optimum solutions obtained by the evolutionary algorithm.
