# The comparative pathology of severe acute respiratory syndrome and avian influenza A subtype H5N1-a review

CorpusID: 34320905 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f6158fddb2b1d9ab4bcb748a3539d2280e380712](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f6158fddb2b1d9ab4bcb748a3539d2280e380712)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Review of the pathology of avian influenza A H5N1
(p3.0) There were very few reports on the pathology of H5N1 infection. Three autopsied cases were reported from Hong Kong [4,26]. For the outbreak in Southeast Asia, pathologic findings were reported on 5 fatal cases from Thailand [27][28][29][30]. Thus, this review consisted of only 8 patients, which are summarized in Table 2. The pathologic material used in the illustration was from cases 1 and 3, which were examined by the authors. Thus, there is a severe limitation on the pathologic data available for H5N1. The gross pulmonary findings showed extensive consolidation with varying degree of hemorrhage. In a fatal case on day 10 (case 3), the lungs were reddish brown, solid, and weighed more than 1000 g (right, 1170 g; left, 1020 g). There was also bilateral lightly blood-stained effusion (right, 700 mL; left, 900 mL). The pulmonary pathology was diffuse alveolar damage plus interstitial lymphoplasmacytic infiltration and fibrosis. The DAD was in the acute exudative phase ( Fig. 3A and B) for patients dying in the first 2 weeks and was in organizing phase ( Fig. 3D and E) for patients dying in the third week or later. In the acute phase, the major cell types in the alveoli were macrophages, neutrophil, and activated lymphocyte (Fig. 3C). Necrotizing alveoli were noted in the acute phase (Fig. 3B), and the destruction of alveoli explained the patchy fibrosis without regenerating pneumocytes ( Fig. 3D and F). There was also interstitial fibrosis. The fibrosis appeared hyaline and paucicellular. Specifically, intra-alveolar fibrosis with a BOOP-like pattern was not observed, in contrast to that of SARS (Fig. 1C, D, and F). Reactive hyperplasia of pneumocytes was present in the organizing phase (Fig. 3F) and viral inclusion was absent. Multinucleated cells were not described. Bronchiolitis with squamous metaplasia was seen. Honeycomb dilatation was noted in a patient dying at 1 month (case 1). Superinfection by aspergillosis was noted in 1 patient (case 5). The authors studied the immunophenotypes of the lymphoid cells in the lungs of case 3. CD3-reactive T cells were more numerous than CD20-reactive B cells. CD4reactive T helper-inducer cells appeared more than CD8reactive T suppressor-cytotoxic cells. Some of the larger activated lymphoid cells were reactive with the activation marker CD30. These cells were also observed in the lymphoreticular system including the spleen (Fig. 4C), tonsil, and lymph node. In the lung, CD56-reactive natural killer cells were rare.
## (s5) Discussion
(p5.0) Both SARS and H5N1 share similar pathology and pathogenesis. Pneumocytes are the primary target of the infection. The extensive pneumocyte destruction and the inflammatory and immune reaction elicited by the viruses cause diffuse alveolar damage. The activation of the cytokines is part of the immune reaction to eradicate the virus. The systemic cytokine activation results in reactive hemophagocytic syndrome in the lymphoreticular system and possibly also mediates other organ damage such as the skeletal muscle fiber necrosis. The lymphoid depletion in the spleen and lymph node in fatal cases may be due to combination of lymphoid necrosis and apoptosis and exhaustion of lymphoid proliferation in response to the cytokine overdrive. The acute tubular necrosis is likely to be the consequence of systemic hypoxia and shock rather than direct invasion of the viruses.

(p5.1) Compared with H5N1, SARS appears to show a less fulminant progression of the DAD. Features of acute DAD are often seen in combination with reparative phase in different parts of the lung. In contrast, H5N1 shows more fulminant and rapidly progressive DAD. This is in keeping with the clinical observations. The development of acute respiratory distress syndrome in SARS is generally in the second week of the illness (first peak on day 11) [32], whereas that for H5N1 is at the end of the first week (median time, day 6) [30]. On histology, DAD shows common pathologic features and distinction of the etiologic agent is not possible. Furthermore, there is difficulty in confirming or excluding SARS in a lung biopsy in the early stage of disease because of its focal involvement and the nonspecific changes. The demonstration of SARS-CoV by immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization in infected cells would be helpful. The presence of atypical multinucleated pneumocytes and multinucleated histiocytes is characteristic of SARS, and these cells are inconspicuous in H5N1. However, such changes are nonspecific because other viral infection such as respiratory syncytial virus and measles may also produce giant cells. Based on the pathologic description and figures in the published reports, the organizing phase of SARS appears quite fibrocellular and intra-alveolar with a BOOP-like pattern. This may explain the empirical success of high-dose corticosteroid in SARS because BOOP is known to respond to corticosteroid. However, in one case treated by high-dose corticosteroid studied by the authors, BOOP still occurred in a lesser extent. For H5N1, the pathologic data are limited. Based on the observation by the authors, the acute DAD appears more necrotizing and hemorrhagic. The alveolar destruction causes foci of fibrosis without pneumocytic regeneration. The organizing phase is also marked by interstitial fibrosis of a hyaline and paucicellular form without BOOP-like pattern.

(p5.2) The SARS-CoV appears recoverable by RT-PCR in the lung for a much longer time (up to day 42) compared with H5N1 (up to day 17). The SARS-CoV appears more widely spread in the human body, including dissemination to the blood, urine, feces, gastrointestinal tract, and liver. Until recently, the extrapulmonary isolation of H5N1 had been negative. There is recent documentation of isolation of H5N1 from the gastrointestinal tract, cerebrospinal fluid, and blood [29,31]. As the virus H5N1 may undergo adaptational mutation to the new human host environment, wider pathologic targets in the human body may become possible. Biopsy and postmortem study of new human H5N1 cases are 4. SARS-CoV: more widespread dissemination to blood, urine, feces, gastrointestinal tract, and liver; H5N1 virus: until recently only isolated from lung, recent report of extrapulmonary isolation from gastrointestinal tract, cerebrospinal fluid, and blood 5. Skeletal muscle fiber necrosis 5. SARS: no documented involvement of brain; H5N1: evidence of cerebral involvement in 2 autopsied cases and one clinical case 6. Acute tubular necrosis urgently needed for further elaboration. In ducks, H5N1 is a systemic disease affecting multiple organs including the central nervous system [33]. So far, evidence of cerebral involvement is noted in 2 autopsied cases (cases 1 and 5) and 1 clinical case [31]. All these 3 cases were children aged 4 to 13 years and may indicate a predisposition in children.
