# New developments in the pathology of malignant lymphoma: a review of the literature published from January to April 2008

CorpusID: 3677709 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/13e5dada55840e398dd74317474d8a8d355fbc41](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/13e5dada55840e398dd74317474d8a8d355fbc41)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s3) B cell lymphomas
(p3.0) It is now widely accepted that diffuse large B cell lymphoma consists of at least two phenotypic subtypes, that is, the germinal center B cell-like and the activated B cell-like groups. It has been shown that the former group responds favorably to chemotherapy and expresses high levels of BCL6. But, the latter group has lower levels of BCL6, constitutively activated nuclear factor-kappaB, and tends to be refractory to chemotherapy. Ding et al. showed that the STAT3 gene is a transcriptional target of BCL6. As a result, high-level STAT3 expression and activation are preferentially detected in the activated B cell group and BCL6-negative normal germinal center B cells [6].

(p3.1) The unusual-type pyothorax-associated lymphoma is a B cell lymphoma developing in the pleural cavity affected by chronic pyothorax. Takakuwa et al. showed by clonality testing and sequencing of the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene in cases and cell lines that this tumor is derived from crippled postgerminal center cells. Usually, such cells do not survive, but the authors suggest that the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) that is invariably present in these cases might provide the basis for the cell survival [7]. O'Hara et al. detected in this lymphoma type that in addition, specific miRNA gene amplifications and concordant changes in pre-miRNA and mature miRNA were present [8].

(p3.2) By clonality analysis and sequencing of the variable region of the immunoglobulin gene in cases of thyroid lymphoma proceeded by Hashimoto thyroiditis showed that most cases had already rearranged the immunoglobulin gene of the malignant population in the benign precursor lesion, supporting the notion that these lymphomas indeed develop out of the Hashimoto's thyreoiditis [9].

(p3.3) Montesinos et al. used expression profiling to determine the cell of origin of 21 cases of central nervous diffuse large B cell lymphoma and compared the results with profiles from various subsets of normal B cells. The expression profile of the central nervous lymphomas was similar to that of late germinal center B cells, and some were of the activated B cell-like diffuse large B cell lymphoma from other sites and others from the germinal center B cell-like subtype [10].
## (s4) Epidemiology of lymphoma
(p4.0) It is well known that regional differences exist in the epidemiology of lymphoma types. Using the World Health Organization (WHO) classification on 2,260 lymphomas from Japan, Aoki et al. confirmed that follicular lymphoma is rare (18%) compared to that of the Western series but that T/natural killer (NK) cells are quite common (25%). Like in Western counties, diffuse large B cell lymphoma is the most common type (33%). Even within Japan, there are regional differences with some areas with high numbers of HTLV1associated lymphoma proliferations [12].

(p4.1) A study of 61 Korean cases of follicular lymphoma showed that this type is not only relatively rare in Eastern countries but also that it is more often grade 3 (57%) and has less often a t(14;18), namely 44%. Since the cases of grade 3 had the least translocations, it might be that they correspond to the 3B cases in Western countries [13].
## (s6) B cell lymphomas
(p6.0) Knowledge of the state of differentiation of lymphoma cells is very helpful in classification. Germinal center B cellexpressed transcript-1 gene that codes for a serpin expressed in the germinal center (centerin) was characterized in human tissues, cell lines, and a large series of lymphomas. The results demonstrate that centerin is expressed exclusively by neoplasms hypothetically to be arrested at the germinal center stage of differentiation, including follicular lymphoma, nodular lymphocyte-predominant HL, and a subset of diffuse large B cell lymphoma, T cell/histiocyte-rich B cell lymphoma, and Burkitt lymphoma. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, splenic marginal zone lymphoma, and mantle cell lymphoma are negative; it would be interesting to know the results in marginal zone lymphomas, the lymphoma type that is presently often misdiagnosed (see below) [15].

(p6.1) A proportion of gastric extranodal marginal zone B cell lymphomas of the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) type are dependent on the presence of H. pylori Toll-like receptors that recognize bacterial proteins and autoantigens, which results in inflammatory reactions and influences tumor development and growth. Adam et al. investigated the presence of Toll-like receptors 4, 5, and 9 on a series of lymphomas and found TLL-4 to be expressed only on all 19 extranodal marginal zone lymphomas. It is a pity that no data on t(11;18), associated with unresponsiveness for H. pylori eradication, are given [16].
## (s7) T cell lymphomas
(p7.0) The debate whether ALCL consist of two groups namely, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-positive and ALKnegative, cases may be solved by the results of Salaverria et al., since they found clear differences in the respective genomic profiles of these groups, even though there were few specific gene alterations for each group except for the known translocations involving the ALK locus [23].
## (s8) Cutaneous lymphomas
(p8.0) The classification of cutaneous lymphomas remains a difficult area. Khamaysi et al. applied the WHO-EORTC classification on their series of cutaneous lymphomas and found 43 new nonmycosis fungoides/Sezary syndrome lymphomas; 29 B cell lymphomas of which 14 were follicle center lymphoma, 10 marginal zone lymphoma, 4 diffuse large-B cell lymphoma, leg type, and 1 diffuse large B cell lymphoma, other;14 T cell lymphomas including five cases of lymphomatoid papulosis, two CD30+ anaplastic large cell lymphomas, one NK/T cell lymphoma, and six peripheral T cell lymphomas, unspecified. Of the six "unspecified" T cell lymphomas, three were CD4+ small/ medium-sized pleomorphic T cell lymphoma, which is considered currently a provisional entity under the unspecified T cell category. The remaining three cases could not be classified beyond the unspecified T cell category, of which two cases had an aggressive course. They conclude that the new WHO-EORTC classification is applicable to most nonmycosis fungoides/Sezary syndrome primary cerebral lymphoma cases, especially the B cell lymphomas [27].

(p8.1) From their large collection of cutaneous lymphomas, the EORTC cutaneous lymphoma group described their cases of subcutaneous panniculitis-like T cell lymphoma in a landmark paper. This lymphoma type is quite aggressive and consists of cases of the alpha/beta T cell phenotype (SPTL-AB) and with a gamma-delta T cell phenotype (SPTL-GD). The series of 63 SPTL-ABs and 20 SPTL-GDs were studied at a workshop of the EORTC Cutaneous Lymphoma Group. SPTL-ABs were generally confined to the subcutis, had a CD4−, CD8+, CD56-, betaF1+ phenotype, were uncommonly associated with a hemophagocytic syndrome (HPS; 17%), and had a favorable prognosis (5-year overall survival). SPTL-AB patients without HPS had a significantly better survival than patients with HPS. SPTL-GDs often showed (epi)dermal involvement and/or ulceration, a CD4−, CD8−, CD56+/−, betaF1-T cell phenotype, and poor prognosis, irrespective of the presence of HPS or type of treatment. These results indicate that SPTL-AB and SPTL-GD are distinct entities and justify that the term SPTL should further be used only for SPTL-AB. SPTL-ABs without associated HPS have an excellent prognosis, and multiagent chemotherapy as the first choice of treatment should be questioned [28]. Wasco et al. described the expression of MUM1 in a series of 58 lymphomas presenting in the skin. It appeared that CD30-positive lymphoproliferations, primary or secondary, generally express MUM1. Also, mycosis fungoides with CD30-positive component expresses MUM1, but other cases of mycosis fungoides were not [29].
## (s9) New entities/subtypes
(p9.0) In this time of tailored therapy and multiple techniques, it seems that each patient has his or her own specific subtype of lymphoma. Prof. Lennert advocated that an entity could be accepted as such if its incidence was at least 5% of the lymphomas. This is probably too restricted as exemplified by the subdivision in cutaneous large cell lymphoma in leg type with poor prognosis and follicle center lymphoma with a very good prognosis as proposed by the group of Willemze. This subdivision was debated fiercely but is now generally accepted. Van Galen of the Willemze group now shows that expression profiling separates these subgroups into the leg type with intense cellular cytotoxic response and the primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma with constitutive activation of the intrinsic-mediated apoptosis pathway, with concomitant downstream inhibition of this apoptosis pathway [31].

(p9.1) The spleen remains an enigmatic organ and so are the lymphomas with primarily splenic involvement. Traverse et al. described 37 cases selected from a group a patients with circulating villous lymphocytes that have numerous basophilic villous lymphocytes. The patients, predominantly older men, presented with moderate lymphocytosis and splenomegaly without pancytopenia. The monoclonal B cells expressed IgM+D, IgM+G, IgM or IgG, as well as CD76 and CD11c, frequently CD103, and rarely CD123. Spleen sections were peculiar, with atrophic white pulp and a monomorphic diffuse lymphoma infiltration in a congested red pulp. Bone marrow infiltration was interstitial and intrasinusoidal without extensive fibrosis. Cytogenetic analysis showed a frequent absence of clonal aberrations (68%). Most cases (79%) were IgH-mutated, with an overrepresentation of V(H)3 and V(H)4 gene families. These results, as well as the clinical evolution, show that those lymphoma cases represent a homogeneous group distinct from splenic marginal zone lymphoma and reminiscent of hairy cell leukemia variant, perhaps corresponding to a separate lymphoma entity [32].

(p9.2) In a series of 55 cases of nodular predominant HL, Yang et al. described a subset of cases that occur in older individuals, at atypical sites and with an increased number of large cells. It remains to be seen what the outcome of the cases is [33]. Vega et al. described six lymphoma cases characterized by t(8;13), a translocation well known from the 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome, a rare hematologic malignancy characterized by myeloid hyperplasia, eosinophilia, and precursor lymphoblastic lymphoma. Histologically, each tumor was composed of two distinct cellular components: smallto medium-sized T cells with scant cytoplasm that resembled lymphoblasts and larger immature-appearing cells with more abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm that resembled myeloblasts, a subset of which expressed myeloid antigens. In all cases, the latter component tended to surround residual lymphoid follicles and/or blood vessels. Numerous eosinophils and prominent high endothelial venules were present in all of the lymph node specimens. Interestingly, cells of both components expressed CD3 on immunohistochemical stains [34].
## (s11) Prognostic factors in lymphoma
(p11.0) Understanding lymphoma biology and using this knowledge in clinical practice has for many years brought the diagnosis of lymphomas at the forefront of diagnostic pathology, using new technologies early on. This seems not the case anymore since in contrast to solid tumors, predictive factors are not rapidly replacing prognostic factors in the lymphoma field (Her2/neu, KRAS, CD117), with only CD20 as predicting rituximab response. Many papers still appear that describe prognostic factors, but until now, very few have come into clinical practice. Van Galen et al. described that expression of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 2 correlates with poor prognosis in a group of 20 activated B cell-like-type diffuse large B cell lymphoma but not in the 13 tested germinal center type [39]. LMO2 protein expression predicts survival in 263 patients with diffuse large B cell lymphoma treated with anthracycline-based chemotherapy including those 80 that had in addition rituximab [40].
## (s12) Staging
(p12.0) The group of Jong studied the staging and clinical data of 106 patients with primary extranodal nongastric marginal zone MALT lymphoma. They confirm that this process frequently presents as stage IV disease (26%) and multifocal disease (32%) and with a site-specific dissemination pattern. They proposed after an extensive staging procedure at presentation to use primary site-directed protocols during follow-up focused on the primary-involved tract/organ system, regional lymph nodes, and pulmonary or gastric relapses [49].

(p12.1) Staging of lymphoma patients remains a cornerstone in clinical management. Bone marrow involvement is often a determining criterion but is not done optimally in many cases. In a series of 113 cases of diffuse large B cell lymphoma from one institution, Talaulikar et al. showed that flow cytometry detected involvement in seven cases that were negative by histology but also that 11 cases were missed. Their results also show that combining the positive cases from conventional staging and flow cytometry has the best predictive value for survival. These data are difficult to interpret, since staging has an influence on treatment [50].

(p12.2) Increasingly fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) is being used in the staging procedure of lymphoma patients. Pelosi et al. addressed the question whether this technique can replace bone marrow biopsies in 194 patients. Although PET and biopsies had similar sensitivity and accuracy, bone marrow involvement was identified by both methods in only 10 out of 49 patients with positive bone marrow involvement by either one of the techniques. There were no significant differences between the HL and the non-HL patients. The authors conclude that FDG-PET has added value to bone marrow biopsies but does not replace them [51].
## (s13) Ancillary techniques
(p13.0) Less invasive approaches for diagnosing and classifying lymphomas are potentially very important. The proteomic spectra of crude sera from 132 patients with diffuse large B cell lymphoma and 75 controls obtained by surfaceenhanced laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (SELDI-TOF-MS) achieved a sensitivity of 94% and a specificity of 94% for detecting diffuse large B cell lymphoma samples in the test set of 85 samples and achieved a sensitivity of 94% and a specificity of 92% for detecting poor prognosis patients in the test set of 66 samples [52]. Using a similar SELDI-TOF-MS approach on small biopsies/fine-needle aspirations from lymphoma patients, Jansen et al. were able to create protein profiles that separate reactive lymph nodes and low-grade B cell lymphomas from cases of diffuse large B cell lymphoma [53]. Using liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry, Roy et al. analyzed the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from patients with central nervous lymphoma and confirmed the results with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Approximately 80 CSF proteins were identified and found to be present at significantly different concentrations, both higher and lower, in training and test studies, which were highly concordant. The findings demonstrate that proteomic analysis of CSF yields individual biomarkers with greater sensitivity in the identification of cancer than does CSF cytology [54].

(p13.1) Lohan et al. went one step further and described the magnetic resonance enterography results of ten patients with small bowel lymphoma and provided features that enable the prediction of the histological type of lymphoma [55].

(p13.2) Lymphoma classification is in some instances based on cytogenetic data, but not many laboratories perform routine cytogenetic analysis on biopsies for lymphoma. Dunphy and Tang analyzed their experience with 261 samples, of which four appeared to be nonhematologic malignancies. In 64 cases, no result was obtained. In 5 of 78 reactive neoplasias, an abnormal cytogenetics was found, and three of these were also clonal and developed follicular lymphoma soon afterwards. Furthermore, in follicular lymphoma, additional cytogenetic features were found to be related to more aggressive grades. Finally, in several cases, the cytogenetic data gave more insight in the process detected [56].

(p13.3) Flow cytometry is commonly used for leukemia classification but is increasingly used for lymphoma diagnosis in conjunction with histological and immunohistochemical evaluation. Karube et al. showed the value of this approach in a series of 490 NK and T cell lymphoproliferations with 15 commonly used markers [57].

(p13.4) Clonality testing in skin lymphomas is considered of little additional value because of the low specificity of the test (Langerak et al.). This was confirmed by Plaza et al. who used clonality testing of the T cell receptor beta gene in a series of 80 cases with a cutaneous infiltrate including reactive dermatoses. They confirmed that almost all cases diagnosed as lymphoma were clonal but that also clonal populations were present in some of the reactive dermatoses [58]. In an important study of Ponti et al., the multiple biopsies approach proved helpful. In many patients, one has more than one biopsy available, and it appeared that in mycosis fungoides, an increase in clonality was observed in connection with both a worsening of the cutaneous disease (79% T1/T2; 100% T3/T4) and an increase in the histopathologic score (HS<5, 76%; HS≥5, 94%) [59].
