# Toward a relevant agenda for warehousing research: literature review and practitioners' input

CorpusID: 36084103 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca73eff22a9accabfac67297b9d06b0af7e2ce28](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca73eff22a9accabfac67297b9d06b0af7e2ce28)

Fields: Engineering, Business, Computer Science

## (s3) Operation strategy
(p3.0) By operation strategy, we mean both strategic planning and general operational policies. Detailed operational planning would fit to the scope of research related to each operation, namely receiving, storage, picking and shipping. Examples of operation strategies and policies are decision making on managerial philosophies [12], outsourcing [13], material flow pattern and FIFO versus LIFO [14].

(p3.1) In addition to the strategic decisions, appropriate operation policies should be devised. Different researchers have worked on the proper utilization of technologies to support the overall strategy: for example, employment of a WMS in cooperation with RFID technology [15] and decision support systems [16].

(p3.2) The distribution of the papers between the two categories of strategic planning and operational policy making is similar. Most of the studies focus on unit-load warehouse, while research on less than unit load is scarce and adds more complications to the analysis. Most of the published works are under deterministic conditions, although the business environment contains a lot of uncertainties and risks.
## (s4) Infrastructure design
(p4.0) Many papers cover different aspects of infrastructure design including estimations of required space [17], layout design and determination of departments' location relative to each other [18], department design [19] and equipment configuration [20]. Most of the papers reviewed in this category follow a mathematical modeling research method, and more specifically the majority of the solution techniques are meta-heuristic algorithms.

(p4.1) The other group of papers in this field is focusing on determining location and size of warehouse departments. Most of the published papers in this field try to capture other aspects in their models as well, such as designing the operation [21] and product allocation to different departments [22]. Multiple-level layout design is one of the most complicated problems in the literature [23]. The more detailed studies are those concentrating on design of the warehouse area, e.g., configuration of lanes in picking/ storage areas [24]. Apart from the layout of the departments, configuration of warehouse equipment is another area of the literature [20]. Finally, very few papers investigate warehouse construction and design from energy efficiency perspective [25][26][27]. Infrastructure design is one of the richest categories in the literature. Several aspects including sizing, dimensioning, department design and configuration of equipment are covered. Research on warehouses with special needs, such as temperature-controlled departments and high seasonality, is relatively scarce. The majority of the literature approach warehouse design problem from economic efficiency perspective, while research with special consideration to environmental performance is scarce. Most of the design papers focus on the storage departments, while research on the layout of receiving and shipping is rare; these departments are more important for a cross-dock warehouse, another field of research which seems to be overlooked in the literature.
## (s5) Human resource management
(p5.0) Human resource management can be investigated from different angles. Scheduling of the staff [28], psychological considerations [29], and ergonomics issues and safety [30] are the main areas explored in the literature. Chakravorty [31] posits that academic research in warehousing and material handling is mainly focused on technical factors to improve performance, but usually neglects human factors.

(p5.1) Ergonomics of warehousing jobs is the most investigated topic in human resource management. Such research can be useful when designing material handling equipment. Even the way that male and female operators [32] and expert and non-expert workers [33] are performing can be different. Awareness regarding such differences would be helpful not only in design of the equipment but also in job assignment in the warehouses.

(p5.2) The reviewed literature shows that human resource management has been considered mainly from an ergonomics point of view, i.e., how handling of different items can have negative impact on the body. Apart from that, researchers have also explored impact of exposure to carbon monoxide from equipment, job rotation and psychological aspects of warehousing work, even though their proportions have been significantly less. Scheduling and rotation of tasks in warehouses are among the everyday work in most of the warehouses and distribution centers, but have not attracted much research.
## (s7) Performance evaluation
(p7.0) Performance evaluation is a critical activity in every business. It provides useful feedback on performance and potential impact of infrastructure design, operational policy and improvement methods. This category includes all publications with the main objective of performance evaluation, measurement and improvement. This evaluation can be considered on three different levels:

(p7.1) 1. Overall performance of a warehouse: e.g., development of an AHP-DEA model to compare performances of different warehouses [45], or a structural equations model to evaluate the logistics capability [46]. 2. Performance of a department or specific process: e.g., level of responsiveness based on order batching policy, capacity of the picking and sorting operations, and picking policy [47], and connection of warehouse design and order picking efficiency [48]. 3. Performance of specific technology or equipment: e.g., evaluation of dual command mini-load throughput time [49], carousel throughput [50], AS/RS performance measurement by using queuing theory [51], travel time of tower crane S/R machine under single and double cycle command [52].

(p7.2) This category was the most researched field after 2000, and it also had a quite high number of published papers in previous decades ( Table 5). Most of the publications focus on the performance evaluation of a particular operation and equipment, and especially for automated warehouses. Studies with consideration to performance management and benchmarking of the successful cases can make significant contributions in future.
## (s8) Receiving and shipping
(p8.0) The warehouse operations initiate in goods receiving and finish in the shipping area. Products are received into the warehouse, assigned to different locations, and after picking, they are packed and shipped out to the customers. The planning of receiving and shipping operations is among the least investigated topics in the literature. Some examples of potential problems to investigate are preparation of goods to be stored [53] and resource allocations, e.g., truck-dock assignment for receiving and delivery and order-truck assignment if orders of different customers are aggregated into one truck [54]. Receiving and shipping are the least investigated categories in the warehousing literature, with preparation operation and resource assignment as the main aspects explored.
## (s14) Operation strategy
(p14.0) Global competition is continuously increasing for most companies. Having cheap labor gives them an important competitive advantage. ''If we cannot keep our overhead down, we cannot compete with them. Doing less with more is what we should do'' (interviewee 9). Having customers who expect more (interviewees 5, 9) calls for customized services that require proper planning and strategy development. The business trend toward more customized demands, order consolidation and big fluctuation in  (4,8,9,12,15) raise the concern of slow movers, calling them one of the main cost drivers. Having said that, warehouse managers need an up-dated assortment of goods; ''It is probably the easiest one to say but one of the most difficult ones to handle'' (interviewee 4). As another aspect of modern business, e-commerce has been growing significantly during the past decade, and this trend will continue in the future. It is important to explore how this change can influence warehouses and their operations. In the words of interviewee 2, ''instead of having major flows going to the bigger distributers, you actually need to start sending smaller parcels to customers. So, more and more, warehouses find that this is a different way of doing work; … and there will still be a flow to normal stores.'' He continues, ''Many warehouse managers may have thought about it but only a few have really adapted to this new way of distributing things''; the nature of material flow has changed and warehouses need to take the responsibility of sending goods to end customers in addition to shops and distribution centers.
## (s18) Storage
(p18.0) Warehouse operations are not so frequently mentioned in the interviews, although several practitioners voice their concern about operations strategy and planning. Two interviewees (3,12) considered storage allocation and reallocation as their concern in the warehouse. Interviewee 12 mentions the warehouse problem during the recession: ''almost all the warehouse slots were occupied and picking productivity was lower than before. Taking a walk around the warehouse, I realized we had products that I was not even aware of.'' In connection to this problem, he finds the solution in reviewing the inventory to recognize the dead items (obsolete SKUs), fast movers and re-allocation of storage places. According to interviewees 3 and 12, appropriate classification of the goods and storage location assignment play critical roles in warehouse operation cost.
## (s31) Connection to other departments and companies
(p31.0) Managing the connection of warehouse with other companies and departments is identified as an important issue by practitioners. But the corresponding research category is among those least investigated. Very few papers have focused on the interface of the warehouse with other departments and companies. The interaction of production and warehousing is the topic most investigated in this category, but there is a significant gap in the relation of warehouses and external companies. Different types of contract (e.g., wholesale price, capacity reservation, performance-based contract) and contract mechanisms need to be explored with both qualitative and quantitative approaches to identify potential benefits and concerns. Integrated planning of warehouse operations with other departments and companies needs a suitable structure of information sharing. It is important to identify what information and when it should be shared, and how to structure interfaces between client and provider of outsourced services (e.g., contracting performance or activities). There is a huge gap between the number of papers with an assumption-restricted modeling approach and those based on the complex reality of warehouses. The lack of empirical research in this area can be considered as a warning to academia. More case and action research studies must be done, which can help the research community to better understand the reality. In addition, research results with a validity check on real-case settings will have direct benefits for practice. The majority of the reviewed papers have mathematical modeling as their main research method, and the outcome of this research is usually sophisticated algorithms. Such methods need to be implanted in WMS for warehouses to use them. But according to the interviewees, most of the algorithms used in WMS are not really advanced, as advanced algorithms often need a lot of accurate data which are not usually available in practice. Hence, practitioners prefer to keep the logic of the solutions pretty simple to make sure they work in reality. Although consideration to global warming is an important trend in operations management literature, majority of the reviewed literature focused on economic efficiency in both warehouse design and operations. Papers with special focus on energy efficiency and environmental performance are very scarce. Surprisingly, this important issue was also almost neglected by interviewed practitioners. Many countries have introduced carbon emission regulation (e.g., cap-andtrade scheme in Europe and carbon tax in Australia), which emphasizes the importance of further research in this field. Opportunities and challenges of employing more advanced technologies, e.g., cloud-based technologies, were also missed by both practitioners and reviewed literature. Cloud-based technologies can be helpful in real-time data analysis and decision making. Although they facilitate information sharing, information security and performance of the system for huge volume of the data need to be investigated. Interviewees raised their concerns regarding occurrence of discrepancies in warehouse operations. One potential option to monitor and track such problems is to use cameras in the warehouse or on the equipment (e.g., forklifts), which can help monitoring and documentation of the procedures in the warehouse. This alternative was not suggested by either literature or practitioners. Effectiveness and possible problems of using such technologies need to be analyzed. According to the identified gaps in the literature and practitioners' input, a research agenda based on the categories in Fig. 1 is presented in Table 7.

(p31.1) Suggested research directions are divided into two areas; first, studies aiming to understand, explain and predict a concept or phenomenon that is currently practiced and exists (positive approach), and second, research attempting to provide guidelines to managers regarding what should be done (normative approach) [74]. The positive studies suggested can be done through survey, case and interview studies; normative studies include but are not limited to modeling studies. Our analysis shows that more empirical investigations should be conducted to understand and capture complexities of the real environment, and proposed normative studies need to be accompanied by practical applications to benefit both academia and practice.
