# Gastrointestinal Behçet's disease: A review

CorpusID: 37526038 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cda39b48395116ae740e3666bb307abcc7ebf312](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cda39b48395116ae740e3666bb307abcc7ebf312)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE
(p2.0) Gastrointestinal (GI) manifestations of Behçet's disease are of particular importance as they are associated with significant morbidity and mortality. GI manifestations usually occur 4.5-6 years after the onset of oral ulcers [14] . The most common symptoms include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and gastrointestinal bleeding [15] . Although ileocecal involvement is most commonly described, BD may involve any segment of the alimentary tract and the various GI organs [14,16] . In general, two forms of intestinal Behçet's disease exist -neutrophilic phlebitis that leads to mucosal inflammation and ulcer formation and large vessel disease (i.e., mesenteric arteries) that results in intestinal ischemia and infarction [17] . The frequency of GI involvement among patients with BD varies in different countries. Lower frequency has been reported in Turkey (2.8%), India (3.4%) and Saudi Arabia (4%), moderate frequency in China (10%) and Taiwan (32%) and the highest frequency has been reported in the United Kingdom (38%-53%) and Japan (50%-60%) [12,16,[18][19][20][21] . It is imperative that the clinician caring for patients with BD is aware of the myriad of clinical manifestations, diagnostic methods and treatment strategies available for the gastrointestinal manifestations of BD.
## (s7) VISCERAL ARTERIAL INVOLVEMENT
(p7.0) BD is a unique form of vasculitis because it can involve arteries and veins of all sizes [69] . One study of 38 BD patients with vascular involvement found that venous involvement was by far the most prevalent (88%) [70] . Incidence of vascular involvement varies between 7%-29% [71] . Males are more commonly affected [72] . Arterial manifestations include formation of aneurysms and luminal thrombi [64] . Important sites of arterial involvement include the arteries of the upper and lower extremities (radial, femoral, popliteal) [73] , pulmonary artery [74] and thoracoabdominal aorta [75] . Other sites of involvement include the subclavian [76] , iliac [77] , carotid [78,79] , renal [80] and coronary arteries [81] . Arterial involvement of the intra-abdominal organs is rare. When it occurs, patients may present with fever, abdominal pain or pulsatile mass. Complications can include intestinal infarction and gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Very few cases of visceral aortic aneurysm exist in the literature -involvement of the celiac trunk [82] , superior mesenteric [83] , hepatic [84] , splenic [85] , inferior mesenteric [86] and ileocolic artery [87] have been described.
## (s8) DIAGNOSIS
(p8.0) Establishing the diagnosis of intestinal BD remains more specific for CD whereas retinal vasculitis is more commonly associated with BD [48] . Both diseases have an increased risk of deep venous thrombosis -however, CD is not associated with other vascular manifestations such as varices, Budd-Chiari Syndrome (BCS) or arterial vasculitis. Neurologic disease, an important complication in BD, is typically not associated with CD.
## (s9) PANCREAS
(p9.0) Pancreatic involvement in BD is exceptionally rare. Very few case reports of acute pancreatitis have been attributed to BD [55,56] . Chronic pancreatitis was also reported in a patient with BD -however he also had a history of heavy alcohol intake [57] . It is possible that pancreatic involvement is underreported or underdiagnosed -an autopsy series of 170 cases from Japan suggested 2.9% involvement of the pancreas [58] . Vasculitis is likely the underlying pathological process leading to pancreatic inflammation -this theory is further supported by other vasculitic syndromes such as granulomatosis with polyangiitis which has also been associated with pancreatitis [59] .
## (s13) MEDICAL MANAGEMENT
(p13.0) Management of Behçet's syndrome is challenging because of a general lack of high quality evidence [92] . Although some controlled data exists for management of arthritis, eye involvement and mucocutaneous disease, there is a considerable lack of evidence addressing treatment strategies for neurologic and vascular manifestations. Similarly, there are no internationally accepted, standardized treatment strategies for gastrointestinal BD. In order to standardize treatment, the Japanese Inflammatory Bowel Disease Research Group proposed a set of consensus statements in 2007 -they were updated again in 2014 to address growing lowlevel evidence supporting the use of anti-TNF-α mAb therapy [93,94] . Generally, with some exceptions, the same classes of medications that have been used for the treatment of systemic BD have also been used to treat intestinal BD and include colchicine, 5-ASA/ sulfasalazine, corticosteroids (CS), immunomodulators, immunosuppressants, IFNα and anti-TNF-α mAb therapy. Table 4 summarizes the highest level of evidence for each modality of therapy.

(p13.1) Similar to IBD, sulfasalazine (3-4 g/d) and 5-ASA (2.25-3 g/d) have been the traditional mainstay of therapy. In a retrospective, single center Korean study of 143 patients with intestinal BD treated with 5-ASA/ sulfasalazine monotherapy, 46 (32.2%) patients had a clinical relapse (defined as DAIBD ≥ 20) [95] . Younger age at time of diagnosis (< 35 years), elevated CRP (≥ 1.5 mg/dL) and increased disease activity (DAIBD ≥ 60) were associated with higher relapse rates. The authors concluded that 5-ASA/sulfasalazine should be reserved for mild-to-moderate intestinal BD.

(p13.2) CS are usually reserved for moderate to severe disease in order to induce remission [93,94,96] . Doses of 20-100 mg prednisolone have been used depending on the severity of the disease [1] . Expert opinion recommends a weight-based approach of 0.5-1 mg/kg per day of prednisolone for 1-2 wk followed by a taper of 5 mg weekly until discontinuation [93,94] . Hospitalized patients with severe disease may require intravenous methylprednisolone therapy [15] . Intravenous pulse therapy of 1 gram/d for 3 d followed by oral prednisolone taper has been advocated [2] . At 1 mo, almost 1/2 of patients achieve complete remission, 43% attain partial remission and 11% will demonstrate no response (i.e., steroid resistance). Patients who are steroid-dependent or steroid-resistant can be difficult to manage and often times require additional therapy (immunomodulators, anti-TNF-α mAb) or surgery. Maintenance therapy with CS is not appropriate and long term steroid use should be avoided given the significant systemic side effects.

(p13.3) Thiopurines are indicated in patients with steroiddependent disease, enterocutaneous fistulae and maintenance of postoperative remission. Expert opinion advocates starting azathioprine at doses of 25-50 mg/d with gradual titration every 2-4 wk to 2.0-2.5 mg/kg [94] . The starting dose of 6-MP is 0.5 mg/kg and similarly is escalated every 2-4 wk to a goal dose of 1.0-1.5 mg/kg [97] . In a retrospective analysis of 272 patients with intestinal BD, 67 patients were started on thiopurines (66 on azathioprine, 1 on 6-mercaptopurine) during hospitalization for the above three indications. Of the 39 patients who were maintained on thiopurines, the relapse rates were 5.8%, 43.7% and 51.7% at one, three and five years respectively [97] . Younger age at the time of diagnosis of intestinal BD (< 25 years) and a lower hemoglobin level (< 11 g/dL) were independent risk factors for relapse on thiopurine maintenance therapy.

(p13.4) Anti-TNF-α mAb therapy alone or in combination with immunomodulatory therapy is also a modality of treatment for patients with steroid-dependent or steroid-resistant intestinal BD. Sfikakis et al [98] recommend the introduction of Anti-TNF-α mAb therapy only in patients who have failed two immunosuppressive agents and require prednisolone at a dosage > 7.5 mg/d. Infliximab (IFX) and adalimumab (ADA) are the two best studied biologic agents. The first published case reports of IFX success were in 2001; clinical response to IFX was demonstrated in 3 patients with steroid dependent BD in two separate case reports [99,100] . A larger case series of 6 patients was also promising. Four out of 6 patients who received induction and maintenance therapy (5 mg/kg) at 0, 2 and 6 wk and every 2 mo Table 4 Summary of evidence for medical management of  intestinal Behçet's disease   Therapy Level(s) of published evidence 5-ASA/sulfasalazine Retrospective cohort study [95] Corticosteroids Expert opinion, European League Against Rheumatism Recommendations [114] Thalidomide
## (s16) SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
(p16.0) As in patients with IBD, surgical therapy is reserved for those who are refractory to medical therapy or presenting with severe gastrointestinal bleed. Other indications for surgery include perforation, fistula formation, intestinal obstruction and abdominal mass [117] . It is interesting to note that ileal disease and ocular lesions are associated with increased risk of surgical resection [118] . There is controversy over the type of surgical procedure and length of bowel to remove. Traditionally, right hemicolectomy, ileocolectomy and partial resection of the small bowel are most commonly performed. Chou et al [41] recommended up to 80 cm of ileal resection from the ileocecal valve at the time of right hemicolectomy More recently, authors suggest a conservative approach with removal of only the grossly involved bowel as there appears to be no relation between length of resection and rates of recurrence or reoperation [117] . For select BD patients who undergo surgery, creation of a stoma may be preferable over primary anastomosis given a high rate of intestinal leakage, perforation and fistulization at the anastomosis site [14,42] . Reoperation in those who undergo surgery is high -30%-44% and often occurs at or near the anastomosis site (similar to CD) [117][118][119] . Independent predictors of reoperation include history of postoperative steroid therapy, CRP levels greater than 4.4 or endoscopic evidence of "volcano-type" deep ulcers.

(p16.1) If medical therapy fails in BCS, percutaneous angioplasty provides an attractive option if the segment of thrombosis in the HV or IVC is focal [120] . Alternatively, transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt may be another appropriate option. It is unclear whether surgical portosystemic shunting affects survival. Orthotopic liver transplantation has been performed as a life-saving procedure in patients with BCS.

(p16.2) Arterial aneurysms in BD are generally treated surgically because of a high risk of rupture. Although open surgical repair (synthetic vs autologous vein graft) were previously the preferred method, an endovascular approach has emerged as a more durable alternative [64] . A Korean study of 16 BD patients who underwent endovascular repair demonstrated a patency rate of 89% at 2 years [121] . A more recent study confirmed that endovascular therapy is safe and has long term durability [116] . Concomitant treatment with immunosuppressive medications is necessary to control vessel wall inflammation.
## (s17) PROGNOSIS
(p17.0) Unlike CD whereby many patients may experience a disease flare-up and subsequent corticosteroid and/or immunosuppressive treatment at least once in their lifetime, intestinal BD generally follows a distinguishable mild or severe clinical course. This was illustrated in a 5 year retrospective study of 130 patients with intestinal BD which demonstrated that a large proportion of patients (77.1%) experienced a mild clinical course; on the other hand, 28.5% had a more severe clinical course with multiple relapses and/ or chronic symptoms [122] . Other studies cite a similar recurrence rate of 24.9%-28% and 43%-49% at 2 and 5 years respectively [123][124][125] .
## (s18) CONCLUSION
(p18.0) Behçet's disease can present with a wide array of gastrointestinal manifestations. Although ileocecal involvement is classically associated with BD, any part of the GI tract from the mouth to the anus can be involved and there may be appreciable morbidity and mortality associated with gastrointestinal BD. Diagnosis remains a challenge with no universally accepted criteria. Management can be confusing and there are no unanimously accepted treatment algorithms. The goal of treatment is to keep patients in clinical remission, reduce relapses and prevent surgical intervention. Although endoscopic remission is a treatment goal in IBD, there is currently insufficient evidence in the literature to recommend mucosal healing as a treatment goal in BD [94] . Treatment requires cooperation across multiple specialties including the primary care physician, rheumatologist, gastroenterologist and possibly interventional radiologist and/or surgeon. Anti-TNF-α mAb therapy appears to be promising for more severe and/or refractory intestinal disease -more clinical trials are necessary to support their use. A certain subset of patients have a poor disease course and better methods to identify them early in the disease course will be an important area of study. It is unclear at this time which populations of BD patients may benefit from early aggressive therapy and whether this intervention will have an impact on the progression of disease.
