# Raising awareness of bronchiectasis in primary care: overview of diagnosis and management strategies in adults

CorpusID: 3885741 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eeca8fcdcdafe28bb840be83c87b5414f95d69c3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eeca8fcdcdafe28bb840be83c87b5414f95d69c3)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) CLINICAL PRESENTATION-WHEN TO SUSPECT BRONCHIECTASIS
(p1.0) A 66-year-old lady presents with a chest infection associated with cough productive of green sputum and increasing shortness of breath. She had never smoked and has no relevant past medical history. Chest x-ray shows no abnormality. She is treated with antibiotic therapy by her primary care physician and improves. She attends again a few months later with worsening productive cough. Her primary care physician notes that she has had several courses of antibiotics for chest infections over the previous 3 winters and has reported a chronic productive cough on a daily basis for the past 3 years.

(p1.1) In new patients or those that do not have an established diagnosis, one of the most common core symptoms is a persistent cough (>90% of patients), often producing large quantities of mucoid (white or clear) or purulent (dark yellow, green or brown) sputum 2 ( Table 2). Adults may have a history of symptoms over many years. Recurrent respiratory tract infections also raise the possibility of bronchiectasis, and patients may take a long time to recover from chest infections or require multiple courses of antibiotics before symptoms fully resolve. Dyspnoea is present in a high proportion of cases, with frequent haemoptysis in severe disease. These symptoms can be variable across patients, with some having symptoms daily and others only having symptoms during exacerbations. 5 The longstanding textbook teaching of bronchiectasis patients with widespread crackles, digital clubbing and cachexia is now rarely seen.
## (s4) OVERALL GOALS OF TREATMENT
(p4.0) The main goals of treatment are to reduce exacerbations, preserve lung function and improve the patient's quality of life. A disease management schematic is shown in Fig. 3. Patients with bronchiectasis should be instructed in how to improve airway clearance using physiotherapy techniques at home or at a physiotherapy clinic. Treatments, both pharmacological and nonpharmacological, should focus on reducing inflammation and preventing exacerbations. Because bronchiectasis involves a permanent change in lung structure, the condition is chronic and the patient's quality of life may be severely impacted. Care is best managed by a stepwise multidisciplinary team approach, including respiratory/chest physiotherapy. 5 Primary care management Some management principles are common to all patients with bronchiectasis and include the requirement for good education about the disease, annual vaccination against influenza and vaccination against S. pneumoniae. Patients that are breathless will benefit from pulmonary rehabilitation as is the case with other respiratory disorders, and patients should be encouraged to exercise. Smoking cessation should be strongly advocated for the minority of patients that continue to smoke (up to 18% of patients with bronchiectasis are reported to be current smokers). 40 Specific management strategies for bronchiectasis depend on the underlying severity and cause of disease. Patients with mild or moderate bronchiectasis are often managed and monitored in the primary care setting. Patients with mild bronchiectasis usually will not require prophylactic antibiotic therapy, but those with sputum production should perform daily physiotherapy between and during exacerbations. 5 Patients with moderate bronchiectasis patients will typically have persistent symptoms in spite of standard care and may require prophylactic long-term antibiotic therapy as well as adjunctive treatments and strategies to promote mucus clearance (see sections below on Secondary care management and Chest physiotherapy/respiratory therapy). 5 In the primary care setting, management should focus on monitoring the disease and implementing techniques and procedures to minimise disease progression and maximise equality of life. Regular clinic visits will allow the primary care provider to coordinate care with specialists and refer the patient  to the appropriate specialist, as needed. Key considerations for the primary care provider to assess at each visit are outlined in Table 3. Regular tracking of exacerbations and symptoms allows the patient to learn more about managing his or her disease and helps to keep the care plan up-to-date. Regular monitoring of sputum 56 (ideally twice per year) will identify the emergence of new pathogens or the development of antibiotic resistance. The previous sputum results can be used to guide future antibiotic use for exacerbations.
## (s5) CONCLUSIONS
(p5.0) Bronchiectasis is a complex chronic disease, often resulting in disability and impaired quality of life. Patient education and compliance with care providers' recommendations are key to successful disease management. Progress in determining best practices and treatments will be aided by patient recruitment into recently developed patient registries in the United States and Europe. 5,51 These registries will encompass the experiences of many more and varied patients than can be included in individual clinical trials. They encourage international collaborations and can help drive research with the overall goal of improving clinical care. 51 Although mild and moderate bronchiectasis usually can be managed in the primary care setting, collaboration with specialists to develop an individualised patient management plan would provide advanced planning should the patient's condition worsen. Those with more advanced disease who require long-term antibiotic therapy should be referred to secondary care.
