# A review of genetic methods and models for analysis of coronavirus-induced severe pneumonitis

CorpusID: 39192185 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f16ce53df97707203bb8c5384403a27c054f699](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f16ce53df97707203bb8c5384403a27c054f699)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s5) SARS-CoV models of disease
(p5.0) Recently, a comparison of transcriptional profiles in human systemic inflammatory diseases and the corresponding mouse models reported that transcriptional responses in murine models were a poor mimic of the responses in human disease (Seok et al., 2013). This comparison was motivated by the poor success rate of drug trials moving from mice to humans. Responses were similar between humans and mice at 6-12 h. However, the overall recovery time for genes to return to baseline was drastically different in humans and mice. Relevant to models of SARS, different mouse models of acute respiratory disease had transcriptional profiles which had R 2 correlations between 0 and 0.8, with 47-61 % of the genes shifting in the same direction, approximating that of random occurrence. Despite all the potential causes for inconsistency in human responses (i.e. age, different treatments, diseases/trauma severity), the transcriptional profiles of human cases of acute respiratory disease were highly consistent, with R 2 values of 0.55, with 84 % of the genes changing in the same direction. In the following sections we will examine the validity of the response of animal models to SARS-CoV infection.
## (s7) Non-transgenic models
(p7.0) Mice are capable of being infected by human SARS-CoV (Chen et al., 2010). The virus replicates in lungs and nasal turbinates of BALB/c mice aged 4-6 weeks and is cleared by 7 days post-infection. However, these mice do not develop significant pulmonary lesions when challenged with a human SARS-CoV isolate, limiting their usefulness . Aged BALB/c mice infected with SARS-CoV show evidence of alveolar damage and interstitial pneumonitis similar to human cases (Roberts et al., 2005a). Recently, a novel non-transgenic approach to creating a mouse model for MERS-CoV utilized transduction of BALB/c mice with adenoviral vectors expressing the human host cell receptor for MERS-CoV, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (Zhao et al., 2014). Infection with MERS-CoV was not fatal, but did produce a perivascular and peribronchiolar lymphoid infiltration, progression to an interstitial pneumonia, and viral clearance occurring 6-8 days post-infection.
## (s10) Golden Syrian hamsters
(p10.0) Syrian hamsters have also been proposed as a model for SARS-CoV infection (Roberts et al., 2005b). Syrian hamsters, 5-week-old females, support efficient viral replication that continues to 5 days post-infection. The disease resolved in 14 days with no mortality reported. Low titres of virus were present in the liver and spleen of hamsters at days 2 and 3 post-infection, but not thereafter. The animals developed a robust protective neutralizing antibody response by day 7, one that the researchers reported was more robust than the antibody response in mice.

(p10.1) Other studies used the golden Syrian hamster model to evaluate mAb therapy (Roberts et al., 2006) and the immunogenicity of a live-attenuated SARS-CoV vaccine (Lamirande et al., 2008). When treated with mAbs after infection, 5-week-old female hamsters showed a reduced viral burden (Roberts et al., 2006). Hamsters also showed reduced lung pathology by virtue of decreased interstitial pneumonitis and decreased lung consolidation by day 7 post-infection. Neither response was dose dependent and 4 mg antibody kg 21 was insufficient to protect from infection because not all hamsters had measurable levels of circulating antibodies in the serum. The study evaluating the use of a live-attenuated vaccine used 7-week-old male hamsters vaccinated with a WT recombinant SARS-CoV Urbani strain or a recombinant SARS-CoV lacking the E gene (Lamirande et al., 2008). After 4 weeks, the hamsters were challenged with either SARS-CoV Urbani or a recombinant SARS-CoV with the spike protein of the GD03 strain of SARS-CoV. All vaccinated hamsters had no detectable virus in the nasal turbinates by day 5 postinfection or the lungs at any time post-infection.

(p10.2) Whilst these studies are promising, the use of the Golden Syrian hamster has been limited. These animals do not suffer any type of obvious clinical disease and they completely resolve their lung lesions (Roberts et al., 2005b). To date, there has been no evaluation of SARS-CoV infection of aged hamsters, so it is possible that, as in some mouse strains, pulmonary disease could develop in older animals. There is an immunosuppressed Golden Syrian model in which cyclophosphamide treatment led to significant weight loss, expanded tissue tropism of SARS-CoV, and increased pathology in lung, heart, kidney and nasal turbinates (Schaecher et al., 2008). This model is useful because the hamsters had a longer duration of illness, mortality being at 20-35 days postinfection, depending on cyclophosphamide treatment, and had a slower progression of disease. However, cyclophosphamide causes lymphopenia, suppresses B-cell activity and activation, and suppresses regulatory T-cell function, limiting the model to the study of viral replication and pathogenesis in the host, and cannot be used to evaluate the effectiveness of vaccination or antiviral treatment in SARS-CoV infection.
## (s14) Conclusions
(p14.0) Animal models will likely not be able to recapitulate completely the disease and pathology that occurs during B. McGruder and J. L. Leibowitz infection of humans with SARS-CoV. Models should be able to represent accurately what occurs in humans, and should be able to do so in a manner that is safe for researchers and that is not overly expensive. Whilst primate models of disease are, generally, considered to accurately mimic human disease, they are expensive and difficult to handle. Smaller mammals are safer and less expensive to work with and house, but usually require host-adapted viruses to recapitulate human disease. These models still require BSL3 containment to work with them safely. Related CoVs that are non-infectious to humans that naturally infect a small mammal are ideal in terms of cost and safety. However, a recent publication has called into question the relevance of much of the mouse data regarding human inflammatory diseases (Seok et al., 2013). Thus, differences between humans and mice can make understanding the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV difficult. However, we have demonstrated that the models of SARS-CoV do, in part, mimic the disease course that is seen in humans not only in terms of cytokine/chemokine response, but also in histology and cellular pathology.
