# Occupational safety and health in construction: a review of applications and trends

CorpusID: 39238172 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ba56402807916dd6bdcdbe73b52a0f64b19cf31](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ba56402807916dd6bdcdbe73b52a0f64b19cf31)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) In most industrialized countries, the construction industry is one of the most significant industries in terms of contribution to gross domestic product (GDP). It also has a significant impact on the health and safety of workers. The construction industry is both economically and socially important 1) . In construction, workers perform a great diversity of activities, each one with a specific associated risk. The worker who carries out a task is directly exposed to its associated risks and passively exposed to risks produced by nearby co-workers 2) . Building design, materials, dimensions and site conditions are often unique, which requires adaptation and a learning curve from site to site. Injuries may occur in a number of ways and at every juncture of the process 3) .

(p0.1) As a result of this situation there is a high frequency of accidents in construction, which makes it an unsafe industry. Degree of safety in this selected sector of the economy is not indicated by a single accident but by a set of accidents that have occurred within a specified time interval. Knowledge about the noticeable trends in accidents is required in order to assess the level of safety and also directions for changes 4) .

(p0.2) Occupational safety and health is an area concerned with the development, promotion, and maintenance of the workplace environment, policies and programs that ensure the mental, physical, and emotional well-being of employees, as well as keeping the workplace environment relatively free from actual or potential hazards that could injure employees 5) . However, the number of articles regarding OSH in construction was small until fifteen years ago. Since 2001 the number of OSH publications relating to construction has increased. From different perspectives and using different tools researchers have studied occupational hazards in construction. Sousa, Almeida, and Dias 6) state that there are several tools and methods to investigate and understand occupational accidents in the construction industry.
## (s4) Trends in risk assessment
(p4.0) For the topic of risk assessment, the search started with Fine's seminal article "Mathematical evaluation for controlling hazards" 17) , in which a formulation to quantify risks is proposed. It is based on three factors that define risk: probability of the accident happening, personnel exposure to the risk, and consequences of the accident (or severity). From his approach, three basic lines of research were identified: management of occupational safety and health, quantifying occupational risk through modeling, and quantifying risk through probability analysis. They are displayed in Fig. 2.
