# A Comprehensive tRNA Genomic Survey Unravels the Evolutionary History of tRNA Arrays in Prokaryotes

CorpusID: 42007454 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9b81730bb8a4c36928d146605157efcbad35e58](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9b81730bb8a4c36928d146605157efcbad35e58)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) play an essential role in the protein synthesis pathway, linking the genetic code with the corresponding amino acids (Widmann et al. 2010). Beyond their canonical role during protein biosynthesis, tRNAs are also implicated in other cellular functions such as the regulation of gene expression and cell death, cell wall formation, protein labelling for degradation, aminoacylation of cell membrane phospholipids, and antibiotic biosynthesis (for review, see Raina and Ibba [2014]).

(p0.1) Typically, tRNA is a short cloverleaf noncoding RNA of approximately 70-100 bases in length which folds into an L-shaped tertiary structure. tRNAs are highly conserved among Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya (Marck and Grosjean 2002;Sprinzl and Vassilenko 2005;Fujishima and Kanai 2014) suggesting that tRNA molecules had already evolved before the emergence of the last universal common ancestor. The tRNA multigene family usually comprises 20 amino acid accepting groups (also called amino acid isotypes), each containing one or more tRNA members that recognize different codons commonly referred as tRNA isoacceptors (Sprinzl and Vassilenko 2005;Goodenbour and Pan 2006). To function as substrate in protein biosynthesis, each tRNA molecule attaches to a single amino acid upon selectively base-pairing its three-base anticodon to a complementary three-base codon sequence of mRNA.
## (s2) Genome Data Sets
(p2.0) The complete genomes of 2,765 prokaryotic (2,600 bacterial and 165 archaeal) organisms available in December 2013 were downloaded from National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) ftp site (ftp:/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/ Bacteria/) and constituted the primary data source. Closely related organisms were not excluded as evolutionary differences (presence/absence of the tRNA gene array, loss/gain of a tRNA gene within an array) in species belonging to the same genus could be observed. The A. ferrivorans CF27 genome (accession number CCCS020000000) was retrieved from the MicroScope website (https://www.genoscope.cns.fr/agc/ microscope/) (Vallenet et al. 2013) under the AcidithioScope project.
## (s5) Atypical tRNA Array Units Were Found in Two Gram-Negative Bacterial Species
(p5.0) Acidithiobacillus organisms are Gram-negative, acidophilic sulfur-oxidizing bacteria that catalyze the oxidative dissolution of sulfide minerals and play major roles in biomining and acid mine drainage. Compared with other Acidithiobacillus organisms, A. ferrivorans CF27 were recently found to harbor a high number of tRNA genes (71 tRNA genes) (Talla et al. 2014), as previously reported in A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T (80 tRNA genes) (Levican et al. 2009). This observation could reflect the physiological importance of protein translation in these proteobacterial organisms. Therefore, the structural organization of the tRNA genes in Acidithiobacillus species was analyzed. An increased number of tRNA genes for each tRNA amino acid (tRNA-AA) isotype ( fig. 1A) except for tRNA-Cys and tRNA-Val genes were found in at least one of the two strains. The additional (or extra) tRNA-AA isotypes (e.g., up to four in A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T and A. ferrivorans CF27 for tRNA-Leu and tRNA-Ser, respectively) explain the higher number of tRNA genes in these two organisms.

(p5.1) Analysis of the corresponding tRNA isoacceptors ( fig. 1B) showed that the extra tRNA-AA genes in CF27 or ATCC 23270 T were mainly related to specific tRNA isoacceptors. Indeed, two copies of tRNA-Arg ACG and tRNA-Asn GUU genes were found present in A. ferrivorans CF27 and A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T against only one copy in other Acidithiobacillus strains. Notably, the genes of all extra tRNAs present in both A. ferrivorans CF27 and A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T were found clustered in a specific region (tRNA array units) in each strain ( fig. 1C). The tRNA array unit of A. ferrivorans CF27 encompassed a 6-kb region with 26 tRNA genes (36.6% of the total), whereas that in A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T comprised 34 tRNA genes (42.5% of the total) within a 9-kb region. These arrays also harbored gene-encoding proteins of unknown function. The presence of tRNA array units in both species could be advantageous in terms of reducing the number of tRNA transcriptional units, thereby allowing coordinated transcription and processing of the precursors. The absence of such arrays in other Acidithiobacillus strains, combined with the location of the ATCC 23270 T tRNA array within an ICE (of about 300 kb) (Levican et al. 2009;Bustamante et al. 2012), suggests that such tRNA array units were independently acquired through horizontal gene transfer (HGT). Moreover, tRNA gene synteny between the two array units ( fig. 1C) clearly suggests that they have a common ancestor (likely similar to the CF27 array unit) followed by gene rearrangements/insertions/deletions during evolution. Indeed, we found tRNA gene insertions/deletions in A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T /A. ferrivorans CF27 (e.g., tRNA-Ser ACU , tRNA-Pro CGG , and tRNA-Leu CAA ), as well as tRNA gene translocation for both tRNA-codons tRNA-Gly UCC and tRNA-Ala UGC genes between the two arrays. It is noteworthy Evolutionary History of tRNA Arrays that neighboring regions of the two array units showed no gene synteny between the two species. As such tRNA array units have only been described in a few organisms, these findings in the two acidithiobacilli species then prompted investigations into the organization and evolution of tRNA array units in all prokaryotic organisms.
## (s6) Occurrence and Distribution of tRNA Array Units
(p6.0) An in silico analysis of tRNA genes within complete bacterial and archaeal genomes (see Materials and Methods; supplementary table S2, Supplementary Material online) was performed. In this way, 33 (e.g., tRNA-Ala GGC and tRNA-Val GAC ) and 27 (e.g., tRNA-Arg ACG and tRNA-Leu CAA ) core tRNA isoacceptors were defined in Archaea and Bacteria, respectively (supplementary information, Supplementary Material online). Twenty-five tRNA genes (e.g., tRNA-Met CAU and tRNA-Ser GGA ) were found present in both archaeal and bacterial core sets and can therefore be considered as the minimal set of tRNA genes (present in at least 90% of the organisms) found in the ancestor of Archaea and Bacteria. The number of tRNA genes and the tRNA gene diversity among this large number of organisms were strongly correlated to the rRNA and GC content, respectively, as previously reported (Kanaya et al. 1999;Lee et al. 2009;Satapathy et al. 2010). This result clearly supports the notion of tRNA and rRNA gene numbers concomitantly increasing to favor efficient protein synthesis. A detailed analysis of these data is available in the supplementary information, Supplementary Material online.

(p6.1) A large-scale in silico identification and analysis of tRNA array units (supplementary table S3, Supplementary Material online) on all complete genomes of prokaryotic organisms was then performed to investigate the propensity for formation of tRNA array units, as well as how these arose in prokaryotic groups during evolution. A tRNA array unit was defined as a genomic region containing at least 20 tRNA genes with a minimal tRNA gene density of two tRNA genes per kilobase. This strategy led to the identification of 383 tRNA gene arrays in 349 organisms (13% of all organisms) that were mainly located within the chromosome (98.4% of array units). The remaining tRNA array units (six in total) were located in plasmids within six bacterial strains: In Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus A6, Nostoc PCC7120, Nostoc PCC7524, and Methylibium petroleiphilum PM1, they were located in plasmids but not in chromosome; in Paenibacillus polymyxa SC2 and Bacillus thuringiensis Bt407, the tRNA arrays were located in both plasmids and chromosomes. Four tRNA arrays that had previously been found in cyanobacterial strains (Puerto-Galan and Vioque 2012), as well as the two array units in A. ferrivorans CF27 and A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T (see above) were identified, thus validating the tRNA array detection procedure. Almost all of the tRNA arrays were present in Bacteria, but in a limited number of phyla including Firmicutes, Cyanobacteria, Actinobacteria and in the g-proteobacteria class ( fig. 2 and supplementary table S4, Supplementary Material online). About 322 Firmicutes organisms (53.7% of all species in this phylum) harbored nearly 93% of all tRNA arrays, most of which were in Bacilli (64.4% of all Bacilli organisms) and Clostridia (26.8% of all Clostridia organisms) taxonomic classes, with, respectively, 311 and 45 tRNA arrays. In these bacteria, the presence of tRNA array units therefore represents one of the major distinguishing features of their tRNA genomic organization. On the contrary, the tRNA arrays were less represented in Cyanobacteria (13.3%), g-Proteobacteria (2%), and Actinobacteria (1%), suggesting that they may have been acquired through HGT (from Firmicutes or from an unknown donor) during evolution. Among the g-Proteobacteria shown to have a high number of tRNA genes, only few were found to harbor tRNA arrays ( . Surprisingly, only one archaeal organism (i.e., the rumen methanogen Methanobrevibacter ruminantium) was found to possess a tRNA array unit of 21 tRNA genes for a total of 60 tRNA genes. Concomitantly, the higher number of tRNA genes in this organism, compared with other Methanobacteriales species (~36-48 tRNA genes), indicated that extra-tRNA genes were probably acquired through HGT after the divergence of the Methanobacteriales order, and may be linked to the specific lifestyle of this organism. Unfortunately, no distinctive physiological features were found between members of the Methanobrevibacter genus that might have explained a lifestyle adaption for M. ruminantium. Among the organisms with tRNA arrays, 316 (90% of the total) were found to have only one tRNA array in their genome, 32 to possess two and one to harbor three tRNA arrays (B. thuringiensis Bt407) within their genome. Detailed analysis of genomic features associated with tRNA array regions is available in the supplementary information, Supplementary Material online.

(p6.2) The Presence of tRNA Array Units Favors the Redundancy of Core tRNA Isoacceptors Next, the distribution of tRNA genes within prokaryotes with or without tRNA array units according to tRNA amino acid isotype and corresponding tRNA isoacceptor was explored (supplementary fig. S1, Supplementary Material online). All of the 20 isotypes were found located within tRNA arrays with the most represented being tRNA-Met (11.3%), tRNA-Leu (9.7%) and tRNA-Gly (9.8%) genes, and the rarest being tRNA-Cys, tRNA-Trp and tRNA-Tyr, each representing just 2% (supplementary fig. S1A, Supplementary Material online). It is noteworthy that selenocysteine tRNA (TCA) and possible suppressor tRNAs (CTA, TTA) were absent from the tRNA array units. For each tRNA isoacceptor, two tRNA gene indexes were defined as the total number of tRNA genes over the total number of prokaryotes either with or without tRNA array units. By comparing these two indexes, we assessed the propensity of an isoacceptor to be located in organisms with or without arrays. As shown in supplementary fig. S1B, Supplementary Material online, 29 tRNA isoacceptor genes (e.g., tRNA-Glu UUC and tRNA-Val UAC ) had higher indexes for organisms with arrays suggesting a favored location of these tRNA genes within array units. Moreover, no differences were observed between organisms with and those without array units with regards to the codon usage (data not shown). The frequency of each tRNA isoacceptor in the array units or nonarrayed regions within array organisms highlighted (supplementary fig. S1C, Supplementary Material online): 1) A highly variable proportion of tRNA isoacceptor genes within the array units compared with nonarrayed regions, 2) 16 tRNA isoacceptor genes that were more represented in tRNA array units than in nonarrayed regions (e.g., tRNA-Leu UAG and tRNA-Met CAU ), and 3) that on the contrary, some tRNA genes were underrepresented in the tRNA array units (e.g., tRNA-Arg CCU and tRNA-Ser GGA ). Except for the tRNA-Arg UCG gene, all tRNA genes displaying a high frequency in array units were included in the set of high tRNA indexes and interestingly, 14 of them were found to belong to the minimal set of tRNA isoacceptor genes (see supplementary information, Supplementary Material online). Altogether, these results suggest that the presence of tRNA array units may contribute toward tRNA gene redundancy in prokaryotic organisms.

(p6.3) The tRNA gene redundancy was then computed for each prokaryote and found to range from 1 (organisms with a unique tRNA isoacceptor gene in at least 2 copies) (e.g., Pyrobaculum calidifontis JCM 11548 and Aciduliprofundum boonei T469) to 43 (organisms in which 43 tRNA isoacceptors were present in at least two copies) (e.g., Treponema pallidum Next, the number of tRNA genes, the tRNA gene diversity, as well as the tRNA gene redundancy at the codon level were compared between prokaryotes with or without tRNA arrays. The tRNA gene diversity index was calculated as the proportion of arrayed or nonarrayed organisms harboring a particular isoacceptor. The results ( fig. 3A) show that the majority of isoacceptors (e.g., tRNA-Ala UGC and tRNA-Phe GAA ) had a similar tRNA gene diversity index between the two sets of Evolutionary History of tRNA Arrays organisms. In seven specific cases (e.g., tRNA-Ala CGC and tRNA-Val CAC ), the tRNA gene diversity index was significantly higher (more than 2-fold) in nonarrayed organisms whereas the opposite was true for two tRNA genes (tRNA-Leu AAG and tRNA-Thr AGU ). Similarly, the tRNA gene redundancy index was assessed as the proportion of arrayed or nonarrayed organisms harboring a redundancy for a particular isoacceptor ( fig. 3B). Comparison between arrayed and nonarrayed organisms revealed a significantly higher tRNA gene redundancy index in arrayed organisms for 27 tRNA isoacceptors (over 59 represented tRNA types in arrayed organisms), therefore suggesting that tRNA array units favor tRNA gene redundancy but not diversity in prokaryotic organisms. In addition, 82% of these tRNA isoacceptors belonged to the core set of essential tRNA genes (supplementary information, Supplementary Material online), suggesting that in order to increase the number of essential tRNA genes, one strategy adopted by prokaryotes has been to favor the presence of array units in their genomes. One advantage to species with tRNA gene redundancy (and consequently high tRNA gene copy number) is that loss of one tRNA gene may have relatively little impact on the overall tRNA population in the cell for that particular tRNA functional isoacceptor. As a high redundancy of tRNA genes indeed facilitates tRNA anticodon mutation as previously suggested (Rogers and Griffiths-Jones 2014), organisms with tRNA array units would be subjected to anticodon shifts.
## (s9) Discussion
(p9.0) In this study, tRNA array units within prokaryotic organisms have been identified and characterized. These genomic structures appeared to be a general feature of Firmicutes genomes, but were highly polymorphic and largely confined to the Bacilli class. The degree of similarity in tRNA array organization reflected phylogenetic relatedness, with high structural similarity between members of the same genus and species but low structural similarities with organisms outside of the genus. As this type of organization is widespread in low GC Grampositive bacteria, it may be important during spore germination and outgrowth, when rapid activation of the translation machinery is required (Green and Vold 1993;Rudner et al. 1993). However, as tRNA array units were found in nonsporulating prokaryotes, such clustered tRNA gene organization does not appear to be an exclusive requirement for sporulation. In E. coli, tRNA arrays significantly influence global tRNA expression at high growth rates (Ardell and Kirsebom 2005). By molecular differential analysis at the population level, tRNA arrays located at the 3 0 -end of rRNA operons were found to be specific to virulent subgroups of Streptococcus agalactiae strains (Rolland et al. 2002). This raises the possibility of a link between these tRNA genes and the virulence of the bacterium. No relationship was found between the presence of the array units and the organism's lifestyle (aerobic or anaerobic, optimal growth temperature, pathogenicity or environmental conditions) (data not shown). Even when A. ferrivorans CF27/A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T were compared with other Acidithiobacillus organisms, no specific physiological features were able to explain the acquisition and maintenance of tRNA array units.

(p9.1) For most tRNA array units (98% of the total), the tRNA genes are transcribed in the same orientation, suggesting that transcription may occur as one (or in a limited number of) operon(s). Hence, this leaves us with an important question: Do these array unit organization convey a selective genetic advantage to their host? One advantage of tRNA gene clustering is that it reduces the number of tRNA transcriptional units, suggesting that the tRNA content in organisms with tRNA array units could be maintained by a simple gene dosage effect. Such adaptations may favor a more efficient translational regulation thus allowing a rapid and coordinated response to environmental stresses. Indeed, it was recently shown that elevation in tRNA levels accelerated translation and protected E. coli against oxidative stress caused by hydrogen peroxide and the antibiotic ciprofloxacin (Zhong et al. 2015). On the contrary, one disadvantage of having a highly clustered tRNA gene organization is the difficulty finely tuning the transcription of each tRNA gene under different growth conditions. One last compelling theory is that controlling the expression of individual and clustered tRNA species enables different levels of translational control, which may be useful for specific gene products or under certain growth conditions. Another important question that remains is: Does the presence of tRNA arrays enhance the efficiency, fidelity or specificity of the translation? For that purpose, the structural organization (same order in amino acids) of the arrays was analyzed as a protein motif or pattern within proteomes of organisms harboring array units compared with nonarrayed organisms. However, there is no difference between the two sets of organisms suggesting that the structural organization of the arrays is not directly linked to the translation efficiency (data not shown). One unique feature of genetic code redundancy allows choosing between alternative codons for the same amino acid. As the efficiency of translation mainly depends on the concentrations of each corresponding tRNA (Fernandez-Vazquez et al. 2013), the increase in redundancy of core tRNA gene sets within organisms harboring array units would be expected to favor translation efficiency.

(p9.2) Comparative array organization revealed that tRNA array units were acquired through HGT (from Firmicutes or unknown donor), before being subjected to tRNA rearrangements, deletions, insertions, and duplications. The evolutionary history of tRNA array units in Bacilli class shows that they may have originated from at least two common ancestors, from unknown donors. More surprisingly, the low number of tRNA arrays in phyla other than Firmicutes and the low structural similarities among each array unit clearly suggest a reduced mobility of these array units across the taxonomic clades and consequently their evolutionary specificity to one clade. Interestingly, the evolutionary history of tRNAs favored the tRNA gene redundancy instead of tRNA gene diversity, in particular the core tRNA isoacceptors. Therefore, the evolutionary bias for tRNA gene redundancy of the core tRNA isoacceptors within the array units remains in agreement with the wobble rules. This observation leads to an open question: Is the wobble effect stands as a consequence of the tRNA gene redundancy or the opposite? As the wobble effect can explain the degeneracy of the genetic code, this will suggest a possible link between the tRNA gene redundancy and the degeneracy of the code, which in turn will stimulate further research and developments in the RNA field.
