# Ocular Applications of Dipyridamole: A Review of Indications and Routes of Administration

CorpusID: 42807868 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/598c5647c1fb0cafd22385b2741850bbf40cb5d4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/598c5647c1fb0cafd22385b2741850bbf40cb5d4)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Preclinical investigation
(p1.0) Meyer et al. investigated the effects of dipyridamole in isolated porcine ciliary arteries (diameter 200-250 microns) and found that the drug induces concentration-dependent relaxation with the vasodilator effect observed at 10 -4 mol/L dipyridamole. 11 He suggested that the findings demonstrate the vasodilator properties of dipyridamole in porcine ciliary arteries and added that endothelial nitric oxide and prostacyclin made important contributions to these effects. He concluded that further study is needed to show whether the properties of dipyridamole may also occur in vivo and offer clinical benefit in patients with ocular vasospasms and other ophthalmic vascular dysfunctions.

(p1.1) Although dipyridamole can decrease the phosphodiesterase activity, it typically does not interfere with retinal cAMP levels. 12 Estrade et al. used ex vivo model of isolated retina to study the effect of dipyridamole on retinal function assessing electroretinogram amplitudes. 13 Dipyridamole had no effect on the retinal function at 10 -5 mol/L concentration, but changes in rat retina electroretinogram were observed at a concentration of 10 -4 mol/L.

(p1.2) Qin and De Vries examined the mechanisms by which sublethal oxidative stress inhibits retinal pigment epithelial cell phagocytosis because reduction in photoreceptor outer segment load under oxidative stress might direct retinal pigment epithelial cells to a self-protected status, which in turn may be important in dry macular degeneration. 14 They found that although the exact mechanism remained to be addressed, dipyridamole alone enhanced retinal pigment epithelial cell phagocytosis of the photoreceptor outer segment.
## (s4) Topical applications
(p4.0) Topical ophthalmic medications are often the preferred mode of quick and efficient delivery of medication to the eye. The specific features of an eye drop's pharmacologic design help to ensure its acceptability to the patient, its bioavailability, and its respective efficacy at the intended site of action. Characteristics such as pH, osmolality, particle size, and PKa balance influence how effectively a topically applied drug will penetrate through the ocular surface and into the eye. The pH of a topical ophthalmic formulation is preferably between 5.0 and 8.0, although some with a pH as low as 3.0 are acceptable because the pH will rapidly approximate to that of lacrimal fluid upon instillation. Topical ocular indications of dipyridamole have not been sufficiently studied in humans, but the experimental data from animal models suggest minimal associated side effects and/or complications, which have been limited to transient minimal irritation at higher concentrations (0.5% in rabbits) and no observed effect on heart rate, blood pressure, or respiratory system. The early work from Podos found that topical application of dipyridamole (2 drops of 5% suspension) in rabbits had no effect on the artificially induced (by prostaglandin E2) ocular hypertension. 26 Miyazaki and Tanaka examined a method for treatment of ocular hypertension and glaucoma based on the use of dipyridamole eye drops. 29 The ocular hypotensive effect was investigated in rabbits treated with eye drops containing 6 concentrations of dipyridamole that ranged from 0.00005% to 0.5% (equivalent to maximal concentration of 5 g/L, or *0.01 mol/L). Maximal reduction of intraocular pressure was achieved in 1-2 h, and results were concentration dependent. The hypotensive effect lasted for 6 h after administration, and for concentrations ranging from 0.001% to 0.5%, the effect remained unchanged for 6 h after instillation. The effect was similar or superior to commercially used timolol maleate 0.5% eye drops. Eye irritation tests revealed that at the highest used concentration (0.5%), slight congestion in the iris was observed at 0.5 h after instillation. The congestion disappeared after 6 h. The effect was not clinically significant since the increased amount of intraocular blood flow is desirable in the treatment of glaucoma. There were no noticeable changes in other eye irritation measures. The pH range of eye drop preparations varied from 3.0 to 8.0 (preferred range 5.0-8.0). The typical single dosage was 1-3 drops, 25 mg to 6 mg, and was administered 1-4 times daily. The authors recommend that the dosage and administration can vary depending on patients' conditions and age. The drug is considered to be free of hypotensive, brachycardiac, and respiratory side effects associated with beta-blockers used in eye drops.

(p4.1) Most recently, Carlock et al. reported a case of pterygium that was treated using topical dipyridamole rather than surgical intervention. 30 At the initial presentation, the pterygium was staged at stage II to III, V3, C3, K2, and P1 (using Johnston, Williams & Sheppard's classification). Treatment with topically applied dipyridamole (1.68 · 10 -4 mol/L in normal saline solution) was initiated, starting with 1 drop twice daily to the affected area, later reduced to 1 drop daily, and then further reduced over the reported duration of 1 year. The patient experienced a marked improvement in both the pterygium, graded as stage 0 to I, V0, C2, K0, P0, and associated symptoms. The tissue regressed from the limbal region of the cornea and decreased in length and height. Conjunctival hyperemia and vascularization resolved and the underlying scleral vessels could once again be visualized. No systemic side effects or eye irritation related to the dipyridamole was reported. Marked improvement to pterygium and associated symptoms. 29 MW, molecular weight.
