# Survey of Game Theory and Future Trends for Applications in Emerging Wireless Data Communication Networks

CorpusID: 43996751 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c994c9da3f0cd4101a00317fe2d4cd2819480085](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c994c9da3f0cd4101a00317fe2d4cd2819480085)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s2) Classical and Evolutionary Game Theory with Cooperation Incentives
(p2.0) Repeating what was already stated, GT is a mathematical tool that studies the interaction among the players participating in a specific use case. There are two distinct high-level perspectives within GT (see Fig. 4): classical and evolutionary. The classical GT essentially requires that all the players make rational choices among a pre-defined set of static strategies. Consequently, it is fundamental in GT that each player must consider the strategic analysis that the players' opponents are making in determining that her/his own static strategic choice is appropriate. By contrast, a more recent branch of GT -Evolutionary GT (EGT) -states that the players are not completely rational, the players have limited information about available choices and consequences, and the strategies are not static (the strategies evolve). The players have a preferred strategy that is continuously ranked with other alternative strategies. If a player finds a better strategy, then she/he prefers to change to that strategy to get a better reward (so-called fitness). The decision to change the preferred strategy can be also influenced by other neighbouring players belonging to the same population (by observation and learning). In this way, the strategy with the highest selection score inside a group of individuals forming a community will become the predominant strategy for that generation of individuals, and it will be transferred to the next generation of individuals (evolutionary aspect). During this transference, some individual characteristics can be changed through selection, crossover or mutation operations. A major potential advantage of evolutionary GT compared to the classical one is that the system's equilibrium could be achieved more quickly. The system's equilibrium (i.e. game solution) in both classic and evolutionary models means a stable system's configuration, satisfying diverse system requirements and from which no player aims to deviate from. As a player deviates from the system's equilibrium then that player would be penalized by some form of degradation on her/his payoff (classical game) or fitness (evolutionary game). Table II compares the main elements of a classical game with the corresponding facets of an evolutionary game. The GT classical approach can be divided into two dominant branches, namely non-cooperative and cooperative (e.g. coalitional). The essential distinction between these branches is that in non-cooperative GT the basic modeling unit is the individual player, while in cooperative GT the basic modeling unit is a group of several players sharing a common goal but in competition with other groups. The game benefit is also divided in different ways. In a non-cooperative game, each participant gains an individual benefit by default in a selfish way. By contrast, in a cooperative game the benefit obtained by a coalition group is shared among the diverse elements forming that group.

(p2.1) In non-cooperative games some incentives to nodes normally self-interested to collaborate among them to reach a common goal can be inoculated in those games by either pricing [26]- [29], [30], reputation [31]- [33], or others [22] [33][34] [35][36] [37]. This collaboration is useful as the network resources are scarce for satisfying high loads. In this way, the available resources should be fairly distributed among the diverse accepted flows. A pricing scheme to give a strong incentive for collaboration is discussed in [30]. They studied the problem of local cooperative application execution for mobile cloud computing in opposition to move the task execution to a remote cloud. The main expectation behind the local task execution is reduce the latency associated to the complete execution of that task. To encourage mobile devices for sharing their unused resources, they design an incentive scheme, which benefits both the tasks' owners and mobile devices, encouraging local task execution. To model this, they proposed a NC Stackelberg game that permits task owner (leader) to decide the price that can be offered to mobile devices for application execution and, the amount of execution units each device (follower) aims to provide, which is constrained by its battery autonomy. In [29] they analysed a spectrum oligopoly market with primaries and secondaries where secondaries select a channel depending on the price quoted by the primary and the transmission rate the channel offers.
## (s7) Discussion on Nash Equilibrium
(p7.0) The NE can be evaluated in both game types: non-cooperative and cooperative [49]. The authors of [30] have studied the probability to find the NE in each game. Initially, in non-cooperative games with incomplete information about the strategies of the opponents, the probability to find the NE decreases as that available information shrinks. This occurs because the lack of available information means less data about the strategy space of the game opponents. Consequently, the moves of the other players are considered in a random way and it is more difficult to obtain probabilistically the game's NE. In contrast, when a cooperative game is played, the probability of finding the more convenient set of NE increases. In fact, considering a cooperative model, each player has more complete information about the strategy space of others. In this way, a specific player can select the more suitable strategy almost without any conflict, which results in achieving the more convenient NE points with higher probability than in the initial case [49].

(p7.1) Another problem associated with a game's NE is about its uniqueness. In fact, some games with static strategies have multiple NEs. A method to solve this problem and to guarantee a single equilibrium is by using a mixed-strategy game, i.e. each strategy has associated a specific probability that defines the odds of that strategy to be selected by a game player. For a comprehensive contribution discussing the uniqueness of NE on network games, see [50].

(p7.2) There is a particularization of NE designated as Correlated Equilibrium (CE) that describes a condition of competitive optimality that can be found easier than NE. It requires observation of the history of decisions (or their associated outcomes) to naturally correlate players' future decisions. This coordination among players in CE can potentially lead to their higher social welfare than making decision independently as in NE. Reaching a CE implies the capability of players to coordinate their decisions in a distributed way as there was an external observer that they all trust, sending to players some recommendations. These recommendations are associated to a global probability distribution, which is created by the external entity, over the set of strategy vectors. Other more practical reason for a game having a CE is due to the players use the same random events (e.g. due to interference in wireless communications) for choosing their strategies.

(p7.3) When a game is deployed at the network via a distributed algorithm there is always the need to tune it to find the right balance between network optimization and service fairness (e.g. among customers). A hybrid solution based on a Stackelberg game (e.g. network operator is the leader) combined with a CG (e.g. each coalition is formed by local customers with similar service expectations is a follower) can be very useful to adopt in these scenarios.

(p7.4) Computing an NE is generally hard in a repeated game (RG). This difficulty lies in computing the NE because the strategy space of a RG is much larger than that of a one-shot game. In addition, in a RG due to the many possible strategies the opponents of each player might be using, it is hard to learn which strategies will do well. In [51], the authors proposed a new refinement of NE in RGs, namely the level-k equilibrium, in order to develop tractable and general algorithms to compute the NE of RGs. Based on this concept, they show the computational effort to find the NE of a RG can be diminished as they aggregate players within groups of k-elements. Inside each group, there is a complete coordination among its elements that enables a group evolution (learning) to select a stable payoff profile from which none element of that group has any incentive to deviate from. This proposal is only discussed for symmetric RGs and it neither uses mutation nor crossover.
## (s10) Behavioral Facets of Game Theory
(p10.0) The design of wireless networking is challenging due to the highly dynamic environmental condition that makes model parameter optimization a complex task. Due to the dynamic, and often unknown, network status, modern wireless networking proposals increasingly rely on artificial intelligence algorithms. Genetic algorithms (GAs) are well known for their remarkable generality and flexibility and have been applied in a wide diversity of scenarios in wireless networks. A comprehensive survey of the applications of GAs in wireless networks is available in [55]. A GA models how a population of entities with similar characteristics (i.e. species), after several generations, through a process of genetic inheritance constrained by mutation, crossover and natural selection, can evolve to a future generation of that species, which is formed by a majority of entities fully-specialized in solving a specific problem. Applying now the GA methodology to the area of wireless networks, one can conclude that discovering the best solution for a wireless network problem could have a huge impact on the system´s performance; this is related to the necessary time to find out the optimum solution of that problem, as well as the amount of energy depleted on each mobile device's battery to discover the optimum solution in the typical distributed architecture of a wireless networking infrastructure. As a more concrete example, a GA to optimize either routing or localization function in a WSN could not be an efficient proposal to real-time applications due to both high delay and resource consumption (e.g. battery) induced by GA's operation. In this context, other alternative learning techniques, such as Reinforcement Learning (RL) performs better than GA, thus increasing WSN lifespan. RL is an unsupervised learning technique where each entity does not inherit any knowledge from the previous generation and learns only by itself through direct experience and interaction with the environment. In spite of the GA issues that we have just discussed, a GA strong advantage is about its easy deployment in digital signal processors (DSPs) or field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) [55]. Aligned with this, a recent contribution uses GA to enhance the WSN lifespan by employing a new rotated crossover combined with diverse mutation operators [56].
## (s16) Non-cooperative Games
(p16.0) The communications on the network edge requires mitigating the interference not only within a cell but also among cells. This interference mitigation is very important to optimize the usage of network resources. In [108] they study spectrum sharing for D2D communications in scenarios such as public safety and vehicular communications. The pool of shared spectrum is obtained from distinct mobile operators involved in a NC game that analyses possible negotiation strategies among them. The mobile operators submit proposals to each other in parallel until a consensus is found. The authors reach the following conclusions: i) the existence of a unique equilibrium point will occur when every mobile operator has a concave utility function on the box-constrained region and all eigenvalues of derivatives of iterative response process are less than unity. In the case a mobile operator does not fulfil the two above conditions then it cannot be accepted within the network since its participation could cause the existence of multiple equilibria which is undesirable; ii) the iterative algorithm based on the mobile operator's best response might not converge to the equilibrium point due to myopically overreacting to the response of the other mobile operators; iii) alternatively, when the Jacobi-play iterative algorithm for updating the mobile operators' strategies is used with a proper smoothing parameter, then all mobile operators experience performance gains compared with the scheme without spectrum sharing. The Jacobi-play strategy update assumes that all players adjust access probabilities in a specific direction, depending on the measured congestion level of the network, and towards the best-response strategy; iv) In this game asymmetric mobile operators could contribute with an unequal amount of resources to the spectrum pool; v) The authors also assume that the iteration converges much faster than any change detected in the channel.

(p16.1) At the network edge is also relevant to control the transmission power of cognitive radio nodes. In [112] they propose a new chaos based cost function to design power control algorithm and analyse the dynamic spectrum sharing issue among secondary users for their uplink communications through cellular cognitive radio networks. They specify utility/cost functions considering the interference from and the interference tolerance of the primary users. They show that their power control game rapidly converges to a single NE. This result is obtained in parallel with a reduction on the power consumption of cognitive radio terminals at the expense of small drift (1-3%) from the target SINR in comparison with other existing game algorithms. The authors of [118] use NC game theory paired with RL methods, to investigate the problem of power allocation in the uplink communication at both source and relay nodes on a multiple-access multiple relayed scenario. This model achieves a good compromise between energy efficiency and overall data rate.

(p16.2) We have assisted to a significant increase on the number of wireless networks operating at the network edge. This requires a more intelligent and flexible MAC that adjusts MAC system parameters (e.g. sensor wakeup period) to reach a fair equilibrium point, minimizing both the system latency and energy consumption [40]. This also means a denser spectrum usage that requires innovation to reuse that spectrum and minimize the interference among the wireless transmitters in case of competitive transmissions [28].
## (s22) Repeated Games
(p22.0) A repeated game (RG) is an effective tool to avoid potential conflicts among wireless nodes. The occurrence of these conflicts leads to selfish behaviors, resulting in poor network performances and detrimental individual payoffs. Contrary to static one-shot games that model interactions among players during a single time interval, in RGs, interactions of players repeat along multiple time intervals. Thus, the players become aware of other players' past behaviors and their future benefits, and they can adapt their strategies accordingly, resulting in better long-term system performance. In addition, the use of RGs with the aid of a convenient incentive mechanism can encourage wireless nodes to adopt more cooperative strategies, thereby improving network performance and increasing players' benefits. Aligned with these goals, the authors of [33] survey a considerable number of RGs in different wireless networks. A very important advantage of using a RG is to enforce learning at cognitive nodes in a NC game with incomplete and imperfect information [149]. With this learning, the game evolves to a state where the interference is tamed and QoS requirements are fulfilled. In addition, [7] revises RGs but within a more specific scope related to security. From the literature in the scope of RGs, we surveyed and divided it in two parts, namely non-cooperative and cooperative, as discussed below.

(p22.1) Discussion about recent work using non-cooperative repeated games From the literature in the scope of NC RGs, we have selected some recent contributions with the following main goals: radio spectrum sharing [150][29]; multimedia distribution [151][152]; D2D communication [153] [154]; and UAVs airborne communications [130].

(p22.2) The NC RGs we have selected are discussed more comprehensively as follows. The radio spectrum sharing among primary and secondary users is studied in two distinct perspectives: cognitive radio access channel among nodes with imperfect information [150], spectrum oligopoly market where each primary user individually defines a channel-price based on its quality [29]. In [150] they study how autonomous cognitive nodes (CNs) can use in an opportunistic way the unused capacity of a channel normally assigned to Primary Users (PUs). The main goal is to find an efficient and fair opportunistic channel access policy among CNs without disrupting the connection quality offered to PUs. They also consider CNs have two limitations when the channel status is monitored: i) imperfect observation due to both sensing and channel errors; ii) computational constraints. In this context, they propose a repeated game implemented by two-state machine (automaton) to fulfil the following requisites: i) maximizing the total network payoff; ii) ensuring fairness among CNs; ii) reducing the likelihood of collisions among CNs; and iii) requiring a small number of sensing attempts to find a channel free of any PU activity. They discuss and compare their results against the ones obtained from a complete centralized model. The authors of [29] investigate a spectrum oligopoly market where each primary user seeks to sell its channel to a secondary user. On one hand, each primary has a strategy to choose a price depending on the transmission rate of its channel. On the other hand, a secondary player aims to select a channel depending on the price and the transmission rate of the channel. It is assumed that the transmission rate evolves randomly (e.g. due to fading). Using their NC game, they have obtained results that illustrate a primary user prices its channel to render the channel that provides high transmission rate. They also show the primaries suffer a decrease on their profit due to a non-cooperative behaviour among them. Additionally, they studied a repeated version of their game. From this last analysis, they have concluded that a primary user can attain a payoff arbitrarily close to the payoff it would obtain when primaries cooperate.

(p22.3) We have also found some work related with multimedia dissemination through either a content distribution network [151] or a mobile multi-flow multicast approach [152]. The article [151] considers two aspects regarding the problem of distributed caching with limited capacity in a content distribution network. Firstly, a nonparametric learning algorithm is proposed to estimate the request probability of videos from past user choices. Secondly, using these estimated request probabilities, the adaptive caching issue is elaborated as a NC RG in which servers autonomously select which videos to cache. The utility function makes a trade-off between the placement cost for caching videos locally and the latency cost associated with delivering the video to the users from a neighbouring server. The game is nonstationary as the preferences of users in each region evolve over time. The authors then propose an adaptive popularity-based video caching algorithm that has two timescales: i) slow timescale corresponds to learning user preferences; ii) whereas fast timescale is a regretmatching algorithm that provides individual servers with caching prescriptions. It is shown that, if all servers follow simple regret minimization for caching, then the network achieves a correlated equilibrium. This means servers can coordinate their caching strategies in a distributed fashion similarly to a centralized coordinating device that all they trust to follow. The authors of [152] address the resource allocation problem in the multi-flow multicast scenario in a cellular networking environment. To configure the multicast and achieve optimal resource allocation, the BS requires the feedback of the channel-quality information (CQI) from the users. There is an incentive mechanism to users truthfully report the channel quality. This mechanism is based on both pricing and water-filling algorithm. A water-filling algorithm tries to maximize the network capacity, allocating network resources to traffic types in a differentiated way, according to their priority. In this way, the priority of a traffic type could depend on its own demand. As an example, a traffic type with a low demand has a high priority allocation for the network resources that traffic type will be using. A very recent mobile scenario is the mobile D2D communication [153] [154]. In [153] the authors have investigated a cellular network consisting of a BS, multiple cellular users and a D2D pair of users that communicate using licensed spectrum resources. They have introduced a new spectrum trading scheme based on supply and demand curves for service providers (SPs) and D2D user. The game model has been formulated and it has been shown that the game has a unique NE point under a specific condition. Furthermore, a gradient-based learning method has been proposed for decision making of the SPs and the D2D user in incomplete information case, when they only have the historical information about the price. The gradient-based characteristic of the learning method ensures that in spite of small learning rates being selected, the learning game converges to the NE point as well. Their results also show that increasing the channel quality results in more profit for SPs. This is a suitable incentive for SPs to offer bandwidth in high quality channels to improve their economic performance and satisfy their users. It is also shown that the higher learning rates may lead to faster game convergence. Nevertheless, increasing the learning rate from a specified threshold will result in the instability of the game. Article [154] proposes a game-theoretic resource allocation scheme to address inter-cell interference with multiple cell settings in a mobile networking environment, including the coexistence of D2D and cellular transmissions that can mutually interfere when D2D reuses the available cellular spectrum. They characterize Base Stations (BSs) as players competing for resources allocation quota of D2D demand, and define as a novelty the utility of each player as the payoff gained from both cellular and D2D.

(p22.4) Another very recent scenario involves the usage of drones. Aligned with this aspect, the authors of [130] aim to fix the beaconing time period of two UAVs acting as airborne access points to optimize both energy efficiency and rate. They study the scheduling of beacons transmitted by two UAVs acting as drone small cells for two distinct scenarios, temporary events and disaster-relief activities. To study the first scenario, they proposed a NC game and characterized the equilibrium beaconing period durations for the competing drones. Next, for studying the second scenario, they described a fully distributed mechanism that allows each drone to self-discover its equilibrium beaconing strategy without any knowledge of its opponent's scheduling decision. The equilibrium point of each game allows drones to efficiently optimize their energy consumption while maximizing the likelihood of getting in contact with the mobile users on the ground. Some aspects of this work that can be enhanced are as follows: i) the UAV backhaul is a satellite link with high latency and limited rate; ii) they not discuss the energy consumption in each UAV associated to the satellite interface.

(p22.5) Discussion about recent work using cooperative repeated games From the literature in the scope of cooperative RGs, we have selected some recent contributions with the following goals: trade-off between load balancing and energy efficiency [155]; mesh wireless networks [156] [157]; and Delay tolerant networks [60].
## (s24) Coalitional Games
(p24.0) CGs have been applied in wireless networks to design fair, reliable, and efficient cooperation algorithms. One should be aware that to incentivize cooperation among the players of a game, this does not imply the usage of a CG (see our discussion in section 2.2 about Reputation and other incentives for cooperation  [179]. All these scenarios are very relevant for the areas of MEC/FC.
## (s25) Small cell networks
(p25.0) We start our discussion with small cell networks. A possible solution to satisfy the problem imposed by high demands of multimedia data over an already deployed mobile cell is to use a deployment choice commonly proposed in 3G and beyond systems, essentially in areas with a huge concentration of users. This choice is based on the usage of femtocells sharing the same spectrum of the macrocells, which raises new challenges, such as the interference mitigation [97][160], spectrum management [159], uplink user association [158], traffic offloading [97], and optimization of the network throughput considering not only network status but also the social-ties among users, essentially as D2D communications are available [161]. Considering the hierarchical system formed by macro and small cells, the interference mitigation becomes more complex to manage because it has two components [97]: cross-tier and co-tier interference. The cross-tier interference is from the macrocell BS to the small cell BSs. The co-tier interference is among small cell BSs. The authors of [97] propose a CG for the mitigation of both co-tier and cross-tier interferences as well as the resource allocation in dense heterogeneous networks that allows in case of congestion the traffic offload from macrocell base station to small cell base stations. Alternatively, [160] is focused specifically in the co-tier interference reduce.
## (s26) Vehicular networks
(p26.0) The main aspect of a vehicular network is the great difficulty (due to vehicles mobility and limitations on the network coverage) in always maintaining high-quality coverage by means of a convenient access technology, e.g. WAVE (IEEE 802.11p) as visualized in Fig. 16. Consequently, a way to mitigate the previous limitation is to enable multi-hop communications in this emerging scenario. To support multi-hop communications in an efficient way, the cooperation among the vehicles needs to be improved. In this way, coalitional formation games can be very useful to attain those goals. Normally the players of these games are the vehicles.

(p26.1) The authors of [169] proposed a cooperative Bayesian Coalition Game (BCG) as-a-service for content distribution amongst vehicles. This work is complemented in [49] by proposing a NC Bayesian CG. The last two contributions [169][49] could have convergence time issues due to a exponentially increasing complexity in the algorithm to form the coalitions of vehicles when the number of vehicles attached to the network is relatively high. Alternatively, in [170] the algorithm to form the coalitions only requires a single iteration, making it a scalable solution in terms of the number of vehicles, each of which searching for the best access network. The limitation imposed by this proposal is that at a given time, a vehicle is only allowed to use one single network interface. The authors of [171] investigated a reliable message delivery in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs). They model the cooperative service-based message sharing problem in the VANET as a coalition formation game among nodes. Some nodes within a coalition operate as relays. In this way, their solution, for each case, chooses the more adequate relay to enhance rate and reduce delay. 
## (s29) Summary
(p29.0) In this sub-section, we have reviewed the existing literature of CGs at the network edge. The covered topics were the following: small cell networks, D2D communications, vehicular networks, wireless sensor networks, cellular communications, and cloud computing. Some challenging issues for CGs are how to discover the correct strategy of each player (collaborate, defect) and the necessary time to reach the more efficient formation of coalitions among the players.

(p29.1) We have also found in the literature some important contributions that revise game-theoretic models, including CGs, applied to several distinct wireless scenarios, as follows: wireless and communication networks with evolutionary games [43] and without this natural selection perspective [180], cognitive radios [89], radio resource allocation in D2D communication [9], energy efficiency [84] or clustering protocols [85] in wireless sensor networks, and to enhance the collaboration among players via either pricing [157], [184] or reputation [156]. In the following sub-section, we review the available evolutionary games in very diverse networking scenarios.
## (s30) Evolutionary Games
(p30.0) Applying evolutionary algorithms to theoretical games allow players with limited-rationality to learn from the environment and take individual decisions for attaining each game's equilibrium with minimum control message exchange. We have found in the literature games that use evolutionary algorithms in very diverse networking scenarios. From these, we have selected a few with the following main goals: developing strategies for wired [185] or wireless [186][64] cases to efficiently use the available resources, distributed management of networking environments with small cells for optimizing the usage of radio capabilities [96] [187], distributed learning to mitigate interference in wireless topologies with Femtocells [94] [188], and enhancing cooperation in VANETs [189]. The evolutionary games we have selected are now discussed as follows.

(p30.1) Developing more efficient strategies for wired/wireless networks Evolutionary algorithms have been proposed for either wired [185] or wireless [186] [190][64] use cases to use the available networking resources in a more efficient way. In [185] they use evolutionary theoretical games to study the necessary network conditions to concurrent transport protocols might either coevolve or not for dealing with the congestion problem. In the latter case, a dominant protocol would be operating at the network. In addition, the authors propose some directions in upgrading the protocols to enable the network operation at an optimum stable state. An evolution on this could be how to deploy in a non-disruptive way the protocol upgrades in a real networking system. In [186] they discuss an evolutionary Game for vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) caching. In the V2V caching, only users who actively participate in this caching can obtain cached contents from others, and users who participate in V2V caching must keep the contents in storage after watching/using/consuming them. In this work, an evolutionary stable strategy is a mixed strategy for the whole population (i.e. the winner strategy), such that the turbulence of a small proportion of other strategies will gradually disappear in the long-term trend. Examples of these minority strategies are related with a reduce number of users leaving or joining the system. The authors of [190] consider NC mobiles, each faced with the problem of which subset of WLANs access points (APs) to connect (and multi-homing) to, and how to split its traffic among them. Considering the many users' regime, they obtain a potential game model and study its equilibrium. The authors analysed the user performance of UDP/TCP throughput with varying frame lengths over WLAN. They also obtain pricing for which the total throughput is maximized at equilibrium and study the convergence to equilibrium under various evolutionary dynamics. They also study the case where the Internet Service Provider (ISP) could charge prices greater than that of the cost price mechanism and show that even in this case multihoming is desirable. They assume only a single ISP offering multihoming connectivity.

(p30.2) Article [64] offers a comprehensive literature revision in evolutionary CG theory applied to wireless networking and communications use cases such as opportunistic and cognitive radio networks. They assumed a homogeneous network.
## (s33) D2D communications
(p33.0) We discuss now some BGs proposals that have been proposed to analyse D2D communications, which is an essential tool to alleviate the problems of congestion and spectrum scarcity in mobile networks.

(p33.1) A mobile operator has the opportunity to increase the profit from his mobile infrastructure, including the allocated spectrum, if some mobile traffic is offloaded from the channels established between users' terminals and macro base stations to other channels that allow a direct communication among user's terminals, avoiding any intervention of macro base stations [192]. In this way, a mobile cell can support sporadic high loads without any cost/overload increase. To avoid causing interference to the neighbouring cell, they assume each D2D link can only share spectrum with the subscribers in its local cell. The authors of [193] study a cooperative spectrum sharing scenario by allowing secondary users (SUs) to dynamically and opportunistically share the licensed bands with primary users (PUs). For rewarding this, a SU relays PU's traffic to improve the PU's effective data rate. In this way, they propose a dynamic NC bargaining game with incomplete information. This lack of information occurs because the PU does not have complete information of the SU's energy cost. Their results indicate that the proposed scheme can lead to a win-win situation, where both the PU and the SU obtain data rate improvements via a bargaining-based mechanism. They assume that the channel gains remain fixed across time slots. In this simplistic way, they only consider the average channel condition. Consequently, the network could offer transitory periods with unwanted operation. Article [153] proposes a spectrum auction where a D2D transmitter bids a demand price-bandwidth curve and each SP offers a price-bandwidth supply curve. In addition, a repeated game qualifies players to learn despite they have access to only a limited set of information. All the auction activities are conducted by a central entity, called the broker which is located at the base station. This solution has some weaknesses: bottleneck, low reliability, because only a single node decides how spectrum is allocated.
## (s34) Vehicular scenarios
(p34.0) The main characteristic of a vehicular environment is the great difficulty in maintaining all the time a high-quality coverage by means of the current access technologies available via a heterogeneous (typically cellular and WiFi) network infrastructure. Consequently, a way to mitigate this limitation is to deploy multi-hop communications in this emerging scenario. Other very interesting and related aspects with this emerging use case are how to dynamically manage the network locations where data (computation power) is stored (available) (at cloud, cloudlet, access points, base stations, each vehicle) to optimize the system performance, and how the electrical grid should be controlled to energize the batteries of electrical vehicles in the most efficient way. We discuss now some BGs proposals that have been proposed in the context of vehicular environments.

(p34.1) The authors of [137] study the energy charging in a power system composed of an aggregator and multiple electrical vehicles (EVs) in the presence of demand uncertainty. They propose a Stackelberg game, where the aggregator is the leader and EVs are the followers. They propose two different approaches under demand uncertainty: a NC optimization and a cooperative design. In the robust NC case, they present the energy charging problem as a competitive game among self-interested EVs, where each EV chooses its demand strategy for maximizing its benefit. In the robust cooperative model, they formulate an optimal distributed energy scheduling algorithm that maximizes the sum benefit of the connected EVs. They theoretically prove the existence and uniqueness of robust Stackelberg equilibrium for the two approaches and develop distributed algorithms to converge to the global optimal solution independently on the demand uncertainty. Moreover, they extend the two models for handling slow variations on the system power. They considered all possible energy variations using the robust game optimization technique to obtain (NC and cooperative) games results. But according to the original authors of robust games [196], these can only produce stable results only for a bounded payoff uncertainty set. So, the question that raises is how accurate could be the game solution of [137] (obtained from a limited set of possible decisions the opponents could choose) for assuming the most correct adversarial realizations of uncertainty in a realistic application.

(p34.2) In [194] they investigate a Bayesian CG as-a-service for intelligent context-switching of virtual machines (VMs) in a vehicular cloud for reducing the energy consumption, so that the clients of VMS can execute their services without a performance degradation. In the proposed scheme, they have used the concepts of LA and GT in which LA are assumed as the players such that each player has an individual payoff based upon the energy consumption and load on the VM. Players interact with the stochastic environment for acting such as the selection of appropriate VMs and based upon the feedback received from the environment, they update their action probability vector. The performance of the proposed scheme is evaluated by using various performance evaluation metrics such as context-switching delay, overhead generated, execution time, and energy consumption. The results obtained show that the proposed scheme performs well with respect to these metrics. Specifically, using the proposed scheme there is a reduction of 10 percent in energy consumption, 12 percent in network delay, 5 percent in overhead generation, and 10 percent in execution time. The data privacy is an open issue that needs to be addressed in vehicular clouds.
## (s35) Efficient resource allocation for Internet of Things
(p35.0) With the advent of the Internet of Things (IoT), the algorithms and protocols that are used in the network edge need to be revisited to rapidly learning how to adapt to the emerging context that is very dynamic and heterogeneous. An example of an algorithm that requires urgent intervention is the one that controls the access to the communications media for the efficient use of network capabilities. We discuss now some BGs proposals that have been proposed in the context of IoT.

(p35.1) The authors of [157] present a novel concept of incompletely cooperative GT and use it to improve the performance of MAC protocols in WMNs. In this game, first, each node estimates the current game state (e.g., the number of competing nodes). Second, the node adjusts its equilibrium strategy by tuning its local contention parameters (e.g., the minimum contention window) to the estimated game state. Finally, the game is repeated several times to get the optimal performance. To use the game effectively in WMNs, the authors present a hybrid CSMA/CA protocol by integrating a proposed virtual CSMA/CA and the standard CSMA/CA protocol. When a node has no packet to send, it contends for the channel in virtual CSMA/CA mode. In this way, the node can estimate the game state and obtain the optimal strategy. When a node has packets to send, it contends for the channel in standard CSMA/CA mode with the optimal strategy obtained in virtual CSMA/CA mode, switching smoothly from virtual to standard CSMA/CA mode. At the same time, the node keeps adjusting its strategy to the variable game state. In addition, the authors propose a simplified game-theoretic MAC protocol (G-CSMA/CA) by designing an auto backoff mechanism based on the incompletely cooperative game. G-CSMA/CA can easily be implemented in mesh nodes. Finally, simulation results show that the incompletely cooperative game can increase system throughput, decrease delay, jitter, and packet loss rate, and support the game effectively.

(p35.2) In [195] they propose a Bayesian CG for an IoT environment. The players of this game have variable learning rates to optimize their decisions in relation to the most suitable coalition they need to stay in. This leads for discovering game NE quicker than preceding proposals that used static learning rates. Their proposal can be enhanced for supporting the collection of data from various RFID tags deployed in the IoT environment.
## (s43) MEC Main Requirements from the Literature
(p43.0) In our opinion, the emerging paradigm of MEC seems very well aligned with a set of existing networking use cases in the available literature. These scenarios are: cognitive small cells, wireless sensor networks, unmanned vehicles, vehicular networks, micro-grid, and tactile Internet. For each of these scenarios, we discuss below some main requirements to be fulfilled. To fulfil these requirements, we think GT can be a very useful tool to analyse and optimize the network infrastructure involved in each one of those use cases. We also pointed out from the current literature further contributions that can be used as solid references to future exciting developments on the novel paradigm of MEC.

(p43.1) Cognitive small cells The deployment of low-cost and high-capacity cognitive small cells over existing cellular networks has been discussed as a promising solution to small cells offload traffic of a macrocell. To achieve this, some problems induced by this hierarchical design needs to be successfully addressed, such as: share of spectrum among macro and Femtocell base stations, as well as among macrocell and Femtocell users [197] [212]. In [6] is available a comprehensive literature revision on applications of Model-Free strategy learning in cognitive wireless networks. In [213] they discuss relevant trends and challenges in the deployment of millimetre wave, massive MIMO, and small cells to prepare the evolution of current mobile networks towards fifth generation (5G) wireless networks. During this evolution, the capacity of mobile networks should increase to support the exponential growth on data traffic. Several deployment strategies at mobile networks can increase their capacity [214]: i) use of larger bandwidth by exploiting higher spectrum frequencies [135] (i.e. more spectrum available); ii) increasing spectrum efficiency by exploiting multi-antenna transmission/reception [133] (i.e. MIMO, cooperative communications); and iii) spatial reuse of spectrum by deploying D2D communications [192], small cells [199], and heterogeneous access networks [132]. Some open issues for D2D communications are the prevention of denial-of-service (DoS) attacks, particularly in D2D LANs [9]. In addition, user identity is also important for security in D2D networks, so there is a need for a novel method to generate and check user identity. Additionally, Machine-to-Machine (M2M) communications is a promising technology for next generation communication systems [215]. This permits direct interaction among a large number of intelligent devices (e.g. sensors, actuators) without any human intervention.

(p43.2) Wireless sensor networks Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have profound significance towards environmental surveillance and remote monitoring by placing sensors in places of difficult access to humans. However, the limited network lifetime is a major deployment barrier for the traditional battery-operated WSN. Consequently, energy-efficient algorithms and protocols should be developed, e.g. energy harvesting [216] [217]. In addition, the data need to be disseminated with low-latency because most of the cases are used to signalize a faulty situation in the monitored environment that urges to be solved [218][219].

(p43.3) In [220] they propose a localization scheme named Opportunistic Localization by Topology Control (OLTC), specifically for sparse Underwater Sensor Networks (UWSNs). In [7] they use GT to tame security threats in WSNs. In [61] [62] are studied economic and pricing models associated to WSNs. In [18] [130]. This requires for wireless communication links with sufficient QoS metrics (e.g. throughput, delay, jitter), satisfying security requirements (e.g. avoid fake DSCs), and the support of energy consumption optimization [138]. An interesting idea is to use UAVS to deploy a crowd surveillance system [222]. Other tantalizing scenario is using unmanned vehicles to maritime tasks [223][224], such as surveillance and patrolling, aquaculture inspection, or wildlife monitoring. There is a clear need for a completely distributed solution to allow each vehicle to learn (e.g. in an evolutive process) how to engage in a more effective way with other vehicles to all these can fulfil a specific mission. To support the system scalability, the vehicles can be organized in clusters, allowing a cooperative learning inside each cluster.
## (s44) Vehicular networks
(p44.0) The interest of intelligent transportation systems and vehicular ad hoc networks has increased in recent years. As a fundamental building block for the development of applications for vehicular networks, the resource management and sharing problem for bandwidth and computing resources should be revisited to support mobile applications in cloudenabled vehicular networks [225]. The challenges to solve are namely: find in an intelligent and efficient ways the more suitable communication link (i.e. with adequate data rate, low jitter and errors), support multi-hop communications, ensure data privacy, give incentives to vehicles cooperate and either relay traffic from others or cache data that can be used by others, support distinct patterns of mobility, use the parked cars as Serving nodes (i.e. like BSs or APs) for the cars circulating on the road, and increase the comfort of the passengers of self-driving vehicles by giving them all the Internet contents they need (e.g. streaming movie, live concert). Finally, new techniques and solutions are needed to handle data appropriately in vehicular networks [226].
## (s45) Micro-grid
(p45.0) Recently, electric vehicles (EVs) and plug-in hybrid EVs have been considered as natural components of future electricity power systems, due to their efficient integration, cost savings, and significant environmental advantages. This will lead to new significant challenges in the design of power systems. These challenges include proposing energy charging scheduling plans for connected EVs, guaranteeing energy demands of EVs during peak hours, and managing information exchange between EVs and the grid (or aggregators). Other interesting area to investigate is the security of these systems. In fact, intrusion detection/prevention and mitigation of DDoS attacks need to be addressed in micro-grids.  [147]. Considering the widespread penetration of plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs), the overall demand on micro-grids may increase manifold in the near future. In this way, [227] proposes a charging-discharging scheme to manage the micro-grid's load using electrical vehicles. In addition, [229] revises comprehensively the diverse on-air technologies to charge battery-operated devices. Driven by the need of sustainable "green communications" the management of the available energy within a network domain is a challenging and very active research topic [228][230] [231]. From these contributions, [228] investigates a decentralized algorithm that allocates energy for wireless networks with renewable energy powered Base Stations. The authors of [230] study dynamic energy trading through a stochastic game. Their solution assists devices to trade the harvested energy with one another based on the service requirement. Reference [231] proposes a double-action-based relay selection scheme to stimulate the relay nodes to forward packets for others, empowering the network connectivity. For the in-home charging of electrical vehicles, consumer electricity consumption can be controlled through electricity prices, namely using a method designated by demand response. Under demand response, retailers determine their electricity prices, and customers respond accordingly with their electricity consumption levels. In particular, the demands of customers who own electric vehicles are elastic with respect to price. In this context, the interaction between retailers and customers can be seen as a game because both attempt to maximize their own payoffs. Considering this fact, the authors of [147] propose a Stackelberg game based on the demand response to control the electricity consumption. Their results evidence that this game reaches an equilibrium point (NE) at which the electrical vehicle charging requirements are satisfied and retailer profits are maximized, when customers use their own utility function. In addition, they conclude that the NE of this game can vary according to the weighting factor for the utility function of each customer, resulting in various strategic choices. Their numerical results confirm that the NE of the proposed game lies somewhere between the minimum generation-cost solution and the result of the equal-charging scheme.
## (s46) Tactile Internet
(p46.0) The Tactile Internet (TI) involves human-to-machine (H2M) communications for remotely supervise tactile/haptic devices. These devices have local sensors and actuators and are required to be controlled via the Internet in a completely reliable and deterministic ways [232]. The TI seems to converge towards a well-defined list of design goals [233]: very low latency on the order of 1 ms; ultra-high reliability; H2H/M2M coexistence; security. Other important challenges for the TI are, as follows [233][234]: resource management; task allocation and orchestration; mobility of robots; remote robot steering and control applications. In addition, the authors of [72] report on the first initiative in designing LANs to facilitate the converged delivery of latency-sensitive TI traffic and bandwidth-intensive applications.
## (s47) GT Future Trends Aligned with MEC Use Cases
(p47.0) We present now some thoughts about possible future GT research directions related to MEC use cases discussed above. We can resume the challenges in the following areas: augmented/assisted/virtual reality, cognitive assistance, dynamic and fair (virtual) resource allocation, seamless session transfer, and congestion control. The augmented/assisted/virtual reality as well as cognitive assistance have a strong demand on location and other environmental information obtained via camera/sensors. The dynamic and fair (virtual) resource allocation has a prominent demand on elastic system capabilities such as storage and computing power. The seamless session transfer has a strong demand on an efficient support of host mobility as well as the life cycle of virtualized resources. The congestion control has a strong demand on two distinct networking aspects: technical and business. We narrow our next discussion in how to control the network congestion. The technical networking aspects that are relevant to mitigate congestion and empower the performance of MEC scenarios are as follows: traffic offloading [235][13] [236], D2D communication [154][38] [9], relaying [237][156] [118], and a recent topic designated by Full Duplex (FD) communications [238]. This last topic has a very high potential to enhance the performance of mobile networks, including the upcoming 5G [181]. In fact, a FD system allows a specific node to send and receive the transmitted signals at the same time and frequency resource, doubling the spectral efficiency of each wireless link. The authors of [238] have used both GT and matching theory to analyse diverse centralized and distributed FD communication networks. Continuing our discussion about the technical aspects that can be applied to cellular networks to attenuate the congestion issue, all these aspects we have just highlighted in the previous text can be deployed using CGs to enhance the cooperation among the devices [192][164] [143]. Nevertheless, according to our current knowledge only a small number of papers have proposed cooperative strategies among users or providers considering the cost for cooperation [167]. The cost can be the power required and the terminal battery energy for negotiation, the additional delay because of the information exchange, the security threats, and the fairness aspect among nodes. In a practical scenario, it is not reasonable to neglect this cost for spectrum management especially in a resource constrained environment like future networks dealing with the near-exponential increase in data traffic. Therefore, investigating the overhead, delay, security threats and fairness issues caused by the communication to form coalition groups for cooperation can be an interesting direction for future research in the area of GT. In addition, trust and security are key issues for future networks. The presence of malicious (or colluding) entities and their possible attacks against incentive mechanisms for cooperation need further research. For investigating different issues such as how to detect and counteract such attacks, and how the reliability of network can be maintained despite the presence of misbehaving nodes, using GT can be a very fruitful research area [239]. Finally, we are assuming the business aspect of the network to tame the congestion. Reference [240] proposes the usage of a dynamic congestion-sensitive tariff, where prices are set in realtime following load or interference for maximizing efficiency and fairness.
## (s48) Final Reflection about GT Applied to MEC
(p48.0) Our discussion was focused on identifying important topics where further work needs to be performed for enhancing the performance of future wireless networks in the face of some expected requisites that MEC would demand for. These topics that GT would need to address are namely heterogeneity, novel flow requirements, scarce resources for network connectivity, traffic offloading, and spectrum sharing. In our view, GT aspects of cooperation and learning will be most relevant for using a common pool of network resources in the most efficient way among the diverse players. The future games for MEC use cases should have a cross-fertilization of ideas among the following features: incentives to cooperate among the players (e.g. pricing, reputation, auctions, lotteries, bargaining games, contract theory, mechanism design, artificial intelligence, and social interactions); the players should play the game in a way to synthesize and integrate both learning and optimum operation of available network resources; one should assume realistically that, in order to make a decision, the players have access to only a limited part of the total system status; and evolutionary algorithms and virtualization will offer flexibility and elasticity to global system operation in spite of variable and diverse traffic loads.

(p48.1) In terms of the deployment of theoretical games at the network edge, the usage of a single game to control the operation of such a heterogeneous and dynamic data communication system seems difficult, because the system has a dynamic behaviour, constrained resources, uncertain information, as well as there are several simultaneous critical tradeoffs to balance, namely: available energy vs. relaying traffic, computation offloading vs. channel interference, and data consistency vs. latency. So, we envision an alternative way to control the system, breaking an original high complex problem in several lower complexity sub-problems. To support this, at the MEC servers, we point out the existence of several virtual machines or "lighter" namespaces (e.g. dockers) with agents where each one can run its own theoretical game with very specific goals, acting as a decision-maker. In this architecture, the terminals should also have some namespaces to play the games in which those terminals need to be involved. The architecture would require -at the edge of the network -some orchestration among the distinct games played by the same terminal. A strong advantage from this coordination is the fully-integrated distribution control of network, computational, and storage resources at the network edge. SDN [17] and NFV [241] can both abstract and orchestrate this control in quicker and more effective ways, solving the various trade-offs in the best way possible [242]. This system can be designated as Software Defined Mobile Edge Computing (SD-MEC). In addition, SDN controllers can combine header fields from any stack layer, creating a crosslayer design that is very suitable for emerging wireless scenarios such as D2D communications [243], vehicular networks [244], and sensor networks [245]. The system could be also hierarchical to support flexibility, reliability and scalability.

(p48.2) The Fig. 18 illustrates a network design of what we have just discussed. There are several communities; each one could be formed by people, devices, or systems. These entities are within communities because every entity has relationships with others in one form or another. This is the basis for another emerging concept on networking designated by mobile social networks [9] [246]. A mobile social network is a user-centric system in which the devices not only process data, but also deal with context information (e.g. location) to either react (passively) or predict (actively) to respectively the network status at each time or an expected network status. In this scenario, the presence of agents at the network periphery (e.g. at either SDN controllers or applications running over the SDN controllers via Northbound APIs) can transform information into network knowledge, creating the cognitive network. This cognitive network, using theoretical games fuelled by evolutionary algorithms and artificial intelligence can infer valid and precise human behavioural patterns from the aggregated data that have been previously acquired via local sensors. Using the inferred knowledge, the agents, after running an election among essentially the neighbouring agents that sorts out a ranked list of viable automatic actions, select the top-most ranked actions, run these over the monitored systems, including network resources and services, and learn from the obtained results [247]. In this way, a digital shared intelligence is created at the network periphery with hopefully precise and valid operational equilibria to successfully solve the initial paradox of offering the most highly viable service quality with minimum cost, as well as supporting fairness among the diverse competitive flows with heterogeneous requisites in the presence of high and unexpected fluctuations on the traffic load.  
