# Recent Developments in Cancer Treatment: A Review

CorpusID: 44794049 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/800938b5c26d55ce2f3476aa6f50fb89dfda6991](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/800938b5c26d55ce2f3476aa6f50fb89dfda6991)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Cancer was first described by Hippocrates using the Greek word "karkinos" (crab or crayfish) [1]. This name came from the appearance of the cut surface of a solid malignant tumor, with "the veins stretched on all sides as the crab has its feet, whence it derives its name" [2]. According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that worldwide there will be almost 22.2 million new cancer cases diagnosed annually by 2030. The overall survival times of patients with many types of malignancies remain low. The above findings underline the urgent need for the development of new therapeutic models, and the improvement of the existing ones, to inhibit cancer progression and deliver improved therapeutic outcomes.

(p0.1) Cancer was first described by Hippocrates using the Greek word "karkinos" (crab or crayfish) [1]. This name came from the appearance of the cut surface of a solid malignant tumor, with "the veins stretched on all sides as the crab has its feet, whence it derives its name" [2]. According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that worldwide there will be almost 22.2 million new cancer cases diagnosed annually by 2030. The overall survival times of patients with many types of malignancies remain low. The above findings underline the urgent need for the development of new therapeutic models, and the improvement of the existing ones, to inhibit cancer progression and deliver improved therapeutic outcomes.
## (s2) SMDs
(p2.0) This kind of medication belongs to the class of cutting-edge anti-cancer drugs. SMDs can penetrate the cell membrane and the blood-brain barrier more easily. They are simple organic molecules with a low molecular weight (<1000 kDa) that can be delivered orally or intravenously. To date, many of these drugs have been used as inhibitors in the treatment of cancer and other diseases.

(p2.1) Kinase inhibitors are a group of molecules that specifically inhibit the action of one or more protein kinases. Hence, they can be subdivided or characterized by the amino acids whose phosphorylation is inhibited [3]. The general assumption is that they block the cell signaling function, but this is only part of the whole process. It is believed that their effect is dose dependent. When high doses of kinase inhibitors are administered to patients, it has been found that they prevent kinases from linking up with the Hsp90-Cdc37 chaperone system, a complex of molecules in cells that plays a vital role in the stability of proteins [4,5]. They have been heralded as a new type of targeted therapy, because there are 400 of them under development and there are 25 already in use. A few examples are erlotinib for the treatment of non-smallcell lung cancer, lapatinib for the treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer, and sorafenib for the treatment of kidney cancer.

(p2.2) A second class of SMDs are the proteasome inhibitors (PIs). Interestingly, transformed cells display greater susceptibility to this kind of drug than healthy tissues [6,7]. Lactacystin was the first Pharmaceutical Regulatory Affairs: Open Access non-peptidic PIs. As SMDs have been proven to be more effective in multiple myeloma than other cancer patients, many of them have been introduced into clinical practice; as monotherapy or in combination with other already established compounds (carfilzomib, marizomib, and MLN9708) [8].

(p2.3) The urgent need for new targeted anticancer drugs has led to the development of an additional type of inhibitor known as cyclindependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors [9]. They function by arresting cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Palbociclib is a US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved investigational new drug, which is an oral and selective inhibitor of CDK 4 and 6. CDK 4 and 6 are two closely related kinases that enable tumor cell progression during the G1 and S phases of the cell cycle. Many broad-range CDK inhibitors such as flavopiridol and olomoucine, as well as specific CDK inhibitors such as fascaplysin, ryuvidine, and purvalanol A) are under investigation in clinical trials [10].

(p2.4) Generally, this type of molecule that can inhibit multiple targets simultaneously, including cell receptors or signal transduction pathway proteins, has been found to be less specific than therapeutic monoclonal antibodies. Consequently, the use of some of these molecules can lead to a higher risk of toxicity and gastrointestinal symptoms. Indeed, it has been shown that molecular-targeted therapies which are used in combination with conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy or moabs achieve improved outcomes [11].

(p2.5) This kind of medication belongs to the class of cutting-edge anti-cancer drugs. SMDs can penetrate the cell membrane and the blood-brain barrier more easily. They are simple organic molecules with a low molecular weight (<1000 kDa) that can be delivered orally or intravenously. To date, many of these drugs have been used as inhibitors in the treatment of cancer and other diseases.

(p2.6) Kinase inhibitors are a group of molecules that specifically inhibit the action of one or more protein kinases. Hence, they can be subdivided or characterized by the amino acids whose phosphorylation is inhibited [3]. The general assumption is that they block the cell signaling function, but this is only part of the whole process. It is believed that their effect is dose dependent. When high doses of kinase inhibitors are administered to patients, it has been found that they prevent kinases from linking up with the Hsp90-Cdc37 chaperone system, a complex of molecules in cells that plays a vital role in the stability of proteins [4,5]. They have been heralded as a new type of targeted therapy, because there are 400 of them under development and there are 25 already in use. A few examples are erlotinib for the treatment of non-smallcell lung cancer, lapatinib for the treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer, and sorafenib for the treatment of kidney cancer.

(p2.7) A second class of SMDs are the proteasome inhibitors (PIs). Interestingly, transformed cells display greater susceptibility to this kind of drug than healthy tissues [6,7]. Lactacystin was the first Pharmaceutical Regulatory Affairs: Open Access non-peptidic PIs. As SMDs have been proven to be more effective in multiple myeloma than other cancer patients, many of them have been introduced into clinical practice; as monotherapy or in combination with other already established compounds (carfilzomib, marizomib, and MLN9708) [8].

(p2.8) The urgent need for new targeted anticancer drugs has led to the development of an additional type of inhibitor known as cyclindependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors [9]. They function by arresting cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Palbociclib is a US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved investigational new drug, which is an oral and selective inhibitor of CDK 4 and 6. CDK 4 and 6 are two closely related kinases that enable tumor cell progression during the G1 and S phases of the cell cycle. Many broad-range CDK inhibitors such as flavopiridol and olomoucine, as well as specific CDK inhibitors such as fascaplysin, ryuvidine, and purvalanol A) are under investigation in clinical trials [10].

(p2.9) Generally, this type of molecule that can inhibit multiple targets simultaneously, including cell receptors or signal transduction pathway proteins, has been found to be less specific than therapeutic monoclonal antibodies. Consequently, the use of some of these molecules can lead to a higher risk of toxicity and gastrointestinal symptoms. Indeed, it has been shown that molecular-targeted therapies which are used in combination with conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy or moabs achieve improved outcomes [11].
## (s4) ADCs
(p4.0) The ADCs that are also called immunoconjugates belong to the moab family. The difference between moabs and ADCs is that the ADC molecule consists of an antibody that is linked with a small compound such as a plant or bacterial toxin, a chemotherapy drug, or a radioactive molecule. The mechanism of action is based on the fact that the moab drives the toxin into the cancer cell where it will manifest its cytotoxic activity. In fact, the process is more complex. When the ADC travels into the circulation, the linker that conjugates the moab with the toxin must be stable in order not to be damaged. However, the moab must have the ability to bind specifically to the target and be internalized by the cell to facilitate improved drug release (in an active form). Finally, the high efficacy of the ADC against the selected target is because of its toxicity [22]. 90Y-ibritumomab tiuxetan, which is an FDA-approved ADC, targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive yttrium-90 to B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. Another ADC is 131I-tositumomab, which targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive iodine-131 to non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. MLN0264 is an experimental ADC designed to selectively deliver a highly potent cytotoxic payload to tumors that express guanyl cyclase C (GCC). MLN0264 consists of the highly toxic agent monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE) attached to an antibody that recognizes GCC via a cleavable linker [23].

(p4.1) In the case of ADCs, there are some disadvantages that still have to be overcome. For ADCs to be used in cancer treatment, the tumor needs to be tested for the expression of the target antigen. In addition, the payload of the ADC may become toxic as a result of premature release. Additionally, as was mentioned above, toxicity may be produced as a consequence of non-specific binding to healthy tissues and heterogeneous solid tumors [24].

(p4.2) The ADCs that are also called immunoconjugates belong to the moab family. The difference between moabs and ADCs is that the ADC molecule consists of an antibody that is linked with a small compound such as a plant or bacterial toxin, a chemotherapy drug, or a radioactive molecule. The mechanism of action is based on the fact that the moab drives the toxin into the cancer cell where it will manifest its cytotoxic activity. In fact, the process is more complex. When the ADC travels into the circulation, the linker that conjugates the moab with the toxin must be stable in order not to be damaged. However, the moab must have the ability to bind specifically to the target and be internalized by the cell to facilitate improved drug release (in an active form). Finally, the high efficacy of the ADC against the selected target is because of its toxicity [22]. 90Y-ibritumomab tiuxetan, which is an FDA-approved ADC, targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive yttrium-90 to B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. Another ADC is 131I-tositumomab, which targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive iodine-131 to non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. MLN0264 is an experimental ADC designed to selectively deliver a highly potent cytotoxic payload to tumors that express guanyl cyclase C (GCC). MLN0264 consists of the highly toxic agent monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE) attached to an antibody that recognizes GCC via a cleavable linker [23].

(p4.3) In the case of ADCs, there are some disadvantages that still have to be overcome. For ADCs to be used in cancer treatment, the tumor needs to be tested for the expression of the target antigen. In addition, the payload of the ADC may become toxic as a result of premature release. Additionally, as was mentioned above, toxicity may be produced as a consequence of non-specific binding to healthy tissues and heterogeneous solid tumors [24].
## (s5) Cancer treatment vaccines
(p5.0) Cancer treatment vaccines belong to the family of biological response modifiers. They are categorized as preventive (or prophylactic) vaccines and treatment (or therapeutic) vaccines. In the field of cancer, therapeutic vaccines are used that are either designed to treat cancers that have already developed or to prevent the disease.

(p5.1) With regard to the immune system's mode of action, it is capable of both specific and non-specific responses against tumor cells. For a cancer vaccine to be successful, it must have the ability to stimulate the immune system to act primarily in a tumor-specific fashion. In this mode, it would present tumor antigens to immune cells and activate CD4 (also known as helper T cells) and CD8 T cells (also known as cytotoxic or killer T cells). CD8 T cells when activated directly kill tumor cells [25], while CD4 T cells are indirectly activated by dendritic cells and macrophages [26] to produce messengers (cytokines) that boost CD8 (killer) T-cell activity [27,28]. name Provenge) is the first FDA-approved therapeutic cancer vaccine for prostate cancer. This is a dendritic cell vaccine; other types of cancer vaccine that are being studied are tumor cell vaccines, antigen vaccines, and DNA and vector-based vaccines [29,30].

(p5.2) At this time point it has to be mentioned that this type of immunotherapy has systemic and local effects. Recent studies have shown that vaccination with embryonic stem cells may generate effective antitumor immunity against ovarian cancer [31]. Because whole cells are used for the preparation of vaccines, a greater proportion of intracellular molecules are combined with a smaller proportion of cell surface-associated molecules, thereby reducing the concentration of cancer cell-specific antigens recognized for vaccine production. Therefore, cancer cells used for the development of cancer treatment vaccines contain a high proportion of targets that may not be cancer cell specific, and an enrichment of cell surface material is needed to improve their effectiveness [32].

(p5.3) Cancer treatment vaccines belong to the family of biological response modifiers. They are categorized as preventive (or prophylactic) vaccines and treatment (or therapeutic) vaccines. In the field of cancer, therapeutic vaccines are used that are either designed to treat cancers that have already developed or to prevent the disease.

(p5.4) With regard to the immune system's mode of action, it is capable of both specific and non-specific responses against tumor cells. For a cancer vaccine to be successful, it must have the ability to stimulate the immune system to act primarily in a tumor-specific fashion. In this mode, it would present tumor antigens to immune cells and activate CD4 (also known as helper T cells) and CD8 T cells (also known as cytotoxic or killer T cells). CD8 T cells when activated directly kill tumor cells [25], while CD4 T cells are indirectly activated by dendritic cells and macrophages [26] to produce messengers (cytokines) that boost CD8 (killer) T-cell activity [27,28]. name Provenge) is the first FDA-approved therapeutic cancer vaccine for prostate cancer. This is a dendritic cell vaccine; other types of cancer vaccine that are being studied are tumor cell vaccines, antigen vaccines, and DNA and vector-based vaccines [29,30].

(p5.5) At this time point it has to be mentioned that this type of immunotherapy has systemic and local effects. Recent studies have shown that vaccination with embryonic stem cells may generate effective antitumor immunity against ovarian cancer [31]. Because whole cells are used for the preparation of vaccines, a greater proportion of intracellular molecules are combined with a smaller proportion of cell surface-associated molecules, thereby reducing the concentration of cancer cell-specific antigens recognized for vaccine production. Therefore, cancer cells used for the development of cancer treatment vaccines contain a high proportion of targets that may not be cancer cell specific, and an enrichment of cell surface material is needed to improve their effectiveness [32].
## (s6) Other Recent Treatments
(p6.0) The development of nanopolymer drug delivery systems is another type of treatment for cancer. Liposomal and lipid-based products have entered the mainstream as sustained-release drug delivery systems. Marqibo (Talon) with the generic name vincristine sulfate is used for the treatment of patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL); Myocet (Cephalon), a liposome -encapsulated form of doxorubicin ,is used for the treatment of breast cancer. These are two examples of the many FDA-approved drugs in this category [33,34]. Additionally, treatment methods that include combinations of therapeutic models already in use, have been investigated.

(p6.1) The development of nanopolymer drug delivery systems is another type of treatment for cancer. Liposomal and lipid-based products have entered the mainstream as sustained-release drug delivery systems. Marqibo (Talon) with the generic name vincristine sulfate is used for the treatment of patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL); Myocet (Cephalon), a liposome -encapsulated form of doxorubicin ,is used for the treatment of breast cancer. These are two examples of the many FDA-approved drugs in this category [33,34]. Additionally, treatment methods that include combinations of therapeutic models already in use, have been investigated.
## (s8) Introduction
(p8.0) Cancer was first described by Hippocrates using the Greek word "karkinos" (crab or crayfish) [1]. This name came from the appearance of the cut surface of a solid malignant tumor, with "the veins stretched on all sides as the crab has its feet, whence it derives its name" [2]. According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that worldwide there will be almost 22.2 million new cancer cases diagnosed annually by 2030. The overall survival times of patients with many types of malignancies remain low. The above findings underline the urgent need for the development of new therapeutic models, and the improvement of the existing ones, to inhibit cancer progression and deliver improved therapeutic outcomes.

(p8.1) Cancer was first described by Hippocrates using the Greek word "karkinos" (crab or crayfish) [1]. This name came from the appearance of the cut surface of a solid malignant tumor, with "the veins stretched on all sides as the crab has its feet, whence it derives its name" [2]. According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that worldwide there will be almost 22.2 million new cancer cases diagnosed annually by 2030. The overall survival times of patients with many types of malignancies remain low. The above findings underline the urgent need for the development of new therapeutic models, and the improvement of the existing ones, to inhibit cancer progression and deliver improved therapeutic outcomes.
## (s10) SMDs
(p10.0) This kind of medication belongs to the class of cutting-edge anti-cancer drugs. SMDs can penetrate the cell membrane and the blood-brain barrier more easily. They are simple organic molecules with a low molecular weight (<1000 kDa) that can be delivered orally or intravenously. To date, many of these drugs have been used as inhibitors in the treatment of cancer and other diseases.

(p10.1) Kinase inhibitors are a group of molecules that specifically inhibit the action of one or more protein kinases. Hence, they can be subdivided or characterized by the amino acids whose phosphorylation is inhibited [3]. The general assumption is that they block the cell signaling function, but this is only part of the whole process. It is believed that their effect is dose dependent. When high doses of kinase inhibitors are administered to patients, it has been found that they prevent kinases from linking up with the Hsp90-Cdc37 chaperone system, a complex of molecules in cells that plays a vital role in the stability of proteins [4,5]. They have been heralded as a new type of targeted therapy, because there are 400 of them under development and there are 25 already in use. A few examples are erlotinib for the treatment of non-smallcell lung cancer, lapatinib for the treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer, and sorafenib for the treatment of kidney cancer.

(p10.2) A second class of SMDs are the proteasome inhibitors (PIs). Interestingly, transformed cells display greater susceptibility to this kind of drug than healthy tissues [6,7]. Lactacystin was the first Pharmaceutical Regulatory Affairs: Open Access non-peptidic PIs. As SMDs have been proven to be more effective in multiple myeloma than other cancer patients, many of them have been introduced into clinical practice; as monotherapy or in combination with other already established compounds (carfilzomib, marizomib, and MLN9708) [8].

(p10.3) The urgent need for new targeted anticancer drugs has led to the development of an additional type of inhibitor known as cyclindependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors [9]. They function by arresting cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Palbociclib is a US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved investigational new drug, which is an oral and selective inhibitor of CDK 4 and 6. CDK 4 and 6 are two closely related kinases that enable tumor cell progression during the G1 and S phases of the cell cycle. Many broad-range CDK inhibitors such as flavopiridol and olomoucine, as well as specific CDK inhibitors such as fascaplysin, ryuvidine, and purvalanol A) are under investigation in clinical trials [10].

(p10.4) Generally, this type of molecule that can inhibit multiple targets simultaneously, including cell receptors or signal transduction pathway proteins, has been found to be less specific than therapeutic monoclonal antibodies. Consequently, the use of some of these molecules can lead to a higher risk of toxicity and gastrointestinal symptoms. Indeed, it has been shown that molecular-targeted therapies which are used in combination with conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy or moabs achieve improved outcomes [11].

(p10.5) This kind of medication belongs to the class of cutting-edge anti-cancer drugs. SMDs can penetrate the cell membrane and the blood-brain barrier more easily. They are simple organic molecules with a low molecular weight (<1000 kDa) that can be delivered orally or intravenously. To date, many of these drugs have been used as inhibitors in the treatment of cancer and other diseases.

(p10.6) Kinase inhibitors are a group of molecules that specifically inhibit the action of one or more protein kinases. Hence, they can be subdivided or characterized by the amino acids whose phosphorylation is inhibited [3]. The general assumption is that they block the cell signaling function, but this is only part of the whole process. It is believed that their effect is dose dependent. When high doses of kinase inhibitors are administered to patients, it has been found that they prevent kinases from linking up with the Hsp90-Cdc37 chaperone system, a complex of molecules in cells that plays a vital role in the stability of proteins [4,5]. They have been heralded as a new type of targeted therapy, because there are 400 of them under development and there are 25 already in use. A few examples are erlotinib for the treatment of non-smallcell lung cancer, lapatinib for the treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer, and sorafenib for the treatment of kidney cancer.

(p10.7) A second class of SMDs are the proteasome inhibitors (PIs). Interestingly, transformed cells display greater susceptibility to this kind of drug than healthy tissues [6,7]. Lactacystin was the first Pharmaceutical Regulatory Affairs: Open Access non-peptidic PIs. As SMDs have been proven to be more effective in multiple myeloma than other cancer patients, many of them have been introduced into clinical practice; as monotherapy or in combination with other already established compounds (carfilzomib, marizomib, and MLN9708) [8].

(p10.8) The urgent need for new targeted anticancer drugs has led to the development of an additional type of inhibitor known as cyclindependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors [9]. They function by arresting cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Palbociclib is a US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved investigational new drug, which is an oral and selective inhibitor of CDK 4 and 6. CDK 4 and 6 are two closely related kinases that enable tumor cell progression during the G1 and S phases of the cell cycle. Many broad-range CDK inhibitors such as flavopiridol and olomoucine, as well as specific CDK inhibitors such as fascaplysin, ryuvidine, and purvalanol A) are under investigation in clinical trials [10].

(p10.9) Generally, this type of molecule that can inhibit multiple targets simultaneously, including cell receptors or signal transduction pathway proteins, has been found to be less specific than therapeutic monoclonal antibodies. Consequently, the use of some of these molecules can lead to a higher risk of toxicity and gastrointestinal symptoms. Indeed, it has been shown that molecular-targeted therapies which are used in combination with conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy or moabs achieve improved outcomes [11].
## (s12) ADCs
(p12.0) The ADCs that are also called immunoconjugates belong to the moab family. The difference between moabs and ADCs is that the ADC molecule consists of an antibody that is linked with a small compound such as a plant or bacterial toxin, a chemotherapy drug, or a radioactive molecule. The mechanism of action is based on the fact that the moab drives the toxin into the cancer cell where it will manifest its cytotoxic activity. In fact, the process is more complex. When the ADC travels into the circulation, the linker that conjugates the moab with the toxin must be stable in order not to be damaged. However, the moab must have the ability to bind specifically to the target and be internalized by the cell to facilitate improved drug release (in an active form). Finally, the high efficacy of the ADC against the selected target is because of its toxicity [22]. 90Y-ibritumomab tiuxetan, which is an FDA-approved ADC, targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive yttrium-90 to B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. Another ADC is 131I-tositumomab, which targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive iodine-131 to non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. MLN0264 is an experimental ADC designed to selectively deliver a highly potent cytotoxic payload to tumors that express guanyl cyclase C (GCC). MLN0264 consists of the highly toxic agent monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE) attached to an antibody that recognizes GCC via a cleavable linker [23].

(p12.1) In the case of ADCs, there are some disadvantages that still have to be overcome. For ADCs to be used in cancer treatment, the tumor needs to be tested for the expression of the target antigen. In addition, the payload of the ADC may become toxic as a result of premature release. Additionally, as was mentioned above, toxicity may be produced as a consequence of non-specific binding to healthy tissues and heterogeneous solid tumors [24].

(p12.2) The ADCs that are also called immunoconjugates belong to the moab family. The difference between moabs and ADCs is that the ADC molecule consists of an antibody that is linked with a small compound such as a plant or bacterial toxin, a chemotherapy drug, or a radioactive molecule. The mechanism of action is based on the fact that the moab drives the toxin into the cancer cell where it will manifest its cytotoxic activity. In fact, the process is more complex. When the ADC travels into the circulation, the linker that conjugates the moab with the toxin must be stable in order not to be damaged. However, the moab must have the ability to bind specifically to the target and be internalized by the cell to facilitate improved drug release (in an active form). Finally, the high efficacy of the ADC against the selected target is because of its toxicity [22]. 90Y-ibritumomab tiuxetan, which is an FDA-approved ADC, targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive yttrium-90 to B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. Another ADC is 131I-tositumomab, which targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive iodine-131 to non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. MLN0264 is an experimental ADC designed to selectively deliver a highly potent cytotoxic payload to tumors that express guanyl cyclase C (GCC). MLN0264 consists of the highly toxic agent monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE) attached to an antibody that recognizes GCC via a cleavable linker [23].

(p12.3) In the case of ADCs, there are some disadvantages that still have to be overcome. For ADCs to be used in cancer treatment, the tumor needs to be tested for the expression of the target antigen. In addition, the payload of the ADC may become toxic as a result of premature release. Additionally, as was mentioned above, toxicity may be produced as a consequence of non-specific binding to healthy tissues and heterogeneous solid tumors [24].
## (s13) Cancer treatment vaccines
(p13.0) Cancer treatment vaccines belong to the family of biological response modifiers. They are categorized as preventive (or prophylactic) vaccines and treatment (or therapeutic) vaccines. In the field of cancer, therapeutic vaccines are used that are either designed to treat cancers that have already developed or to prevent the disease.

(p13.1) With regard to the immune system's mode of action, it is capable of both specific and non-specific responses against tumor cells. For a cancer vaccine to be successful, it must have the ability to stimulate the immune system to act primarily in a tumor-specific fashion. In this mode, it would present tumor antigens to immune cells and activate CD4 (also known as helper T cells) and CD8 T cells (also known as cytotoxic or killer T cells). CD8 T cells when activated directly kill tumor cells [25], while CD4 T cells are indirectly activated by dendritic cells and macrophages [26] to produce messengers (cytokines) that boost CD8 (killer) T-cell activity [27,28]. name Provenge) is the first FDA-approved therapeutic cancer vaccine for prostate cancer. This is a dendritic cell vaccine; other types of cancer vaccine that are being studied are tumor cell vaccines, antigen vaccines, and DNA and vector-based vaccines [29,30].

(p13.2) At this time point it has to be mentioned that this type of immunotherapy has systemic and local effects. Recent studies have shown that vaccination with embryonic stem cells may generate effective antitumor immunity against ovarian cancer [31]. Because whole cells are used for the preparation of vaccines, a greater proportion of intracellular molecules are combined with a smaller proportion of cell surface-associated molecules, thereby reducing the concentration of cancer cell-specific antigens recognized for vaccine production. Therefore, cancer cells used for the development of cancer treatment vaccines contain a high proportion of targets that may not be cancer cell specific, and an enrichment of cell surface material is needed to improve their effectiveness [32].

(p13.3) Cancer treatment vaccines belong to the family of biological response modifiers. They are categorized as preventive (or prophylactic) vaccines and treatment (or therapeutic) vaccines. In the field of cancer, therapeutic vaccines are used that are either designed to treat cancers that have already developed or to prevent the disease.

(p13.4) With regard to the immune system's mode of action, it is capable of both specific and non-specific responses against tumor cells. For a cancer vaccine to be successful, it must have the ability to stimulate the immune system to act primarily in a tumor-specific fashion. In this mode, it would present tumor antigens to immune cells and activate CD4 (also known as helper T cells) and CD8 T cells (also known as cytotoxic or killer T cells). CD8 T cells when activated directly kill tumor cells [25], while CD4 T cells are indirectly activated by dendritic cells and macrophages [26] to produce messengers (cytokines) that boost CD8 (killer) T-cell activity [27,28]. name Provenge) is the first FDA-approved therapeutic cancer vaccine for prostate cancer. This is a dendritic cell vaccine; other types of cancer vaccine that are being studied are tumor cell vaccines, antigen vaccines, and DNA and vector-based vaccines [29,30].

(p13.5) At this time point it has to be mentioned that this type of immunotherapy has systemic and local effects. Recent studies have shown that vaccination with embryonic stem cells may generate effective antitumor immunity against ovarian cancer [31]. Because whole cells are used for the preparation of vaccines, a greater proportion of intracellular molecules are combined with a smaller proportion of cell surface-associated molecules, thereby reducing the concentration of cancer cell-specific antigens recognized for vaccine production. Therefore, cancer cells used for the development of cancer treatment vaccines contain a high proportion of targets that may not be cancer cell specific, and an enrichment of cell surface material is needed to improve their effectiveness [32].
## (s14) Other Recent Treatments
(p14.0) The development of nanopolymer drug delivery systems is another type of treatment for cancer. Liposomal and lipid-based products have entered the mainstream as sustained-release drug delivery systems. Marqibo (Talon) with the generic name vincristine sulfate is used for the treatment of patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL); Myocet (Cephalon), a liposome -encapsulated form of doxorubicin ,is used for the treatment of breast cancer. These are two examples of the many FDA-approved drugs in this category [33,34]. Additionally, treatment methods that include combinations of therapeutic models already in use, have been investigated.

(p14.1) The development of nanopolymer drug delivery systems is another type of treatment for cancer. Liposomal and lipid-based products have entered the mainstream as sustained-release drug delivery systems. Marqibo (Talon) with the generic name vincristine sulfate is used for the treatment of patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL); Myocet (Cephalon), a liposome -encapsulated form of doxorubicin ,is used for the treatment of breast cancer. These are two examples of the many FDA-approved drugs in this category [33,34]. Additionally, treatment methods that include combinations of therapeutic models already in use, have been investigated.
