# Neuromodulatory Treatments for Alcohol Use Disorder: A Review

CorpusID: 44158705 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b5f18f333e2f57bfd1cda338c50a87f3dc3ddb25](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b5f18f333e2f57bfd1cda338c50a87f3dc3ddb25)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s3) Drinking in the Dark (DID)
(p3.0) To induce pharmacologically significant ethanol drinking in mice, Rhodes et al. [37] tested multiple paradigms involving intermittent access to ethanol in various time points in the sleep-wake cycle. Using C57BL6 male and female mice, on a 12:12 light:dark cycle (22:00 lights off, 10:00 lights on), mice drank approximately 90% more ethanol in a 2-h period when ethanol was substituted for water starting 3 h after lights off (active phase of circadian cycle) in comparison to starting 1 h after lights off. Similarly, mice drank 50% more when starting 3 h after lights off in comparison to 2 h after lights off [37]. This procedure yielded the animal model referred to as "drinking in the dark" (DID), through the promotion of high levels of ethanol drinking-mimicking that of binging, without the need of extensive training or the inclusion of sucrose. By replacing the water bottle with 20% ethanol for 2 or 4 h in the mouse's home cage, starting 3 h after lights off, and repeating across four consecutive days, mice reliably drank ethanol to levels that produce a BEC of 1.0 mg/mL by day 4.

(p3.1) There are several unique advantages to the DID system in modeling binge-like ethanol consumption. First, it reliably achieves pharmacologically meaningful BECs in a well-defined, limited access time frame [30]. This allows for ease of experimental design for high throughput testing of the effects of pharmacological compounds or other more invasive interventions on binge-like ethanol intake, because the ethanol access occurs over a relatively truncated period of time [37]. Indeed, repeated episodes of DID procedures leads to relatively consistent binge-like ethanol drinking, even up to 10 repeated 4-day DID procedures [38]. Exhibition of binge-like drinking behavior with short-term ethanol access more precisely mirrors human binge drinking behavior. In other ethanol binge models where ethanol is directly administered by the experimenter, these passive, forced, or potentially painful methods of ethanol administration can confound the true motivation to binge ethanol [21]. The DID paradigm allows for preclinical modeling of binge drinking, a hallmark of AUD, in the context of potential therapeutics, such as DBS.
## (s4) Intermittent Access (IA)
(p4.0) A series of experiments conducted by Simms et al. were designed to further characterize intermittent access to 20% ethanol using 2-bottle choice drinking paradigms. The experiments were adaptations from Wise [39], in an effort to induce ethanol consumption without adulteration. Animals were given access to 20% ethanol for three 24 h sessions per week. Ethanol access was intermittent in the sense that access was reinstated every other day. Using a two-bottle choice, animals had continuous access to at least one bottle of water at all times. However, the second bottle alternated between 20% ethanol and water. In experiment one, animals were given access to 20 ethanol-drinking sessions (across 45 days), water only and ethanol + water consumption was recorded. This resulted in a steady escalation in ethanol intake until the fifth drinking session, thereafter, there was no difference in ethanol consumption in subsequent sessions. Experiment two involved a 40-day period of abstinence following the 20th ethanol drinking session using the rats from experiment one. Following the abstinence period reinstatement of ethanol using IA was conducted across ten drinking sessions. There was no significant difference in mean ethanol consumption (g/kg/24 h) between the ten drinking sessions before and after the abstinence period [40]. Preclinical models utilizing both IA and DID allow for unadulterated consumption of ethanol that better represent the pathophysiology of AUD.
## (s5) Disrupting Binge Behavior in Animal Models
(p5.0) There have been several successful pharmacologic and surgical interventions geared towards attenuating binge-like ethanol consumption in animal models. Pharmacological inactivation through the utilization of a neuronal inhibitory agent such as a GABA agonist clinically emulates an anatomic inhibition similar to DBS, enabling further investigations of the role of specific anatomical regions in the context of a behavior. In female rodent models, bilateral pharmacological silencing of the NAcc shell with GABA agonists baclofen and muscimol did not decrease the acquisition (lever presses) of ethanol (EtOH) drinking behavior, but did reduce EtOH consumption in chronically drinking rats. While, 200 µA of DBS also consistently reduced EtOH consumption in chronically drinking rats. The amount of EtOH consumption returned to baseline levels following termination of therapy in both paradigms [41].

(p5.1) NTX and ACAMP neurochemically target different components of alcohol seeking behavior. NTX is a µ-opioid receptor antagonist while ACAMP is a NMDA receptor antagonist. Through the alcohol deprivation effect, ethanol seeking increases after a period of imposed deprivation. This increase in ethanol seeking was pharmacologically blocked by chronic administration of ACAMP in rodents [36]. The effect of NTX and the combination of NTX + ACAMP on oral ethanol self-administration was also observed following an imposed period of abstinence. In a two-lever free-choice ethanol self-administration experimental design where rats were conditioned to access ethanol or water via different lever pushes, response for ethanol reinstatement increased significantly following a deprivation period. The NTX only group and the combination NTX + ACAMP blocked the increased ethanol consumption following the abstinence period on post-deprivation day one. On day two, the combination of ACAMP + NTX group sustained the blocked increase in ethanol consumption, while the NXT group alone did not [42]. Thus, while both NTX and ACAMP seem to quell acute ethanol seeking following periods of deprivation, ACAMP may be more effective at sustained consumption amelioration than NTX alone.
## (s6) Deep Brain Stimulation
(p6.0) Rodents undergoing stimulation of the NAcc demonstrated a decrease in consumption and preference when self-administering high-fat chow, ethanol, cocaine, and morphine but not water or regular chow [12,43,44]. This is thought to be due to alterations of dopamine physiology with DBS [15]. Thus, NAcc stimulation mimics the effects of a lesion, and can be thought of in the same way as local dopamine depleting/inhibitor injections such as baclofen and muscimol [45,46]. Long-term structural disruptions via lesioning the NAcc shell reduced alcohol preference in HAP rats [15], and abnormal dopaminergic transmission to NAcc has been implicated as a potential mechanisms of DBS in the context of addiction [44].
## (s8) Baclofen Trial
(p8.0) A study conducted by de Beaurepaire in 2012 intended to study the long-term effects of baclofen in 100 patients with alcohol dependence resistant to conventional treatments. Baclofen demonstrated limited efficacy for patients with comorbid mental disorders, concurrent use of psychotropic drugs, and "lack of real motivation to stop drinking" which could be in part due to the inability to reach the optimal dose-because of the intolerability of side effects. Fifty-nine percent of the participants had one of several psychiatric disorders including anxiety, depression, bipolar, psychosis, sleep disorder, eating disorder, and other substance abuse, and 88% reported at least one undesirable side-effect while on baclofen [51,52]. Thus, baclofen therapy is limited in the AUD population due to its side effect profile at therapeutically effective doses and the high proportion of comorbid psychiatric disorders in the AUD population that preclude its use.
## (s9) Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS)
(p9.0) In 2013, Da Silva et al. [53] conducted a sham-controlled study that targeted unilateral treatment of the frontal lobe dysfunction with the intent of reducing cravings and relapse through the use of repetitive unilateral anodal stimulation of the left-dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (L-dlPFC) in 13 heavy drinkers (200 g ethanol a day). Initially, participants who received the L-dlPFC treatments were found to have significant decrease in craving and depressive symptoms, as well as increased executive function in comparison to the sham group. However, these results were short lived because 4 of the 6 in the treatment group relapsed during the trial, compared to 1 relapse in the sham group [53]. Later, in 2014, Klauss et al. [54] conducted a trial of bilateral tDCS stimulation of the dlPFC in 35 severe alcoholics that were randomized into sham and treatment groups in the study. Two of the 16 in the sham group, and 8 in the treatment group remained alcohol abstinent by the end of the six months of follow-up. No differences were reported with regards to cravings, frontal function, and depressive/anxiety symptoms [54]. Modest effects seen with tDCS on cravings are tempered by high relapse rates and long-term efficacy for this therapy remains to be established.
## (s10) Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS)
(p10.0) In 2010, Mishra et al. conducted a trial involving rTMS of the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (R-dlPFC) in 45 patients diagnosed with alcohol dependence syndrome. 30 participants received active rTMS treatment, and 15 received sham treatment. Within the first 4 weeks following rTMS treatment-cravings significantly decreased in active treatment group, however, beyond 4 weeks there was no significant difference between the treatment and sham groups with regards to cravings. Similarly, there was no significant difference between relapse rates between the two groups [55]. In a follow-up study in 2011, Hoppner et al. [56] conducted a trial involving rTMS of the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (L-dlPFC) in 19 detoxified females. The intent was to investigate the effect of rTMS on mood and cravings in alcohol-dependent women. There were no significant differences between the treatment and sham groups with regards to mood or cravings [56]. Again, while at best a temporary decrease in cravings was seen with rTMS therapy, this was not durable in the long term and had no effect on relapse rates.
## (s11) Disulfiram Intervention
(p11.0) Ethanol is converted to acetaldehyde by alcohol dehydrogenase, and acetaldehyde is then converted to acetate by aldehyde dehydrogenase. Disulfiram blocks enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase and is a common pharmacological intervention in the treatment of alcohol dependence. In the presence of alcohol, acetaldehyde accumulates to cause symptoms including tachycardia, flushing, diaphoresis, dyspnea, nausea, and vomiting creating a deterrent to alcohol ingestion in a controlled environment. However, efficacy of disulfiram drops tremendously in an unsupervised environment as compliance with the regimen and succumbing to relapse becomes a decision at the discretion of the patient [57]. A longitudinal trial involved 120 alcoholic volunteers who were assigned at random to receive subcutaneous disulfiram implants and were followed for a subsequent 2-year period. Post-implantation all groups demonstrated an increase in sobriety, however, there was no significant dose response relationship nor was there a significant difference between groups in the incidence of disulfiram ethanol reaction [58].
## (s13) 2008-2016 DBS Pilot Trial
(p13.0) A study conducted in Germany consisted of 5 patients with treatment-resistant alcohol dependency (based on DSM4 and ICD-10 criteria) that underwent DBS treatment and longitudinal follow-up care beginning in 2008. The inclusion criteria for this study included males, ages 25-60, with 10 years or more of alcohol dependence, who completed detoxification and subsequent period(s) of abstinence for at least 2 weeks. To be eligible for this study, participants had to have demonstrated treatment failures of at least two inpatient programs (6 months or longer for each program), failure of anti-craving pharmaceutical interventions such as ACAMP and NTX, as well as failure of community and self-help intervention programs. Participants had to have had at least 10 years of schooling in addition to a "finished apprenticeship or higher education" to ensure they had the mental capacity to perform psychological tests before and after implantation and understood the procedures and associated risks. Patients included in this study were considered severely addicted to alcohol and, on average, consumed at least 200 g of ethanol a day [6,61,62].

(p13.1) Participants were excluded if they had any of the following: seizures during detoxification, mental retardation, clinically significant impairments on neuropsychological battery, alcohol related personality change, use of additional addictive substances, or marked atrophy signifying brain damage detected via MRI. Additionally, high scores on the neuroticism scale and/or antisocial personality disorder were exclusionary [61]. It is important to note that all patients were offered continuous care for their DBS device as well as psychiatric outpatient care covered by their compulsory health care insurance, making all treatment free of charge [62].

(p13.2) Implantation of the electrodes were localized to the ventro-caudo-medial accumbens, which required adjustments to stereotactic coordinates to account for individual anatomical variations, determined by MRI. The target was defined as 2 mm rostral to the anterior border of the anterior commissure at the level of the mid-sagittal plane, 3-4 mm ventral, and 6-8 mm lateral of the midline. The target was placed 2-2.5 mm lateral of the vertical limb of Broca's diagonal band. Using a deep fronto-lateral approach, the two distal contacts of the DBS-electrode were placed in the caudo-medial accumbens, the third contact within the transition-area to the medial border of the internal capsule, with a fourth connection point in the most medial part of the capsule. The contacts within the NAcc were placed in the caudo-medial area [61].

(p13.3) Each patient in this trial had a unique experience with his DBS treatment. Patient 1 remained abstinent from the time of his DBS initiation in 2007 to the follow-up reported in 2016, nearly 8 years later. Patient 2 also remained abstinent since initiation of DBS in 2008 without relapsing until he was lost to follow-up in 2014. Patient 3 continued to relapse after initiation of DBS in 2007, underwent a 12-week inpatient rehab treatment, and continued to relapse after short lapses of abstinence. He accredited DBS with the elimination of his alcohol cravings, but reported significant external stressors that drove his relapses. Nearly three years after implantation he was imprisoned for almost 4 years. His alcohol cravings resurfaced after his battery ran out of power while incarcerated. The patient died soon after, and the study authors assumed that DBS had no influence on his death, but rather continuous consumption of alcohol may have contributed. Patient 4's clinical records and lab results indicated abstinence for over 12 months following initiation of DBS. He claims he then relapsed for a few days out of curiosity. He had additional relapses with subsequent detoxifications after 17, 21, 26, and 31 months. He stated that DBS helped him to avoid relapsing continuously, and that he accredited relapses to stress, rather than cravings. His lab results indicated relapses lasted for at least one to two weeks, though he always self-reported that his relapses were of a few days length only. After 36 months, he was diagnosed with a major depressive episode that was treated into remission with an SSRI and psychotherapy. He continued to relapse during the fourth year of DBS. He claimed alcohol helped him cope with the sudden death of his healthy and sober brother, while he continued to live as an addict. He was eventually lost to follow-up and was found dead at his home. Patient 5 relapsed nearly 20 months after DBS initiation and continued to have short relapses about every 2-3 months to "relieve" negative stress, but stated that craving for alcohol had persistently disappeared. He received outpatient psychotherapy treatment at the same treatment center 24 months after initiation of DBS due to feelings of guilt and depressive symptoms. During that time, he did not remain abstinent and was unable to avoid drinking. He started antidepressant medication and depressive symptoms were alleviated.

(p13.4) All 5 patients reported disappearance of cravings for alcohol, including cue-induced cravings in everyday life, consistent with the Alcohol Urge Questionnaire (AUQ) responses obtained post DBS initiation. Despite a reduction in declarative urge, select patients were unable to remain completely abstinent, leaving room for the possibility that consumption of alcohol essentially shifted from goal-directed behavior to habitual behavior. The absence of craving for alcohol is consistent with the hypothesis that DBS of the NAcc may be modulating the reward system of the brain, which was otherwise modulated maladaptively by alcohol [63,64]. Two of the five patients died with implications that continuous alcohol consumption contributed to their deaths. With the exception of one patient (patient 3) experiencing transient hypomanic symptoms directly after DBS initiation, no other adverse side effects associated with DBS were observed or reported. Stimulation parameters for individual patients were not changed throughout the course of treatment [6,61,62,65].

(p13.5) Subsequent testing with patient 3 revealed that active DBS was associated with somewhat slower and less risky choices, implying a more impulsive, riskier, and less controlled behavior when neural activity was not modulated by DBS. DBS affecting the NAcc/bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BSTM)/ventral pallidum (VP) regions made an impact on reward processing. Behaviorally, the patient demonstrated a tendency towards more risky behavior when the stimulator was turned off. A similar impulsive behavioral pattern is known from Parkinson patients treated with drugs affecting dopaminergic D2/D3 receptors [65]. PET revealed win-and loss-related activations in the paracingulate cortex, temporal poles, precuneus, and hippocampus under active DBS, brain areas that have been implicated in action monitoring and behavioral control. With the exception of the temporal pole, these activations were not seen when DBS was deactivated [65].
