# Analysis of Amygdala Nucleus in the Rat Brain: A review study

CorpusID: 44654200 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b5b576aea762badaa3d61bce1093a1cb258e0af1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b5b576aea762badaa3d61bce1093a1cb258e0af1)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Amygdale is an almond-shaped nucleus that is located in depth of the temporal lobe. It was identified by Burdach in the early nineteenth century (1). Based on the autoradiographic and immunohistochemical studies, amygdale isn't homogenous but it contains many nuclei (1). For this reason is called amygdaloid complex. Amygdale is involved in modulation of behavior, emotions, learning, and autonomic processes. Also, it has been reported to be involved in neurodegenerative disorders, epilepsy, depression and anxiety (1). With regard to ethical problems, it seems necessary to investigate its structure and function in the experimental models such as mice and rat. The aim of this study was the investigation of cyto and myeloarchitectonic as well as receptoarchitectonic of the rat amygdala.
## (s4) Basolateral nucleus or basal nucleus
(p4.0) Basolateral nucleus involved in the regulation of fear and anxiety, emotional memory and spatial learning processes (3)(4)(5). Amygdala's role is not in long-term memory but in modulation of memory in other brain regions, particularly the hippocampus (6, 7). In Nissl preparation, basal nucleus is divided into the BLA and BLP subnucleus that the BLA shows darker staining than the BLP. Bundles of fibers surround this nucleus .The posterior part basolateral nucleus is striated by reason of passing a bundle of fibers that are mostly oriented perpendicularly. In silver preparations the BLA subdivision is distinguished from lateral nucleus by a lighter staining (2).
## (s13) Anterior amygdale area
(p13.0) Based on the histochemical data, anterior amygdale area is divided into two parts: the AAV and the AAD. The ventral part is composed of neurons by different shapes and sizes, whereas the dorsal part consists of larger and lighter staining than the ventral part. This area contains a dense and homogenous fiber plexus. Fibers in the molecular layer don't show a layered pattern expect for fibers around sublamina 1 and lateral olfactory tract (11). This area divided into the AAVL and AAVM subnuclei. The AAVL and AAVD subdivisions display a denser staining than the AAVM.
