# Molecular Sciences Therapeutics for Inflammatory-Related Diseases Based on Plasmon-Activated Water: A Review

CorpusID: 44099186 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19ae0bdcf1b10b054e908675a901a11263db946a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19ae0bdcf1b10b054e908675a901a11263db946a)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s1) Different Kinds of Water Preparation Methods Novel Properties Representative Reference
(p1.0) Hydrogen-rich water Adding saturated hydrogen gas in water Scavenging free radicals [13] Acidic cosmetic water Adding acidic compound in water Scavenging free radicals [19] Sulfurous water Adding sulfur compound in water Scavenging free radicals [20] Engineered water Electrospraying water vapor Inactivate foodborne microorganisms [42] Magnetic water Applying magnetic fields on water Reduced hydrogen bonds (HBs) [45] Plasmon-activated water/this work Resonant illumination on gold-supported nanoparticles (AuNPs) in water Scavenging free radicals, reduced HBs and energetic [23] 2. Results and Discussion
## (s2) Creation and Characteristics of Plasmon-Activated Water (PAW)
(p2.0) As shown in our previous study [23], we reported an innovative and facile method for preparing small water-clusters (SWCs) with reduced-affinity HBs by letting bulk DI water flow through supported AuNPs under resonant illumination to give NP-treated (AuNT) water at constant temperature. Utilizing LSPR on illuminated AuNPs, the strong HBs of bulk water can be disordered when water is located at the illuminated Au/water interface. The prepared SWC is free of AuNPs. The energy supported AuNPs under resonant illumination to give NP-treated (AuNT) water at constant temperature. Utilizing LSPR on illuminated AuNPs, the strong HBs of bulk water can be disordered when water is located at the illuminated Au/water interface. The prepared SWC is free of AuNPs. The energy efficiency for creating SWCs is ca. 17%. The resulting stable AuNT water exhibits distinct properties at room temperature, which are significantly different from the properties of untreated bulk water. Since the SWC (also the different term of AuNT water) was created from the HET, the term "SWC" (or term "AuNT water") was replaced by the term "PAW" in the latest published papers.

(p2.1) As shown in Figure 1a, the SPR band of AuNPs in solution locates at ca. 519 nm. This spectral center is red-shifted to 538 nm, and becomes broader in the whole visible-light region for the AuNPsadsorbed ceramic particles. This characteristic LSPR of AuNPs-adsorbed ceramics suggests that the effect of HET on breaking the HBs of bulk water is performed with illumination of white light. This phenomenon is further enhanced by wavelength-optimized resonant light, as used in this work with green light-emitting diodes (LEDs) at the wavelength maximum centered at ca. 530 nm. Figure 1b exhibits the schematics regarding the mechanism on the creation of SWCs with decreased hydrogen bonding due to the LSPR effect on AuNPs at resonant illumination, and the distinct properties and antioxidative activity of created SWCs. The creation of SWCs occurred at the resonantly illuminated AuNPs interface. After creation, both the forward reaction from bulk water to AuNT water and the corresponding reverse reaction from AuNT water to bulk water in absence of AuNPs are slow because the required activation energies for both reactions are very large. Thus, the created SWC is temporarily trapped in an activation energy valley with a relatively stable state in which SWC can maintain its energetic state, not reverting to the normal HB structure of bulk water. The measured saturated solubility of normal electrolyte of NaCl in SWCs is markedly enhanced. Also, the SWC itself is capable of effectively scavenging free hydroxyl and 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radicals, and effectively reduce NO release from lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammatory cells [23].
## (s4) Physchemical and Cellular Antioxidation Properties of PAW
(p4.0) As reported in the literature, hydroxyl radicals are the most cytotoxic ROS, and as such, they can directly or indirectly damage DNA and cause cancer [88][89][90]. It is well known that excessive amounts of ROS are produced at sites of inflammation. Therefore, the unique ability to scavenge free hydroxyl radicals and other distinct properties of PAW compared to DI water may offer a new therapy on suppressing inflammation and even on curing cancer. Figure 4a demonstrates the electron spin resonance (ESR) spectra regarding hydroxyl radicals of DI water and PAW for reference. No significant peaks were observed for either DI water or PAW. This result suggests that the created electron-doping PAW differs from the reported engineered water nanostructures with a very strong 
## (s6) Innovative Therapeutic Strategy Utilizing PAW
(p6.0) Gross observations of whole lungs to lung metastasis in LLC-1 xenograft mice are shown in Figure 6a. All tumor-like lesions were identified on lung lobes and thoracic walls, but not present in other organs of thoracic and abdominal cavities. These tumor-like lesions were further identified by hematoxylin and eosin staining as LLC-1 tumor lesions (Figure 6b). As shown in Figure 6b, the LLC-1 tumor lesions localized around blood vessels suggested that the injected LLC-1 cells invaded pulmonary tissues via circulation. The metastasis rate of LLC-1 cells was calculated according to gross observations of the LLC-1 lung tumor presence, and was analyzed by a two-tailed Fisher's test. Interestingly, five of 17 LLC-1 grafted mice drinking DI water demonstrated lung metastasis, compared to zero of the 14 LLC-1 grafted mice drinking PAW. The metastasis rate in PAW-consuming mice was significantly lower than that of DI water-consuming mice. The average survival time of PAW-fed mice was 6.57 ± 0.66 days, whereas in DI water-fed mice, it was 4.62 ± 0.71 days. In cisplatin-administrated mice, PAW-fed mice also had a prolonged survival time of 8.01 ± 0.77 days, compared to 6.38 ± 0.61 days for DI water-fed mice (Figure 6c). This result suggests that PAW may enhance the tumor suppression efficiency of cisplatin in LLC-1-implanted mice. This can be attributed to the different states of cisplatin in DI water and in PAW. It was reported that cisplatin is poorly soluble in water [98], indicating some aggregations of cisplatin molecules are generated in DI water [77]. 
## (s7) Innovative Therapeutic Strategy Utilizing PAW
(p7.0) Gross observations of whole lungs to lung metastasis in LLC-1 xenograft mice are shown in Figure 6a. All tumor-like lesions were identified on lung lobes and thoracic walls, but not present in other organs of thoracic and abdominal cavities. These tumor-like lesions were further identified by hematoxylin and eosin staining as LLC-1 tumor lesions (Figure 6b). As shown in Figure 6b, the LLC-1 tumor lesions localized around blood vessels suggested that the injected LLC-1 cells invaded pulmonary tissues via circulation. The metastasis rate of LLC-1 cells was calculated according to gross observations of the LLC-1 lung tumor presence, and was analyzed by a two-tailed Fisher's test. Interestingly, five of 17 LLC-1 grafted mice drinking DI water demonstrated lung metastasis, compared to zero of the 14 LLC-1 grafted mice drinking PAW. The metastasis rate in PAWconsuming mice was significantly lower than that of DI water-consuming mice. The average survival time of PAW-fed mice was 6.57 ± 0.66 days, whereas in DI water-fed mice, it was 4.62 ± 0.71 days. In cisplatin-administrated mice, PAW-fed mice also had a prolonged survival time of 8.01 ± 0.77 days, compared to 6.38 ± 0.61 days for DI water-fed mice (Figure 6c). This result suggests that PAW may enhance the tumor suppression efficiency of cisplatin in LLC-1-implanted mice. This can be attributed to the different states of cisplatin in DI water and in PAW. It was reported that cisplatin is poorly soluble in water [98], indicating some aggregations of cisplatin molecules are generated in DI water [77]. The absorption spectra showed the OD at 362 nm of cisplatin in PAW was almost the same as that in DI water (Figure 7a). However, a significant difference was observed in photoluminescence (PL) spectra with an excitation wavelength of 350 nm (Figure 7b). Cisplatin displayed emission bands at 396 and 397 nm in DI water and in PAW, respectively. The PL intensity of cisplatin in PAW was 1.6-fold higher than that in DI water. This evident difference can perhaps be attributed to the status of cisplatin complexes in the different waters. The poor solubility of cisplatin in DI water results in the formation of some aggregations that quenched the fluorescence. However, this phenomenon was observed less, because cisplatin can be more easily dissolved in PAW. The solubilities of cisplatin in DI water and in PAW were measured at 25 °C. The solubility of cisplatin in PAW was 3.4 ± 0.11 mg The absorption spectra showed the OD at 362 nm of cisplatin in PAW was almost the same as that in DI water (Figure 7a). However, a significant difference was observed in photoluminescence (PL) spectra with an excitation wavelength of 350 nm (Figure 7b). Cisplatin displayed emission bands at 396 and 397 nm in DI water and in PAW, respectively. The PL intensity of cisplatin in PAW was 1.6-fold higher than that in DI water. This evident difference can perhaps be attributed to the status of cisplatin complexes in the different waters. The poor solubility of cisplatin in DI water results in the formation of some aggregations that quenched the fluorescence. However, this phenomenon was observed less, because cisplatin can be more easily dissolved in PAW. The solubilities of cisplatin in DI water and in PAW were measured at 25 • C. The solubility of cisplatin in PAW was 3.4 ± 0.11 mg mL −1 , which was higher than that in DI water (2.6 ± 0.01 mg mL −1 ). The increased solubility was ca. 30.8%, indicating PAW improved the solubility of cisplatin. This reveals that PAW improved the solubility of cisplatin and reduced interactions among cisplatin molecules, thus showing a higher PL intensity. Compared to the aggregated cisplatin in DI water, which could be considered to be a large size and of high molecule weight, well-dispersed cisplatin in PAW could be transported more easily across plasma membranes, thus enhancing the tumor suppressive efficiency of cisplatin in LLC-1-implanted mice. Furthermore, the zeta potentials of cisplatin solutions with 0.5% sodium chloride (NaCl) were also monitored over time. Charges of the cisplatin solutions were −8.6 and −19.3 mV with DI water and with PAW, respectively. Moreover, the negatively charged environment was stable for the following 2 days. A negatively charged environment is favorable for maintaining the activity of cisplatin before it is transported across plasma membranes [99]. The activity of cisplatin was mainly dominated by the stability of cisplatin. It had been reported that cisplatin was easily hydrolyzed [100]. The hydrolysis process released two chloride ions into water. The presence of chloride ions in water would increase the solution conductivity. To evaluate the stability of cisplatin in DI water and in PAW, the cisplatin solutions (0.28 mM) were prepared, and the conductivities were measured with time at 25 • C (Figure 7c). The conductivity of fresh cisplatin solution in PAW (0.274 µS cm −1 ) was higher than that in DI water (0.184 µS cm −1 ). Mindfully, the higher conductivity of cisplatin solution in as-prepared PAW was not attributed to the higher degree of cisplatin's hydrolysis, due to the intrinsically high conductivity of PAW. In storage with time, the conductivities of both solutions increased gradually, indicating that the cisplatin were hydrolyzed in both solutions. By plotting the relation of conductivity to time, two linear plots were obtained from DI water-based cisplatin and PAW-based cisplatin solutions. The slope of PAW-based cisplatin solution was 0.027, which was lower than that of DI water-based cisplatin solution (0.038). This indicated that the use of PAW could avoid hydrolysis of cisplatin, thus enhancing its stability. The high stability of cisplatin in PAW could express the high activity of cisplatin in LLC-1 further. Therefore, higher cisplatin activity could be maintained when it was dissolved in PAW [77].
