# Registration of Laser Scanning Point Clouds: A Review

CorpusID: 46937427 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c1d5e5d17729e543f0faaca4fe44234118ce2ec1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c1d5e5d17729e543f0faaca4fe44234118ce2ec1)

Fields: Medicine, Geography, Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s5) Point-Based Methods
(p5.0) Points are most widely used within the feature-based LiDAR registration method [53]. Extraction of feature points is very important in this method and the extraction result directly affects the registration accuracy of point clouds. Compared with natural environments and objects, the artificial objects are often more geometrically regular, and the accuracy of their geometric feature information is relatively high [54]. Building corners, traffic signs, and road signs are therefore commonly-used feature points.
## (s10) Surface-Based Methods
(p10.0) Surface features contain more information than line or point features and are less affected by noise. They can therefore be used for automatic registration of LiDAR point clouds. In urban spaces, surfaces are an important element of the ground object structure. LiDAR devices on different platforms can obtain a large amount of ground point cloud data and more precise registration can be achieved by making the best use of these surface features. The extraction accuracy of surface features and their distribution in the point cloud scene directly affect the final registration result. Many researchers have used the least squares method, random sample consensus algorithm, and principal component analysis method for surface fitting, allowing surface features to be obtained in the point cloud scene. The extracted surfaces are mainly ground, roofs, and building facades.

(p10.1) As shown in Table 4, most researchers use the least squares method when performing point cloud registration based on surface features. The method is used to minimize the distance between corresponding surface features of different LiDAR point clouds [89]. When using the least squares method for registration of 3D surfaces, it is necessary to take full account of the randomness of the local surface-normal vector [90]. The accuracy of this method is sufficient for ground deformation monitoring [89]. Some researchers have also implemented point cloud registration by locating conjugate surface features [91][92][93]. Despite the higher accuracy of registration based on surface features, the requirements for point cloud segmentation and the fitting algorithm are high, because surface features must be extracted before registration. In addition, the 3D point cloud scene to be registered must contain numerous surface features [98]; otherwise, it is difficult to guarantee registration accuracy.
## (s11) Other Feature-Based Methods
(p11.0) Although many studies have used point, line, and surface features to obtain high-accuracy LiDAR point cloud registration, there are still some difficulties relating to large-scale urban 3D point clouds. For example, point-based methods are extremely susceptible to the influence of point density and noise. Most line-based methods are only applicable to buildings when the contours of the building are easy to extract, making these methods difficult to apply to suburbs with fewer buildings. Surface-based methods have high requirements for overlapping areas, and at least three pairs of surfaces should be present in the clouds to be registered [48].
## (s13) Iterative Approximation Methods
(p13.0) In current point cloud registration research, the iterative approximation method mainly refers to the ICP algorithm and its series of improved algorithms. The ICP algorithm is built on the quaternions method, which uses a 4D vector to represent three rotation parameters and one angle parameter [10,107]. The advantage of this method is that it can directly solve rigid body transformation through a rigorous mathematical process, without the need for an initial estimate of location. Besl and McKay first proposed the ICP method for registration of 3D data [11]. This method assumes good estimation of initial location; a number of points are selected from the point set to be registered, and the points corresponding to these points in the reference point set are then identified. The transformation is obtained by minimizing the distance between these pairs of points. The closest point set is then recalculated according to a rigorous solution process and repeated iterations are performed until the objective function value remains constant and the registration result is obtained. This method does not fully consider the effect of noise on accuracy of registration results; however, the effect of noise can be reduced by weighting the least squares distance to improve registration accuracy [108][109][110]. In the computer vision field, in order to speed up the registration process and prevent locally optimized results, several studies register point clouds by calculating feature-substitute point pairs, including invariant features, such as curvature and spherical harmonics [111], surfaces [112], and angular-invariant features [113]. Such ICP-registration methods in computer vision are reviewed in [12,[114][115][116].

(p13.1) The development of LiDAR technology has greatly promoted application and development of ICP algorithms for remote sensing and mapping. In the ICP process, it is important to identify the closest point to a known location, with three search strategies used, i.e., point-to-point, point-to-surface, and point-to-projection [90,[117][118][119]. However, since the LiDAR device uses discrete laser pulses to measure the distance to a ground target, the target point clouds are practically a dense set of sampling points and do not reflect all details of the target object, especially at the target boundary. Furthermore, due to differences between acquisition devices, angles, and methods, there is no one-to-one correspondence between point sets of LiDAR point clouds from different platforms, and point clouds are easily affected by noise. Registration accuracy is often not ideal and the calculation process is complicated; direct use of the ordinary ICP algorithm therefore often leads to anisotropic and inhomogeneous localization errors. In addition, the ICP algorithm requires that initial location of point clouds should not differ significantly; otherwise, the algorithm will render locally optimal solutions. Many researchers have therefore attempted to improve the ICP algorithm, using strategies that are mainly focused on looking for other registration features, algorithm optimization, and selection of appropriate data-management methods, as shown in Table 5. Table 5. Improved methods based on ICP.
## (s18) Methods with Auxiliary Data
(p18.0) In the process of acquiring point cloud data, under certain conditions LiDAR equipment can simultaneously obtain target image data and measurement-device location GNSS coordinates. Especially when using TLS to obtain point clouds, a standard target is generally used to quickly stitch multi-station point clouds. Images, GNSS data, and standard targets can therefore effectively assist in registration.

(p18.1) In image-assisted point cloud registration, images are generally used to extract features, including 2D SIFT features [147] and conjugate corner features [35]. These features are described, screened, registered, and mapped to 3D space to find conjugate features [52,148]; the point cloud conversion parameters are then calculated [52,149]. Compared with discrete LiDAR point clouds, the image has rich space-continuous spectral information, so textural features are evident [150], and features based on image extraction have higher reliability and robustness.

(p18.2) GNSS can accurately obtain the coordinates of the ground target. Some LiDAR equipment therefore also records the spatial location of the platform equipment center while acquiring 3D point clouds. Initial global registration of airborne and MLS data can be performed using GNSS information [30,151], but, in complex urban areas, occlusion by buildings can cause GNSS signal lockout, reducing registration accuracy of point clouds [152].

(p18.3) A standard target is widely used in multi-station TLS point cloud stitching, which uses a special standard target as the same name feature for registration. During the scan of objects by LiDAR equipment, these standard targets can be placed in appropriate locations in the scan area. It must be ensured that more than three standard targets are placed between adjacent scanning stations. After obtaining the standard target information, automatic registration can be performed using associated LiDAR registration processing software, such as Cyclone software. In forests, a dense tree canopy can significantly reduce GNSS positioning accuracy and even hinder the acceptance of GNSS signals. Registration of 3D point clouds based on standard target information only has a narrow range of applications due to the challenges posed by complex scanning scenes and difficulties in setting targets.
## (s20) Comparison of Different Point Cloud Registration Methods
(p20.0) Geographical scenes contain a large amount of features, especially in urban space, where widely distributed buildings, roads, and transport facilities provide many point, line, and surface features. Such features can be used to quickly achieve registration between different point clouds. Feature-based registration methods are usually applicable for coarse registration, which provides a good initial position for fine registration, effectively reducing computation demands for point cloud registration. A key process in this feature-based approach is feature extraction, which directly affects final registration accuracy. Although the existing feature-based method can achieve good results by searching for conjugate points, lines, or surface features, it is still difficult to use feature-based methods for large-scale LiDAR point cloud registration, because it is difficult to guarantee that extracted features are evenly distributed within the global range. Since point clouds are irregular and discrete, a point-based feature method is more sensitive to the density of point clouds and noise than a line-based or surface-based feature method. At present, most line-feature methods use lines obtained from building point clouds to calculate conversion parameters, but this is relatively difficult in areas with few buildings. The surface-based feature method requires large overlap between different LiDAR point clouds to locate conjugate surface features. In addition, most feature-based registration studies use local features of point clouds, and there is little research on use of global features. Global features can characterize the global characteristics of point clouds, while local features only represent its domain characteristics. The feature-based approach must thus maintain a balance between feature proficiency, method stability, and time efficiency [154].

(p20.1) Most existing feature-based registration methods can only be used to achieve initial registration. In contrast, the iterative approximation method, the random sample consensus method, and the normal distribution transformation model are widely used for fine registration. Because LiDAR point cloud registration using the ICP algorithm occurs through iteration, requirements for the initial position of the point clouds are relatively high. When the initial position of the point clouds is poor, it is difficult to obtain a globally optimal solution. The ICP algorithm also requires high point cloud density; when this is low, registration errors may occur in the search for the closest point. In addition, time complexity is generally high with the ICP algorithm. Selecting an effective feature can help speed up the convergence process and reduce registration time [75]. However, it is still impossible to avoid potential errors during location of the closest point by an effective feature. Such problems have been discussed at the target level [155] and as a local feature of a computational point [153].

(p20.2) An important process in the RANSAC registration method is continuous filtering of registration features during point cloud registration, with the optimal registration feature used to solve conversion parameters. The random sample consensus has been widely used for point cloud registration, and can achieve good registration results even if overlapping areas are small. However, this method requires iterative sampling and calculation of point cloud consistency. The number of iterations has a significant influence on registration speed and accuracy. If the number of iterations is too high, convergence speed is relatively slow, but if the number of iterations is too small, this will lead to poor selection of samples, making it difficult to obtain desired registration results.

(p20.3) Although the NDT algorithm has been widely used for 2D image registration, it is rarely used in 3D LiDAR research. The NDT algorithm does not require knowledge of the corresponding point relationship or extraction of the registration feature from point clouds; consequently, its calculation efficiency and registration precision are higher. However, this method has a significant drawback in that the cost function is not continuous. Since the method first divides the point clouds into grids and then calculates the Gaussian distribution in the grid, the discontinuous cost function cannot guarantee calculation of high precision conversion parameters. If grid size is too large, final registration accuracy is difficult to guarantee. If grid size is too small, the probability distribution function in the body element cannot accurately characterize the surface features. A multi-scale method could effectively solve the problem of determining the grid unit scale. In the image data-assisted point cloud registration process, most registration methods remain feature-based. Use of GNSS and target data depends on known locations of auxiliary data; the principle is simple and easy to implement, but the degree of automation is often not high. In Table 6, we compare these point cloud registration methods. Additionally, we compare the applications and performances of different point cloud registration methods, as shown in Table 7. These registration methods are classified based on the coarse-to-fine strategies, the applications of these methods are presented by experimental environment, the performances of these methods are compared based on the deviation between reference and registered data, and the information of the experimental environment, experimental data, and deviation of each method is listed according to the paper. 
## (s23) New Types of LiDAR Data Registration
(p23.0) At present, the LiDAR systems used in most areas are small-spot discrete systems. Because the signal received by these systems is discrete, single or multiple-pulse echo information, the ability to characterize the vertical structure and physical characteristics of ground surface objects is reduced, restricting application to other fields. With the development of improved LiDAR sensors, a new, full-waveform LiDAR system came into being. Full-waveform LiDAR adds all-digital waveform recording technology to traditional LiDAR, allowing real-time recording of all or part of the laser reflection echo waveform. Mallet and Bretar [160] reviewed four aspects of full-waveform LiDAR: system introduction, processing methods, quantitative analysis, and applications.
