# Applying precision feeding to improve the nitrogen efficiency of swine production: a review of possible practices... Applying precision feeding to improve the nitrogen efficiency of swine production: a review of possible practices and obstacles Aplicação da alimentação de precisão para melhorar a eficiência do nitrogênio na produção de suínos: revisão de possíveis práticas e obstáculos

CorpusID: 46556301 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/56c68632e962f8a760b207aa54b6b57ef1dc5cf2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/56c68632e962f8a760b207aa54b6b57ef1dc5cf2)

Fields: Mathematics, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s3) Intestinal losses Integument losses
(p3.0) Maximum efficiency of amino acid utilization 1 Content in PD 2 ---(g kg -1 DM intake)---(mg kg -1 body weight 0.75 d -1 ) combined with a perfect balance between essential amino acids, and with optimizing the supply of nonessential amino acids. For this reason, precision feeding techniques have come under increasing study in recent years, and some researches have been conducted on the swine production chain (HAUSCHILD et al., 2012;POMAR et al., 2014;ANDRETTA et al., 2014MONTEIRO et al., 2016).
## (s4) New feeding practices toward nitrogen efficiency in pigs
(p4.0) Usually, the nutrient density progressively decreases with an increase in the pig's body weight. Therefore, the optimal concentration of nutrients in the diet also decreases over time. One way to adjust the dietary concentration of nutrients to match the animal's requirements is to increase the number of feeding phases (Figure 1). These schemes are commonly used to accommodate continuous changes in the amino acid requirements of growing pigs, and the environmental benefits of this strategy have been demonstrated (POMAR et al., 2009;POMAR et al., 2014). However, the use of several diets increases the cost of feed management and facilities. Based on this premise, FEDDES et al. (2000) developed a system with the automatic blending and distribution of two diets combined in variable proportions, which can meet the requirements of pigs throughout their growing period (POMAR et al., 2014). The diets are formulated to meet the pig's nutritional requirements at the beginning and at the end of growth period. POMAR et al. (2014) formulated two diets, one of them meeting the pig's nutritional requirements at the beginning of the growing period (high nutrient concentration) and the other meeting the requirements at the end of this period (low concentration). They commingled diets in different proportions, according to the three-phase (3P) or daily feeding program, in order to meet the nutritional requirements at the beginning of each feeding stage. The group of pigs receiving the daily feeding program consumed 7.3% less protein than the group fed the 3P, as a result of the progressive decrease in the amount of protein released during the course of the experiment (Figure 2). Replacing the traditional 3P method with the daily feeding program reduced the intake and excretion of nitrogen by 7.3% and 12%, respectively.

(p4.1) However, current group phase-feeding programs do not account for the variation among individuals, and the diets are usually formulated to optimize the population performance, with most of the pigs receiving more nutrients than they actually need (HAUSCHILD et al., 2010). While promoting better nutrient use, they fail to provide exactly what each animal requires. In this context, precision feeding is a modern approach in which pigs are fed individually using diets adjusted in real time according to their patterns of feed intake and growth (HAUSCHILD et al., 2012).

(p4.2) For this purpose, HAUSCHILD et al. (2012) developed and evaluated a mathematical model used to estimate the daily amino acid requirements of individual growing-finishing pigs. The empirical component was used to estimate, in real time, the nutrient requirements for each pig. Based on these estimates, the mechanistic component uses classic factorial equations to estimate the optimal concentration of amino acids that must be offered to each pig to meet its requirements. The authors also evaluated the precision of the proposed model by comparing its estimates with those generated by the InraPorc model. They considered that the mechanistic model component estimated the optimal SID lysine to net energy ratio with reasonable variation between animal and overtime, with an average variation coefficient of 7 and 14%, respectively. Thus, they concluded that the model makes it possible to dynamically estimate the amino acids requirements of each pig.

(p4.3) Furthermore, the limitation related to the effect of between-animal variability on determining amino acids requirements has been approached by the application of precision feeding principles. ANDRETTA et al. (2014) evaluated the impact of moving from a conventional system to a precision feeding system (multiphase individual (MPI) feeding) on performance and dietary nutrient utilization in growing-finishing pigs. During the overall trial, they observed that the systems had similar values of feed intake, weight gain, feed conversion ratio and N and phosphorus retention. In the same way, there was no difference in carcass characteristics and in the weight of the main cuts. However, compared with the 3P program, the MPI feeding led to a reduction in lysine intake by 27%, and N and phosphorus excretion reduced by 22% and 27%, respectively, as a result of improved efficiency in terms of N and phosphorus retention (Figure 2).
## (s5) CONCLUSION
(p5.0) The studies and the development of new formulation methods to increase the efficiency of use of nutrients and to reduce nitrogen excretion by pigs, since they are cost-effective and applicable, are essential to achieve a more precise nutrition. Modeling animal nutrition has been effective to estimate growth and nutritional requirements, and since these methods are increasingly being discussed and refined, the trend is that they will be increasingly used in assessing pig nutrition. There is a strong need for developing Figure 1 -Supply of SID lysine (g/kg) during the growing period (from 30 to 115kg of body weight) according to a four (4P) and multiphase (MP) feeding program. Increasing the number of feeding phases enhances the economic and environmental benefits by adjusting the concentration of nutrients in the diets to match the animals' requirements (based on MONTEIRO et al., 2016). models that best describe the animal growth trajectory, the physiological conditions in terms of lean and fat body masses, as well as the rate and efficiency of nutrient deposition that better reflect the changes in the digestive and metabolic phenomena in pigs. However, due to the importance of considering between-animal variation, stochasticity has been included in some modelling approaches to study the impact of changes in this factor on performance. This seems to indicate that, in the near future, we could have models capable of evaluating how the whole population responds to different management practices. Moreover, precision feeding can be a tool to assess the adequacy of nutritional requirements, since its use can bring economic and environmental benefits, through, the feeding applied to an individual and not to groups. However, the implementation of precision feeding systems presents significant challenges which are related to their complexity, reliability and cost effectiveness. Nevertheless, in some countries, the development of sustainable precision livestock farming is a vision for the future of the swine industry. Therefore, since this feeding approach is still being developed and refined, it is expected to be available soon as a sustainable tool to increase the competitiveness of the pig industry.
