# Photonic Crystals for Optical Sensing: A Review

CorpusID: 4668142 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a1866a236947b46ad3f35db8ea2c3069ddecaa7b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a1866a236947b46ad3f35db8ea2c3069ddecaa7b)

Fields: Engineering, Physics, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) In recent years, photonic sensors have seen a massive development because of the increasing demand of sensing applications in healthcare, defence, security, automotive, aerospace, environment, food quality control, to name a few.

(p0.1) The development and integration of Microfluidic and Photonic technologies, with specific reference to the CMOS-compatible silicon-on-insulator (SOI) technology, allows to enhance sensing performance in terms of sensitivity, limit-of-detection (LOD) and detection multiplexing capability. Photonic sensors have been the subject of intensive research over the last decade especially for detection of a wide variety of biological and chemical agents. In this context, photonic Lab-on-a-chip systems represent the state-of-the-art of photonic sensing since they are expected to exhibit higher sensitivity and selectivity as well as high stability, immunity to electromagnetic interference and product improvements, such as smaller integration sizes and lower costs.

(p0.2) In recent years, rapid advancements in photonic technologies have significantly enhanced sensing performance, particularly in the areas of light-analyte interaction, device miniaturization, multiplexing and fluidic design and integration. This has led to drastic improvements in sensor sensitivity, enhanced limit of detection (LOD), advanced fluidic handling capability, lower sample consumption, faster detection time, and lower overall detection cost per measurement. With future commercialization of photonic biosensors in a Lab-on-a-chip, next generation biosensors are expected to be reliable and portable, able to be fabricated with mass production techniques, to reduce the cost as well as to do multi-parameter analysis, enabling fast and real-time measurements of a large amount of biological or physical parameters within a single, compact sensor chip.

(p0.3) In this context, photonic crystals (PhCs) represent an intriguing solution for achieving high performance in sensing applications. In fact, since a lot of photonic architectures have been widely investigated and employed in photonic sensing (e.g., ring resonator, surface Plasmon resonance (SPR) -based sensors, microdisks, microspheres, to name a few), PhCs exhibit a strong optical confinement of light to a very small volume, enabling the detection of chemical species characterized by nanometer dimensions. In addition, by using advanced chemical surface functionalization techniques and integration with microfluidic systems, very high performance can be achieved in ultra compact sensor chips. For example, the detection of dissolved avidin concentrations as low as 15 nM or 1 μm/ml, has been experimentally achieved by using functionalized slotted PhC cavities with integrated microfluidics (Scullion et al., 2011). Ultra high performance have been experimentally and theoretically demonstrated, such as a LOD less than 20 pM for anti-biotin, corresponding to less than 4.5 fg of bound material on the sensor surface and fewer than 80 molecules in the modal volume of the integrated microcavity (Zlatanovic et al., 2009).

(p0.4) PhC-based sensors have been also proposed as gas sensors in mid infrared (mid-IR), since many gases (e.g., CO 2 , CH 4 , CO) exhibit absorption lines in mid-IR wavelength region. Other applications reported in literature concern with the detection of temperature, pressure, stress and humidity measurements, to name a few.

(p0.5) From a technological point of view, photonic sensors based on PhCs, including photonic crystal optical fiber (PCFs) and integrated planar photonic crystals, are suitable for multiplexing and label-free detection. For example, a large-scale chip-integrated PhC sensor microarrays has been recently proposed and demonstrated for biosensing on a SOI-based platform (Zou et al., 2012). Standard and CMOS compatible technological processes (i.e., electron-beam lithography, inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching, plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD)) are generally employed for PhCs fabrication, making these sensors suitable for mass-scale and low cost production. Finally, PCFs can be easily fabricated by stacking tubes and rods of silica glass into a large structure of the pattern of holes required in the final fiber.
## (s3) Advances in Photonic Crystals
(p3.0) izing the PhC, but in introducing a straight line defect in which a modified waveguide width acts as resonant cavity (Jágerská et al., 2010). As sketched in Fig. 4, the device consists of a 2D PhC characterized by hexagonal cell and lattice constant a = 510 nm. The waveguide region is obtained by removing a row of air holes in the middle of the structure. An air -slot is embedded in this line defect region. The width of the air slot is kept constant at 100 nm, except in the middle. A slit is made by increasing the width of air slot from 100 nm to 120 nm, in the centre. This reduction in slot width results in the formation of reflective barriers for traveling mode, thus in a resonant cavity whose length is L = 3a.

(p3.1) The complete device has been processed on a 220-nm-thick SOI wafer with a 2 μm buried oxide layer. The cavity mode is strongly confined into the cavity region, the effective mode volume is V eff = 0.05μm 3 and the spatial overlapping between cavity mode and air slot is Γ > 0.73.
## (s7) Opto-mechanical sensors based on PhC
(p7.0) In this section, PhC-based sensors designed for pressure, force, strain and torsion sensing, are discussed. The sensing principle consists in monitoring variations of optical characteristics induced by the physical deformation of the PhC-based device.

(p7.1) In this context, a force and strain sensor is sketched in Fig. 19 (Li et al., 2011). The architecture presented above is a typical dual-nanoring (DNR) channel drop filter on 2D photonic crystal with hexagonal lattice. A silicon PhC crystal slab of 220 nm thickness is released on a SOI substrate and the ratio between radius of air holes and lattice constant is set to be r / a = 0.292.

(p7.2) The nanoring is obtained by removing localized air holes to form an hexagonal defect. The dual-nanoring is made by two aligned nanorings with a centre-to-centre distance d = 11a. The structure is sandwiched between two waveguides, so that it is possible to identify four ports in the PhC platform. The first one acts as input port (red arrow) and the other ones are used for transmission (TR) and forward (FD) or backward drop (BD), indicated in Fig. 19 as TR port, FD port and BD port, respectively.

(p7.3) The device characterized by PhC single-nanoring structure shows a photonic band gap map for TM modes, characterized by a band gap in the range of normalized frequency extended from 0.26 to 0.33. The corresponding band gap wavelength ranges from 1242 nm to 1577 nm and a resonant peak displayed in BD port is located at 1553.6 nm revealing a Q-factor of 3,884, while FD and TR ports reveal a spectral dip at the same wavelength mentioned above.

(p7.4) Simulations evidence that two rings are always phase-matched and their resonances are not independently. In fact, Li et al. have demonstrated that the wavelength of the resonant peak at the BD port is strongly dependent on the ring size and separation distance d between two rings. Consequently, when physical structure is deformed, a variation of the resonant wave-Advances in Photonic Crystals 262 length can be detected. The application of an external force to the device induces a strain linearly proportional to the applied force located at the junction between cantilever and SOI substrate. In particular, the stronger the applied force, thus the strain induced to the sensor, the bigger the red shift of the resonant wavelength to be detected. As sketched in Fig. 20, three different configurations are adopted by moving the DNR resonator on the cantilever and three different correspondent sensor responses are obtained. For example, in cantilever labelled as type p1, the resonant peak shifts from 1553.6 nm to 1554.9 nm, corresponding to a force variation ranging from 0 to 400 nN. In this configuration, as the load force approaches to 500 nN, the output signal intensity at the BD port is lightly reduced, while the signal intensity at the FD port increases. Consequently the signal intensity at the TR port is also increased. The device exhibits a degraded resonant behaviour due to deformed DNR resonator.

(p7.5) The cantilever labelled as type 2p, maintains the channel drop mechanism up to the load force of 700 nN before losing its resonant behaviour. In the last configuration indicated as type p3, only the second ring is kept within the deformation region and the sensitivity of the DNR is reduced. In fact, a less range of load force is detected through this type of cantilever. The BD behaviour is degraded in case of applied force higher than 100 nN.

(p7.6) A PhC micro-pressure sensor has been fabricated and characterized (Bakhtazad et al., 2010). The device is based on an air-bridged line-defect silicon slab PhC waveguide, as sketched in Fig. 21.  The device is fabricated in SOI technology. In this structure the bridge is obtained by removing a portion of buried oxide layer of 1000 nm thickness, while the top silicon layer is 320-nmthick.

(p7.7) The PhC structure has hexagonal lattice with lattice constant a = 430 nm, diameter holes d = 300 nm. A waveguide is embedded by removing a row of holes in ΓK direction. Two 700nm-thick channel waveguides are placed at input and output section in order to ensure an efficient light coupling. In case of TM polarization, the structure shows a band gap with its centre at about 1550 nm.

(p7.8) The sensor operation is based on the optical field profile changes to the proximity of surrounding material induced by the applied pressure on the top of the sensor. Consequently, changes in the transmission spectrum are directly linked to the magnitude of the applied force.
## (s10) Advances in Photonic Crystals
(p10.0) In both structures, by increasing the pH of the complex sample a red shift of the diffraction peak can be observed due to the ionization of the ionic gel. The diffraction red shift occurs after the gel is swollen. The presence of defect in the 3D PhC structure enhances both sensitivity and response time of the PhC sensor. In fact, the device characterized by the defect shows a red-shift of ∆ λ = 60 nm that is greater than the wavelength shift ∆ λ = 40 nm obtained with the defect-free device and estimated for the same pH concentration.

(p10.1) A different architecture used for pH sensing (Jiang et al., 2012) is based on poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)/poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) photonic crystal materials. This sensor exhibits good durability and adjustability. The pH response is monitored by diffraction wavelength shift. A solventassisted method is used to physically cross-link a thermo-reversible PVA hydrogel around CCA and form a gelated crystalline colloidal array photonic crystal material (GCCA). Glutaraldehyde is used to chemically cross-link the PVA hydrogel in order to avoid the collapse of cross-linked GCCA during the procedure for the introduction of environmentally sensitive components. It has been demonstrated that the sensing is better for high concentration of glutaraldheyde solution, because the high cross-link density improves equilibrium hydrogel volume needed for the diffraction shift measuring. The modified Bragg's law reported in Eq. (13), regulates the phenomenon mentioned above:

(p10.2) where D is the center-to-center distance between the nearest spheres, n i and V i are the refractive index and volume of each component, respectively, and θ is the angle between the incident light and the sample normal. As pH increases the hydrogel absorbs water and swell. The center-to-center distance also increases and a red shift of the diffraction peak is generated. The sensor exhibits a wavelength shift of ∆ λ = 96 nm when a solution of pH 7.6 is concentrated in cover medium for 30 min, being the same sensor initially exposed to a solution of pH = 4.8.

(p10.3) In conclusion, a photonic sensor consisting of a glass substrate and a three dimensional photonic crystal realized by using nanoparticles and poly(dimethysiloxane) (PDMS) elastomer has been investigated (Endo et al., 2007). The PhC is generated by infiltrating the opaline lattice of particles with a liquid prepolymer to PMDS in voids. Subsequently the material is thermal cured.

(p10.4) Even in this case, the physical sensing is governed by the Bragg's law that can be written in terms of spacing between planes of crystal (d 111 ) as follows:
## (s11) Photonic crystal fiber sensors
(p11.0) Photonic crystal fibers (PCFs), also named as micro-structured optical fibers (MOFs), represent nowadays a new and intriguing typology of optical fibers suitable for sensing applications such as measurement of strain, refractive index, pressure, temperature, magnetic field, to name a few. PCF-based sensors are characterized by high sensitivity, small size, robustness, flexibility and ability for remote sensing. Other advantages concern with the possibility to be used even in the presence of unfavorable environmental conditions such as noise, strong electromagnetic fields, high voltages, nuclear radiation, for explosive or chemically corrosive media, and at high temperatures.

(p11.1) Substantially, PCFs are fused-silica optical fibers characterized by a hollow or silica core surrounding by a regular pattern of voids running along the fiber axis, as sketched in Fig. 30 below.

(p11.2) In particular, it is possible to appreciate the difference among PCFs, as in Fig. 24(a-b), with respect to conventional single mode fibers (SMFs), as in Fig. 24(c). In particular, propagation properties in conventional optical fibers and PCFs can be tuned by properly designing geometrical parameters, such as the hole diameter indicated with h, the fiber core diameter d, the pitch x (i.e., the distance between the center points of two consecutive holes), the fiber length L and, obviously, materials.

(p11.3) In PCFs, light can be guided by two different mechanisms, i.e., index-guiding or bandgapguiding, as a function of the principle of the light confinement (Buczynski, 2004). In particular, in PCFs characterized by a solid core or by a core with a refractive index higher than the microstructured cladding's one, light is guided as in conventional silica fibers (i.e, doped silica core surrounded by the silica cladding). In fact, light propagates in the high refractive index region by the total internal reflection (TIR) principle at the interface between the core and the low refractive index cladding. In addition, air holes periodically arranged over the fiber crosssection characterize the micro-structured silica cladding, resulting in an effective cladding index. Consequently, the TIR at the core-cladding interface is known as modified TIR and it can occur with very low core-cladding refractive index (RI) contrasts, enabling the fabrication of both core and cladding by the same material.
## (s12) Photonic crystal fiber sensors for physical sensing
(p12.0) In this paragraph, PCF sensors are investigated in detail, focusing on design criteria and measurement setups usually employed in sensing procedures. To this purpose, by firstly considering the class of PCF physical sensors, an highly sensitive torsion sensor has been experimentally demonstrated by incorporating a segment of novel side-leakage PCF . In Fig. 25, the cross-section of the fabricated PCF and the relevant experimental setup are sketched. The fiber is characterized by a 125 μm cladding diameter. The elliptical Ge-doped core, adopted to introduce the fiber birefringence, is characterized by the major diameter of 4 μm while the minor one is equal to 2.88 μm. Moreover, the diameter and the pitch of air holes are ~ 5.48 μm and ~ 8.06 μm, respectively. The experimental setup equipped for torsion sensing is based on the Sagnac interferometer. In particular, it is composed by an optical source, a 3dB coupler that splits input light in two distinct optical signals counter-propagating in the Sagnac loop and by a polarization controller (PC), used for the interferometer optimization. In addition, a 14.85cm-length segment of side-leakage photonic crystal fiber is incorporated in the Sagnac loop. As sketched in Fig. 31, one of the optical fiber extremity is fixed while the other one is not bounded, thus it can be twisted in clockwise and counter-clockwise directions. Finally, an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) is adopted for monitoring the output spectrum.

(p12.1) When the fiber is twisted, the linear defect can induce different mechanical stresses to the elliptical Ge-doped core. The combination effects of the torsion-induced circular birefringence and the intrinsic birefringence of the PCF fiber, generate an elliptical birefringence. Consequently, the elliptical birefringence is proportional to the torsion angle, and its rotary direction is determined by the torsion direction. In fact, when the PCF is twisted clockwise, the elliptical birefringence is right-rotary, on the contrary it is left-rotary when the fiber is twisted in the opposite direction. Finally, the torsion-induced wavelength shift Δλ characterizing the sensor transmission spectrum can be estimated by using the following expression:

(p12.2) where λ is the operative wavelength, η is the circle birefringence ratio of the torsion-induced circle birefringence to the sum of the fiber birefringence, b t is a constant that described the torsion-induced variation of the circle birefringence, and Δτ is the torsion angle. Moreover, the wavelength shift Δλ is negative when the fiber is twisted clockwise, whereas it is positive when the fiber is twisted counter-clockwise.

(p12.3) Interesting results have been experimentally demonstrated with the PCF-based sensor described until now. In particular, a maximum torsion sensitivity of about 0.9354 nm/° has been achieved with a torsion angle measurement error due to the temperature effect of about 0.054 ~ 0.178 °/°C.

(p12.4) Generally, PCF sensors are designed to be strain and temperature independent. To this purpose, temperature insensitivity can be achieved by engineering the fiber composition and geometry. Otherwise, it can be contemplated the use of fiber Bragg grating (FBG) or long period grating (LPG) in the measurement setup, but making the sensor architecture complicated and costly (Gong et al., 2010).

(p12.5) A PCF-based modal interferometric torsion sensor has been investigated and experimentally tested according to the experimental setup sketched in Fig. 26 (Nalawade et al., 2012). The measurement setup consists in a broadband source (BBS), a multi-mode optical fiber for guiding the signal to the PCF and a single-mode fiber (SMF) for collecting the signal to the OSA. A torsion sensitivity of about 79.83 pm/° has been achieved in the dynamic range of 180°.

(p12.6) In addition, strain and temperature effects on torsion sensitivity have been demonstrated to be negligible in the range 0÷4500 με and 30÷200 °C, revealing very high performance. In conclusion, sensing performance described above and other intriguing experimental results such as a torsion sensitivity of 1 nm/° with a temperature sensitivity of -0.5 pm/°C in the range 30÷100 °C (Zu et al., 2011), suggest PCF-based sensors as good candidates for torsion sensing.

(p12.7) PCFs have been widely used in industry and reservoir engineering for monitoring fundamental parameters such as temperature and pressure. To this purpose, high performance have been theoretically demonstrated by using a PCF-based sensor, as in Fig. 27  As sketched in Fig. 27(a), the PCF cross section is characterized by air holes properly designed and periodically surrounding the inner hollow core. Consequently, this device has been designed for operating by the band-gap guiding principle, making the sensor proposed extremely selective in terms of operative wavelength. According to Fig. 27(b), the PCF described until now is fixed in a chamber filled with a specific gas. Moreover, left fiber tip receives input light at λ = 1.55 μm emitted by a laser source and the remaining tip guides the propagating light at the photo-detector (PD).

(p12.8) The sensor mechanism is based on the transmission peak wavelength shift induced by the temperature/pressure changes. In particular, it is needed to distinguish between the pressure and temperature sensing principle. In fact, when the sensor is used for pressure measurement, a mechanical piston (see Fig. 33b) can move due to pressure of oil well environmental. This causes the chamber gas to be compressed in high pressure or be dispersed in low pressure. Consequently, the refractive index of the specific gas filling PCF holes changes leading to a variation of photonic band gap and fundamental modes of PCF. Moreover, the wavelength sensitivity expressed in nm/RIU and previously defined in Eq. (4) can be applied also in this kind of PCF sensing application, indicating analogous sensing performance.

(p12.9) The mechanical piston is not yet used when the PCF-based sensor operates as temperature sensor. In particular, thermal gradients induce gas RI changes and, consequently, operative wavelength shifts, according to Eq. (4). Obviously, the filling gas has to be properly chosen such as its thermo-optic coefficient is high enough for ensuring appreciable sensitivity. This approach is used also for making the temperature effects negligible when the sensor is used for pressure monitoring. In fact, the filling gas is chosen such as its thermo-optic coefficient has opposite sign with respect to the silica's one. In this way, silica and gas RI changes due to temperature influences can be properly compensated, resulting in the possibility of completely removing temperature effects.
