# Psychological Medicine Embracing polygenicity: a review of methods and tools for psychiatric genetics research

CorpusID: 4787226 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88eee8882255f0797b5427600fa9f17dacc3cfce](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88eee8882255f0797b5427600fa9f17dacc3cfce)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The reduction in costs of genotyping technologies in recent years has led to an explosion of genetic and phenotypic information collected on large numbers of people. The primary aim of these studies is to identify genetic polymorphisms associated with a quantitative trait or with an increased risk of disease. These genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have led to an important increase in understanding of the underpinnings of psychiatric and other disorders (Sullivan et al. 2012;Visscher et al. 2012;Gratten, 2016). They have provided empirical data demonstrating that common disorders are polygenic and have allowed interrogation of the genetic architecture, in terms of number, frequency, effect size and interactions of genetic risk factors. However, the potential use of GWAS data goes far beyond identification of trait associated loci.

(p0.1) Here, we present an overview of some recently developed methods utilising genome-wide genotype and phenotype data on large numbers of individuals and show how they can be applied to the research of psychiatric disorders. These new methods serve at least one of the following purposes: (i) estimation of the extent of genetic influence on traits (Estimation of proportion of variance attributable to genome-wide single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), SNP-heritability or h 2 SNP ), (ii) uncovering of shared genetic control between traits (Estimation of genetic correlation from using genome-wide SNPs), (iii) predictions of genetic risk for individuals (Polygenic risk prediction), (iv) uncovering of causal relationships between traits [Mendelian randomisation (MR)], (v) identifying causal SNPs and genes (Fine-mapping and gene prioritisation), or (vi) Detection of genetic heterogeneity. There is often an overlap between these applications: some methods can be applied for more than one purpose, and some of the available software implements more than one method. In this overview, it is not possible to be exhaustive, and we apologise to authors whose methods have not been included.

(p0.2) Most of the methods presented here require genetic data in either of two formats. One is that of full individual level genotype data and phenotypic measurements on each person, where the genetic data can be represented as a matrix with allele counts for each genetic marker for each person. While this offers the largest range of analytic options, file sizes can be very large, which can become prohibitive as computational burden is usually non-linear with increasing numbers of individuals and markers. Moreover, privacy concerns can prevent this type of data from being shared across research groups. Summary statistics of genome-wide association analysis represent the second data format, for which data sharing has fewer privacy concerns (Pasaniuc & Price, 2016). GWAS summary statistics comprise the association test statistic (including direction of effect for a reference allele), standard error, p value of association and allele frequency of each SNP. While it has been shown that it is possible to infer whether an individual was part of a cohort using summary statistics, the power to do so is limited (Homer et al. 2008;Sankararaman et al. 2009;Visscher & Hill, 2009), and in any case requires the genome-wide genotype data of the individual to be identified. To guard against any privacy concerns GWAS summary statistics can be provided using allele frequencies estimated in large independent samples of the same ethnicity. Methods which require only summary statistic data benefit from shorter analytical runtimes, much reduced computer memory requirements, and applicability to a larger number of traits. These benefits usually come at the cost of lower precision (larger standard errors), when compared with methods that utilise individual level genotype data.

(p0.3) While genetic data in one of these two formats are required by all methods presented here, some methods additionally make use of other information, such as genomic annotation or expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) data. Genomic annotation can give clues about the functional importance of a region in which a SNP resides, whereas eQTL data are the result of an association test where the phenotype analysed is expression of a gene.

(p0.4) Here we review a range of different polygenic methods and highlight their aims and the input data they require (Fig. 1). For each method, we provide some examples of applications relevant to psychiatric genetics research (Table 1).
## (s2) Estimation of genetic correlation using genome-wide SNPs
(p2.0) Two traits are genetically correlated, if there is a correlation between the true effect sizes of SNPs affecting the two traits, or in other words, when, on-average, SNPs have directionally similar effects on two traits. Genetic correlation can reflect pleiotropy, which is defined as a genetic variant affecting both traits. However, while a non-null genetic correlation can imply pleiotropy is present at many SNPs, a genetic correlation of zero could arise when pleiotropy is common, but the direction of effects are uncorrelated across SNPs. Genetic correlations (r G ) are of interest because they suggest a shared aetiology. However, misdiagnosis between two genetically uncorrelated diseases can generate significant estimates of r G (Kendler, 1987;Wray et al. 2012). The availability of genetic marker data on disease casecontrol samples has allowed the interrogation of the genetic relationship between diseases, often for the first time, since traditional methods to estimate genetic correlation based on increased risk of a disease in relatives of those with another disease requires often unattainably large samples .

(p2.1) Formally, genetic correlation is defined as genetic covariance between two traits, scaled by the genetic standard deviations of the two contributing traits. Methods used to estimate SNP heritability can be extended into a bivariate form to estimate r G . In order to estimate genetic correlation using GREML, individuallevel genetic data and measurements on two phenotypes are required (from the same or from different individuals). The power of bivariate GREML analyses to detect r G departing from 0 or from 1 depends on the population value of r G , the SNP-heritability of both traits, on the sample sizes, on whether the same or different samples are used for the two traits, and for disease traits, on the proportion of cases in the sample . For example, for two diseases with lifetime prevalence of 1%, SNP-h 2 of 0.2 and genetic correlation of 0.5,
## (s4) Examples of applications to psychiatric disorders
(p4.0) One of the first applications of the bivariate GREML method to disease traits was to estimate genetic correlations between psychiatric disorders, presenting evidence that most pairs of disorders result in estimates that are significantly different from zero (PGC cross disorder group ). From those initial estimates the high correlations between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (~0.6) and between bipolar and MDD (0.5) were considered plausible given evidence from family studies; however, the high genetic correlation between schizophrenia and MDD was more surprising for the clinical community. In fact, close study of the literature from family studies (PGC Cross disorder group, 2013) showed that all three genetic correlation estimates were consistent with published increased risk to relatives (RR) of one disorder for individuals diagnosed with another. However, for the same genetic correlation the size of RR involving a very common disorder (~15% lifetime risk) such as MDD is much smaller than when both disorders are less common (<1% lifetime risk for both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder).

(p4.1) Genetic correlation can arise through misdiagnosis between two diseases. For example, those first presenting with clinical features consistent with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder can in the long-term receive a diagnosis of schizophrenia (and vice versa) (Joyce, 1984;Meyer & Meyer, 2009). However, it can be shown analytically that very high misclassification rate of 20% would be needed under no shared aetiology to result in r G of~0.6 estimated between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (Wray et al. 2012). In contrast, a high genetic correlation between disorders would be consistent with some clinical presentations being difficult to classify.
## (s5) Polygenic risk prediction
(p5.0) Estimates of SNP effects can be used to predict the genetic risk of individuals. Simple risk scores for each individual are calculated as the sum over all per SNP effects, where the per SNP effect is the allele count of the SNP for the individual multiplied by the effect size of the SNP (Wray et al. 2007;Purcell et al. 2009). Here the SNP effects come from a typically large and wellpowered discovery (sometimes called training) data set. While the ultimate goal of genetic risk prediction is in applications where the phenotype has not yet been observed, in research applications the risk predictor is evaluated for individuals in a target (sometimes called validation or testing) data set where the phenotype has already been recorded, so that the efficacy of the predictor can be evaluated.

(p5.1) Screening of high-risk individuals for early intervention or prevention programs is a potential clinical application of polygenic risk prediction that at present is not widely used because of the low accuracy of genetic risk predictors (Chatterjee et al. 2016). However, there are applications of polygenic risk prediction in research where low prediction accuracy is less limiting; for example, it could be a cost-effective strategy to conduct follow-up studies in samples ascertained to be low or high for polygenic risk. The genetic predictor is evaluated against a measured phenotype in the target sample, which may or may not be the same phenotype from which the predictor was constructed. Generally, if the predicted and the measured trait are genetically correlated, then there should be positive prediction accuracy, given enough power in both data sets (Dudbridge, 2013).

(p5.2) In the usual implementation of polygenic risk scores, SNP effect sizes have been estimated from the standard, one SNP at a time GWAS analysis. The construction of polygenic risk scores is based on some decision about the proportion of SNPs to include in the predictor. As the discovery sample p value threshold becomes more lenient, the increased predictive power of including estimated effect sizes from more true positive associated SNPs is balanced by the inclusion of more false positives. The optimum proportion of SNPs to include depends on the (unknown) genetic architecture and size of the discovery sample. In the latest schizophrenia GWAS, the optimum p value threshold was identified as 0.05 (based on variance explained in out-of-sample prediction across many samples), although inclusion of all SNPs did not lower accuracy drastically (Ripke et al. 2014). Often a range of different p value thresholds are used to determine the best predictor, although this approach is prone to overfitting. Software such as PLINK (Purcell et al. 2007;Chang et al. 2015) implements basic polygenic risk scoring, while PRSice compares polygenic risk predictors using a large number of p value cutoffs to find the optimum threshold given the data (Euesden et al. 2015). In polygenic risk scoring, LD among SNPs is usually accounted for by applying LD-clumping, i.e. pruning of SNPs based on LD but with higher preference to SNPs with lower p values (usually simply termed 'clumping'). Prediction accuracy can be improved by using methods that provide estimates of SNP effects that are conditional on all other SNPs, thereby directly taking SNP LD correlations into account (de Los Campos et al. 2013), such as Genomic Best Linear Unbiased Prediction (GBLUP) (Meuwissen et al. 2001), which is widely used in animal breeding. In GWAS, there are many more SNPs compared with individuals so effects sizes of each SNP are not estimable in a multiple regression model. In GBLUP, it is assumed that SNP effect sizes are drawn from a normal distribution and a shrinkage term, or penalty term, proportional to the trait heritability is introduced in the model. More complex models are BayesR  or LASSO (least absolute shrinkage and selection operator) (Abraham et al. 2013). These methods shrink the SNP effect estimates (i.e. the effect attributable to SNPs in LD with each other is shared between the correlated SNPs) and will ensure the predicted phenotypes are more accurate, and in LASSO and BayesR shrink a proportion of SNPs to zero. The gains in prediction accuracy are dependent on underlying genetic architecture .

(p5.3) If individual-level genotype data are not available, it is still possible to transform marginal SNP effects (standard GWAS summary statistics) into penalised, conditional SNP effects, by making use of an LD reference data set Robinson et al. 2017). This is implemented in GCTA (Yang et al. 2011a) and in LDpred , which not only accounts for LD between SNPs, but also uses a Bayesian framework to adjust the SNP effects for traits where an infinitesimal model (all SNPs have some effect) is not the best fit to the data (e.g. autoimmune disorders). This is analogous to the selecting SNPs based on p value in standard polygenic risk prediction and can further improve accuracy.

(p5.4) Finally, GBLUP approaches can be extended to a multi-trait model, which can further improve prediction accuracy when phenotypes are genetically correlated, because measurements on each trait provide information on the genetic values of the other correlated traits. This approach has been implemented in the program MTG2 and has been shown to improve prediction accuracy for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (Maier et al. 2015).
## (s7) Mendelian randomisation
(p7.0) MR analysis investigates the causal relationships between traits. It is a specific form of an instrumental variable analysis (Evans & Davey Smith, 2015), where the goal is to test the causal effect of an explanatory variable (exposure to a risk factor) on a dependent outcome variable (such as disease risk). In MR, genetic markers are used as the instrumental variables. The MR poster child is the application to blood lipid levels and myocardial infarction ). Together with a number of randomised controlled trials (Keene et al. 2014), this application of MR has had major impact on drug development by providing evidence against a causal role of HDL and thus helped in the search for effective ways of preventing myocardial infarction, and demonstrates how evidence from an MR analysis could be used to circumvent costly randomised controlled trials.

(p7.1) Despite its great potential, MR is often limited by low power, and by the fact that it is very difficult to show that all the assumptions (see Fig. 3) that are necessary to infer causality are met. However, if MR is applied bidirectionally for trait pairs of approximately comparable power, and evidence for significant causality is detected in only one direction, then this can help to infer causality over pleiotropy. The power in MR studies is a function of the true causal association between exposure and outcome and of the variance explained by the instrumental variables . Since statistically significantly associated SNPs often only explain a small proportion of the genetic variance, for many pairs of traits, very large sample sizes are needed to achieve sufficient power to detect causal associations [see online calculator ].
## (s8) Examples of applications to psychiatric disorders
(p8.0) Several MR studies have investigated a potential causal influence of variables, which are known to be associated with psychiatric traits and diseases from observational studies. One study which looked at BMI as a potential risk factor concluded that there is no evidence of BMI being a causal influence on schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, but weak evidence of BMI conferring a higher risk of MDD. It was noted, however, that the BMI association suffers from low power caused by small sample sizes for MDD (Hartwig et al. 2016). C-Reactive protein (CRP) is a potential risk factor for psychiatric disorders with undisputed correlational association, but unclear causality. A study from 2016 surprisingly found a protective role of genetically elevated CRP levels on the risk for schizophrenia, as well as weak (nominally significant) evidence for a risk increasing effect on bipolar disorder as well as a range of other somatic traits (Prins et al. 2016). This is in contradiction with another 2016 study, which identified elevated CRP levels to confer an increased risk of schizophrenia (Inoshita et al. 2016). There is much debate on whether cannabis is a risk factor for psychosis or schizophrenia, or whether the association is due to reverse causation or due to a confounding factor (McGrath et al. 2010;Gage et al. 2016). Recently MR studies have provided evidence for a causal role of cannabis in the development of schizophrenia, but also for a reverse causation (Gage et al. 2017;Vaucher et al. 2017). Several other risk factors for schizophrenia, anxiety and depression have been investigated through MR with negative results (Bjørngaard et al. 2013;Gage et al. 2013;Taylor et al. 2016).

(p8.1) In summary, MR studies investigating risk factors for psychiatric disorders could in a few cases provide evidence for a risk increasing effect. As the power of GWAS with increasing sample sizes, there will be more robust SNP associations which can be used as instrumental variables. This will provide more evidence for whether the many negative results were just caused by low power or by the absence of a true causal association, but interpretation of causality needs to carefully consider confounding factors.
## (s9) Fine-mapping and gene prioritisation
(p9.0) LD between SNPs is both a blessing and a curse for GWAS. On one hand, it makes it possible to probe only a subset of all genetic variants yet still detect associations for a much larger set, either through tagging of non-genotyped SNPs by genotyped SNPs or through LD-based imputation to sequenced reference samples. On the other hand, it means that a detected association does not necessarily imply a causal role for the associated SNPs. Fine-mapping attempts to identify which out of a number of associated SNPs in a LD region have a causal role, and which are merely associated because they are in LD with causal SNPs (Sekar et al. 2016).

(p9.1) To better understand disease aetiology, it may be of interest to identify causal genes, rather than causal SNPs. In many cases the causal gene may simply be the gene closest to the most strongly associated SNP in a region, but this is not always so (Claussnitzer et al. 2015).
## (s10) Identifying causal SNPs
(p10.0) A range of different approaches have been developed for the finemapping of SNPs. Most of them use information on functional annotation of the genome and LD between SNPs, in addition to SNP association statistics on one or more diseases. An algorithm (PICS) utilising all these kinds of information has recently been applied to 21 autoimmune disorders and identified many putative causal variants by integrating information from different types of functional annotations, including epigenetic marks and gene expression information (Farh et al. 2015).
## (s14) Detection of genetic heterogeneity
(p14.0) Most genetic studies are based on the assumption that individuals who exhibit similar symptoms or who have been diagnosed with the same disease are representatives of the same underlying biology defined by a common genetic architecture. Under a polygenic disease architecture, each individual is likely to have a unique combination of risk loci, but with each combination drawn from the pool of risk loci. Genetic heterogeneity occurs when individuals with the same clinical presentation have risk alleles drawn from independent (or perhaps correlated) sets of risk loci, and the genetic risk profile of one or more subgroups of cases departs from that of the rest. This may arise through misclassification of some cases, or through distinct aetiological pathways leading to the same diagnosis (Flint & Kendler, 2014;Jeste & Geschwind, 2014). The inherent phenotypic heterogeneity within psychiatry makes detection of genetic heterogeneity an appealing goal and identification of distinct pathways holds the promise of shedding light on disease aetiology. Furthermore, a biological basis for disease stratification could lead to more personalised treatments (Kapur et al. 2012).
## (s15) Examples of applications to psychiatric disorders
(p15.0) The BUHMBOX method was used to investigate the shared genetic basis between MDD and schizophrenia, and found no evidence that suggested that a subset of MDD cases was genetically more similar to schizophrenia cases, implying that the genetic correlation estimated between the disorders reflect pleiotropy (Han et al. 2016). Application of this method will become more interesting as sample sizes increase.
## (s16) Conclusions
(p16.0) For many psychiatric disorders, genetic factors explain more variation in disease risk in the population than any other known risk factors (Sullivan et al. 2012), but only recently has it become possible to resolve the overall familial genetic risk into individual risk factors at the DNA level. The evidence is now conclusive that psychiatric disorders, like many other common disease and disorders are highly polygenic underpinned by thousands of genetic loci, each of which contributes a small amount to the overall genetic risk. After a period in which many candidate gene studies have reported association results, which failed to replicate (Chanock et al. 2007), the hypothesis-free GWAS approach has established itself as the dominating paradigm to find associated genetic loci. With ever growing sample sizes, more and more SNPs surpass the stringent p value threshold for almost all investigated traits. However, it is also becoming clear that the bulk of genetic risk factors remains hidden among those loci that do not achieve genome-wide significance. Many of the methods presented in this review leverage the large amount of information that is harboured by genetic variants, regardless of whether or not they achieve significance. While the focus of some methods is on individual SNPs or genes, other methods aggregate over a potentially large number of loci to answer questions such as 'What is the combined genetic effect of all measurable SNPs on phenotypic variance?', 'Do these traits have a shared genetic aetiology?' or 'Do these traits causally influence one another?'. One thing that all of these methods have in common is that their utility crucially depends on the power to detect an association, which in turn depends on sample size. Larger sample sizes lead to a higher computational burden, but for most analytical questions, which have been presented here, there are methods which can utilise summary statistics and thus drastically reduce runtime and memory requirements.

(p16.1) The literature on new methods is ever-growing and while we have tried to present an overview of key methods to help navigation of this complex field, it is difficult to be fully exhaustive. In particular, pathway analyses are important application of GWAS summary statistics, but these methods have been reviewed recently (Wang et al. 2010) and so were not considered here. We have illustrated the methods with some example applications; however, we expect the full potential of the data will only be revealed in coming years when studies with half a million or more people will be widely available. A key issue for the field is to develop cost-effective strategies to capture larger sample sizes with both DNA samples and phenotypic data as these are needed to evaluate the extent to which genetic data can explain phenotypic heterogeneity and to fulfil the potential of more personalised medicine.
