# UPINE PUBLISHERS Open Access L Latest Trends in Textile and Fashion Designing A Review of Men's Underwear Styles and Its Various Fabrics

CorpusID: 49227052 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/746e9a25de99401a1600367eedc135e33e502bcd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/746e9a25de99401a1600367eedc135e33e502bcd)

Fields: Art

## (s19) Men's Bikinis
(p19.0) In the era of boxer briefs and men's brief, bikinis for men was like a rare bird. The underwear style was introduced in the year 1942. After gaining a lot of popularity among women in the 20th century, the erotic style of underneath article was usually used in the swimwear category of men. However, with time it has become popular as men's underwear [14]. Bikinis for men are considered a sensual version of men's brief. This underwear style offers the same fitted look and support as that of the traditional briefs. However, it was skimpier than the former. This style of underneath article was initially used as swimwear. Later it became one of the best sellers in men's underwear category. This is one of the best options for men who are looking sex appeal with going over-the-top. This is one of the most versatile underwear styles that can sport at work as well as for casual spree. The conventional bikinis are an apt option for the long working hours. With the top-notch support and skimpy cut, the underwear holds the package and keeps it breezy. For parties and other casual occasions, the sexy, yet functional styles of pouch bikini underwear are ideal. The pouch elevates the position of genital and accentuates the visibility of the front profile. Thus, one can bring the entire attention in the right place.
## (s28) Men's G-Strings
(p28.0) G-strings are considered as the skimpier version of thong underwear. These underwear styles were incorporated into the vocabulary of women's underwear the 1980s. However, with time men got body and style-conscious. With the change in the taste and preference, it gained popularity in the early 2000s [16]. Just like thongs, G-strings for men covers absolutely nothing at the back. However, the front offers ample support to the boys of the wearer. There are a lot of saying regarding the name of the underwear. Some say that it is named after the G-string of a guitar. While according to Wikipedia, in the 19th century, the word G-string was used for a loincloth. In the opinion of linguist Robert Hendrickson, the letter 'G' stands for the groin. The feminine style of underneath article with a touch of machismo can give a contrasting combination to the masculinity of the wearer. This underneath apparel was specifically used for the pleasure purpose. It still continues to be a staple for all those prefer keeping everything spicy in their relation. The provoking glimpse of the asset can take the sex appeal to the next level. The seamless underwear can be teamed up with a variety of outfit and can be even worn on formal occasion. Paring them with office attire or even tuxedo will get rid of the prominent problem of visible underwear line.
## (s36) Properties of cotton
(p36.0) Cotton is very soft and lightweight. Thus, the underneath clothing made up of this fiber is comfortable. The fabric has tiny pores that allow breathing well. Keeping the ventilation and air circulation to the next level, cotton underwear provides a comfy feel down there. Cotton has high absorbency and is moisture resistant. Thus, it can keep dry even during the hottest day of summer. The fabric is stronger when wet than dry. Moreover, it can withstand heat, detergent and even bleach. This ensures the durability of the underneath article. However, it is more prone to shrinkage if not treated properly [18].
## (s42) Properties
(p42.0) Modal is the softest fabric in the world. This pretty much explains its significance in the men's underwear industry. The undies made of this fiber can keep cozy all day long. Despite the soft and silky feel, the material wears resistant and strong. This is one fabric that has very high wet strength, thus, it can even withstand machine wash and can be tumble dried. Even after multiple washes, the material stays absorbent, soft and supple. Modal is often blended with cotton and other synthetic fibers. It even allows easy dyeing [20].
## (s45) Properties
(p45.0) Just like cotton, rayon is comfortable, airy and moisture absorbent. Thus, the undies made up of this fabric are a perfect choice to deal with excessive sweating and problems related to it. What makes it versatile is the fact that it can be easily dyed in vivid colors. This has made the introduction of some jazzy and lesser used shades possible in the intimate category for men. The fabric has moderate strength but is soft to the skin and abrasion resistant. Thus, it is practical option to reduce sticking and squashing of the manhood during the day. The shrink resistant material makes the underneath article durable, and sustain multiple washes. Rayon underwear materials to be washed by hand and should not be clubbed with other clothes in the washing machine [20].
## (s48) Properties
(p48.0) Polyester provides a smooth and synthetic feel. The skivvies made of this material feel very soft against the skin of the wearer. The fabric is resistant to wrinkle, mildew as well as abrasion. This is why it is used in making men's swimwear. The fabric keeps the package isolated and away from the body even when drenched. Polyester is extremely strong and does not stretch or shrink. Thus, these undergarments last longer than usual undies. Moreover, it can be machine washed and dried [21].
