# Exploring Childhood Lead Exposure through GIS: A Review of the Recent Literature

CorpusID: 497918 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4a36bec2124123842d56450eb385f7068ea6a8c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4a36bec2124123842d56450eb385f7068ea6a8c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Geography, Medicine

## (s2) Recent Reviews
(p2.0) A review of GIS-utilized studies on childhood lead poisoning has not been conducted. There are some non-GIS based reviews on lead poisoning in relation to cardiovascular diseases [55], resuspension of urban soil [56], multiple risk factors on Hispanic sub-population [57], lead dust from traffic volume [58], leaded gasoline on urbanized areas [59], and exposure to lead in soil dust [60]. We will describe these reviews and summarize what is known and unknown as a source of lead exposure and build on these reviews with our comprehensive review, inclusive of GIS-based studies.
## (s6) GIS Analysis/Citation Region/Date Common Risk Factors/Major Findings
(p6.0) Old housing, race, poverty, population density, education, vacant housing, renting, and seasonality/The age of housing, education level, and percentage of African American population variables are significant predictors of BLLs. Point in polygon analysis (PIP), address geocoding, and spatial regression/ [14] Syracuse, NY/2007 House value, race/EBLLs are significantly associated with the percentage of African American population and average house value. Spatial autocorrelation, kriging, Local Moran's I, and LISA/ [15] Cook, IL/2007 Old housing, income, and minority populations/The authors concluded that the dependent variable is significantly associated with housing age, income, and minority populations.
## (s9) Risk Modeling
(p9.0) This section refers to nine articles on risk model development for childhood lead poisoning [10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18]. Sargent et al. [10] conducted a census tract analysis over childhood lead exposure in Rhode Island. The study used 17,956 BLL screening records from the children who were aged 0 to 59 months and screened between 1992 and 1993. Because of the small area problem, the authors excluded two of the census tracts where there were very few screening samples. The study used the percentage of children with BLL ≥10 µg/dL as the dependent variable. The population of children for the census tracts was assigned based on census estimates. The study's final model includes five independent variables which explained 83% of the variance in lead exposure. According to the final model, percentages of screened children, households with public assistance income, houses built before 1950, vacant houses, and recent immigrants are positively associated with the outcome measure. Percentages of houses built before 1950 and vacant houses are significantly associated with the dependent variable. The source of lead exposure in immigrant children was unknown due to the possibility that they could be exposed to lead in their home countries. The study also found that there is no association between the percentage of African American population and high lead exposure in Rhode Island.
## (s10) Environmental Risk Factors
(p10.0) This section discusses eight studies that address environmental risk factors [19][20][21][22][23][24][25][26]. Guthe et al. [19] conducted one of the earliest GIS studies on childhood lead poisoning in 1992. The authors studied New Jersey municipalities of Newark, East Orange, and Irvington. The study mapped blood screening records overlaid with census tracts in the municipalities. Children blood samples were from the years 1983 to 1990. Unlike all the relevant studies reviewed in this article, the study used a 15 µg/dL threshold level, which was the BLL threshold level at the time. This study used street level address geocoding. Guthe et al. used command line address matching software, which is one of the oldest address geocoding engines. In terms of environmental factors, Mielke et al. [20] studied the associations between childhood BLLs and soil lead in Louisiana. The study used three data sets: soil lead data, age of housing data, and children blood lead data for urban New Orleans and rural Lafourche Parish in Louisiana. The study focused on soil contamination and leaded paint sources of lead toxicity problems. The percentage of housing built before 1940 was considered an indicator of leaded paint. Using x and y coordinates of census tract centroids, the authors plotted the three data sets within a three dimensional spatial model. The study showed that there is a relationship between low BLLs and new housing neighborhoods, and old housing neighborhoods were split evenly between old and new housing. There is also an association between high soil lead areas and neighborhoods where children with EBLLs reside. The study suggests that inner-city children should be the focus area to eliminate lead toxicity problems in the population.

(p10.1) Griffith et al. [21] employed several GIS tools that include geocoding, buffer analysis, and interpolation techniques such as kriging to depict the lead poisoning problem in Syracuse, NY. This study shows the geographic distribution of lead toxicity in Syracuse, NY in three aggregated levels: census block, census block group, and census tract. Linear regression with spatial autocorrelation is used as a statistical method for the three aggregated levels. The study shows that there is a major difference between urban and rural exposure, which is consistent with the results from Laidlaw et al., and Mielke et al. [56,58,59]. It however finds no statistically significant relationship between historically heavily traveled streets and lead exposure. Lead poisoning is detectable regardless of the level of geographic resolution. Griffith et al. also showed that BLLs are correlated with percentage of children at risk, population density, mean housing value, and percentage of the African American population.

(p10.2) Gonzalez et al. [22] investigated the possible impact of point sources of lead exposure relative to other types of lead exposure sources. The study was conducted in Tijuana, Mexico with, Hispanic children aged between 1.5 and 6.9 years. In order to deal with the confounding variable of cultural habits, the study used BLLs where the subjects reported that they did not use lead-glazed ceramics for cooking or food storage purposes. The study was composed of 76 samples from 14 sites. Gonzalez et al. mapped the distribution of these 76 point sources as well as five point sources containing 19 soil samples with the values ranging from 100 to 7870 µg/g soil lead. They compared the children BLLs with Bocco and Sachez [73] study's prediction model which was based on fixed industrial lead point sources. Similar to the Bocco and Sachez study, the authors assigned Tijuana census tracts the labels of "high", "medium", "low", and "N/A" risk levels based on proximity to the lead point sources. The authors also mapped these risk levels of census tracts and children cases with elevated blood lead levels (≥10 µg/dL) where the subjects reported non-use of lead-glazed ceramics.

(p10.3) In 2007, Miranda et al. [23] explored the potential effect of the use of chloramines in water treatment systems over childhood lead exposure in Wayne County, North Carolina. The authors examined the relationship between these potential effects and the age of housing in order to help guide policy practices in North Carolina. The authors used the datasets of children BLLs, tax parcels, census data, and water treatment system boundaries. Children BLLs were geocoded based on tax parcels with a 72.4% geocoding success rate from the surveillance data between 1999 and 2003. The study used multivariate regression to analyze the data and concluded that the use of chloramines in the water treatment systems might inadvertently increase lead exposure among children.

(p10.4) Another environmental study by Miranda et al. [25] conducted in 2011 to investigate the relationship between avgas lead exposure and children BLLs. The authors selected 66 airports in 6 counties of North Carolina based on the availability of tax assessor data, the volume of air traffic, and the number of screened children for lead toxicity. The study used the airports' estimated annual lead emissions which were obtained from the U.S. EPA Office of Transportation and Air Quality. The children BLL data composed of the blood tests conducted between 1995 and 2003 for the children between the ages of 9 months and 7 years. The authors determined the airport boundaries using tax parcel data. The authors created buffer zones surrounding each airport selected in the study. The buffers were created based on the distances of 500 m, 1000 m, 1500 m, and 2000 m from the polygon edges of the airports. Unlike most of the studies discussed in this review article, Miranda et al. used GIS to show children locations in a jittered representation even though they run the statistical model based on actual point locations. Using the geocoded locations, Miranda et al. was able to join children locations and buffer zones, which were created from the airport boundaries. The authors assigned dummy variables to children locations based on the boundaries mentioned above and seasons for the screening time. The model includes the age of housing, screening season, and demographic variables. The authors also used inverse population weights to eliminate the possible bias caused by high numbers of screening cases on parcels. The study found a significant positive association between logged BLLs and the distances to the airport locations. It further shows that seasonality is an important factor in estimating BLLs. In fall, spring, and summer seasons, children were found having higher BLLs on average compared to winter season screenings. Age of housing was negatively associated with BLLs while the median household income and minority neighborhoods had positive associations with BLLs.

(p10.5) Mielke et al. [24] conducted a comparative analysis of lead poisoning problems by assessing the pre-Katrina blood and soil lead concentrations around public and private properties in New Orleans. Soil lead data was composed of 587 soil samples (224 samples from public properties, and 363 samples from residential private properties) and 55,551 BLL screening records for the years between 2000 and 2005. The study shows significant differences among the blood lead prevalence between the inner city (CJ Peete) and outlying areas (Florida) of New Orleans. The study also found no statistically significant other differences between inner and outer cities. The authors found that, among the screens in public properties, differences between inner and outer cities in lead toxicity prevalence are a better proxy than age of construction. The study noted that lead additives in gasoline had more impact on childhood lead exposure than the dust from leaded paint. In terms of lead dust from vehicles, the largest amount of lead was deposited on soil in the inner-cities whereas outer-cities were not experiencing a large amount of lead deposit from the exhaust due to a lighter traffic volume. Consequently, the study indicated that lead toxicity originated from soil contamination could help explain lead toxicity in children.
## (s11) Genetic Variation
(p11.0) One of the reviewed studies focused on the genetic variation of childhood lead poisoning problems [27]. Since other studies found a significant relationship between childhood lead poisoning and African American populations, the authors focused on genetic variation of the problem. The study used previously developed data of children BLLs by Miranda et al. [11], which geocoded children cases at the tax parcel level in order to get the construction year of house units from tax assessor data. The study also considers the occupancy status, which was also gathered from tax parcels. The authors note that the spatial autocorrelation problems were minimized by assigning individual year of construction from tax parcels. The ANOVA comparison of models with and without spatial autocorrelation also corroborated the non-existence of spatial autocorrelation. Since some of the information pertaining to construction years is missing in the tax parcel dataset, some cases lacked this information. In those cases, the study assigned the construction year from the nearby parcels. Some studies in the literature indicate that the relationship between high BLLs and African American populations might be because of low calcium intake in the population. According to this study, however, the relationship between high BLLs and African American populations might be more related to genetic polymorphisms.
## (s12) Political Ecology
(p12.0) Hanchette's study focused on the political ecology aspect of childhood lead toxicity. The author used Moran's I [71] and LISA statistics [72] to investigate the spatial distribution of lead poisoning prevalence at the county level in North Carolina. They use 10-year children BLL data from 1995 to 2004. In the study, the data findings show that there is a significant cluster of high BLL rates in eastern North Carolina. The author indicated that these clusters of high rates show persistent health disparities in the region. Hanchette claims that the health disparities in eastern North Carolina results from large scale socio-economic and cultural processes rather than neighborhood characteristics such as poverty and old housing. The study found that the Appalachia (western North Carolina) region displayed low rates of lead poisoning even though the region had high poverty rates. Another major finding is that high rates of lead poisoning clusters correspond with African American populations only in eastern North Carolina. Unlike this region, southern North Carolina does not have high rates of lead poisoning despite high concentration of African American populations. The author suggests that the convergence of poverty, older housing, and the large rural African American population can be explained by the long history of tenant farming. According to Hanchette, this transition from an agricultural state to a mixed economy led to changes in socio-economic characteristics of the eastern region of North Carolina.
## (s13) Conclusions
(p13.0) This article reviewed twenty-three GIS-based studies examining spatial modeling of childhood lead poisoning and risk factors that were published after 1991, the year the CDC's threshold updated to 10 µg/dL. GIS use in lead studies revealed greater detail about the magnitude of lead poisoning within populations. Reviewed articles indicate that surveillance and screening practices have extended considerable amount of importance in targeting "at-risk" populations. However, the literature shows that some health departments failed to account for "at-risk" populations [7][8][9]. This issue can be resolved through the implementation of GIS in health departments.

(p13.1) Risk factors for childhood lead poisoning (age of housing, urban/rural status, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, population density, renter/owner occupancy, housing value, and nutritional status) have been thoroughly parsed out in childhood lead poisoning research. Unfortunately, address geocoding methods, the parameters used, and the uncertainties they presented were not included in a similar level of detail in the research. Most of the reviewed studies did not provide the input parameters such as the reference system and the match rate. Since these parameters have a direct impact on results of the spatial analyses, this makes it difficult to conduct legitimate comparisons among the various articles.
