# A Survey on Graph Drawing Beyond Planarity

CorpusID: 4947258 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2900ef06167eb5684020db9ccfcb9fe42a07a919](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2900ef06167eb5684020db9ccfcb9fe42a07a919)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s3) Graph Families
(p3.0) The beyond-planar graph families considered in this survey are defined as graphs that admit drawings not containing specific forbidden configurations, that is, sets of edges that violate some desired topological or geometric property of the edge crossings. Table 1 provides a schematic illustration of some beyond-planar graph families, among the most studied in the literature. For each family X, we define what a drawing of type X is. A graph belongs to family X if it admits a drawing of type X. Definitions based on first-order logic formulas have been recently proposed for many of these types of drawings [58].

(p3.1) k-planar drawings. A k-planar drawing (k ≥ 1) does not contain an edge crossed more than k times. The family of k-planar graphs, for k = 1, was introduced in 1965 in the context of the simultaneous vertex-face coloring of planar graphs [182]. The study of k-planar graphs, for k > 1, was proposed for the first time as a tool for finding lower bounds on the crossing number of a graph [177], i.e., on the minimum number of crossings in a drawing of a graph.
## (s9) Relationships Between Graph Families
(p9.0) Some families of beyond-planar graphs have similar edge densities or exhibit similar structural and topological properties. In these cases it is natural to ask whether they have some inclusion relationships. In what follows, we survey the main results concerning this research direction.

(p9.1) RAC graphs and 1-planar graphs. One of the most studied problems on the subject is the relationship between RAC graphs and 1-planar graphs. Recall that straight-line RAC drawings have at most 4n − 10 edges, while topological (resp. geometric) 1-planar graphs have at most 4n − 8 edges (resp. 4n − 9). This immediately implies that optimal 1-planar graphs are not straight-line RAC. Eades and Liotta proved in fact that these two families are in general incomparable, and provide a series of interesting results about their relationships [119]. They exhibit an infinite subfamily of straight-line RAC graphs with n ≥ 85 vertices that are not 1-planar (see, e.g., Fig. 6(a)), and they show that there exist infinitely many 1planar graphs with 4n − 10 edges that are not straight-line RAC (see, e.g., Fig. 6(b)). On the positive side, every optimal straight-line RAC graph is 1-planar (see, e.g., Fig. 4(d)).

(p9.2) Brandenburg et al. study the RAC drawability of the 1-planar graphs with independent pairs of crossing edges (the IC-planar graphs) [60]. They show that every IC-planar graph has a straight-line RAC drawing, while this is not true for the larger class of the NIC-planar graphs [30].

(p9.3) The incomparability of straight-line RAC graphs and 1-planar graphs, together with the fact that ICplanar graphs always admit a straight-line RAC drawing (which is also 1-planar), suggest two interesting questions: (i) What is the complexity of deciding whether a graph admits a drawing that is both 1-planar and straight-line RAC? (ii) Does every 1-planar graph admit a 1-planar drawing that is also RAC if we allow at most one bend per edge? These questions have been recently answered [40]: Question (i) is NP-hard, as already mentioned in Section 5 (see Table 3), while Question (ii) has a positive answer. Figure 6(c) shows a 1-planar RAC drawing with at most one bend per edge of the graph in Fig. 6(b). Additional inclusion relationships between 1-planar and straight-line RAC drawings have been studied for constrained drawings and they are summarized in Section 9.

(p9.4) k-planar graphs and k-quasi planar graphs. Note that the tight bounds on the edge density of 3-planar and 3-quasi planar graphs imply the existence of 3-quasi planar graphs that are not 3-planar. On the other hand, for k ≥ 1, every k-planar graph is clearly (k + 2)-quasi planar. These two observations have motivated a recent work on the relationship between k-planar graphs and k-quasi planar graphs [14]. This work proves that, for k ≥ 3, every k-planar graph is (k + 1)-quasi planar. The proof is based on a rerouting argument that starts from a k-planar drawing and resolves all possible bundles of k + 1 pairwise crossing edges. The drawing produced by this technique is (k + 1)-quasi planar, but it may not be k-planar anymore. This result has been later extended to the case k = 2 [138]. Thus, every k-planar graph is (k + 1)-quasi planar, for k ≥ 2.

(p9.5) k-planar graphs and fan-planar graphs. Since optimal fan-planar graphs have the same density as optimal 2-planar graphs (optimal n-vertex graphs have 5n − 10 edges for these two families), Binucci et al. study the relationship between fan-planar and k-planar graphs [48]. They prove that these two families are incomparable. On the one hand, they show that for any k ≥ 2 there exists a fan-planar graph that is not k-planar; the proof uses a complete 3-partite graph K 1,3,h , where the index h depends on k; this graph is clearly fan-planar but any of its drawings contains too many crossings to be k-planar. On the other hand, they exhibit 2-planar graphs that are not fan-planar.

(p9.6) k-gap planar graphs, k-planar graphs, k-quasi planar graphs. Bae et al. studied the relationship between k-gap planar graphs and both k-planar and k-quasi planar graphs [31]. By using Hall's theorem, they prove that for every k ≥ 1 all 2k-planar graphs are k-gap planar. On the other hand, for every fixed k ≥ 1, there exists a 1-gap planar graph that is not k-planar. Similarly, by using a counting argument on the number of crossings, they prove that all k-gap planar graphs are 2k + 2-quasi planar, while for all k ≥ 1 they exhibit a quasi planar graph that is not k-gap planar.

(p9.7) Planarly-connected graphs, 1-planar graphs, fan-planar graphs. Ackerman motivates the study of planarly-connected graphs with the fact that both maximally dense 1-planar graphs and maximally dense fan-planar graphs are planarly-connected [7]. For 1-planar graphs, the high-level idea is to consider a drawing with the minimum number of crossings of a maximally dense graph; in such a drawing, for every pair of crossing edges there is a crossing-free edge that connects their endpoints, as otherwise one could contradict either the fact that the drawing is crossing minimal or the fact that the graph is maximally dense. The idea for fan-planar graphs is similar.

(p9.8) The intersection relationships between the different families of beyond-planar graph families are summarized in Table 5. Each family in a row (resp. column) is represented by a thin (resp. thick) circle. Each cell reports the relationship between the corresponding row and column using the common Venn diagram notation. Note that, some relationships immediately derive from the definitions. For example, a fan-planar drawing is always k-quasi planar (for each k ≥ 3), because three mutually crossing edges imply that two independent edges are crossed by a third one.

(p9.9) Open Problems. Table 5 shows that some pairs of beyond-planar graph families have a non-empty intersection that is not an inclusion. In these cases, it is interesting to characterize the graphs that belong to both families. For example, there are 1-planar graphs that are not straight-line RAC, there are straight-line RAC graphs that are not 1-planar, all optimal straight-line RAC graphs are 1-planar, and all IC-planar graphs are straight-line RAC [119,60]. However, the following is still open.
## (s13) Vertex Complexity
(p13.0) A bar visibility representation of a graph G maps each vertex of G to a distinct horizontal segment, called bar, and each edge of G to a vertical unobstructed segment, called visibility, between the two bars corresponding to its end-vertices. This kind of representation is intrinsically planar, and on the other hand every planar graph admits this representation 2 (see, e.g., [194,205]). In order to realize non-planar graphs, other visibility models have been proposed, such as bar k-visibility representations and rectangle visibility representations.
## (s14) Area-Crossing Trade-offs for Planar Graphs
(p14.0) Many papers in graph drawing study the area requirement of planar straight-line drawings. Different popular results establish that an n-vertex planar graph can always be drawn with straight-line edges in O(n 2 ) area [81,186]. It is also proven that this bound is worst-case optimal for the family of planar graphs, as there are infinitely many planar graphs that require quadratic area to be drawn in the plane without edge crossings [81]. Several attempts have been done to prove the existence of straight-line planar drawings with o(n 2 ) area for specific sub-families of planar graphs, such as trees, outerplanar graphs, and series-parallel graphs (see, e.g., [97] for references on these results). A natural question that arises from the aforementioned results is whether allowing some edge crossings may help to reduce the area of a drawing of a planar graph. In other words, what is the area requirement of beyond-planar drawings of planar graphs? Wood shows that, for any fixed positive integer k > 0, all k-colorable graphs have a straight-line drawing in linear area; this implies that planar graphs always admit O(n) straight-line drawings with crossing edges [206]. However, the technique by Wood can give rise to drawings where some edges contain a linear number of crossings and the angles at which two edges cross can be arbitrarily small.

(p14.1) The use of edge crossings that form large angles is studied in different papers. Straight-line RAC drawings of planar graphs may require Ω(n 2 ) area [17], thus right angle crossing drawings do not help to reduce the area requirement bound for planar graphs in the general case. On the positive side, for infinitely many values of n, there exists an n-vertex planar graph whose requirement is Θ(n 2 ) for straightline planar drawings and Θ(n) for straight-line RAC drawings [200]. Analogous results hold for other aesthetics such as uniform edge length and angular resolution [200]. In addition, every planar graph admits an ACLα drawing with two bends per edge in O(n 5 3 ) area [19] and every planar graph with vertex-degree at most ∆ admits a 4-bend RAC drawing in O(n √ ∆n) area [19]. Note that, if ∆ is a sublinear function of n, these RAC drawings have subquadratic area.

(p14.2) Compact non-planar drawings of planar graphs with constant or sublinear number of crossings per edge are also studied [97]. Every n-vertex outerplanar graph admits a straight-line drawing with O( n log n ) crossings per edge in O(n log n) area. Also, for any given > 0, every n-vertex outerplanar graph admits a straight-line drawing with O(n 1− ) crossings per edge in O(n 1+ ) area, which gives a clear trade-off scheme between area requirement and number of crossings per edge. Both these results are based on a linear-time drawing algorithm, which can also be applied to other sub-families of planar graphs that admit a "level" drawing with specific properties, such as flat series-parallel graphs with bounded degree (see [97] for a definition of these families). On the other hand, if we insist in having a constant number of crossings per edge, planar and non-planar drawings of planar graphs have in general the same area requirement. This is true even for series-parallel graphs [98].

(p14.3) On the positive side, every n-vertex planar graph has a straight-line o(n)-quasi planar drawing in o(n 2 ) area. More precisely, by combining drawing techniques in [98] with results on the track number of planar graphs [113], one can prove that every n-vertex planar graph admits either a straight-line O(log n)quasi planar drawing in O(n log 3 n) area or a straight-line O(log 2 n)-quasi planar drawing in O(n log n) area. Also, every partial 2-tree admits a linear-area straight-line drawing with thickness at most 10, and hence a linear-area 11-quasi planar straight-line drawing [98]. Furthermore, outerplanar graphs and flat series-parallel graphs with bounded vertex degree (which are partial 2-trees) have quasi planar and 5-quasi planar drawings in linear area, respectively [96]. Table 8 summarizes the main results concerning area-crossings trade-offs for beyond-planar drawings of planar graphs. Table 8: Area-Crossings Trade-Offs for Planar Graphs. ∆ denotes the maximum vertex degree. The question mark indicates that bounds better than those for planar drawings are not known. For reasons of space, the table does not report the corresponding references.
## (s24) 23
(p24.0) The treatment of edge crossings in graph visualization embraces other topics that have not been discussed in the previous sections. Although these topics are not properly recognized as part of the literature on graph drawing beyond planarity, recent works have established interesting connections with beyond-planar graph families, which highlight new interesting research directions.

(p24.1) Crossing Minimization. Computing drawings of graphs with minimum number of crossings is a problem with a long tradition, and a huge amount of papers has been devoted to it (see [68] for a survey). It is well known that the crossing minimization problem is NP-complete and it remains hard also in very restricted scenarios, for instance when the graph is bipartite and we look for a straight-line 2-layer drawing of it [130]. However, for 2-layer RAC drawable graphs the problem can be solved efficiently [90], which suggests that the crossing minimization problem might be polynomial-time solvable also with respect to other forbidden crossing configurations.
