# Overview of the detection methods for equilibrium dissociation constant K D of drug-receptor interaction

CorpusID: 49292514 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34c0c45377debf4e5c2ca3daf4ab08e095ab15d7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34c0c45377debf4e5c2ca3daf4ab08e095ab15d7)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The type of drug target is divided into receptor, enzyme, nucleic acid, and so on. There are about 40% drugs which interact with the corresponding receptors in order to exert their pharmacological effects. When the ligands (first messenger) combine with the corresponding receptor, a signal cascade reaction occurs through the second messenger in the cell, resulting in a series of biological effects, such as immune response and cell proliferation [1][2][3]. Therefore, it is very necessary to study the interaction between drugs and receptors, which contributes to understanding the mechanisms of drugs [4][5][6][7][8]. The equilibrium dissociation constant (K D ) is the basic parameter to evaluate the binding properties of the drug-receptor [9][10][11]. Thus, it is of great importance to determine the K D values of the drugs.
## (s1) Radioligand binding assay
(p1.0) In the early 1960s, radiolabelled nuclide was used in the receptor pharmacology study. Based on occupation theory [17], RBA method was established. RBA is based on the interaction between radiolabeled ligand and receptor. RBA can be used to study the interaction between receptor and hormones, neurotransmitters, growth factors and drugs, as well as the interaction between the receptor and the second messenger [18].
## (s3) Affinity chromatography
(p3.0) In the affinity chromatography, biological macromolecules bind in the carrier surface through chemical reaction. Affinity chromatography utilizes the liquid chromatography method to study the interaction between drugs and biological macromolecules [57][58][59]. As shown in Table 3, affinity chromatography is widely used in biochemistry, molecular biology, and genomics. It is becoming a commonly used method in the interaction of drug and biological macromolecules [60,61].
## (s4) Fluorescence energy resonance transfer method
(p4.0) Fluorescence spectroscopy is the most popular technique in the field of biology and medicine, which leads people to the microcosmic world of bio-medicine. The theoretical basis for FRET is a nonradiative energy transfer between two fluorescent molecules (D and A, whose excitation spectra are partially overlapped) that are located close to each other (less than 10 nm) [79][80][81]. FRET can  be used to study receptor-ligand interactions, affinity constants, receptor dimerization, and so on [82][83][84].
## (s5) Isothermal titration calorimetry
(p5.0) ITC is a technique based on the reaction heat to quantify the interactions of various biomolecules. As a kind of rapid and direct tool without markers, ITC can detect any heat changes of biochemical reaction process. ITC is widely used in molecular biology research, drug design and structure optimization, and drug mechanism studies [94,95].

(p5.1) Micro calorimeter with high sensitivity and high automation is used to monitor and record the calorimetric curve of the reaction process continuously and accurately. ITC, an in situ, on-line and non-destructive method, provides the thermodynamic and kinetic information (eg, binding constant (K D ), reaction stoichiometry (n), enthalpy (ΔH) and entropy (ΔS) [96,97]. ITC can be also used to study the properties of drug-receptor interaction by directly detecting the heat changes during the process of biochemical reaction [98,99].

(p5.2) By means of the ITC method, Li et al. [16] studied the interaction of neomycin and tobramycin with MLL protein, and found that the K D values are18.8 for neomycin and 59.9 μM for tobramycin, respectively. Daddaoua group found that only 2-ketoglutarate could act on PtxS with an affinity constant K D of 15 μM from glucose, ketoglucose and 2-ketoglucose by ITC technology [100].

(p5.3) Without any modification of receptors and ligands, ITC can directly determine the affinity of the drug-receptor under natural conditions [101]. ITC can not only determine the binding affinity, but also clarify the potential mechanism of molecular interactions. ITC is able to confirm the expected binding targets in the drug discovery process, deeply understand the structure-function relationship, and provide the guidance for candidate compounds selection and lead compounds optimization [102,103].
