# materials Advanced Chemical Looping Materials for CO 2 Utilization: A Review

CorpusID: 51619337 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1ce617a23d2d16fd1880943fca4976fcc0ada9e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1ce617a23d2d16fd1880943fca4976fcc0ada9e)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Engineering, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s2) CO 2 Carrier
(p2.0) Among all the solid CO 2 sorbents, CaO is a proper material to act as CO 2 carrier because of numerous advantages [41,42]: (1) low cost since it can be derived from limestone that is readily available; (2) non-toxic to the environment; (3) the spent materials can be further used in the cement industry after decarburization, supporting sustainable development in economy; (4) CaO may also serve as an alkaline catalyst in biomass conversion processes; and (5) the heat from the exothermic carbonation of CaO can be retrieved to compensate the high heat requirement during chemical looping. However, it is well known that the reactivity decay over cycles of CaO-based CO 2 sorbents, particularly natural material-based sorbents, is inevitable. The main causes for the deactivation are particle sintering and attrition. Hence, many efforts have been made to improve their sintering resistance ability and mechanical strength, including doping of the material to suppress sintering, thermal or chemical pretreatment to achieve superior structural properties, development of new synthetic sorbents with good CO 2 capture capacity and stability. Additionally, the development of feasible technologies for the reactivation of spent sorbents is of equal importance. The recent progress in CaO-based looping materials has been summarized by numerous review articles [43][44][45][46].
## (s3) Oxygen Carrier
(p3.0) The nature of the oxygen carrier is a crucial matter, because a chemical looping process requires it to possess a certain redox activity and be able to withstand multiple cycles without large loss in the integrity of physical and chemical properties. Ideally, the oxygen carrier should function with reproducible kinetics at high temperature, and the materials that only show reactivity near or even above their melting point should be eliminated [1]. Oxygen transport capacity is another important property of an oxygen carrier. It is defined as the usable oxygen in the oxygen carrier during one redox cycle, which determines the fuel conversion and the circulation rate [2,47]. If chemical looping process is performed in a fluidized bed, the oxygen carriers additionally need to have sufficient mechanical strength to avoid attrition, which is quite common during their lifetime. In this sense, the attrition behavior of materials should be evaluated according to standard crushing tests under chemical looping operation conditions [39]. When carbonaceous and sulfur-containing fuels (fossil fuels and biomass) are used as feedstocks in chemical looping, issues like coke deposition, sulfur poisoning and high operation temperature inevitably result in deactivation of the oxygen carrier. Hence, properties like coke resistance, sulfur tolerance and thermal stability are of great importance for developing a proper oxygen carrier. In addition, the effect of ash formation on the performance of an oxygen carrier cannot be ignored, particularly in the utilization of biomass. Ash with low melting point alkali metals such as Na or K will promote agglomeration of the oxygen carrier [48,49], while high-acid ash (e.g., SiO 2 -rich ash) leads to the production of potassium silicates that facilitate particle sintering, suppressing the fuel conversion and CO 2 capture efficiency [50]. Therefore, the resistance of an oxygen carrier to agglomeration is also a critical factor for its practical application. Eventually, the reactivity of oxygen carrier includes not only the theoretical conversion of fuel, relying on the thermodynamic properties of the materials, but also transport and reaction kinetics, which depend on composition, structure as well as texture properties like particle size, porosity and specific surface area [1].

(p3.1) Among various transition metals, Ni, Fe, Cu, Mn and Co-based materials are commonly considered to serve as oxygen carriers, although they present some disadvantages: Low reactivity and Despite of the toxicity and high cost, Ni-based material still receives major attention as a reliable reforming catalyst due to its high catalytic activity with CH4 and other light hydrocarbons [51]. Almost complete CH4 conversion can be obtained over Ni-based oxygen carriers during a CLR process. However, particle sintering and the loss of metallic Ni, owing to partial re-oxidation into NiO, along with the repetition of cycles cause a significant loss of catalytic performance [52]. In addition, Ni-based materials are sensitive to deactivation by sulfur poisoning and coke deposition. Improved Ni-based materials are necessary to be designed to tackle these drawbacks for further application.

(p3.2) Fe-based materials are commonly known as a good option for oxygen carriers due to their low price, high mechanical strength and environmentally friendly nature [39]. They almost have no tendency for carbon or sulfur deposition [53], making them promising candidates in all chemical looping processes involving carbonaceous and sulfur-containing fuels. Further, iron oxide presents the highest oxygen storage capacity from CO2 (0.7 mol CO2/mol Fe) over a broad range of operating temperatures (600~1800 °C) [22]. Thus, chemical looping dry reforming over Fe-based oxygen carriers has been one of the target technologies for CO2 utilization. However, within the multiple oxidized states of Fe system, only the transformation from Fe2O3 to Fe3O4 is suitable for CLC process due to thermodynamic limitations, leading to low oxygen transport capacity of Fe-based oxygen carriers. Other drawbacks also impede the application of Fe-based oxygen carriers, including relatively low reactivity towards gaseous fuels and the agglomeration related to magnetite formation [54]. The development of new-generation Fe-based oxygen carriers should focus on solving these issues.

(p3.3) The flexible redox behavior between the oxidized (CuO) and reduced (Cu or Cu2O) forms of Cu ensures that Cu-based materials have both high reactivity and oxygen transfer capacity. The Despite of the toxicity and high cost, Ni-based material still receives major attention as a reliable reforming catalyst due to its high catalytic activity with CH 4 and other light hydrocarbons [51]. Almost complete CH 4 conversion can be obtained over Ni-based oxygen carriers during a CLR process. However, particle sintering and the loss of metallic Ni, owing to partial re-oxidation into NiO, along with the repetition of cycles cause a significant loss of catalytic performance [52]. In addition, Ni-based materials are sensitive to deactivation by sulfur poisoning and coke deposition. Improved Ni-based materials are necessary to be designed to tackle these drawbacks for further application.

(p3.4) Fe-based materials are commonly known as a good option for oxygen carriers due to their low price, high mechanical strength and environmentally friendly nature [39]. They almost have no tendency for carbon or sulfur deposition [53], making them promising candidates in all chemical looping processes involving carbonaceous and sulfur-containing fuels. Further, iron oxide presents the highest oxygen storage capacity from CO 2 (0.7 mol CO 2 /mol Fe) over a broad range of operating temperatures (600~1800 • C) [22]. Thus, chemical looping dry reforming over Fe-based oxygen carriers has been one of the target technologies for CO 2 utilization. However, within the multiple oxidized states of Fe system, only the transformation from Fe 2 O 3 to Fe 3 O 4 is suitable for CLC process due to thermodynamic limitations, leading to low oxygen transport capacity of Fe-based oxygen carriers. Other drawbacks also impede the application of Fe-based oxygen carriers, including relatively low reactivity towards gaseous fuels and the agglomeration related to magnetite formation [54]. The development of new-generation Fe-based oxygen carriers should focus on solving these issues.

(p3.5) The flexible redox behavior between the oxidized (CuO) and reduced (Cu or Cu 2 O) forms of Cu ensures that Cu-based materials have both high reactivity and oxygen transfer capacity. The advantages of Cu also include relatively low cost and toxicity, so Cu-based oxygen carriers have received greater attention from both industry and academia. Moreover, the negative influence of sulfur impurities on the performance of Cu-based oxygen carriers during a chemical looping process is not significant when the oxygen carrier-to-fuel ratio lies above 1.5 [53]. There are two main disadvantages that limit the application of Cu-based materials as oxygen carrier: One is attrition owing to their weak mechanical strength, another is agglomeration as a result of the low melting point of Cu. The former can be relieved through stabilizing Cu by inert promoters, such as Al 2 O 3 , ZrO 2 , TiO 2 and SiO 2 [55]. In order to solve the melting problem, keeping the operation temperature lower than 800 • C could be effective [39].
## (s7) Mixed Oxide Materials
(p7.0) It is well accepted that complex metal oxides may provide better properties than the individual metal oxides. Therefore, oxygen carriers based on mixed oxides have been investigated by combining different active metal oxides in a single particle or mixing different oxygen carriers, each composed of a single metal oxide. The main objective is to combine the complementary advantages of different oxygen carriers for the practical application in a chemical looping process.

(p7.1) The CoO-NiO supported YSZ oxygen carrier was found to have high reactivity towards CH4, complete absence of coke formation and good regenerative ability in natural gas-fueled CLC, even though the formation of a NiCoO2 solid solution decreased the redox reaction rate to some extent [101]. Hossain et al. [102] reported that the addition of Co into a Ni/Al2O3 material not only enhanced the reducibility of the oxygen carrier due to the suppression of NiAl2O4 formation, but also inhibited the agglomeration of particles by maintaining consistent Ni dispersion throughout the redox cycles.
## (s8) Mixed Oxide Materials
(p8.0) It is well accepted that complex metal oxides may provide better properties than the individual metal oxides. Therefore, oxygen carriers based on mixed oxides have been investigated by combining different active metal oxides in a single particle or mixing different oxygen carriers, each composed of a single metal oxide. The main objective is to combine the complementary advantages of different oxygen carriers for the practical application in a chemical looping process.

(p8.1) The CoO-NiO supported YSZ oxygen carrier was found to have high reactivity towards CH 4 , complete absence of coke formation and good regenerative ability in natural gas-fueled CLC, even though the formation of a NiCoO 2 solid solution decreased the redox reaction rate to some extent [101]. Hossain et al. [102] reported that the addition of Co into a Ni/Al 2 O 3 material not only enhanced the reducibility of the oxygen carrier due to the suppression of NiAl 2 O 4 formation, but also inhibited the agglomeration of particles by maintaining consistent Ni dispersion throughout the redox cycles.
## (s10) Perovskite Structure
(p10.0) Oxygen carriers with perovskite structure are receiving increasing attention owing to their enhanced redox properties, high oxygen mobility and thermal stability. Perovskite-structured oxide materials are typically formulated as ABO 3 , where A is a large alkaline earth or rare earth element and B is a smaller transition metal cation [134]. Where the A-site cation is responsible for the thermal resistance, the B-site cation will be the contributor to the reactivity, e.g., the catalytic activity in chemical looping reforming of CH 4 . As a result, the selection of B-site cations is crucial in the design of promising perovskite-structured oxygen carriers. In addition, the interaction between the A and B cations can affect the reactivity and selectivity during fuels conversion as well as the stability of the structure [1].
## (s12) Bifunctional Materials for Catalyst-Assisted Chemical Looping
(p12.0) When using Fe-based oxygen carrier as looping material, the reduction rate of iron oxide by hydrocarbon fuel is very slow, especially in the presence of CO 2 (originating from feed and product). As a result, the conversion of fuel and CO 2 is limited. Through addition of a catalyst component (commonly Ni), a bifunctional material, possessing an extra catalytic function for decomposition of hydrocarbon fuel into syngas (the latter ensures the formation of metallic Fe for adequate CO 2 cyclic conversion), brings chemical looping towards a new stage-catalyst-assisted chemical looping dry (or auto-thermal dry) reforming (CCDR or CCAR), two processes which are designed for efficient conversion of hydrocarbon fuels accompanied by maximum CO 2 utilization. Figure 11 sketches the CH 4 -based catalyst-assisted chemical looping processes over a Ni-Fe bifunctional material. In the reduction half-cycle, the Ni catalyst converts CH 4 and CO 2 in syngas (a mixture of H 2 and CO), which reduces the iron oxide oxygen carrier. Reduction of iron oxide by H 2 and CO is significantly faster and deeper than by CH 4 [23,149], which emphasizes the importance of the Ni catalyzed CH 4 reforming process. Upon re-oxidation, the oxygen carrier is regenerated by feeding extra CO 2 , thereby producing CO. In such processes, the Ni-Fe bifunctional material is required to provide not only an optimum activity towards conversion of CH 4 and CO 2 into CO and H 2 , but also provide redox properties for interaction with both reducing gases (CO and H 2 ) and oxidizing gases (CO 2 and H 2 O). Therefore, the material must show functions of both reforming catalyst and oxygen carrier, i.e., exhibit a bifunctional character. 
## (s13) Bifunctional Materials for Catalyst-Assisted Chemical Looping
(p13.0) When using Fe-based oxygen carrier as looping material, the reduction rate of iron oxide by hydrocarbon fuel is very slow, especially in the presence of CO2 (originating from feed and product). As a result, the conversion of fuel and CO2 is limited. Through addition of a catalyst component (commonly Ni), a bifunctional material, possessing an extra catalytic function for decomposition of hydrocarbon fuel into syngas (the latter ensures the formation of metallic Fe for adequate CO2 cyclic conversion), brings chemical looping towards a new stage-catalyst-assisted chemical looping dry (or auto-thermal dry) reforming (CCDR or CCAR), two processes which are designed for efficient conversion of hydrocarbon fuels accompanied by maximum CO2 utilization. Figure 11 sketches the CH4-based catalyst-assisted chemical looping processes over a Ni-Fe bifunctional material. In the reduction half-cycle, the Ni catalyst converts CH4 and CO2 in syngas (a mixture of H2 and CO), which reduces the iron oxide oxygen carrier. Reduction of iron oxide by H2 and CO is significantly faster and deeper than by CH4 [23,149], which emphasizes the importance of the Ni catalyzed CH4 reforming process. Upon re-oxidation, the oxygen carrier is regenerated by feeding extra CO2, thereby producing CO. In such processes, the Ni-Fe bifunctional material is required to provide not only an optimum activity towards conversion of CH4 and CO2 into CO and H2, but also provide redox properties for interaction with both reducing gases (CO and H2) and oxidizing gases (CO2 and H2O). Therefore, the material must show functions of both reforming catalyst and oxygen carrier, i.e., exhibit a bifunctional character. In previous work [23], a bifunctional 5 wt % Ni/CeO2-Fe2O3 material was prepared by impregnation of the required amount of Ni on a 50 wt % CeO2-Fe2O3 oxygen carrier. The working principle of the bifunctional material in CCDR is shown in Figure 12a. During the reduction halfcycle, the mixture feed of CH4 + CO2 is converted on Ni sites to CO and H2, which in turn reduce the oxygen carrier component (from Fe3O4 to metallic Fe), yielding CO2 and H2O. Subsequently, the reduced oxygen carrier is re-oxidized (from Fe to Fe3O4) by extra CO2, producing CO in the reoxidation half-cycle. During H2-TPR of the Ni/CeO2-Fe2O3 bifunctional material, Fe2O3 is reduced to Fe3O4, and then FeO, finally transforming into metallic Fe. At around 350 °C metallic Ni appears due to the reduction of NiO. Interaction between Ni and Fe leads to Ni-Fe alloy formation from 580 °C onwards. This alloy remains stable up to 600 °C during CO2-TPO but is completely decomposed into Ni and Fe3O4 at 700 °C (Figure 12b). The addition of Ni to CeO2-Fe2O3 shows great promise towards generation of CO from CO2 in CCDR. As seen in Figure 12c, the position of the CeO2 (111) peak shows In previous work [23], a bifunctional 5 wt % Ni/CeO 2 -Fe 2 O 3 material was prepared by impregnation of the required amount of Ni on a 50 wt % CeO 2 -Fe 2 O 3 oxygen carrier. The working principle of the bifunctional material in CCDR is shown in Figure 12a. During the reduction half-cycle, the mixture feed of CH 4 + CO 2 is converted on Ni sites to CO and H 2 , which in turn reduce the oxygen carrier component (from Fe 3 O 4 to metallic Fe), yielding CO 2 and H 2 O. Subsequently, the reduced oxygen carrier is re-oxidized (from Fe to Fe 3 O 4 ) by extra CO 2 , producing CO in the re-oxidation half-cycle. During H 2 -TPR of the Ni/CeO 2 -Fe 2 O 3 bifunctional material, Fe 2 O 3 is reduced to Fe 3 O 4 , and then FeO, finally transforming into metallic Fe. At around 350 • C metallic Ni appears due to the reduction of NiO. Interaction between Ni and Fe leads to Ni-Fe alloy formation from 580 • C onwards. This alloy remains stable up to 600 • C during CO 2 -TPO but is completely decomposed into Ni and Fe 3 O 4 at 700 • C (Figure 12b). The addition of Ni to CeO 2 -Fe 2 O 3 shows great promise towards generation of CO from CO 2 in CCDR. As seen in Figure 12c, the position of the CeO 2 (111) peak shows a downward shift indicating partial reduction. This shift is quite significant in Ni/CeO 2 -Fe 2 O 3 , while it remains limited in CeO 2 -Fe 2 O 3 and doesn't occur at these temperatures in pure CeO 2 , meaning the partial reduction is enhanced by the addition of Ni, leading to deeper reduction of the oxygen carrier. As a result, a higher CO yield can be obtained during the reduction half-cycle when feeding CO 2 . The CO yield over the Ni/CeO 2 -Fe 2 O 3 bifunctional material is proven to be 10 times higher than over the CeO 2 -Fe 2 O 3 oxygen carrier (Figure 12d).
## (s14) Conclusions
(p14.0) Chemical looping technology has recently emerged as a promising "clean energy conversion technology" due to the advantages of manageable inherent CO2 capture. In a chemical looping scheme, a single reaction is broken down into two, spatially or temporally separated half-cycle reactions, coupled through the cyclic transformation of a solid looping material. Depending on their functions, the looping materials can be divided into two main types, correspondingly defining two groups of chemical looping processes: As an oxygen carrier, to transport oxygen through cyclic reduction and re-oxidation during chemical looping combustion or reforming; as a CO2 carrier, to remove CO2 in-situ through cyclic carbonation and calcination during sorption-enhanced chemical looping. The flexibility of chemical looping processes allows the utilization of various feedstocks (fossil fuels, CO2 and renewables) and the production of various value-added chemicals (H2, CO, syngas and liquid fuels) via tailoring of reactor feed and looping materials. The CO 2 utilization during this process can be further enhanced through the construction of a double-zone reactor bed configuration [126], composed of a core-shell structured Fe/Zr@Zr-Ni@Zr bifunctional material (the first zone) followed by a core-shell structured Fe 2 O 3 /ZrO 2 @ZrO 2 oxygen carrier (the second zone). In this bed configuration, it is expected that much more CO 2 can be converted to CO due to the additional oxygen storage capacity provided by the second oxygen carrier zone.
