# materials Ga-Based Alloys in Microelectronic Interconnects: A Review

CorpusID: 51956672 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b8591c9726ef4031ce5d4e093fdb2ab7eb13b824](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b8591c9726ef4031ce5d4e093fdb2ab7eb13b824)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s6) Soldering
(p6.0) Soldering has been a fundamental interconnection technology in microelectronic packaging since the commencement of the electronic age. During the soldering process, the gap between the surfaces to be joined (usually metals) is filled with a molten alloy that has the ability to wet the substrates, usually with the assistance of a flux that removes oxides from the substrates and the molten alloy. Traditional Sn-37Pb solder has a melting point of 183 • C. Pb-free solders that are now widely used in electronic assembly have even higher melting points. Sn-3Cu-0.5Cu ("SAC305"), has a melting range of 217-220 • C and Sn-0.7Cu-0.05Ni (SN100C ® ), has a melting point of 227 • C. The temperature required in processes based on those solders has the potential to damage the heat-sensitive materials used in electronic devices, including modern microchip components and flexible substrates such as polyester film. There have been ongoing efforts to study various alloying elements including Ag, Bi, Cd, Cu, In, Sb, Zn, and Al to create alloys that make possible low temperature soldering processes [58], to reduce energy consumption, and to reduce the risk of damaging components. Their low melting points, together with the possibility of forming intermetallic compounds (IMCs) with other metals meant that Ga and Ga-based alloys are potential joining materials in microelectronics.

(p6.1) The feasibility of using pure Ga paste to realise transient liquid phase bonding with a Cu substrate (with and without Pt coating) at processing temperatures ranging from 160 to 300 • C has been examined [59,60]. In the studies, Cu/Ga/Cu and Cu/Pt/Ga/Pt/Ga sandwich couples have been fabricated at 160 and 300 • C, respectively, to gain knowledge for developing practical industrial Ga-based solder materials ( Figure 3). including Ag, Bi, Cd, Cu, In, Sb, Zn, and Al to create alloys that make possible low temperature soldering processes [58], to reduce energy consumption, and to reduce the risk of damaging components. Their low melting points, together with the possibility of forming intermetallic compounds (IMCs) with other metals meant that Ga and Ga-based alloys are potential joining materials in microelectronics. The feasibility of using pure Ga paste to realise transient liquid phase bonding with a Cu substrate (with and without Pt coating) at processing temperatures ranging from 160 to 300 °C has been examined [59,60]. In the studies, Cu/Ga/Cu and Cu/Pt/Ga/Pt/Ga sandwich couples have been fabricated at 160 and 300 °C, respectively, to gain knowledge for developing practical industrial Gabased solder materials ( Figure 3). The bonding between a magnetron sputtered Cu layer and an electroplated Ga layer on a 50 nm Au seed layer has been investigated [61]. A schematic cross section of the interface to be joined is illustrated in Figure 4a  In addition to the cases in which pure Ga was used as a joint material, some Ga-based alloys have also been studied.

(p6.2) A ternary Sn-32 wt % Bi-6 wt % Ga alloy with a melting point of 128 °C was developed as a solder alloy [62]. The Ga content in this alloy is the maximum amount possible without forming a liquid phase or creating the possibility of Ga segregation. This new solder was reflowed on Cu substrates at 158 °C and then annealed at 70, 90, and 110 °C for 24-720 h to determine the IMCs that The bonding between a magnetron sputtered Cu layer and an electroplated Ga layer on a 50 nm Au seed layer has been investigated [61]. A schematic cross section of the interface to be joined is illustrated in Figure 4a. The bonding of these samples was performed at 25 • C in commercial wafer bonding equipment with a pressure of 2.5 MPa and holding time of 10 min. Subsequently, the wafers were annealed at different temperatures up to 200 • C for 80 h. After annealing at 90 • C, a shear strength of up to 90 MPa was achieved. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the bond cross section is shown in Figure 4b. including Ag, Bi, Cd, Cu, In, Sb, Zn, and Al to create alloys that make possible low temperature soldering processes [58], to reduce energy consumption, and to reduce the risk of damaging components. Their low melting points, together with the possibility of forming intermetallic compounds (IMCs) with other metals meant that Ga and Ga-based alloys are potential joining materials in microelectronics. The feasibility of using pure Ga paste to realise transient liquid phase bonding with a Cu substrate (with and without Pt coating) at processing temperatures ranging from 160 to 300 °C has been examined [59,60]. In the studies, Cu/Ga/Cu and Cu/Pt/Ga/Pt/Ga sandwich couples have been fabricated at 160 and 300 °C, respectively, to gain knowledge for developing practical industrial Gabased solder materials ( Figure 3). The bonding between a magnetron sputtered Cu layer and an electroplated Ga layer on a 50 nm Au seed layer has been investigated [61]. A schematic cross section of the interface to be joined is illustrated in Figure 4a. The bonding of these samples was performed at 25 °C in commercial wafer bonding equipment with a pressure of 2.5 MPa and holding time of 10 min. Subsequently, the wafers were annealed at different temperatures up to 200 °C for 80 h. After annealing at 90 °C, a shear strength of up to 90 MPa was achieved. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the bond cross section is shown in Figure 4b. In addition to the cases in which pure Ga was used as a joint material, some Ga-based alloys have also been studied.

(p6.3) A ternary Sn-32 wt % Bi-6 wt % Ga alloy with a melting point of 128 °C was developed as a solder alloy [62]. The Ga content in this alloy is the maximum amount possible without forming a liquid phase or creating the possibility of Ga segregation. This new solder was reflowed on Cu substrates at 158 °C and then annealed at 70, 90, and 110 °C for 24-720 h to determine the IMCs that In addition to the cases in which pure Ga was used as a joint material, some Ga-based alloys have also been studied.

(p6.4) A ternary Sn-32 wt % Bi-6 wt % Ga alloy with a melting point of 128 • C was developed as a solder alloy [62]. The Ga content in this alloy is the maximum amount possible without forming a liquid phase or creating the possibility of Ga segregation. This new solder was reflowed on Cu substrates at 158 • C and then annealed at 70, 90, and 110 • C for 24-720 h to determine the IMCs that formed and the evolution of the interfacial morphology as a function of time. The only IMC phase observed at the interface area was CuGa 2 . The shear strength of the joints formed by reflowing this solder alloy on Cu substrate with an organic solderability preservative (OSP) coating was measured and the authors concluded that although the CuGa 2 IMC is brittle, this solder is still a potential candidate for low-temperature microelectronics packaging.
## (s7) Heat-Free Bonding
(p7.0) Stable undercooled liquid nano-and/or micro-particles have been considered for use as a low temperature solder [69]. Since Ga and some of its alloys are liquid near or at room temperature and exhibit significant undercooling on solidification, a few attempts have been made to eliminate the heat required in conventional soldering.
## (s8) Heat-Free Bonding
(p8.0) Stable undercooled liquid nano-and/or micro-particles have been considered for use as a low temperature solder [69]. Since Ga and some of its alloys are liquid near or at room temperature and exhibit significant undercooling on solidification, a few attempts have been made to eliminate the heat required in conventional soldering.
## (s15) IMC Properties
(p15.0) As can be seen from the Cu-Ga phase diagram and microstructure analysis, the main IMCs formed in the Cu-Ga system at low temperature are CuGa 2 and Cu 9 Ga 4 . A study showed that effective packaging of EGaIn with CuGa 2 would remarkably enhance the electrical conductivity (6 × 10 6 S m −1 , ∼80% increase) and thermal conductivity (50 W m −1 K −1 , ∼100% increase) compared to EGaIn [103]. The result further indicated the possibility of utilizing Ga-based alloys in microelectronic interconnections to provide good thermal and electrical conductivity as well as mechanical support.
## (s18) Wettability
(p18.0) Wettability properties are vital for liquid alloys in nearly all applications, including interconnection fabrication. Taking soldering as an example, the success of the joining process depends on the development of a liquid interlayer that has the ability to wet the substrate materials. Factors identified as influencing wetting include liquid metal oxidation behavior, liquid-solid alloying, or corrosion reactions with substrates, and the substrate surface conditions including roughness, contamination, segregation, and oxides [111].
