# Recent advances in design of new urease inhibitors: A review

CorpusID: 51941207 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a52ee304bc07b317ce4e4bf3e2ceab710617370a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a52ee304bc07b317ce4e4bf3e2ceab710617370a)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s4) Flavonoids
(p4.0) It is well known that structural diversity and complexity within natural products stimulates research on their use as lead compounds for various diseases. Extracts of various plants, including green tea and cranberries often have been used to treat gastritis or urinary tract infections. This effect is believed to result from the action of (+)-catechin and (À)-epigallocatechin gallate as urease inhibitors [60]. Also flavonoids isolated from other plants: Daphne retusa (daphnretusic acid), Pistacia atlantica (transilitin and dihydro luteolin) and cotton (gossypol, gossypolone and apogossypol) appeared to be micromolar inhibitors of urease from jack bean [61][62][63]. These studies stimulated the efforts to analyze inhibitory potential of flavonoids in some detail. Thus, 11 natural and 19 synthetic compounds were screened against H. pylori urease [64]. They appear to be moderate competitive (micromolar range) to weak inhibitors of the enzyme with synthetic compounds   (13) into the crystal structure of H. pylori urease performed by the AutoDock program revealed the mode of binding of this inhibitor. In detail, the compound is oriented with its benzopyrone moiety in proximity to urea binding cavity, letting phenyl ring to locate at the mouth of the cavity. The channel to the active site for urea is therefore blocked off. Since catechol moiety of flavonoids does not bind nickel ion(s) there is a possibility of covalent interaction of this fragment of the molecule with one of cysteine residues present in the binding site. Such a mechanism has been determined and detail studied in the case of simple catechol [41]. Radix Scutellariae, known as ''Huang-Qin" in Chinese, is originated from the dried root of Scutellaria baicalensis. Its major bioactive compounds are flavone glycosides baicalin and scutellarin (Fig. 5, compounds 16 and 17). Baicalin was found to be a competitive, slow-binding and concentration-dependent inhibitor of jack bean and H. pylori ureases [66][67][68]. Kaempferol-3-O-b-D-glucopyr anoside (compound 18) and kaempferol-3-O-a-L-rhamnopyrano side (Fig. 5, compound 19), isolated from the fruits of Syzygium alternifolium, appeared more potent inhibitors of H. pylori enzyme [69].

(p4.1) Molecular modeling revealed that these compounds are bound differently than flavonoids, with catechol being involved in complexation of nickel ion. However, the most important for inhibition seems to be interaction with cysteine located at the mobile flap covering the active site through its SAH. . .p interactions with aromatic fragment of these molecules (Fig. 6). The active site of ureases is of relatively small volume (related to the size of urea) and is covered by a movable flap. This flap contains a cysteine residue that could be targeted by inhibitors. This cysteine, besides being directly involved in the architecture of the active site, plays a vital role in positioning other key residues in the active site appropriately for the catalysis.
## (s5) Other natural products
(p5.0) Natural products (mostly secondary metabolites) have been the most successful source of potential drug leads so far. Even if these efforts somewhat decline in interest they continue to provide unique structural diversity of potential enzyme inhibitors. This is also the case if considering research on urease. In last several years there are several reviews on action of plant extracts [70][71][72] and isolated natural compounds [20,73] 
## (s8) Inhibitors, which bind covalently to urease
(p8.0) These inhibitors are compounds designed to bind covalently to a specific molecular target and thereby suppress its biological function. They exhibit crucial advantage resulting from strong binding to the target and thus higher potency, extended duration of action and lower dose. However, they are also often considered as less attractive drug candidates because of drawbacks as general toxicity, immunogenicity and problems associated with degradation of inhibited proteins, issues that are of great concern. Therefore, it is not surprising that such inhibitors of urease have been scarcely studied.

(p8.1) Good candidates for such inhibitors are Michael acceptors. Thus, forty relatively simple molecules containing functional groups of various geometries (E and Z isomers) of substituted double bonds or containing linear triple bonds or allenes were screened for their inhibitory activities against S. pasteurii urease. This led to several compounds exhibiting potency in the nanomolar range [94]. All groups that are controlling the chemical reactivity of double/triple bonds contained carbonyl groups (carboxylic acids, their esters or ketones), with compounds 32 and 33 (Fig. 10) being the most potent. As shown by molecular modeling, compound 33 is the first example of an interesting mode of binding, which combines the formation of a covalent bond with the cysteine residue and interactions with two nickel ions (Fig. 10). Such a mode of binding seems to promote selectivity of the inhibitors toward this enzyme.    Another example of covalent inhibitor of urease is Disulfiram (compound 34, Fig. 11), a drug used to support the treatment of chronic alcoholism by inhibiting acetaldehyde dehydrogenase. Kinetic experiments suggest that it carbamylates Citrullus vulgaris urease active site flap Cys695 in a manner similar to its action on dehydrogenase (Fig. 11) [95].

(p8.2) Also novel selenoorganic bacterial urease inhibitors based on a 1,2-benzisoselenazol-3(2H)-one scaffold are acting by binding this sensitive cysteine in H. pylori and S. pasteurii enzymes [96]. The most active appeared to be ebselen (Fig. 12, compound 35), an agent of anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant and cytoprotective activity studied as a potential drug against reperfusion injury, stroke, hearing loss, tinnitus and bipolar disorder. Molecular modeling had shown its preferable binding resulting from both complexation of nickel ion by carbonyl atom of the molecule and formation of sulfur-selenium bond with cysteine 322 (Fig. 12).
## (s9) Organophosphorus compounds as transition state analogs
(p9.0) Competitive inhibition of urease by phosphate was first described as far as in 1934 [97] and intensively studied up to 2001 when its binding mode to urease from S. pasteurii was deter-mined by crystallography [37]. It is a relatively weak inhibitor, whereas its amides (phosphoramidates) rank amongst the most active ones with their high efficiency being well justified by the crystal structures of complex of diamidophosphoric acid with S. pasteurii urease (compound 36, Fig. 13) [35]. This analysis had shown that high activity of this compound is apparently related to its close similarity to the transition state of the enzymatic reaction and tight binding to the active metallocenter.

(p9.1) Urea is a primary solid nitrogen fertilizer in the market because of the restriction against the use of ammonium nitrate, which may be employed as explosives, and the high price of ammonium sulfate. Its hydrolysis by bacterial ureases results in the loss of ammonia, which, besides the economic significance for the farmers, may have negative ecological impact on atmospheric quality. Since phosphoramidates are relatively cheap compounds they are considered as agents reducing the losses of ammonia from urease fertilizers. This is well exemplified by introduction of new formulation of an old inhibitor -N-(n-butyl)thiophosphoric triamide (NBPT, compound 37, ARM U TM ) to agriculture in 2017 [98,99]. Recently evaluated binding of this inhibitor to S. pasteurii urease showed that NBPT, after binding to the enzyme, is hydrolyzed yielding monoamidothiophosphoric acid (MATP, compound 38), which is effectively bound to the two Ni(II) ions in the active site ( Fig. 13) [38]. Thus, NBPT may be classified as suicide substrate of this enzyme.

(p9.2) Quite recently a big library of structurally variable phosphoramidates was prepared and studied against jack ban urease. Structure-activity relationship analyses suggest that the presence of cyclohexylamine group (see the structure of representative compound 39, Fig. 13) is an important feature associated with enhanced activities [100].
## (s10) Coordination complexes
(p10.0) Complexes of simple organic molecules with metal ions are applied as inhibitors of enzymes on the premise that they may either act through substitution of one of the ligands by specific amino acid side chains of the enzyme or by such preorganization of relatively simple molecules into complex scaffold that is complementary to the structure of binding sites of the enzyme. Most likely, in the case of urease, only this second mean has been used.

(p10.1) Complexation of copper (II) and zinc (II) ions by Schiff bases formed between simple analogs of salicylic aldehydes and phenylethylamines resulted in formation of either polymeric structures (these are not useful as inhbitiors) or dimeric ones, in which two molecules of ligand are bound to central copper ion (see the representative structure 48 in Fig. 16) [107]. The latter ones appeared far more effective inhibitors of jack bean urease than parent Schiff bases. Simple ternary cobalt (II) complexes with 1,2-bis (2-methoxy-6-formylphenoxy)ethane (obtained by reacting of vanillin with 1,2-dribromoethane) and phenylalanine, tryptophan (compound 49, Fig. 16) or methionine also appeared to be moderate inhibitors of jack bean urease [108]. Molecular modeling proved that they are well fitting to the binding cavity of this urease.

(p10.2) Quite complex structure is a ternary chelate composed of two copper (II) ions with four molecules of ((E)-3-(2,3-dihydrobenzo[ b] [1,4]dioxin-6-yl)acrylic acid (simple derivative of cinnamic acid) and two molecules of DMSO. It is potent, submicromolar inhibitor of jack bean urease [109].

(p10.3) For the construction of various supramolecular structures, silver as a d 10 metal is quite frequently used because of its flexible coordination sphere and the fluid nature of interaction between silver and multifunctional ligands. Recently silver (I) carboxylate complexes based on the substituted trans-cinnamic acids, 1,4benzodioxane-6-carboxylic acid and propyl-substituted imidazole-4,5-dicarboxylic acid (compound 50), which are the promising candidates for urease inhibitors [110][111][112]. In solution they form a polymeric structure and the mode of their binding do the enzyme was not evaluated.  
