# Etiology of Femoroacetabular Impingement in Athletes: A Review of Recent Findings

CorpusID: 5178876 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4eb5872a9177dd897c545cd8a71338f8219f65f0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4eb5872a9177dd897c545cd8a71338f8219f65f0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Prevalence of Femoroacetabular Impingement (FAI) in Athletic Populations
(p2.0) Several studies have compared the prevalence of hip deformities in the preprofessional, semiprofessional, and elite athletic population with control groups often comprised of healthy individuals or amateur players [13,15,24]. These studies show that the radiological and clinical signs of FAI are more prevalent in athletic populations compared with control groups [13,15,24]. The rest of this subsection presents the details of these comparative studies for athletes exercising various types of sporting activities. The prevalence of cam and pincer types of deformity measured using different radiographic parameters (including alpha angle) was 70 and 50 %, respectively, among elite male and female soccer players [25]. In a study of adolescent and young male soccer players, the presence of cam-type deformities was measured using a 3-point scoring system. A higher prevalence of anterosuperior flattening and anterosuperior prominence was found in the athlete group compared with the control group [13]. Moreover, the prevalence of increased alpha angle tended to be higher in the athlete group: 26 % of athletes vs. 17 % of the control group (p = 0.31) [13]. The range of motion of hips with cam-type deformity (alpha angle [60°) was lower than hips without cam-type deformity. Another comparative study of asymptomatic semiprofessional and amateur soccer players showed significantly higher values of alpha angle for the kicking leg of the semiprofessional group compared with the control group [15]. In addition, 22 % (5/ 22) of the semiprofessional players had positive clinical signs, while no amateur player exhibited any positive clinical findings [15].
## (s3) Relationship Between Type and Intensity of Physical Activity and FAI
(p3.0) Only limited information is available in the literature regarding the effects of the type and intensity of physical activity on the development of FAI. In one study, ice hockey players were found to be 4.5-fold more likely to show radiological signs of cam-type FAI, particularly elevated alpha angles, compared with skiers [29]. In a study of semiprofessional and amateur soccer players, a positive correlation between the number of training sessions per week and alpha angle was found [15]. A recent study [30] compared the incidence of cam-type deformity, defined as alpha angle [60°, between two groups of elite soccer players who had trained with different frequencies in their years of skeletal development. The prevalence of cam-type deformity was significantly higher in the group that trained four or more times per week compared with the group that trained three or less times per week [30].
## (s9) Functional and Biomechanical Findings
(p9.0) Musculoskeletal loading is directly related to the physical activities undertaken by individuals. In order to study the musculoskeletal loading of athletes, one usually needs to study the movement of their different body segments and the forces exerted to their body during those movements (e.g. the ground reaction force). One could then relate those to internal musculoskeletal forces, including muscle and joint reaction forces, using biomechanical models such as musculoskeletal models [48,49] or mass-spring-damper models [50,51]. Biomechanical studies of athletes in relation to FAI could be performed in two contexts. First, one could study athletes' movement patterns and musculoskeletal forces while they perform specific sport-related physical activities that involve extreme ranges of motion and repetitive impact. The same type of analysis could be performed for normal physical activities such as gait.

(p9.1) Moreover, both types of the above-mentioned analyses could be performed for symptomatic and asymptomatic athletes. Indeed, these types of analysis may need to be performed separately for individuals who are at different stages of FAI development, from inception of hip deformity to advanced stages of cartilage lesions. These types of analysis are only scarcely available in the literature. Perhaps the most well-studied case is the case of normal physical activity of symptomatic FAI patients [52][53][54][55][56]; however, these studies are not very useful in understanding the etiology of the disease. In a few studies [34,57], some biomechanical and functional data are reported for asymptomatic athletes in normal physical activities such as gait, and in clinical examinations. In particular, semiprofessional soccer players exhibited significantly higher loading rate, peak vertical force, and peak tibial acceleration compared with amateur soccer players [57]. In turn, the maximum rearfoot motion of the semiprofessional players group was found to be significantly smaller than amateur soccer players [57]. In another study, professional female soccer players were compared with non-professional players, and were found to exhibit significantly smaller flexion and internal rotation, respectively, for both their hips and preferred kicking leg [34]. More signs of the association between FAI and the limited range of hip  [17]. CGP curved growth plate. Reprinted from Roels et al. [17], with permission from the Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Ó 2014 motion, including internal rotation \10°, were found in a different study of 226 asymptomatic adolescent athletes [58].

(p9.2) There are nil to very limited biomechanical and functional data regarding the musculoskeletal loads experienced by symptomatic or asymptomatic athletes when performing sport-related physical activities at extremes ranges of hip motion and possibly involving repetitive impact loading. This type of information is the most valuable type of biomechanical data when studying the etiology of sport-related hip deformities.
## (s10) Possible Causal Relationships
(p10.0) The clinical, radiological, mechanobiological, and biomechanical findings reviewed earlier could be used to propose a theory for the development of hip deformities in athletes. Since the prevalence of cam-type deformity is greater in athletes compared with control groups (Sect. 2.1), it is reasonable to assume that physical activities somehow lead to the development of these hip deformities. On the other hand, the currently available evidence shows that the development of hip deformities starts at a very early age when the skeleton is not mature, that cam-type deformity does not develop after the closure of the growth plate, and that the alpha angle increases with age during adolescence (Sect. 2.3). It is therefore reasonable to assume that the development of cam-type deformity is related to skeletal development. In this scenario, the mechanical loads experienced during vigorous physical activity result in certain patterns of local stress in the growth plate and its surrounding areas. This is partly due to the mechanical properties of the cartilage-like tissue in the growth plate that are different from those of the surrounding bone. Since the above-mentioned loads are generated at the extreme ranges of hip motion, the joint reaction loads may be applied at the areas of the femur that do not normally experience large musculoskeletal loads. This could lead to generation of mechanical stimulus for bone growth in the areas of the femur that do not normally experience mechanical growth stimulus. The process of skeletal development therefore deviates from the usual case where the dominant mechanical loads of the femur are balanced, the extreme ranges of hip motion are rare, and the sphericity of the femoral head is preserved. This is consistent with the above-mentioned mechanobiological finding that specific types of physical activity, e.g. external rotation or flexion, stimulate the development of cam-type deformity and not the usual loading experienced in, for example, gait (Sect. 3.1). In addition to the type of physical activity, the intensity and frequency of physical activity could play a role in the development of hip deformities. It is known that a higher frequency of load application and application of greater mechanical loads could both lead to increased bone apposition [39,59]. Moreover, the highly dynamic and impact-like nature of mechanical loading in certain sports could generate higher levels of mechanical growth stimulus. This is consistent with the above-mentioned findings which show that there is a positive correlation between alpha angle and training intensity (Sect. 2.2), that professional players have elevated alpha angles and higher prevalence of deformities compared with non-professional players who normally train less (Sect. 2.1), and that the prevalence of hip deformities may be dependent on the type of physical activity (Sect. 2.2). Biomechanical findings (Sect. 3.2) also show that the loading of the lower extremity, including the peak force and loading rate, are higher in asymptomatic semiprofessional players. This further strengthens the theory that the development of hip Fig. 2 An X-ray of a representative young soccer player at baseline and follow-up, together with the distribution of the osteogenic index close to the growth plate. As the femur grows, there are areas of bone formation, and possibly even areas of bone resorption. These observations nicely explain load-driven development of a cam-type deformity. Reprinted from Roels et al. [17], with permission from the Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Ó 2014 deformities in athletes is caused by load-driven deviations from the normal growth patterns during the years of skeletal development.
## (s13) Discussion
(p13.0) The etiology of the hip deformities predisposing individuals to FAI is not currently well understood; however, there has been intensive clinical, radiological, mechanobiological, and biomechanical research during the last few years. The findings of these research projects have provided us with a foundation of facts upon which a theory regarding the etiology of hip deformities in athletes could be built. In this article, the currently available clinical, radiological, mechanobiological, and biomechanical findings relevant for the study of etiology of FAI were reviewed, and a theory consistent with these facts was presented as to how hip deformities develop in athletes. However, the level of evidence available in the literature is not enough to enable us to decisively accept or reject the presented theory. That is why it is of the utmost importance to test the hypotheses presented here (Sect. 5), as well as other relevant hypotheses, using high-power studies of different types of athletic populations. Moreover, the modulations of the presented theory with other pathways of cartilage damage, such as inflammation, should be carefully studied [60].

(p13.1) The hypotheses presented in the previous section are important for assessment of the validity of the presented theory. However, more could be learned about the potentially developmental nature of cam-type deformity through the study of the relationship between the movements of athletes during sporting activities, the musculoskeletal loads experienced by athletes when undertaking those movements, and the development of cam-type deformity. As previously mentioned, biomechanical techniques, such as motion capture systems, the apparatus for measurement of external forces, and inverse dynamic musculoskeletal models, could be used to understand the type, magnitude, and direction of musculoskeletal loads experienced by athletes when undertaking any given physical movement. On the other hand, the obtained musculoskeletal loads could be used in FE models that incorporate bone growth models to understand whether any given movement could contribute to the development of cam-type deformity by adversely affecting the mechanical bone growth stimulus. If we know which physical movements might contribute to imbalances in the bone growth stimulus, it might be possible to develop compensatory exercises that, although not necessarily needed for the training of players, could restore the balance of the mechanical bone growth stimulus, thereby ensuring that hip deformities do not develop.

(p13.2) Robust methodology is, in any case, very important for these endeavors. There are several technical details that are important regarding the methodology used in such investigative studies. In this paper, two specific technical points-one pertaining to clinical and radiological studies and the other pertaining to biomechanical and mechanobiological studies-are highlighted.
