# A Survey of Cyber Security Countermeasures Using Hardware Performance Counters

CorpusID: 51872115 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/199911146384beb95b36430b804106663c246b15](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/199911146384beb95b36430b804106663c246b15)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s10) C. Examples of Machine Learning and Context Sensitivity
(p10.0) Machine learning includes most approaches in the area of artificial intelligence. Learning may be supervised, such as training HPC data against known valid and known malicious applications. This learning is usually offline, i.e., the classification engine for detecting malicious behavior is developed before runtime or deployment. Learning may also be unsupervised, such as online during runtime based on accumulated information, e.g., information from HPCs. Security policy may still be specified for unsupervised learning and the classification engine will learn violations to this policy. Context sensitivity implies knowledge of the operating environment or application. This knowledge may include information from the source or binary code such as the proper execution paths, e.g., control flow graph verification, or mathematical rules, such as those extracted from the code or based in physics for physical processes, to validate proper operation of the compiled application. Instrumentation of the binary may be performed to provide checkpoints within the application to facilitate these checks. Knowledge of the user environment may be used to detect deviation from expected user behaviors, or even the behaviors of the machine hardware.

(p10.1) The goal of machine learning is to provide a more advanced detection scheme that eliminates the false positives from simple signatures and heuristics as well as eliminating the false negatives when sophisticated attacks are launched that use valid code fragments and other seemingly valid approaches. Machine learning is typically of much higher processing overheads and is often deployed as a second layer to a signature or heuristic first layer, which acts as a pre-filter to minimize the performance impact.

(p10.2) Torres et al. [19] performed a survey of approaches that were essentially intelligent outlier rejection. The desired approach characteristic was unsupervised learning by using collected HPC data only, i.e., a data-driven approach. Cache misses and branch mis-predictions were common variables studied. During runtime, HPC data was collected for specific intervals (1ms, 10ms, 100ms) with the assumption that valid activity was more common (normal) and that invalid activity (attacks) would be statistical outliers to the HPC data. The countermeasure behaved similarly to heuristic analysis without the necessity of pre-determining heuristic thresholds. The machine learning portion would build a model in memory of the valid state space as the statistical norm.
