# Chitosan-based nanomaterials on controlled bioactive agents delivery: a review Volume 7 Issue 4 -2018 Chitosan-based nanomaterials on controlled bioactive agents delivery: a review 485

CorpusID: 52206985 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ab07b909fa375c9edeff397980a9e2cd149fd9e2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ab07b909fa375c9edeff397980a9e2cd149fd9e2)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s1) Chitosan
(p1.0) Chitosan is actually a polysaccharide rather know. It can be considered a lineal copolymer of glucosamine and N-acetyl-glucosamine and it is generally named as poly (β-1,4-glucosamine-co-N-acetyl-β-1,4glucosamine). Although it is naturally present in some fungi, especially of the Mucor species, its main source of production is the chemical deacetylation of chitin or poly (N-acetyl-1,4-glucosamine), a reaction that usually leads to a random distribution of acetylated (GlcNAc; β-(1,4)-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-4-glucopyranose) and deacetylated (GlcN; β-(1,4)-2-amino-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranose) units along the chain, in proportions defined by a parameter known as degree of deacetylation (DD). DD represents the fraction of deacetylated units in the biopolymer chains and it usually ranges between 0.50-0.95. Figure 1 allows clarifying this definition. The presence of the amine groups along the chain gives to this biopolymer its distinctive feature of other known polysaccharides (pectin, dextran, agarose, carrageenan, etc.), which exhibit acidic properties in aqueous solutions, while chitosan has a basic character due to the protonation of the amine group present in each of the glucosamine units. Similarly, it has been widely proposed that the chitosan biological activity derives, to a large extent, from the cationic character associated with said protonation 12, 16 although it has been proven that hydrophobic interactions also play their role. 17 Commercial chitosan generally appears in the form of flakes or as a powder of color between white and beige, whose glass transition temperature depends on the molecular weight, DD and the moisture content in the sample analyzed. On the other hand, the material is soluble in short-chain organic acids such as formic, lactic, acetic, tartaric, citric, etc., being an acetic acid 1% aqueous solution the solvent most commonly employed. Obtaining values of pH <6 is fundamental for its dissolution in these systems. It is also soluble in 1% aqueous solutions of mineral acids such as hydrochloric acid and nitric acid but it is insoluble in sulfuric and phosphoric acids.

(p1.1) Chitosan has a series of properties that have allowed it to be proposed for a wide range of applications in multiple fields. Thus, for example, it can act as a thickener in foods because it forms highly viscous aqueous solutions, is mucoadhesive, forms polyelectrolyte complexes, has excellent filmogenic properties, acts as a chelating agent for many metals, has the potential to bind to microbial and mammals cells and, due to its regenerative effect, it is an excellent material for the preparation of scaffolds in tissue engineering as well as bone formation. Another of their appreciated biological properties, which are used commercially in agriculture, are its benefits as a stimulant of growth and inducer of defense mechanisms against phytopathogens, fungicide for the protection of seeds, post-harvest protection of fruits, etc. In dentistry and medicine it has also been used for the preparation of commercial materials in the treatment of haemorrhages and burns.
## (s5) Coacervation/precipitation
(p5.0) A procedure commonly used for the preparation of NPs by this route consists in dropping a determined volume of a solution of Na 2 SO 4 of known concentration on a fixed volume of a solution of chitosan in aqueous acidic medium, of known concentration, under constant magnetic stirring during a previously established time, after which the coacervates are separated by filtration through membranes with pore diameters greater than 400nm. Among the parameters that must be controlled in this type of systems is the sulphate/amine molar ratio (r SA ). 36 There are some variations of this procedure that include the use of surfactants in the chitosan solution, the use of ultrasound during magnetic stirring, the separation of NPs by centrifugation, etc.
## (s6) Reverse emulsification
(p6.0) A colloidal system with reverse micelles is first prepared using a surfactant in an organic solvent; an aqueous solution of chitosan is added to this system, with constant agitation to avoid the formation of turbidity. The size of NPs can be increased by adding additional amounts of water. After achieving the system stability, a covalent crosslinking agent is added and it is allowed to react for the necessary time with constant agitation. Subsequently, the organic solvent is evaporated to obtain a transparent dry mass, which is dispersed in water, followed by the addition of the appropriate salt to precipitate the surfactant. This is separated by centrifugation and the liquid supernatant phase containing the NPs is decanted, dialyzed and lyophilized. 37 This method, apart from being tedious, has the disadvantage of using surfactants and organic solvents that make it difficult to purify the NPs obtained, a situation that can strongly limit it for applications related to the transport and release of therapeutic agents.
## (s7) Polyelectrolyte complexation
(p7.0) Systems to produce this type of NPs can be very similar to that used in either ionotropic gelation, spraying/drying or coacervation with Na 2 SO 4 . The substantial difference with theses consists of the macromolecular nature of the employed polyanions in order to obtaining a polyelectrolyte complex (polyplexes), i.e., it can highlight the use of DNA to obtain this type of NMs. 38 A very important advantage of these systems is that they allow obtaining nanoparticles with positive or negative external charges, depending on which polyelectrolyte solution is allowed to drip on the solution of the other. Additionally, it is possible to construct NPs with a variable number of layers, which can be formed by alternating immersion of the initial NPs in the solutions of the polyelectrolytes of interest. Figure  2 shows a hypothetical molecular arrangement of both polyelectrolytes when drops of an aqueous solution of chitosan are dropped onto an aqueous solution containing a macromolecular polyanion. It is important to indicate that even when the initially formed spheres can exceed the nano scale, their size decreases considerably when they are thermally dried.  
## (s8) Some system of chitosan-based NMs for controlled bioactive agents release
(p8.0) Chitosan has strongly attracted attention in recent years for the preparation of drug carrier nanomaterials with applicability in the "smart" drug delivery because of their good bioadhesibilidad, biocompatibility and biodegradability properties. Additionally, this biopolymer can undergo a wide range of chemical modification reactions becoming more versatile yet. In this regard, numerous studies have been reported on the preparation of specific transport systems and effective delivery of different types of therapeutic agents, i.e., genes, proteins, hormones, etc. Also, the routes of administration that are being tested are diverse: oral, nasal, intravenous, ocular, etc. Table 1 presents a brief list of studies that have recently been reported on this subject. Subsequently, a short discussion of some release systems that have been tested is presented. [39][40][41][42][43][44] 
## (s9) Gene transfection
(p9.0) Despite showing generally low efficiencies for genetic transfection, chitosan-based NMs seem to be able to take advantage of its ability to adhere to the cell walls due to the positive surface charges provided by the protonation of the chitosan amine groups. In this regard, studies of Lavertou et al., 45 point out that the maximum of transgenetic expression occurs when the DD/molecular weight (MW) ratio goes from high DD/low MW up to low DD/high MW. These researchers tested some formulations of NPs (type chitosan/plasmid DNA polycomplex) particularly effectives, which have shown transfection efficiency values promisingly comparable to those obtained with the best known positive controls. On the other hand, the chemical modification of chitosan could be an alternative route for the generation of new NMs that allow achieving better results in the area, as it has been demonstrated by the modification of chitosan with folic acid and achieving in this way a cell viability of 80%, which competes advantageously with 30% obtained for an usual transfection agent such as LipofectAMINE 2000. 46
## (s10) Hormone release
(p10.0) Estradiol is a potent sex hormone which has been used in the prevention and treatment of Alzheimer disease. It is of fundamental importance to achieve a sufficient tissue concentration of estradiol in the brain to observe its effect. When estradiol is administered alone, orally, their cerebrospinal levels result very low; however, these levels were found to be high compared to plasma levels when estradiol was administered intranasally as chitosan NPs, suggesting that estradiol is transported to the brain directly when it is transported through the nasal route as chitosan NPs. 47 Another promissory system based in polymeric-metallic hybrid nanoparticles coated with glycol chitosan has been proposed recently for progesterone controlled release. Kinetic studies carried out with it shown that release differ significantly with pH changes, where nanoparticles exhibited swelling at pH 6.5 and shrinkage at pH 7.4. On the other hand, metabolic activity assay of C3H10T1/2 cell line resulted in a promising biocompatibility of these magnetic nanoparticles. 48 Regarding this topic, a special commentary should be made on the chitosan/tripolyphosphate-based nanosystems developed by Rather et al., 49 for the sustained nanorelease of the hormone gonadotropin (obtained from salmon) in test fish (common carp), obtaining a fertilization 13% higher than the injection of the hormone alone. In addition to the greater effectiveness of the system these results can also be considered a clear evidence of the protection that chitosan provides to the hormone, which is known to have a short half-life in the bloodstream.
## (s11) Protein release
(p11.0) Medical and pharmaceutical studies related to protein release are very numerous due to the diversity of roles played by them. Table 2 shows some recent studies on protein delivery/release using chitosanbased NMs. As it can be seen proteins can act in some cases as an active therapeutic agent and in others their role can be that of signaling agent to direct the carrier to a specific target and/or enhancer of the cellular uptake of the bioactive agent-loaded Nps. Finally, it is important to stand out that most studies conducted with chitosan suggest that it ensures greater stability and protection of proteins from degradation during their transit through aggressive areas, as well as promote better contact with biomembranes, ensuring a greater bioavailability of these. [51][52][53][54][55][56]  In vitro anticancer activity of CR loaded Nps was studied by Sulforhodamine B assay using a Human Breast Carcinoma cell line.
