# Active Impedance Control of Bioinspired Motion Robotic Manipulators: An Overview

CorpusID: 53250478 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/68ba778811989321b106ea99226a35b04cb3e285](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/68ba778811989321b106ea99226a35b04cb3e285)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s5) Variable Impedance Control
(p5.0) For most biological movements, muscles behave as mechanical actuators with a nonlinear stiffness behavior; according to biological studies, muscle viscosity can be considered constant. The force-velocity relationship includes nonlinear characteristics during contraction and stretching; increasing the applied force may result in an increase in muscle stiffness. It is important to note that the slopes of the impedance curve represent the muscle impedance associated with muscle movement [74,75] and the references therein. The impedance profiles of the human joint can vary during motion [76]. In effect, humans can grasp objects softly and safely by regulating muscle stiffness. Moreover, it is known that the locomotion of humans consists of miscellaneous motion phases, e.g., a single-support phase, double-support phase, and jumping. Therefore, humans should modify muscle stiffness to attenuate any heterogeneous disturbances or even to track desired interaction forces [77].

(p5.1) There are essential applications that the robot is in contact with the human such as exoskeletons, orthosis, and prostheses. In view of the above statement, using the conventional impedance control with fixed coefficients, e.g., fixed stiffness, cannot achieve the required target impedance for the human-robot interaction. Accordingly, variable stiffness-based impedance control can improve the performance of the desired force tracking and the dexterity of the robotic system. It is a suitable strategy for modulation of the parameters of the impedance behavior such that stability is guaranteed and the performance is improved and safer. This policy of changing stiffness is explained above (Section 3) and is mentioned here due to its correlation with variable impedance control; see also [62,73,78].
## (s6) Remark 2.
(p6.0) It is important to keep in mind that the timevarying virtual stiffness parameter can be the critical determinant of the system stability. Literature proves that there are two options for time-varying virtual impedance mass/inertia: (1) it can be of constant value with no effect of Lyapunov stability or (2) it can be of a value equal to the mass/inertia of the robot end effector. The last case can be exploited to design a control law free of contact force feedback; see [43,73] and the references therein. In addition, the virtual damping parameters can be selected as d t = 2ξ m k t , where ξ > 0 is a constant damping ratio.
