# 06+ MILLION TOP 1% MOST CITED SCIENTIST 12.2% AUTHORS AND EDITORS FROM TOP 500 UNIVERSITIES Cyanobacterial Toxins Emerging Contaminants in Soils: A Review of Sources, Fate and Impacts on Ecosystems, Plants and Animal and Human Health Provisional chapter Cyanobacterial Toxins Emerging Contaminants in Soils: A Review of Sources, Fate and Impacts on Ecosystems, Plants and Animal and Human Health

CorpusID: 53410839 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73bf80cf738aa9ec00cc46af41ca01e683e5a82a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73bf80cf738aa9ec00cc46af41ca01e683e5a82a)

Fields: Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s7) Microorganisms
(p7.0) Secondary, metabolites produced by cyanobacteria seem to have several activities as antiviral, antifungal and antibacterial [71]. In aquatic environments, several studies revealed an inhibition of bacterial growth after 8 days of exposure to cyanobacterial extract containing microcystins or pure microcystin standards [105]. In the same way, Giaramida et al. [106] reported that the exposure to cyanobacterial extract containing microcystins induced changes in structure and physiology of bacterial communities. The measure of arylsulfatase, phosphatase, urease and β-D-glucosidase activities in the soil, after irrigation with cyanobacterial extract of M. aeruginosa (PCC7820) diluted between 5 and 100 µg equivalent MC-LR L −1 during 14 or 90 days, revealed an absence of the alteration of the activity of these enzymes linked to sulphur, phosphorus and nitrogen mineralization and cellulose degradation, respectively [107,108]. In contrast, these studies revealed a stimulation of the potential of nitrification that was positively correlated to an increase in the abundance of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria, whereas the ammonia-oxidizing archaea were not impacted. In a recently study, El Khalloufi et al. [109] highlighted the effects of cyanobacterial extract containing microcystins on soil microorganisms from the rhizosphere of Medicago sativa. The authors exposed M. sativa to 100 µg equivalent MC-LR L −1 during 30 days at three times a week and a pyrosequencing analysis was further established to characterize the bacterial community of the rhizosphre. The results revealed fluctuations with an increase in Betaproteobacteria and a decrease in Gammaproteobacteria proportion. Furthermore, cyanobacterial extract containing microcystins used for irrigation seemed to be toxic towards Actinobacteria, Gemmatimonas, Deltaproteobacteria and Gammaproteobacteria, however other groups as Clostridia, Opitutae and bacteria related with Betaproteobacteria, were stimulated [109]. However, Lahrouni et al. [110,111] reported that rhizobia-Vicia faba symbiosis was not impacted by microcystins. Nevertheless, several studies revealed the presence of heterotrophic bacteria in the soil containing a microcystin-gene cluster, mlrA, B, C and D essential for degradation of microcystins [89,94,95,112]. For example, some species of the proteobacteria belonging to the genera Sphingomonas, Methylobacillus and Paucibacter are known to degrade microcystins [10, 76]. Additionally, Jia et al. [113] showed that a fungus, Trichaptum abietinum, was able to degrade microcystins. However, no studies have yet examined the effects of cylindrospermopsin and neurotoxins in soil microorganisms.
## (s8) Invertebrates
(p8.0) The impact of cyanotoxins on aquatic invertebrates was well documented (for review, see Ref. [114]). However, the effects of these toxins on soil invertebrates are scarce. The effects of microcystins on soil nematods Ceanorhabditis elegans were studied by Li et al. [115,116] and Holajjer et al. [117]. After exposure to 1 µg MC-LR L −1 , a reduction in lifespan, a delay of development, an increase in generation time, a decrease in brood size, a suppression of locomotion behaviour and a decrease in hsp-16-2-gfp expression were observed [115]. In addition, the neurotoxicity of MC-LR was demonstrated in C. elegans with significant severe defects of chemotaxis to NaCl and diacetyl, and thermotaxis [116]. Therefore, the application of toxic cyanobacteria in soil may reduce nematode infestation and finally increase plant yield (see review in Ref. [117]). Concerning the macrofauna, and to the best of our knowledge, only one study was reported in the literature on the survival and reproduction of the springtail Folmiosa candida after application to the soil of a cyanobacterial biomass containing different concentrations of microcystins from 21 to 3662 µg g −1 DW [118]. The results showed no adverse effects on survival and reproduction when the ratio cyanobacterial biomass/soil attained 4 g kg −1 DW soil.
## (s9) Plants
(p9.0) The phytotoxicity of cyanotoxins was observed on aquatic plants but in the last years several studies investigated this field for terrestrial plants. As described in the review of Corbel et al.

(p9.1) [10], the phytotoxicity of neurotoxins and cytotoxic alkaloids is less studied in comparison to microcystins. In laboratory conditions, several studies reported that the rate of germination of several plants decreased with an EC50 of 11 mg eq. MC-LR L −1 for Triticum durum [107,119] and an EC50 comprised between 16 and 20 mg eq. MC-LR L −1 for tomatoes [120]. In these conditions, generally, the germination was impacted by microcystins for concentrations upper than 1 mg eq. MC-LR L −1 and responses differed according the sensitivity of plants. Indeed, Corbel et al. [107] highlighted the higher sensitivity of wheat in comparison with tomato and lettuce seeds. Chen et al. [121] reported that the rice seed were more resistant than the rape ones. In addition, Corbel et al. [107] reported that a crude extract of cyanobacteria containing microcystins induced a significant decrease in the radicle lengths of MicroTom and Saint-Pierre tomatoes plants for concentrations higher than 5 and 20 mg eq. MC-LR L −1 . Similar results, showing an inhibition of 44% of root growth, were obtained after exposition of Triticum aetivum exposed to 0.5 µg MC-LR L −1 [122]. Chen et al. [121] reported that high concentrations of MC-LR (>2 mg L −1 ) inhibited root elongation, crown roots formation and lateral root formation from primordia for rice plants. In an earlier study, Gehringer et al. [123] observed a decrease in root and leaf biomasses of M. sativa with 5 and 10 µg eq. MC-LR L −1 . By contrast, other studies demonstrated that pure MC-RR at environmental concentrations (<10 µg L −1 ) accelerated the rape growth of some plants [87]. In a recent study based on tomato irrigation for 14 days by cyanobacterial extract containing concentrations from 5 to 100 µg eq. MC-LR L −1 , Corbel et al. [107] showed similar results with an enhancement of aerial biomasses, whereas the root biomasses were not impacted by these treatments. In the same way, a chronic exposure with an experiment of duration 90 days revealed a stimulation of tomato growth during the first 40 days post-germination [124]. In addition to the toxicity of microcystins linked to the specific inhibition of serine/threonine protein phosphatases [33], the increase in antioxidant defences induced by these toxins suggests that oxidative stress is also a major mechanism contributing to their phytotoxicity (reviewed in Ref.
## (s10) Bioaccumulation of cyanotoxins in agricultural plants and consequences on human and animal health
(p10.0) Humans were exposed to cyanobacteria toxins through many routes, including drinking water, recreational contact and health food products made from cyanobacteria, and food chain. While some of these routes are well enough informed the others are them less, notably that corresponding to the consumption of crop plants. Although, no case of poisoning by these products has been reported worldwide, this eventuality must not be ignored. Indeed, a recent epidemiological study showed that the excessive incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in the population of the islands of Guam in the Pacific was linked to a consumption of the seeds of cycas contaminated by a neurotoxin, β-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA), produced by a species of cyanobacteria of the genus Nostoc living in symbiosis in the roots of this plant [134].
