# Forest and biodiversity conservation in ancient Indian culture: A review based on old texts and archaeological evidences

CorpusID: 54723427 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2bd1dc90bce3315618152754aaee7102ec04e05a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2bd1dc90bce3315618152754aaee7102ec04e05a)

Fields: History, Environmental Science

## (s3) ILSHS Volume 30
(p3.0) cutting any part of a tree, fines of variable amounts were imposed on the offender depending on the types of injury. Emphasis was given particularly on those which bear fruits, flowers or provide shades. Among material forests, one which was large, full of resource, accessible and watered by a river was given more importance, because it could be a shelter in time of trouble. 4 The environmental issues described in Arthasastra are very much relevant in modern society. In 1972, the conference on human environment in Stockholm mentioned about some principles which were very much similar to the edicts of Arthasastra. Even in India, some of the environmental laws like Water (prevention and control of pollution) Act 1974, The Forest Conservation Act 1980 and The Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972 show amazing similarity with forms and contents of Arthasastra.

(p3.1) cutting any part of a tree, fines of variable amounts were imposed on the offender depending on the types of injury. Emphasis was given particularly on those which bear fruits, flowers or provide shades. Among material forests, one which was large, full of resource, accessible and watered by a river was given more importance, because it could be a shelter in time of trouble. 4 The environmental issues described in Arthasastra are very much relevant in modern society. In 1972, the conference on human environment in Stockholm mentioned about some principles which were very much similar to the edicts of Arthasastra. Even in India, some of the environmental laws like Water (prevention and control of pollution) Act 1974, The Forest Conservation Act 1980 and The Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972 show amazing similarity with forms and contents of Arthasastra.
## (s19) ILSHS Volume 30
(p19.0) cutting any part of a tree, fines of variable amounts were imposed on the offender depending on the types of injury. Emphasis was given particularly on those which bear fruits, flowers or provide shades. Among material forests, one which was large, full of resource, accessible and watered by a river was given more importance, because it could be a shelter in time of trouble. 4 The environmental issues described in Arthasastra are very much relevant in modern society. In 1972, the conference on human environment in Stockholm mentioned about some principles which were very much similar to the edicts of Arthasastra. Even in India, some of the environmental laws like Water (prevention and control of pollution) Act 1974, The Forest Conservation Act 1980 and The Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972 show amazing similarity with forms and contents of Arthasastra.

(p19.1) cutting any part of a tree, fines of variable amounts were imposed on the offender depending on the types of injury. Emphasis was given particularly on those which bear fruits, flowers or provide shades. Among material forests, one which was large, full of resource, accessible and watered by a river was given more importance, because it could be a shelter in time of trouble. 4 The environmental issues described in Arthasastra are very much relevant in modern society. In 1972, the conference on human environment in Stockholm mentioned about some principles which were very much similar to the edicts of Arthasastra. Even in India, some of the environmental laws like Water (prevention and control of pollution) Act 1974, The Forest Conservation Act 1980 and The Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972 show amazing similarity with forms and contents of Arthasastra.
