# Health care-associated infections -an overview

CorpusID: 54449668 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/14179d6e7c0160e49ee7a2af13ba3c2f88a927db](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/14179d6e7c0160e49ee7a2af13ba3c2f88a927db)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) 2325
(p6.0) Health care-associated infections and prevention strategy About 68.6% of all bacterial isolates were resistant to cefuroxime used in the management of orthopedic SSIs. This study also found that diabetes mellitus, smoking, operations lasting more than 3 hours, the absence of antibiotic prophylaxis, and a history of previous surgery were positive risk factors associated with a significant upsurge in SSIs. 87 SSIs comprise at least 14%-22.2% of all HCAIs for abdominal surgery [88][89][90] and often lead to extended hospitalization and higher antimicrobial costs. 71 The microorganisms generally involved in such SSIs include S. aureus, coagulasenegative Staphylococci and Enterococcus spp., and E. coli. 71 S. aureus has been known to be a major cause of HCAIs for over 100 years. 91 When first introduced, nearly all strains were susceptible to penicillin, but since its wide and often irrational use, S. aureus started to become resistant by producing β-lactamase enzyme. 91 By 1960, 95% hospital variants of S. aureus were resistant. 91,92 To help combat resistance, several new penicillins were developed to resist Staphylococcal β-lactamase, such as methicillin, oxacillin, cloxacillin, and flucloxacillin. 91 However, within 1 year of methicillin being marketed in 1960, the first MRSA strain of S. aureus was reported in England. 93 The MRSA strain represents 50% of HCAIs in the US and Europe and causes infections that are very difficult to manage because of their potential resistance to multiple antimicrobials. [94][95][96] In one study, the incidence of SSIs was after gastrectomy in 11.3%, after colorectal surgery in 15.5%, after hepatectomy in 11.3%, and after pancreaticoduodenectomy in 36.9%. 97 While the incidence of SSIs was higher in the absorbable stitching material than the silk group for all surgical procedures, the difference was not statistically significant. 97 A Japanese study on abdominal surgery reported an overall SSI rate of 14.4%. The SSI rates in the suture-less, Vicryl, and silk groups were 4.8%, 14.8%, and 16.4%, 88 respectively, again with no statistically significant differences between the groups. In colorectal surgery, the SSI rate in the polyglactin 910 (absorbable, synthetic, usually braided suture; Vicryl TM ) group was 13.9%, which was statistically significantly lower than that of the silk group (22.4%; P=0.034). The incidence of deeper SSIs in the Vicryl group, including deep incisional SSIs (ISSIs) and organ/space SSIs (OSIs), was statistically significantly lower than that in the silk group (P=0.04). 88 The SSI rates did not differ among the suture types overall in gastric surgery or in appendectomy. 98 A US study of pediatric patients found that while this was only 2.5% of the caseload, colorectal surgery contributed to 7.1% of the SSIs. 98 The SSI rates of all types of colorectal surgery were 5.9% (ISSIs: 3.2%; OSIs: 2.7%) with the uppermost being total abdominal colectomy (11.4%) trailed by partial colectomy (8.3%) and colostomy closure (5.0%). 98 Inflammatory bowel diseases caused the topmost health problems in a comparison of all colorectal diagnosed diseases (24.9%; ISSIs: 22%; OSIs: 28.6%). Hirschsprung's disease (14.2%; ISSIs: 15.4%; OSIs: 12.8%) and anorectal malformations (12.4%; ISSIs: 17.6%; OSIs: 6.4%) were the next major group in colorectal diseases. 98 Finally, a study utilizing univariate analysis defined 13 statistically significantly variables related to SSIs. Those were patients aged over 60 years, lower functional status, diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, immunocompromising disease, anticancer medications, immunosuppressive agents, impaired immune system, open cholecystectomy, laparotomy, an American Society of Anesthesiologists score above 2, drain insertion, and dirty wound. 99 Using multivariate regression analysis, this study also found that immunosuppressive agents (OR =2. 5 
