# Biomolecular phases in transverse palatal distraction: A review

CorpusID: 54561100 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bac83bc057613900543d99f734110445ff83cc9d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bac83bc057613900543d99f734110445ff83cc9d)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Transverse palatal distraction is a technique of rapid maxillary expansion to increase the maxillary width in case of transverse palatal deficiency. This is achieved by osteo-distraction technique (OD) which is routinely used for new bone formation by stimulatory effect of tension and stress on bone forming cells (Cope et al., 1999).

(p0.1) Osteo-distraction is a surgical method for regenerating bony deficiencies. The traditional method which involves osteotomies and replacing the osteotomy gaps with bone grafts have resulted in intraoperative morbidity and postoperative regression. These disadvantages have been overcome by Osteo-distraction which does not require bone harvesting from other sites (Marchac and Arnaud, 2012;Perez et al., 2011). Osteo-distraction, also known as distraction osteogenesis, callotasis, and distraction histogenesis, is a process of regenerating new bone and overlying tissue by slow, continuous and controlled application of traction force on a surgically fractured bone (Osteotomy). The main advantage of this process is that the newly formed bone and soft tissue is similar to the native tissues. The consolidation phase in this process plays a major role for functional remodeling of the new bone and soft tissues which resembles the native bone and overlying soft tissue (Cope and Samchukov, 2000;Rowe et al., 1999;Choi et al., 2000) Osteo-distraction is based on two principle laws i.e.; ''Wolff's Law" and ''Law of Tension Stress". According to Wolff's law, when stresses are applied on bone, it will remodel in accordance to the stresses, whereas, Law of Tension Stress suggests that gradual and constant force application on living tissues creates stress that can regenerate new tissues similar to the native tissues (Amir et al., 2009;Frost, 2004;Li et al., 1997). Snyder et al. (1973), applied the concept of osteo-distraction in mandible. In 1976, Bell and Epker used osteo-distraction technique for transverse palatal distraction in cases of transverse deficiency of maxilla.
## (s1) Bio-mechanical aspect of TPD
(p1.0) According to Karp et al., (1992), the healing after distraction differs from normal fracture healing in two ways; a. In OD membranous ossification occurs compared to endochondral ossification seen in regular fracture healing b. In OD controlled micro trauma is done to create osteotomy gaps

(p1.1) There are five cascades of events that occur in OD, with differing biological processes in each phase: a. Osteotomy b. Latency phase c. Distraction Phase d. Consolidation phase e. Remodeling phase (Singh et al., 2016) 
## (s5) Consolidation period (neutron-fixation)
(p5.0) This period in craniofacial distraction starts after 6 weeks and lasts for 12 weeks. During this period, mineralization of newly formed regenerate occurs. There are various factors such as BMP, platelet-rich plasma that help in new bone formation during this final stage (Singh et al., 2016).

(p5.1) BMPs role in new bone formation has been discussed in distraction phase, based on these findings exogenous BMP-2 has been used successfully to shorten time for new bone regeneration in osteo-distraction (Yonezawa et al., 2006;Rachmiel et al., 2004).

(p5.2) Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) consists of growth factors and antimicrobial properties which promote new bone regeneration during consolidation phase. Due to these properties of PRP it has been demonstrated that injection of a combination of PRP with either bone marrow cells or mesenchymal cells into the osteotomy site enhances bone healing and shortens the consolidation phase (Griffin et al., 2009;Kanthan et al., 2011;Tsay et al., 2005;Drago et al., 2013).
