# Drip Fertigation in Vegetable Crops for Enhancing Productivity and Resource Use Efficiency: An Overview

CorpusID: 55769159 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/504933cea212f6f091613af490bc1f4a10b095e5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/504933cea212f6f091613af490bc1f4a10b095e5)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s3) Need of fertigation
(p3.0) Rapid increase in area under micro irrigation, now fertigation is getting momentum in number of the countries. The concept of fertigation is new to the Indian subcontinent growing popularity to accept of this concept making it easy to adopt "Fertigation". Fertigation is the technique to apply water soluble solids or liquid fertilizers through the drip irrigation on weekly or monthly basis so as to reach each and every plant regularly and uniformly. It is the most effective and convenient means of maintaining optimum fertility level and water supply according to the specific requirement (Shirgure, 2000).

(p3.1) Fertigation permits application of a nutrient directly at the site of a high concentration of active roots and as needed by the crop. Scheduling fertilizer applications on the basis of need offers the possibility of reducing nutrient element losses associated with conventional application. Methods that depend on the soil as a reservoir of nutrients thereby increasing nutrient use efficiency.
## (s14) Sweet pepper
(p14.0) Celery Kaniszewski et al., (1999) reported that fertigated celeriac plants had greater leaf area, dry matter production and nitrate N and total N contents than those given through broadcast N with or without drip irrigation.
