# A Review on Data Analytics for Supply Chain Management: A Case study

CorpusID: 55422957 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a90c6d013efa5ac714f85d69b0af5794effef49c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a90c6d013efa5ac714f85d69b0af5794effef49c)

Fields: Business, Computer Science

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) After the 1990s great changes in the operating rules of world economy and market competition patterns, enterprises have identified the need for globalization of economic development. Companies need to rely on the integration of their own and external resources available in the market. This integration enables the working pattern of a system that gives quick response to the needs of the market. Also the ad-hoc situations that arise in the market. Such a system is referred to as Supply Chain Management (SCM) [1]. SCM is defined as managing the flow of information, material and resources across and within the network of upstream and downstream organizations [2]. Supply chain can be defined as network of flow of products, financial deliverables, customer services and network of information, material and resources. Management of multiple relationships in supply chain is referred to as supply chain management. Some of the factors like product success, customer satisfaction, growth of an organization depends on the successful execution of SCM [5].
## (s1) Volume:
(p1.0) Volume refers to the huge amount of data generated from emails, twitter, photos, and videos every second. In SCM, Volume can be related to the data generated from the use of Sensors, bar codes, ERP, Transport management system and database technologies. Previously volume is measured in Gigabytes which is now measured in Zettabytes (ZB) or even Yottabytes (YB). There are different forms and ways of storing the Big data generated from supply chain industry [20]. Rational database management system (RDBMS), which is a structured model employed to see, analyze, manufacture and store the huge amount of supply chain management data. Also the data clusters in Big data storage includes components like  
## (s3) Variety:
(p3.0) It refers to the different forms of data like structured, unstructured or semi structured [35]. Also it includes different types of data from XML to video to SMS. The variety of data in the field of SCM includes data from diverse sources like retailers, distributors, suppliers, inventory, sales, consumer [9] etc. Big Data collection process in SCM includes 2 variety of sources: Upstream and downstream sources. The data from upstream source includes supplier's side, through intermediate stream or warehouse side. Data from downstream includes logistics, distribution or retailer side [20].
## (s11) A. Descriptive Analytics:
(p11.0) Descriptive Analytics (DA) is mainly used to analyze "what is happening" now in order to answer the question of "What happened" in the past. This is the first level of analytics where 90% of organizations apply this strategy for betterment of the future. DA identifies the historical data and analyzes the pattern. Descriptive Analytics mainly aims at identifying the problems and opportunities in the field of SCM within the existing processes and functions [17].

(p11.1) Descriptive Analytics uses the techniques like  Data Modeling  Regression Analysis  Visualization  OLAP (online analytical processing) operations like drill down, up and across to identify the areas.

(p11.2) Big data tools for supply chain analytics has been summarized in the Table 1. OLAP operations for Supply chain may include shipments, products, logistics, customers, suppliers and other dimensions like rates and cost. The applications of Descriptive analytics provide the managers with real time data regarding the quantities of goods and location in the supply chain.
## (s12) B. Predictive Analytics:
(p12.0) Predictive analytics (PA) use both quantitative and qualitative methods to analyze the real time and historical data to estimate the past and future levels of integration of business processes among functions or companies, as well as the associated costs and service levels [9]. Predictive analytics aims at projecting what will happen in the future and why it may happen [17]. PA includes algorithms/techniques such as [2] 1. Time series methods & Advanced forecasting.
## (s14) Frequent pattern mining algorithms
(p14.0) Predictive analytics mainly focused on forecasting at strategic, tactic and operational levels, which is based on the planning process in terms of network design, production planning, inventory management and capacity planning [14]. Predictive analytics uses mathematical algorithms and programming in order to predict the patterns within data

(p14.1) To understand the Descriptive and Predictive Analytics, an experimental is performed on sales data, which is a benchmark dataset available. The results are found to be interesting. A predictive model is developed based on regression analysis.
## (s15) C. Prescriptive Analytics:
(p15.0) DA and PA are focused on what and when it will happen, whereas Prescriptive Analytics anticipates on "why it has happened". It collects the data continuously to re-predict the events which enable the decision makers to increase the prediction accuracy for taking better decisions. Prescriptive analytics explains the reasons behind certain events. It is mainly associated with simulation and optimization [2]. The aim of Prescriptive analytics is to improve the business performance [17]. Three classes of algorithms used under this analytics method are  Decision trees  Fuzzy Rule-Based System  Switching Neural Networks (Logic Learning Machine)
## (s19) IV. CHALLENGES OF SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
(p19.0) According to Robak et al [2014], the open research problem in supply chain management along with logistics can be analyzed from the view of stake holders and executive business components, where key business functions are forecasting, inventory management, transport management and also human resources. Big data can address the issues of Supply chain like timely response, time delivery, real time planning, supplier and customer relationship management etc. [15]. Operating an effective supply chain involves continuous flow of information, which in turn helps to create better material flow [8]. The main focus in supply chain is the customer. So achieving a good customer focused system is one of the aim of SCM [8]. The key supply chain processes/ challenges are listed and shown in the  Supply chain need to be aware of the benefits given by the big data for their operations.
## (s21) A. Distribution Network Optimization
(p21.0) Distribution network involves locating warehouses and production plants and also to identify the strategy for distribution of products from supplier to warehouses and from warehouses to customers [12]. The key challenges of Distribution network optimization are optimization of domestic transportation network, achieve flexibility in network redeployment when network changes and also to minimize the total cost of distribution network. Benefits of n/w optimization by achieving above challenges are the Optimized Network.
## (s22) B. Green Logistics
(p22.0) It implies efficiency in using transportation equipment's. Some of the key features in Green logistics are Minimization of carbon emission, Cost reduction from resource saving and environmental externalities [13]. better utilization of resources, social and environment responsibility etc. Introducing or adopting green logistics is a complex process which requires cross disciplinary coordination and also changes in the current operation process [19]. This can be also being achieved by introducing new practices in the area of supply and distribution that links them to other participants like suppliers and customers in the value chain. This link must be supported by management staff's, their characteristics and also by human resources [19].
## (s25) E. Last mile delivery problem
(p25.0) The main challenge in this problem is delivering thousands of packages to customer in an efficient way. Another challenge here is time bound delivery of goods. Benefit by overcoming this problem is Customer Satisfaction. BDA enable the Last mile delivery problem by increasing the level of operational efficiency [15].
## (s33) E. Intelligent cargo
(p33.0) Capabilities under Intelligent Cargo are selfidentification, context detection, access to services, status monitoring and registering. Self-organized logistic company's functions without intervention by managers, engineers or by the software control. Of the above approaches, the Intelligent traffic management systems attracted the greatest interest during recent years. Uckelmann described Smart Logistics as technical components to gain data on the level of material flow and to process these data for monitoring and further purposes [23]. Smart Logistics are a key approach in the information logistics cross company and international transportation networks to meet the need for robustness, flexibility, resilience and agility [23]. Technical components in smart logistics are as follows:
## (s34) VI. REGRESSION
(p34.0) Regression is a collection of data mining or statistical modelling technique used to describe the behavior of random variable by using one or more quantitative variables. The Linear regression uses the method or of a straight line (y= mx + c) in order to predict the value of y by determining the appropriate values for m and c based upon the value of given x. y becomes a dependent variable and other variables becomes a predictor or independent variable. The relationships between target variable and the predictors are summarized in model. This relationship has been applied to variety of datasets whose target values are unknown. Some of the applications of regression analysis in Business are predictive analytics, operation efficiency, supporting decisions, correcting errors and new insights. Regression analysis is mainly used to determine the values of parameters for a function which cause the function to best fit of asset data that we provide. Equation mentioned below explains the relationships in terms of symbols. Equation explains that regression is a function of estimating the value of a continuous target expressed as Y, a function (F) of one or more predictors (x1, x2, ---xn), a set of parameters (θ1, θ2 ...θn) and a measure of error as (e) [32].
## (s36) B. Coefficients of determination
(p36.0) The coefficient of determination denoted by R is an output of regression analysis. This has been interpreted as follows  The R ranges from 0 to 1.  R is 0 means the dependent variable cannot be predicted from an independent variable.  If R is between 0 to 1 means that the extent to which the dependent variable is predictable [32].  R is 0.10 indicates that 10% of variance in y is predictable from x, and if it is 0.20 then 20% is predictable and so on.
