# A Review of Complementary and Alternative Medicine Therapies on Muscular Atrophy: A Literature Review of In Vivo/In Vitro Studies

CorpusID: 56645187 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9a27081512369ee6bd182e0374cf28b40034d07](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9a27081512369ee6bd182e0374cf28b40034d07)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Muscle atrophy is defined as a reduction in muscle mass, which is a concept that covers partial or complete wasting away from muscle. In general, functional and morphological changes caused by muscular atrophy usually result in decreased muscle fiber cross-sectional area, protein content, muscle strength, and increased insulin resistance [1]. Muscle atrophy occurs in cachexia, a comorbidity of abnormal conditions such as cancer, AIDS, congestive heart failure, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It also occurs in sarcopenia, a decrease in muscle mass and strength associated with aging [2].

(p0.1) Although the causes of muscle atrophy are not fully understood, numerous factors contributing to the deterioration of muscle atrophy have been found through recent studies. Among these, decreased alpha motor neuron numbers, increased inflammatory cytokinesis, and decreased hormonal function are considered important factors in its pathogenesis [3].

(p0.2) Meanwhile, according to research by Alfonso et al. [4], the prevalence of sarcopenia in senior citizens aged 60 to 70 years was found to be 5-13% and 50% in patients over 80 years. Around the world, the population over 60 years was estimated to be about 60 million in the year 2000 and has been projected to be about 1.2 billion by 2025 and 2 billion by 2050. On condition that the current average prevalence of muscle loss is maintained, at least 50 million people to date and about 200 million people in the next 40 years will be affected by sarcopenia.

(p0.3) In complementary and alternative medicine, symptoms of muscular atrophy are treated using acupuncture, chuna 2 Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine treatment, and herbal medicine. In addition to these clinical treatments, many studies on complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) therapies for muscular atrophy have been conducted recently, but the results in literature have been insufficient. Against this background, we performed a literature review of CAM on muscular atrophy to establish a research model and suggest a direction for future research.
## (s1) Method
(p1.0) . . Search Strategies. We conducted this literature review of in vivo/in vitro studies through Korean and foreign electronic database searches. Foreign databases used included PubMed, Cochrane Library, China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), and Wanfang MED. Domestic databases searched included Korean Traditional Knowledge Portal (KTKP), Oriental Medicine Advanced Searching Integrated System (OASIS), Research Information Services (RISS), National Assembly Library, and the Korean studies information Service System (KISS). In the Korean databases, "muscular atrophy", "muscle loss", and "complementary and alternative medicine" were used as search terms. In CNKI and Wanfang MED, we used cross-language searches and related search terms which were "muscle atrophy", "muscle loss", and "肌 肉減少".

(p1.1) The search strategy used in the searches in PubMed and the Cochrane Library was based on a combination of medical subject headings outlined in Table 1. The searches were conducted independently by two investigators (SM Jeong, YC Park) who retrieved relevant studies published before August 2018. After retrieving the articles, we extracted and classified the data by animal or cell models, intervention type (herbal medicine, acupuncture, and moxibustion), and outcome measures (muscle mass, strength, and histological and/or biochemical measurements). The extracted data was then verified by the third author (YH Baek). Disagreements were resolved by consensus through face-to-face discussions among the three authors.

(p1.2) . . Study Selection. The inclusion criteria for the literature review were as follows: (1) articles on complementary and alternative medicine treatments for muscular atrophy and (2) in vivo or in vitro studies, while the exclusion criteria included the following: (1) clinical trial; (2) articles that were not original; (3) articles that were not in English, Korean, or Chinese; (4) duplicate studies. We also excluded studies that did not focus on muscle loss or muscle cell loss and those which did not use complementary and alternative medicine treatment. Full articles meeting the inclusion criteria were retrieved and read carefully.
## (s2) Results
(p2.0) . . Literature Search. The search initially yielded 973 articles out of which duplicates were eliminated. After screening the titles, 872 articles were excluded due to a lack of adequate coverage of the topic of interest, and after full text assessment, 57 additional articles were excluded for one or more of the following reasons: (1) articles that were not based on original research; (2) articles that did not involve in vivo or in vitro studies; and (3) abstracts and comments. Finally, 44 articles were included in our literature review (Figure 1).

(p2.1) . . In Vivo Studies. A total of 36 articles (27 of which were in vivo only and 9 of which were in vivo with in vitro studies) were classified as in vivo studies in our review. . . . Animal Model Species. The most commonly used model was the Sprague-Dawley rat which was used by 22 out of the 36 studies. C57BL/6 mice were used in 6 studies, BALB/c mice were used in 2 studies, and DBA/1 J mice, Kunming mice, and SPF/VAF mice were used in one study each. Three papers did not mention which animal models were used. There were variations in the ages of the animals used in the studies, with 16-, 12-, 10-, 9-, 8-, 7-, and 6-weekold animals being used in 1, 2, 11, 1, 6, 1, and 7 studies, respectively. In one study, the ages of animals used in the test group differed from that of the control group, being 5 and 19 months, respectively. With regard to the sex of the animals, male rats were predominantly used, featuring in 30 studies, while one study used only female rats and one study used a combination of male and female animals. The other studies did not mention sex of the animals.

(p2.2) In order to induce muscular atrophy, various disease models were used in the studies. The most commonly used model for muscular atrophy was the hindlimb suspension (HS) method, developed by Morey-Holton and Wronski [49]. HS rat model was used in 7 of the 36 studies. The next commonly used model was nerve damage-induced muscular atrophy model which was used in 6 studies. Among these studies, direct injury to the sciatic nerve or the peroneal nerve was used to cause atrophy. The chronic kidney disease (CKD) model, in which induction was done by 5/6 nephrectomy was used in 5 studies. The alcohol-induced muscular atrophy model, transgenic model, and the cancer-induced cachexia model (C26-colon-adenocarcinoma implanted) were used, and each of these models was used in three of the 36  studies reviewed. In two studies, diabetes was induced by the administration of streptozotocin to evaluate muscular dystrophy due to diabetes. There were 2 studies using stroke models (middle cerebral artery occlusion, MCAO) and one study for each of the following models: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), dexamethasone-induced atrophy, spinal cord injury, and the aging models ( Figure 2).

(p2.3) . . . Interventions. The most common types of intervention were herbal medicines which were used in 28 studies. In addition, there were 7 studies using electroacupuncture and one study using moxibustion ( Figure 3). The treatment periods were 12 days in 2 studies, 2-4 weeks in 24 studies, 1-6  months in 8 studies, and 38 weeks in 1 study. One study did not limit the treatment period.

(p2.4) . . . Outcomes. Muscle mass, the most common primary outcome, was investigated in 28 out of the 36 studies. All except one reported a significant increase in muscle mass. Ten articles investigated muscle function, all of which reported significant increases in muscle strength (Tables 2 and 3).
## (s3) (A) Oxidative Stress Model.
(p3.0) In the three studies using the oxidative stress model, Jung et al. found that idesolide extract protected muscle cells from oxidative stress by promoting the activation of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) in the cells [42]. HSP70 protects cells from a number of apoptotic stimuli, including oxidative stress and is significantly downregulated in various models of skeletal muscle atrophy [52]. They also found the same effects when sauchinone (root of Saururus chinensis) was used as the mode of treatment [44].

(p3.1) In Choe YH., isorhamnetin (ISO) extract was treated to hydrogen peroxide-(H2O2-) induced oxidation damaged muscle cells. In general, H2O2 causes cell apoptosis with mitochondrial damage and ROS generation by upregulation of Bax and downregulation of Bcl-2 [53]. The ISO extract inhibited the apoptosis by the restoration of Bax, Bcl-2 proteins, and decreasing of caspase-9 and caspase-3. In addition, the ISO activated the antioxidant protein heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and its transcription factor, nuclear factor erythroid derived 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), thereby suppressing oxidative stress [47].
