# Understanding atmospheric organic aerosols via factor analysis of aerosol mass spectrometry: a review

CorpusID: 5792216 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d257d62c4930c076957765daf73c95841009be47](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d257d62c4930c076957765daf73c95841009be47)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine

## (s3) PMF analysis of aerosol mass spectra
(p3.0) Lanz et al. [51] reported the first PMF study on an AMS dataset acquired in Zurich, Switzerland, in summer 2005 and identified six factors, including an HOA, two OOAs, and three factors linked to charbroiling, wood burning, and food cooking sources, respectively. The less oxidized OOA-2 factor was found to represent less processed, more volatile SOA [51]. Ulbrich et al. [38] also reported using PMF for identification of a semivolatile OOA-2 factor, in addition to a more oxidized, regional OOA-1 and an HOA in Pittsburgh. These PMF results agree well with the original two-factor (HOA and OOA) CPCA results of Zhang et al. [40,55]. The fact that PMF is able to retrieve a low-concentration, yet distinct factor (OOA-2) highlights its strength in extracting information from datasets, e.g., resolving factors that make up a small fraction of the total mass. Based on PMF analysis of synthetic ORG matrices that were reconstructed assuming variable contributions from Pittsburgh OOA-1, OOA-2, and HOA factors, Ulbrich et al. [38] estimated that PMF of quadrupole AMS data (unit-mass resolution; UMR) can typically retrieve factors that account for at least 5% of the AMS mass.

(p3.1) The extraction of two distinct OOA subfactors was achieved later in PMF studies of a large number of other AMS datasets [13,14,18,56]. Typically, the more oxidized OOA factor (OOA-1) correlates well with sulfate and is thought to be more aged and non-volatile. In contrast, the less oxidized OOA (OOA-2) is thought to be typically semivolatile because of its diurnal cycles and time trends that are similar to those of ammonium nitrate and chloride, both of which dynamically partition between gaseous and particulate phases depending on ambient temperature and humidity. The relative volatility characteristics of the two OOAs were confirmed by thermodenuder measurements [57][58][59][60]. In particular, Cappa and Jimenez [60] reported volatility distributions for both OOAs and other OA components for Mexico City. For these reasons, Jimenez et al. [13] introduced the more descriptive acronyms LV-OOA (low-volatility) and SV-OOA (semivolatile), respectively, that have become the standard terminology. However, the terminology LO-OOA and MO-OOA for less and more oxidized OOA, respectively, is also appropriate, especially for datasets for which volatility data are not available. More discussion on the differences among OOA subtypes is given in the section "OOA subtypes and interpretation".
## (s4) % of Total Signal
(p4.0) The elemental and organic mass-to-carbon ratios for each factor are shown in the legends. (Adapted from Ref. [39]) A summary of the key diagnostic plots of the PMF results is shown in Fig. 5 AMS and the other from an on-line GC-MS. Because both techniques determine individual molecules (or larger fragments or decomposition products) in aerosols, these analyses may be particularly useful for studying the sources and source contributions of OA. Williams et al. [69] performed PMF analysis on hourly timeresolution data of organic marker compounds measured with a thermal desorption aerosol GC-MS-FID (TAG) instrument from a study site in Riverside, California. The grouping of marker compounds in each factor was used to identify the presence of several different source types, including local vehicle emissions, food cooking operations, biomass burning, regional primary anthropogenic emissions, biogenic POA sources, several types of SOA, and semivolatile anthropogenic and biogenic OA. A key challenge in this type of tracer-based apportionment is to assign a fraction of OA mass to each factor, because the tracers account for only a small fraction (<20%) of the OA mass. Williams et al. [69] performed this step using a multivariate fit of their OA components to the AMS OA concentration. Figure 3 shows the diurnal cycles of OA sources obtained with this method during the summer study, with SOA (POA) being more important during the day (evening/night), in agreement with, e.g., the NYC results in Fig. 2 and AMS results at other locations. An earlier study applied principal-component analysis (PCA) on data from the same instrument, and identified several sources due to transported and local anthropogenic pollution, transported and local biogenic emissions, and a local marine or dairy source, for a summer 2004 dataset in coastal Nova Scotia, Canada [70]. However, PCA apportions variance, and the resulting time series and mass spectra of the factors can contain negative values. PCA is therefore fundamentally different from PMF, which apportions the mass directly into nonnegative solutions that are physically meaningful.

(p4.1) Dreyfus et al. [34] used PMF to study the time trends of 60 organic molecular and fragment ions measured with a photoionization aerosol mass spectrometer (PIAMS) with a time resolution of a few minutes. Six factors were identified and linked to POA sources, including diesel exhaust, car emissions/road dust, and meat cooking. The mass contributions of individual sources were subsequently estimated, similarly to Williams et al. [69], by combining the PMF results and the EC/OC data. Figure 4 shows the results of a factor attributed to meat cooking aerosol, based on:

(p4.2) 1. the mass spectrum that shows prominent peaks at m/z values corresponding to the molecular ions of palmitic, linoleic, stearic, and oleic acids, all of which are tracer compounds for meat cooking (Fig. 4a); 2. the diurnal pattern that shows two characteristic peaks consistent with typical mealtimes (Fig. 4b); and 3. the wind rose plot which shows features consistent with the locations of cooking facilities near the site (Fig. 4c).
## (s5) Evaluation and selection of PMF solutions
(p5.0) Although a major objective of multivariate factor analysis is to explore underlying covariation of variables in a dataset to extract physically meaningful factors that can be related to distinct sources, processes, and/or properties, the solution algorithms provide only mathematical solutions that require careful evaluation and interpretation. In this section the various steps in PMF analysis are illustrated within the framework of AMS data. Ulbrich et al. [38] conducted a thorough assessment of PMF modeling of AMS data and discussed in detail several technical aspects of the analysis, including error matrix preparation, data pretreatment, selections of the optimum number of factors (P) and rotational forcing parameter (FPEAK), and evaluation of PMF solutions. These steps are summarized in Table 1. These authors also reported the development of an Igorbased (WaveMetrics, Lake Oswego, OR, USA) open- source PMF Evaluation Tool (PET, available at http:// cires.colorado.edu/jimenez-group/wiki/index.php/PMF-AMS_Analysis_Guide#PMF_Evaluation_Tool_Software) that enables systematic probing of the PMF solution space, automated batch analyses, and user-friendly visualization and intercomparison of the solutions and residuals [38]. Figure 5 shows a summary of key diagnostic plots useful for evaluating the final PMF results from an AMS dataset, which should also be useful for other aerosol mass spectrometers. An important first step of the PMF analysis is to decide the optimum number of factors that "best" explain the data. Ulbrich et al. [38] demonstrated that the trend of the PMF quality-of-fit parameter (Q) changing with regard to the number of factors can be useful to identify the minimum number of factors (Fig. 5a). A large decrease in Q/Q exp with the addition of a factor indicates that the additional factor is able to explain a significant fraction of the variation in the data unaccounted for by the others. In addition, examining the Q/Q exp contributions per column (m/z) or per row (t) in the matrix may help identify individual m/z values or time steps that affect the model lack-of-fit most strongly (Fig. 5h, i). Depending on the causes, and especially when non-physical effects (e.g., instrumental issues) cause extraneous variability that interferes with the PMF identification of the real components, the corresponding variables may be properly downweighted or even removed to reduce disproportionate effects on the fitting outcome [74].

(p5.1) The model residual time series (i.e., the difference between the summed measured mass spectrum and its modeled approximation; Fig. 5g) is particularly useful for evaluating the solutions of PMF and related methods [38,41]. The presence of time-dependent structure in the residual suggests the need for additional factor(s) for better fitting. However, for ambient datasets (Fig. 5g), it is common that substantial structure remains in the residual time series after all physically meaningful factors have been assigned. A main reason for this is true variations in the spectra of the factors, which cannot be captured with a reasonable number of components given the assumption of constant spectra in bilinear models including PMF [38]. As Ulbrich et al. [38] pointed out, this assumption of constant factor mass spectra in bilinear methods can limit the retrievability of small factors from AMS datasets.
## (s7) Insights into organic aerosol sources, processes, and properties
(p7.0) Overview of OA factors and their spatial distribution An important advantage of factor analysis is that it reduces the extremely complex OA composition to a limited number of chemically and physically meaningful components that can be linearly combined to reproduce the observed time and chemical variations in ambient OA. A broad overview on the chemistry, variability, and evolution characteristics of atmospheric submicron OA is emerging from the analysis of a large number of AMS datasets acquired from worldwide locations. Zhang et al. [6] performed an integrated analysis of 37 AMS datasets collected from three continents (North America, Europe, and Asia) and concluded that oxygenated OA species (surrogate for SOA) are ubiquitous and dominant in the Northern Hemisphere. PMF analyses of these worldwide AMS datasets further led to the compilation of a global picture on the oxidation states and dynamic evolution of multiple OA factors [13,14,103], which complements those obtained by use of other techniques [104]. In addition, two recent studies discussed the spatial distribution of aerosol chemical composition and the evolution of OA in Europe based on measurements of aerosol chemical composition across the continent [18,56]. Figure 9 shows a summary of the results from PMF analysis of 43 worldwide datasets. Usually 2-5 OA components were extracted for each study, consistent with those discussed above. It is important to note that the mass spectrum corresponding to any given factor is similar but not identical across multiple sites [14]. From Fig. 9 it is clear that the average mass concentrations and compositions of submicron particles vary substantially across sites. Whereas both HOA and OOA loadings decrease with distance from urban sites, the decrease of HOA is much more pronounced and the average OOA concentrations are often of the same order in various atmospheric environments [6]. The relative contribution of OOA evolves from an average of 63% of the organic matter in submicron particles at urban locations to usually more than 90% in rural and remote locations [6]. This difference in relative contributions reflects the spatial differences in the sources of HOA and OOA, respectively. Primary sources of OA (particularly HOA) are highest in urban centers and are quickly diluted when advected away from their sources. SOA is thought to be produced on time scales of a day or more in amounts that greatly exceed the urban HOA [10], so OOA corresponds not only to locally produced SOA but also SOA produced downwind of polluted areas and thus has a larger footprint (i.e., over wider regions). In addition, the source region for SOA precursors has additional sources with a more regional footprint, including regional biogenic emissions and biomass burning emissions. Figure 10 provides a clear example of this difference in HOA and OOA source footprints. The data points shown in the figure correspond to AMS and CO 2 (as a combustion tracer) gradient measurements downwind of a highway source (I-93 in Somerville, MA, USA) reported in Canagaratna et al. [12]. The measurements were made aboard a mobile laboratory equipped both with instruments that responded rapidly to aerosols and with gas phase instruments, with AMS measurements performed every few seconds [105]. The OOA concentrations were not significantly affected by the highway source and no gradient was observed. The gradient in HOA concentrations, on the other hand, mirrors the decreasing CO 2 concentrations, and is indicative of the effect of dilution as the pollution plume is mixed with ambient air.

(p7.1) When HOA particles mix in with background air, they can also become coated with background secondary aerosol material (i.e. species such as ammonium sulfate, ammonium nitrate, and secondary organic species). Cross et al. [106] used PMF analysis of single particle mass spectra measured with the single particle light-scattering AMS (SP LS-AMS) to show that HOA particles, which were likely to be emitted as POA from a near-by highway, quickly become internally mixed with secondary inorganic and organic compounds after emission. Canagaratna et al. [12] determined the effective densities of the single particles examined in the Cross et al. [106] study and confirmed that they were consistent with their PMF-based classification as "pure" and "mixed" HOA single particles. Taken together, these results indicate that coating processes are likely to modify HOA particles and lead to an evolution of their properties and effects with time.

(p7.2) Overview of OA factors and their spatial distribution An important advantage of factor analysis is that it reduces the extremely complex OA composition to a limited number of chemically and physically meaningful components that can be linearly combined to reproduce the observed time and chemical variations in ambient OA. A broad overview on the chemistry, variability, and evolution characteristics of atmospheric submicron OA is emerging from the analysis of a large number of AMS datasets acquired from worldwide locations. Zhang et al. [6] performed an integrated analysis of 37 AMS datasets collected from three continents (North America, Europe, and Asia) and concluded that oxygenated OA species (surrogate for SOA) are ubiquitous and dominant in the Northern Hemisphere. PMF analyses of these worldwide AMS datasets further led to the compilation of a global picture on the oxidation states and dynamic evolution of multiple OA factors [13,14,103], which complements those obtained by use of other techniques [104]. In addition, two recent studies discussed the spatial distribution of aerosol chemical composition and the evolution of OA in Europe based on measurements of aerosol chemical composition across the continent [18,56]. Figure 9 shows a summary of the results from PMF analysis of 43 worldwide datasets. Usually 2-5 OA components were extracted for each study, consistent with those discussed above. It is important to note that the mass spectrum corresponding to any given factor is similar but not identical across multiple sites [14]. From Fig. 9 it is clear that the average mass concentrations and compositions of submicron particles vary substantially across sites. Whereas both HOA and OOA loadings decrease with distance from urban sites, the decrease of HOA is much more pronounced and the average OOA concentrations are often of the same order in various atmospheric environments [6]. The relative contribution of OOA evolves from an average of 63% of the organic matter in submicron particles at urban locations to usually more than 90% in rural and remote locations [6]. This difference in relative contributions reflects the spatial differences in the sources of HOA and OOA, respectively. Primary sources of OA (particularly HOA) are highest in urban centers and are quickly diluted when advected away from their sources. SOA is thought to be produced on time scales of a day or more in amounts that greatly exceed the urban HOA [10], so OOA corresponds not only to locally produced SOA but also SOA produced downwind of polluted areas and thus has a larger footprint (i.e., over wider regions). In addition, the source region for SOA precursors has additional sources with a more regional footprint, including regional biogenic emissions and biomass burning emissions. Figure 10 provides a clear example of this difference in HOA and OOA source footprints. The data points shown in the figure correspond to AMS and CO 2 (as a combustion tracer) gradient measurements downwind of a highway source (I-93 in Somerville, MA, USA) reported in Canagaratna et al. [12]. The measurements were made aboard a mobile laboratory equipped both with instruments that responded rapidly to aerosols and with gas phase instruments, with AMS measurements performed every few seconds [105]. The OOA concentrations were not significantly affected by the highway source and no gradient was observed. The gradient in HOA concentrations, on the other hand, mirrors the decreasing CO 2 concentrations, and is indicative of the effect of dilution as the pollution plume is mixed with ambient air.

(p7.3) When HOA particles mix in with background air, they can also become coated with background secondary aerosol material (i.e. species such as ammonium sulfate, ammonium nitrate, and secondary organic species). Cross et al. [106] used PMF analysis of single particle mass spectra measured with the single particle light-scattering AMS (SP LS-AMS) to show that HOA particles, which were likely to be emitted as POA from a near-by highway, quickly become internally mixed with secondary inorganic and organic compounds after emission. Canagaratna et al. [12] determined the effective densities of the single particles examined in the Cross et al. [106] study and confirmed that they were consistent with their PMF-based classification as "pure" and "mixed" HOA single particles. Taken together, these results indicate that coating processes are likely to modify HOA particles and lead to an evolution of their properties and effects with time.
## (s23) PMF analysis of aerosol mass spectra
(p23.0) Lanz et al. [51] reported the first PMF study on an AMS dataset acquired in Zurich, Switzerland, in summer 2005 and identified six factors, including an HOA, two OOAs, and three factors linked to charbroiling, wood burning, and food cooking sources, respectively. The less oxidized OOA-2 factor was found to represent less processed, more volatile SOA [51]. Ulbrich et al. [38] also reported using PMF for identification of a semivolatile OOA-2 factor, in addition to a more oxidized, regional OOA-1 and an HOA in Pittsburgh. These PMF results agree well with the original two-factor (HOA and OOA) CPCA results of Zhang et al. [40,55]. The fact that PMF is able to retrieve a low-concentration, yet distinct factor (OOA-2) highlights its strength in extracting information from datasets, e.g., resolving factors that make up a small fraction of the total mass. Based on PMF analysis of synthetic ORG matrices that were reconstructed assuming variable contributions from Pittsburgh OOA-1, OOA-2, and HOA factors, Ulbrich et al. [38] estimated that PMF of quadrupole AMS data (unit-mass resolution; UMR) can typically retrieve factors that account for at least 5% of the AMS mass.

(p23.1) The extraction of two distinct OOA subfactors was achieved later in PMF studies of a large number of other AMS datasets [13,14,18,56]. Typically, the more oxidized OOA factor (OOA-1) correlates well with sulfate and is thought to be more aged and non-volatile. In contrast, the less oxidized OOA (OOA-2) is thought to be typically semivolatile because of its diurnal cycles and time trends that are similar to those of ammonium nitrate and chloride, both of which dynamically partition between gaseous and particulate phases depending on ambient temperature and humidity. The relative volatility characteristics of the two OOAs were confirmed by thermodenuder measurements [57][58][59][60]. In particular, Cappa and Jimenez [60] reported volatility distributions for both OOAs and other OA components for Mexico City. For these reasons, Jimenez et al. [13] introduced the more descriptive acronyms LV-OOA (low-volatility) and SV-OOA (semivolatile), respectively, that have become the standard terminology. However, the terminology LO-OOA and MO-OOA for less and more oxidized OOA, respectively, is also appropriate, especially for datasets for which volatility data are not available. More discussion on the differences among OOA subtypes is given in the section "OOA subtypes and interpretation".
## (s24) % of Total Signal
(p24.0) The elemental and organic mass-to-carbon ratios for each factor are shown in the legends. (Adapted from Ref. [39]) A summary of the key diagnostic plots of the PMF results is shown in Fig. 5 AMS and the other from an on-line GC-MS. Because both techniques determine individual molecules (or larger fragments or decomposition products) in aerosols, these analyses may be particularly useful for studying the sources and source contributions of OA. Williams et al. [69] performed PMF analysis on hourly timeresolution data of organic marker compounds measured with a thermal desorption aerosol GC-MS-FID (TAG) instrument from a study site in Riverside, California. The grouping of marker compounds in each factor was used to identify the presence of several different source types, including local vehicle emissions, food cooking operations, biomass burning, regional primary anthropogenic emissions, biogenic POA sources, several types of SOA, and semivolatile anthropogenic and biogenic OA. A key challenge in this type of tracer-based apportionment is to assign a fraction of OA mass to each factor, because the tracers account for only a small fraction (<20%) of the OA mass. Williams et al. [69] performed this step using a multivariate fit of their OA components to the AMS OA concentration. Figure 3 shows the diurnal cycles of OA sources obtained with this method during the summer study, with SOA (POA) being more important during the day (evening/night), in agreement with, e.g., the NYC results in Fig. 2 and AMS results at other locations. An earlier study applied principal-component analysis (PCA) on data from the same instrument, and identified several sources due to transported and local anthropogenic pollution, transported and local biogenic emissions, and a local marine or dairy source, for a summer 2004 dataset in coastal Nova Scotia, Canada [70]. However, PCA apportions variance, and the resulting time series and mass spectra of the factors can contain negative values. PCA is therefore fundamentally different from PMF, which apportions the mass directly into nonnegative solutions that are physically meaningful.

(p24.1) Dreyfus et al. [34] used PMF to study the time trends of 60 organic molecular and fragment ions measured with a photoionization aerosol mass spectrometer (PIAMS) with a time resolution of a few minutes. Six factors were identified and linked to POA sources, including diesel exhaust, car emissions/road dust, and meat cooking. The mass contributions of individual sources were subsequently estimated, similarly to Williams et al. [69], by combining the PMF results and the EC/OC data. Figure 4 shows the results of a factor attributed to meat cooking aerosol, based on:

(p24.2) 1. the mass spectrum that shows prominent peaks at m/z values corresponding to the molecular ions of palmitic, linoleic, stearic, and oleic acids, all of which are tracer compounds for meat cooking (Fig. 4a); 2. the diurnal pattern that shows two characteristic peaks consistent with typical mealtimes (Fig. 4b); and 3. the wind rose plot which shows features consistent with the locations of cooking facilities near the site (Fig. 4c).
## (s25) Evaluation and selection of PMF solutions
(p25.0) Although a major objective of multivariate factor analysis is to explore underlying covariation of variables in a dataset to extract physically meaningful factors that can be related to distinct sources, processes, and/or properties, the solution algorithms provide only mathematical solutions that require careful evaluation and interpretation. In this section the various steps in PMF analysis are illustrated within the framework of AMS data. Ulbrich et al. [38] conducted a thorough assessment of PMF modeling of AMS data and discussed in detail several technical aspects of the analysis, including error matrix preparation, data pretreatment, selections of the optimum number of factors (P) and rotational forcing parameter (FPEAK), and evaluation of PMF solutions. These steps are summarized in Table 1. These authors also reported the development of an Igorbased (WaveMetrics, Lake Oswego, OR, USA) open- source PMF Evaluation Tool (PET, available at http:// cires.colorado.edu/jimenez-group/wiki/index.php/PMF-AMS_Analysis_Guide#PMF_Evaluation_Tool_Software) that enables systematic probing of the PMF solution space, automated batch analyses, and user-friendly visualization and intercomparison of the solutions and residuals [38]. Figure 5 shows a summary of key diagnostic plots useful for evaluating the final PMF results from an AMS dataset, which should also be useful for other aerosol mass spectrometers. An important first step of the PMF analysis is to decide the optimum number of factors that "best" explain the data. Ulbrich et al. [38] demonstrated that the trend of the PMF quality-of-fit parameter (Q) changing with regard to the number of factors can be useful to identify the minimum number of factors (Fig. 5a). A large decrease in Q/Q exp with the addition of a factor indicates that the additional factor is able to explain a significant fraction of the variation in the data unaccounted for by the others. In addition, examining the Q/Q exp contributions per column (m/z) or per row (t) in the matrix may help identify individual m/z values or time steps that affect the model lack-of-fit most strongly (Fig. 5h, i). Depending on the causes, and especially when non-physical effects (e.g., instrumental issues) cause extraneous variability that interferes with the PMF identification of the real components, the corresponding variables may be properly downweighted or even removed to reduce disproportionate effects on the fitting outcome [74].

(p25.1) The model residual time series (i.e., the difference between the summed measured mass spectrum and its modeled approximation; Fig. 5g) is particularly useful for evaluating the solutions of PMF and related methods [38,41]. The presence of time-dependent structure in the residual suggests the need for additional factor(s) for better fitting. However, for ambient datasets (Fig. 5g), it is common that substantial structure remains in the residual time series after all physically meaningful factors have been assigned. A main reason for this is true variations in the spectra of the factors, which cannot be captured with a reasonable number of components given the assumption of constant spectra in bilinear models including PMF [38]. As Ulbrich et al. [38] pointed out, this assumption of constant factor mass spectra in bilinear methods can limit the retrievability of small factors from AMS datasets.
## (s27) Insights into organic aerosol sources, processes, and properties
(p27.0) Overview of OA factors and their spatial distribution An important advantage of factor analysis is that it reduces the extremely complex OA composition to a limited number of chemically and physically meaningful components that can be linearly combined to reproduce the observed time and chemical variations in ambient OA. A broad overview on the chemistry, variability, and evolution characteristics of atmospheric submicron OA is emerging from the analysis of a large number of AMS datasets acquired from worldwide locations. Zhang et al. [6] performed an integrated analysis of 37 AMS datasets collected from three continents (North America, Europe, and Asia) and concluded that oxygenated OA species (surrogate for SOA) are ubiquitous and dominant in the Northern Hemisphere. PMF analyses of these worldwide AMS datasets further led to the compilation of a global picture on the oxidation states and dynamic evolution of multiple OA factors [13,14,103], which complements those obtained by use of other techniques [104]. In addition, two recent studies discussed the spatial distribution of aerosol chemical composition and the evolution of OA in Europe based on measurements of aerosol chemical composition across the continent [18,56]. Figure 9 shows a summary of the results from PMF analysis of 43 worldwide datasets. Usually 2-5 OA components were extracted for each study, consistent with those discussed above. It is important to note that the mass spectrum corresponding to any given factor is similar but not identical across multiple sites [14]. From Fig. 9 it is clear that the average mass concentrations and compositions of submicron particles vary substantially across sites. Whereas both HOA and OOA loadings decrease with distance from urban sites, the decrease of HOA is much more pronounced and the average OOA concentrations are often of the same order in various atmospheric environments [6]. The relative contribution of OOA evolves from an average of 63% of the organic matter in submicron particles at urban locations to usually more than 90% in rural and remote locations [6]. This difference in relative contributions reflects the spatial differences in the sources of HOA and OOA, respectively. Primary sources of OA (particularly HOA) are highest in urban centers and are quickly diluted when advected away from their sources. SOA is thought to be produced on time scales of a day or more in amounts that greatly exceed the urban HOA [10], so OOA corresponds not only to locally produced SOA but also SOA produced downwind of polluted areas and thus has a larger footprint (i.e., over wider regions). In addition, the source region for SOA precursors has additional sources with a more regional footprint, including regional biogenic emissions and biomass burning emissions. Figure 10 provides a clear example of this difference in HOA and OOA source footprints. The data points shown in the figure correspond to AMS and CO 2 (as a combustion tracer) gradient measurements downwind of a highway source (I-93 in Somerville, MA, USA) reported in Canagaratna et al. [12]. The measurements were made aboard a mobile laboratory equipped both with instruments that responded rapidly to aerosols and with gas phase instruments, with AMS measurements performed every few seconds [105]. The OOA concentrations were not significantly affected by the highway source and no gradient was observed. The gradient in HOA concentrations, on the other hand, mirrors the decreasing CO 2 concentrations, and is indicative of the effect of dilution as the pollution plume is mixed with ambient air.

(p27.1) When HOA particles mix in with background air, they can also become coated with background secondary aerosol material (i.e. species such as ammonium sulfate, ammonium nitrate, and secondary organic species). Cross et al. [106] used PMF analysis of single particle mass spectra measured with the single particle light-scattering AMS (SP LS-AMS) to show that HOA particles, which were likely to be emitted as POA from a near-by highway, quickly become internally mixed with secondary inorganic and organic compounds after emission. Canagaratna et al. [12] determined the effective densities of the single particles examined in the Cross et al. [106] study and confirmed that they were consistent with their PMF-based classification as "pure" and "mixed" HOA single particles. Taken together, these results indicate that coating processes are likely to modify HOA particles and lead to an evolution of their properties and effects with time.

(p27.2) Overview of OA factors and their spatial distribution An important advantage of factor analysis is that it reduces the extremely complex OA composition to a limited number of chemically and physically meaningful components that can be linearly combined to reproduce the observed time and chemical variations in ambient OA. A broad overview on the chemistry, variability, and evolution characteristics of atmospheric submicron OA is emerging from the analysis of a large number of AMS datasets acquired from worldwide locations. Zhang et al. [6] performed an integrated analysis of 37 AMS datasets collected from three continents (North America, Europe, and Asia) and concluded that oxygenated OA species (surrogate for SOA) are ubiquitous and dominant in the Northern Hemisphere. PMF analyses of these worldwide AMS datasets further led to the compilation of a global picture on the oxidation states and dynamic evolution of multiple OA factors [13,14,103], which complements those obtained by use of other techniques [104]. In addition, two recent studies discussed the spatial distribution of aerosol chemical composition and the evolution of OA in Europe based on measurements of aerosol chemical composition across the continent [18,56]. Figure 9 shows a summary of the results from PMF analysis of 43 worldwide datasets. Usually 2-5 OA components were extracted for each study, consistent with those discussed above. It is important to note that the mass spectrum corresponding to any given factor is similar but not identical across multiple sites [14]. From Fig. 9 it is clear that the average mass concentrations and compositions of submicron particles vary substantially across sites. Whereas both HOA and OOA loadings decrease with distance from urban sites, the decrease of HOA is much more pronounced and the average OOA concentrations are often of the same order in various atmospheric environments [6]. The relative contribution of OOA evolves from an average of 63% of the organic matter in submicron particles at urban locations to usually more than 90% in rural and remote locations [6]. This difference in relative contributions reflects the spatial differences in the sources of HOA and OOA, respectively. Primary sources of OA (particularly HOA) are highest in urban centers and are quickly diluted when advected away from their sources. SOA is thought to be produced on time scales of a day or more in amounts that greatly exceed the urban HOA [10], so OOA corresponds not only to locally produced SOA but also SOA produced downwind of polluted areas and thus has a larger footprint (i.e., over wider regions). In addition, the source region for SOA precursors has additional sources with a more regional footprint, including regional biogenic emissions and biomass burning emissions. Figure 10 provides a clear example of this difference in HOA and OOA source footprints. The data points shown in the figure correspond to AMS and CO 2 (as a combustion tracer) gradient measurements downwind of a highway source (I-93 in Somerville, MA, USA) reported in Canagaratna et al. [12]. The measurements were made aboard a mobile laboratory equipped both with instruments that responded rapidly to aerosols and with gas phase instruments, with AMS measurements performed every few seconds [105]. The OOA concentrations were not significantly affected by the highway source and no gradient was observed. The gradient in HOA concentrations, on the other hand, mirrors the decreasing CO 2 concentrations, and is indicative of the effect of dilution as the pollution plume is mixed with ambient air.

(p27.3) When HOA particles mix in with background air, they can also become coated with background secondary aerosol material (i.e. species such as ammonium sulfate, ammonium nitrate, and secondary organic species). Cross et al. [106] used PMF analysis of single particle mass spectra measured with the single particle light-scattering AMS (SP LS-AMS) to show that HOA particles, which were likely to be emitted as POA from a near-by highway, quickly become internally mixed with secondary inorganic and organic compounds after emission. Canagaratna et al. [12] determined the effective densities of the single particles examined in the Cross et al. [106] study and confirmed that they were consistent with their PMF-based classification as "pure" and "mixed" HOA single particles. Taken together, these results indicate that coating processes are likely to modify HOA particles and lead to an evolution of their properties and effects with time.
