# Clinical Medicine A Literature Review of Proton Beam Therapy for Prostate Cancer in Japan

CorpusID: 58539316 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f80badcadff95e865e771a8fdcc53d874399844](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f80badcadff95e865e771a8fdcc53d874399844)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The prostate is a biologic structure found only in males. It is a walnut-shaped organ that increases in size as one age. The prostate is situated as inferior to the bladder and anterior to the rectum and seminal vesicles. The prostatic part of the urethra passes through the center of this organ that acts as a predicted that the use of proton beam treatment for localized PCa will continuously increase in the near future.

(p0.1) Since the proposed project in 1973 by High Energy Accelerator Research Organization on the usage of proton beam particles and the actual experimental period on the year 2000 of less than 100 patients, the number of facilities as well as patients had gradually increased annually with around 24,000 patients in 2015 [12]. With the large number of proton beam facilities in the country, the further increase of patients undergoing this treatment due to the emendations of NHI and the development of medical equipment and technology, it is necessary to know what kind of research and advancements has been done on proton therapy of prostate cancer in Japan. For these reasons, this literature review was conducted.
## (s7) Intensity Modulated Proton Therapy
(p7.0) Intensity modulated proton therapy (IMPT) is the other proton beam delivery technique that makes use of pencil beam scanning that allows larger treatment size and supports increased flexibility in dose-shaping efficiency and dose conformity. A number of hospitals make use of this technique, such as the Hokkaido University Hospital [20].

(p7.1) Matsuura et al. analyzed the distortion effect of the application of gold markers in proton treatment of prostate cancer using the Monte Carlo simulation. Two gold markers sized 2 and 1.5 mm visible on fluoroscopy were used. Three beam directions were utilized for this simulation, right lateral (field 1, ∠270 • ), left lateral (field 2, ∠90 • ), and anterior angle (field 3, ∠0 • ). Biological effects of the dose distortions were analyzed using dose distribution. Improving dose distortion by adding the number of fields outweighs the expanding dose of the shaded region, resulting in an improvement of tumor control probability. Additionally, the marker placed close to the distal part of the beams exhibited minimum dosage, while placing it upstream of the CTV creates downstream dose recovery. Also, this simulation concluded that usage of two or more fields with a marker size of 1.5 mm does not affect the tumor-control probability. However, 2 mm markers require more than two irradiation fields to outweigh the decrease the tumor control probability by less than 3% [32].

(p7.2) A simulation study on the benefit of real time motion compensation was conducted by Fujii et al. in 2017. This simulation study focused on the influence of intrabeam patient repositioning in the real-time image gated proton beam therapy system of 9 prostatic cancer patients which indicated that patient positioning during beam delivery is an effective way to obtain better target coverage and uniformity, while reducing the target margin when the prostate moves during irradiation [33].
## (s8) Comparison between IMPT and PSPT
(p8.0) Comparison between IMPT and PSPT delivery system was conducted in a clinical study by Kase et al. The efficiency of the two techniques in terms of proton distribution to the tumor and organ at risk were documented. Sixteen patients participated in a study of treatment planning comparison between the techniques, four of whom were diagnosed with prostate cancer. IMPT has a greater ability in concentrating the dose to the patient target volume (PTV) in comparison to PSPT, while the PTV dose homogeneity were noted to be more desirable in PSPT. Decreased dose homogeneity of IMPT was due to hotspots near the border of the PTV, while increased dose homogeneity in PSPT can be credited to the utilization of static ridge filters designed to administer constant dose in the SOBP region and the placement of beam collimator close to the patient's body surface. This study confirmed that IMPT can reduce large doses to the OAR, yet it was not effective in decreasing the maximum dose irradiation to the skin of prostate cancer patients. Hence, the use of IMPT is not beneficial in reducing the probability of inflammation. However, due to the decreased dosage to the OARs incidence of rectal bleeding and irradiation cystitis is also reduced. The utilization of IMPT can enhance the dose concentration by around 50% of the isodose line. Another significant factor to consider is the beam angle selection in order to produce the optimal treatment outcome when using IMPT [29].
## (s9) Target Positioning and Organs at Risk
(p9.0) Target positioning is a very important factor to deliver adequate amount of dosage to the target with minimal radiation to the organ at risk. In 2018, Maeda et al. compared bone and prostate matching in terms of the dose constraint in the rectum and dose coverage in the prostate which resulted to more favourable outcomes in the latter. Maeda et al. measured movements of the prostate, seminal vesicles, as well as the rectum at the time of CT image guiding proton therapy for prostate cancer while studying the range difference in lateral opposed proton beams. A total of 375 CT images of 10 patients were taken to assess the movements of the prostate, seminal vesicle, and rectum with the use of bone, prostate center (PC), and prostate-rectum boundary (PRB) matching strategies. Extensive movement of the seminal vesicle towards the superior-inferior direction and anterior region of the rectum was observed. Comparison of the three matching strategies showed that PRB matching exhibited the least positional disparity on all directions specifically in the posterior part of the prostate however, there was no significant difference on the anterior part positioning. The use of PRB matching along with CT guidance image can be more beneficial in decreasing rectal toxicities. It was observed that errors are increased in the anteroposterior (AP) and superoinferior (SI) parts of both the prostate and seminal vesicle, yet a larger deviation was found in the latter alongside its lateral portion. The prostate had shown a higher daily disparity on the AP side than the SI direction indicating that prostate movements are inclined toward the anterior side. In CT image guided proton therapy, keeping the dose constraint of the rectum and the dose coverage of the prostate can be achieved by proper repositioning of AP and SI direction in conventional bone matching. PRB matching showed the least average positional deviation along the AP and SI direction compared to the other two techniques. Bone matching and prostate center matching increased the positional deviations and errors of the rectal wall in the inferior to superior side, but less can be observed in PC. In the case of PRB matching, errors and average positional deviation were minimal around the center of the prostate due to the decreased movement of the seminal vesicle (SV) in this matching strategy. Thus, positional disparity due to SV movements can be better balanced out by PRB matching in comparison to PC and bone matching [34,35].

(p9.1) Fuji et al. conducted a clinical research on the effect of rectal emptying tube (RET) to the rectal volume and prostate localization. Pronounced internal motion of the prostate was observed in the AP direction, agreeing with previous reports [34,35]. The relationship between the reduction of rectal volume and disparity in prostate motion was also confirmed in this study. Internal motion can be influenced by various factors such as rectal filling, bladder filling, leg position, respiratory position, and most importantly, rectal volume. Twenty-one patients had given their consent to use a RET which releases gas from the rectum to mechanically control the its volume. This device is also useful for immobilization of the organ and also hampers rectum shape change after emplacement. Results showed that RET can decrease the rectal volume and prostate displacements in the anteroposterior and superoinferior direction. In comparison with the use of an endorectal balloon, RET placement exhibited to be more favorable as it was able to reduce prostate motion in all directions of about 0-4 mm. Aside from this, the use of an endorectal balloon can cause a distended rectum, which may lead to alteration in the prostate shape and anterior position. Thus, the use of RET can significantly decrease prostate motion following reduced rectal volume changes and it can be more beneficial for patient use than the endorectal balloon [33].

(p9.2) Aside from the rectum, another OAR to be considered in proton beam therapy is the urinary bladder. Takamatsu et al. assessed the benefit of time-fixed bladder control and bladder volume using ultrasonography for prostate cancer patients undergoing proton beam therapy. From March 2011 to September 2013, 75 prostate cancer patients were treated with PBT. Bladder volume was measured prior to irradiation proper at a fixed time of 60 min after urination. Results showed that time-fixed bladder control is closely correlated with bladder volume during treatment, thus increasing the risk of bladder volume inadequacy in the patient. Ultrasonography for prostate cancer patients undergoing proton beam therapy can be beneficial in managing time-fixed bladder control to decrease the probability or toxicity [36].
## (s11) Materials and Methods
(p11.0) Published work on Proton Beam Therapy for Prostate Cancer in Japan were gathered using PubMed database in the second-half of 2018. We went through abstracts and manuscripts written in English with the keywords 'proton beam therapy', 'prostate cancer' and 'Japan'. Research details were as follows ("proton therapy"[MeSH Terms] OR ("proton"[All Fields] AND "therapy"[All Fields]) OR "proton therapy"[All Fields] OR ("proton"[All Fields] AND "beam"[All Fields] AND "therapy"[All Fields]) OR "proton beam therapy"[All Fields]) AND ("prostatic neoplasms"[MeSH Terms] OR ("prostate"[All Fields] AND "cancer"[All Fields]) OR "prostate cancer"[All Fields]) AND ("japan"[MeSH Terms] OR "japan"[All Fields]). In this literature review, everything that discussed proton beam therapy for prostate cancer in Japan were included. This identified 23 articles. Analysis of journals included in this study is shown in Figure 1 using a flowchart by PRISMA [72]. 
