# The Assessment Process of Pupils' Learning in Saudi Education System: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 59399951 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12824c5963cbb352587ddb56ab94a9e135adcf6a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12824c5963cbb352587ddb56ab94a9e135adcf6a)

Fields: Education

## (s8) Teachers' Perceptions of Assessment Practice
(p8.0) There is a general view prevailing among a limited number of researchers that age and gender influence the perceptions of mathematics teachers towards the process of assessment of students learning and assessment practices in schools, reference [31] endeavoured to describe the nature of classroom assessment and grading practices. Their findings showed that female teachers were more interested in the assessment of students' achievement, and used it more frequently than their male counterparts did.

(p8.1) Reference [34] founds that the majority of secondary teachers used teacher constructed-tests to assess the achievement and performance of their students, but that most teachers consider the act of assessment as additional to their busy schedule. 70% of female teachers over 54% of male teachers viewed assessment tasks as extra requirements on their list of duties and did not consider them to be tools for the improvement of student performances and achievement.

(p8.2) Reference [30] showed through an examination of classroom assessment and grading in high schools in the United States that there was no link between teacher assessment practices, ability levels of students, subject matter and grade level. However, age has been shown to be a moderating factor influencing the attitudes of teachers towards their assessment practices. Teachers above the age of forty showed a much higher belief that assessment should be accompanied by grade assignment than teachers below the age of 35. Therefore perceptions and attitudes towards assessment practices of teachers may be age related [25].

(p8.3) The understanding that perceptions affect behaviour has attracted the interest of a number of researchers in the area of assessment practices. Reference [16] studies into of inservice teacher's perceptions of classroom assessment surmised that teachers perceive assessment to be interplay of a number of factors. They found that teachers below the age of 34 attached less value to classroom assessment and used standardized tests more often in their classroom practices. An analysis of gender as a moderating factor in teacher perception did not yield any meaningful results.
## (s9) The Assessment Process in Saudi Education System
(p9.0) There is a close interlinking of teaching materials, classroom management skills, educational aims and educational assessment processes. Assessments are essential components of teaching and learning programmes and play a role in shaping individual learning. Assessment is used in Saudi Arabia to measure student attainment [8] using an examination system and is the only system of assessment used [7]. An internal exam is sat by students at the end of every term with the school year having two terms in all, and the results are used to assess progression to the next grade by combining 50% of each term's grades. This is done in all years of education from primary, intermediate to secondary school [8] Internal exams make up the remaining assessments and are set by teachers, who design their own assessments, within the constraints of resources available to them within their school. The grading system for all assessments in Saudi Education System as ( Table 1) below: 
## (s11) The Assessment Process in Intermediate School
(p11.0) The Saudi Arabian curriculum is rigid and prescriptive with no opportunity for teachers to develop or amend it. It is centrally controlled and oriented on academic subjects [8] with the national curriculum, education facilities, assessment, teachers, additional funding and administration controlled by the Ministry of Education. Reference [8] suggesting that it is characterised by insufficient professionalism in administration of assessments, curricula and data gathering, and he purports that the curriculum lacks performance standards, content and rigor, and is hampered by poor decision making because there is insufficient data to inform decision making. These factors severely affect the national assessment strategy of the Kingdom [7]. However there are those such as [8] who also accuses the Saudi curriculum for being wanting and not providing pupils with the necessary content to inform decision making, with little opportunity for teachers, parents and students to influence curriculum development. The lack of teacher involvement in curriculum development has resulted in this rigid and over prescriptive curriculum, and has reduced teachers to merely delivering prescribed content. Reference [8] suggests that this means the educational system itself can only be substandard.

(p11.1) Policy makers devise and implement national assessments to meet the country's needs. The main purposes are: diagnostic, to identify problems in learning and develop new strategies to help pupils meet educational goals; evaluative, to assess the grading of school performance; formative, to measure student performance compared to the set curriculum content, partially with the view of improving the future student performance; and summative, to systematically record student's performance and grade them [7].
