# A Survey on Color Image Segmentation Techniques for Melanoma Diagnosis

CorpusID: 59407515 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d9ea98775ddd78d937541ec60fb853bfc69caf65](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d9ea98775ddd78d937541ec60fb853bfc69caf65)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) Study of Color Image Segmentation Techniques
(p1.0) In 2-5 Hill-climbing segmentation technique is used. Hill climbing algorithm is used to detect the region of interest in CIE's color channels L * a * b. Count of histogram bins and the image are taken as input arguments by HCA for every dimension. HCA returns a label which denotes a color cluster. 3D color histogram is computed for input image. With this algorithm, most appropriate peaks are found in uphill move. The given image is generally divided into 2 regions by this method as lesion and background skin. Peaks are detected globally by hill climbing algorithm in 3D color histogram. It is a search window algorithm which runs over the n dimensional space of the histogram for finding biggest bin in that window. It is a non parametric simple and fast algorithm. In 6-10 K-means clustering technique is used. On the basis of certain characteristics, K mean clustering method tries to identify groups of similar respondents. The required number of segments or clusters is specified by the analyst. The distance between the centre of the cluster and the respondent is calculated. The process is repeated continuously till the maximum distance between the centers of the cluster is achieved. Respondents are allocated to the cluster which has the nearest center. Segmentation takes place in two stages. For enhancing the medical images through color separation, decorrelation stretching is used. The second step is grouping of regions into two classes. High level of differentiation can be achieved with this method. This technique is implemented to overcome segmentation process of low level images. It is fast, straight forward technique. It is based on heuristic partitioning and unsupervised iterative method. In [11][12][13][14] Radial Search algorithm is used for segmentation. Border of a lesion can be detected more accurately with the help of this algorithm. Intensity lesion image is formed by converting the image's pixels. The initial point is considered as the center of the intensity lesion image. N radial lines are emerging from the center equally at an angle of (360/N) degrees. The border points are found by radial search technique in an independent way, for tracing the border based on the border point of the nearest neighbor. Along each radial line the border point are searched by the algorithm. Radial search expressions are:
