# The diagnostic and prognostic value of CHFR hypermethylation in colorectal cancer, a meta-analysis and literature review

CorpusID: 6077004 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48404c3d11b37026ca324a1847ea9137a82404ea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48404c3d11b37026ca324a1847ea9137a82404ea)

Fields: Medicine

## (s10) Statistical analysis
(p10.0) Analysis was conducted using Review Manager 5.2 (Cochrane Collaboration, Oxford, UK). The pooled odds ratios (ORs) with its 95% confidence intervals were calculated. Heterogeneity among studies was estimated using the Cochran's Q statistic and I 2 tests [10]. The I 2 statistics was used to examine the difference for between study variability due to heterogeneity rather than chance, with a range from 0 to 100 percent. When heterogeneity (I 2 ) was less than < 50%, a fixed effect model was used to calculate parameters. If there was substantial heterogeneity (I 2 values ≥ 50%), a random-effect model was used to pool data and attempt to identify potential sources of heterogeneity based on subgroup analyses. The analysis was performed to compare the frequency of CHFR methylation between CRC and normal colorectal tissue. The frequency of CHFR hypermethylation was compared in different tumor characteristics. The pooled ORs were estimated for the correlation between CHFR hypermethylation and clinicopathological features. P values tailed less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Publication bias is what occurs whenever the research in the published literature is systematically unrepresentative of population of completed studies. Funnel plots were used for detection of publication bias.
