# Beamforming in Wireless Communication Standards: A Survey

CorpusID: 63892404 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/175a8748a7330301557e585526a90471372d42e0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/175a8748a7330301557e585526a90471372d42e0)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s6) rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) standardized Universal Mobile Telecommunication Systems (UMTS)
(p6.0) with the aim of technical specifications and reports for a 3 rd generation and beyond mobile system. Although elementary beamforming methods were an early technology, it was still supported by the 3 rd Generation Partnership Project or 3GPP. The process of forming the beam in the desired direction and nulls in the direction of jammers was incorporated 18 . UMTS specifies three possible modes which are flexible beamforming and fixed beam patterns and none. None denoted that beamforming is optional and flexible beamforming denoted adaptive beamforming and grid of fixed beams denoted a set of predefined beams 17,19 .
## (s7) Fourth Generation -LTE/LTE-Advanced
(p7.0) The Long Term Evolution or LTE standard was developed as a new standard which is IP and packet based. The decade old UMTS networks did not have any more capacity to meets the high bandwidth and high speed demands made by the end user which resulted in the adoption of 4G 20 . LTE was built on technologies such as coordinated multipoint, advanced multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO), heterogeneous networks and carrier aggregation 21,22 .
## (s8) Indoor Networks
(p8.0) After IEEE 802.11 was standardized in 1997, various Wireless LAN standards have been introduced. Indoor environments are known to have severe multipath effects that can cause significant fading of wireless signals and the key idea of using beamforming in indoor networks is to carefully choose the signal applied to each individual element of the antenna so that multipath effects can be avoided and SNR can be improved.

(p8.1) Beamforming is being deployed in various indoor network standards such as WiMAX, Wi-Fi and WPAN standards. Before 802.11n standard was developed, Access Points (AP) used antennas with fixed radiation patterns. These antennas were omni-directional and the radiation pattern could not be changed once used even though manufacturers could use external antennas with the highest range and narrowest beam width 24 . In the 802.11n, the absence of standardization made it hard for beamforming to work effectively among vendor products which was overcome to a great extent by the standardization of beamforming in the 5 th generation Wi-Fi standard, 802.11ac.

(p8.2) To improve the reliability of the Wi-Fi signal, 802.11ac beamforming technology takes advantage of the MIMO system 25 , in which the signals sent by multiple antennas is combined to produce a resultant beam. Any device with multiple antennas can perform beamforming to any other device at any time. But 802.11ac adds the opportunity for the receiver to help the beamforming transmitter to precisely steer its transmitted energy towards the receiver by a process called "channel sounding".

(p8.3) Channel sounding is performed as explained: a NDP (Null Data Packet) Announcement frame to the concerned receiver by the transmitter. When the receiver gets the NDP, it analyzes and calculates a feedback matrix towards the transmitter which is accepted and the steering matrix according to the feedback obtained is calculated. This steering matrix is then used to adjust the phase and amplitude of the signal, and therefore the transmitter can transmit data toward right directions. Thus it is ensured that, in the required directions, the signals get stronger and in the unwanted directions the signals get weaker and the energy is used in the most efficient way.
