# Disease-modifying treatments for multiple sclerosis -a review of approved medications

CorpusID: 6377032 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a5832a11de1c939279fa5d6ad9c641307ca9b6a6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a5832a11de1c939279fa5d6ad9c641307ca9b6a6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a common cause of disability in young adults. Irreversible axonal damage occurs even in the earliest phases of disease evolution [1]. Although some people with relapsingÀremitting MS (RRMS) have a 'benign' disease course with minimal disease activity and impairment, most patients experience increasing disability over time and eventually convert to secondary progressive MS (SPMS). There is still no curative treatment, but during the last 20 years eight different therapies have become available including interferon beta, glatiramer acetate, teriflunomide, dimethyl fumarate, natalizumab, fingolimod, alemtuzumab and mitoxantrone, and several new compounds are in development. All the approved medications have mainly anti-inflammatory effects and increasing evidence indicates that all of them are more effective in the early phases of disease development [2,3]. With the development of more effective treatments, the aim of treatment has changed dramatically in the last decades, from simply reducing relapse rates and slowing of disability progression to preventing all evidence of new disease activity [4]. In the current review, the mode of action and documented effect of the current immunomodulatory MS therapies are briefly discussed.
## (s3) Interferon beta
(p3.0) Interferon beta is a naturally occurring polypeptide predominantly produced by fibroblasts. Its anti-inflammatory effects are largely believed to result from the inhibition of T-lymphocyte proliferation, a shift of cytokine response from an inflammatory response to an anti-inflammatory profile, and reduced migration of inflammatory cells across the blood-brain barrier [5]. Interferon beta is available for MS treatment in recombinant forms, as interferon beta-1a or interferon beta-1b. Interferon beta-1b is given as a dose of 250 lg subcutaneously every other day; interferon beta-1a is given as a dose of 30 lg intramuscularly once weekly or subcutaneously at doses of 22 or 44 lg three times a week.
## (s4) Glatiramer acetate
(p4.0) Glatiramer acetate is a pool of synthetic peptides, resembling sequences of myelin basic protein, with an average length of 40-100 residues. The mechanisms of action have not been fully clarified but are probably largely related to anti-inflammatory effects by promoting Th2 deviation under the development of Th2 glatiramer acetate reactive CD4+ T cells. These can accumulate in the central nervous system (CNS) and promote bystander suppression by releasing anti-inflammatory cytokines [23]. Glatiramer acetate is administered as subcutaneous injections of 20 mg once a day.
## (s5) Teriflunomide
(p5.0) Teriflunomide is an immunomodulatory agent that selectively and reversibly inhibits the mitochondrial enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, required for de novo pyrimidine synthesis. This leads to reduced proliferation of dividing cells that need de novo synthesis of pyrimidine to expand. The therapeutic effect in MS is not fully understood but it is probably mediated by a reduced number of circulating lymphocytes [28]. Teriflunomide is administered as tablets, 14 mg once daily.

(p5.1) Two phase III trials in RRMS [29,30] showed that teriflunomide 14 mg once daily, compared to placebo, reduced the ARR by 31%-36%, the rate of disability progression by 26%-27% and MRI gadoliniumenhancing lesions by about 80%. Another phase III trial of teriflunomide 14 mg once daily, compared to interferon beta-1a 44 lg subcutaneously three times weekly, showed similar effects on the ARR (0.26 and 0.22 respectively) and on time to a new relapse or termination of treatment [31]. Teriflunomide 14 mg once daily has been tested in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of CIS patients with silent MRI lesions. Teriflunomide treatment was associated with significantly prolonged time to a second relapse and a reduction in new MRI lesions [32]. Teriflunomide has not been studied for the treatment of progressive MS.

(p5.2) Common adverse events include upper respiratory tract infection, urinary tract infection, paraesthesia, diarrhoea, nausea, hair thinning, alanine aminotransferase increase, reduction in blood leucocytes and increase in blood pressure [29,30]. Relatively frequent (every second week) alanine aminotransferase screening during the first 6 months of treatment is recommended and thereafter every second month [29,30]. Teriflunomide treatment should be stopped if liver transaminase levels increase three times above upper normal levels. Regular measurements of blood pressure, white blood cells and platelet counts are also recommended. Teriflunomide has a long half-life. Elimination with cholestyramine or activated charcoal for 11 days can accelerate teriflunomide elimination, leading to more than 98% decrease in teriflunomide plasma concentrations. Liver function needs to be carefully monitored during teriflunomide treatment, and discontinuation of therapy should be considered if a serum transaminase increase more than three times the upper normal level is confirmed. Rare cases of pancytopenia have been reported with the use of leflunomide; this should also lead to treatment termination.
## (s6) Dimethyl fumarate
(p6.0) Dimethyl fumarate is an immunomodulatory agent with anti-inflammatory properties, but the mechanism of action in MS is only partially understood. Pre-clinical studies indicate that dimethyl fumarate responses are primarily mediated through activation of the nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2) transcriptional pathway. Dimethyl fumarate has also been shown to upregulate Nrf2-dependent antioxidant genes in patients [33]. Dimethyl fumarate is administered as a 240 mg capsule twice daily.

(p6.1) Two phase III trials of RRMS [34,35] showed that dimethyl fumarate 240 mg twice daily, compared to placebo, reduced the ARR by 44%-53%, the rate of disability progression by 22%-32% and MRI gadolinium-enhancing lesions by about 75%-94%. Compared to glatiramer acetate as an active comparator in one of the trials [35], dimethyl fumarate 240 mg twice daily reduced the ARR by 24% and the rate of disability progression by 17%. These differences were not significant and the study was not powered to detect statistically significant differences in treatment effect. The number of new and enlarging MRI T2 lesions was significantly reduced by about 36%. Dimethyl fumarate has not been studied for the treatment of CIS or progressive MS.

(p6.2) Common adverse events include flushing, nausea, diarrhoea and abdominal pain [34,35]. The treatment may also reduce white blood cell counts and give elevations of hepatic transaminases; regular blood tests are therefore recommended [34,35]. Dimethyl fumarate should be stopped if liver transaminase levels increase three times above upper normal levels.

(p6.3) Recently, a case of John Cunningham virus (JCV) induced progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy (PML) was reported in a patient who had received dimethyl fumarate [36]. An additional four PML cases have been previously reported in psoriasis patients who had received fumaderm [37]. Prolonged severe lymphopaenia (<500 cells per cubic millimetre) that persists for more than 6 months has been suggested as a risk factor for PML. In the case of persistent lymphopaenia, dimethyl fumarate should be terminated in JCV-positive patients.
## (s8) Fingolimod
(p8.0) Fingolimod is an oral sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor (S1PR) modulator that subsequent to its phosphorylation binds with high affinity to S1PR, which in turn leads to an internalization and degradation of the receptor in different tissues and cell types, including lymphocytes. As a consequence, fingolimod inhibits the ability of autoreactive lymphocytes to egress from the lymph nodes towards the CNS. Fingolimod 0.5 mg capsules are given orally once daily [38].
## (s9) Natalizumab
(p9.0) Natalizumab is a monoclonal antibody against a4-integrin, blocking the interaction with its ligands. The mechanism of action is largely through preventing adherence of activated leucocytes to inflamed endothelium, thus inhibiting the migration of inflammatory cells into the CNS. Natalizumab is administered as a 300 mg intravenous infusion every 4 weeks [41].

(p9.1) The pivotal phase III trial of RRMS showed that natalizumab monotherapy reduced the ARR by 68%, the rate of disability progression by 54% and MRI gadolinium-enhancing lesions by more than 90% compared to placebo [41]. Another study [42] found that treatment with natalizumab added to interferon beta-1a was significantly more effective than interferon beta-1a alone in reducing ARR, new T2 lesions and disability progression. Natalizumab is currently not documented to be effective against CIS, SPMS or PPMS.

(p9.2) Although natalizumab is generally well tolerated, the treatment is associated with an increased risk of developing PML [43]. This is a potentially life-threatening CNS infection of oligodendrocytes by the JCV. Therefore all patients receiving natalizumab should be screened for previous JCV infection. The risk for PML in JCV-negative patients is low (<0.09/1000) and is probably associated with recent seroconversion (estimated as 2%-3% each year) or a false negative test. Amongst the JCV-positive patients the risk of developing PML is influenced by treatment duration and previous immunosuppressive treatment. The risk is relatively low during the first 2 years of treatment and increases thereafter. The highest risk is found amongst JCV-positive patients who previously have also received immunosuppressive treatment after 2 years of treatment (~1/60) [44]. Anti-JCV antibody levels seem also to differentiate PML risk in anti-JCV antibody positive patients with no prior immunosuppressant use [45]. As a general rule, it is recommended that JCV-positive patients who have been treated with natalizumab for more than 2 years should be switched to another second-line therapy. Based on current knowledge, a washout time of 8 weeks seems to reduce the risk of rebound effect compared to longer washout periods. In the case of a low JCV index (<1.5), natalizumab treatment may in some cases be continued after thorough information is given to the patient and under careful evaluation for new symptoms that may represent PML [44]. Three-monthly JCV index evaluation and MR examination is then recommended. It is recommended to retest JCV-negative patients every 6 months and JCV-positive patients should be carefully informed about the risk for PML at treatment initiation and after 2 years of treatment.

(p9.3) Natalizumab treatment may induce an immune response, with the formation of persistent NABs (~4%-6%) against the preparation. NABs usually appear within the first 12 months of treatment, reduce the efficacy of the treatment and are associated with higher rates of infusion-related adverse events. Accordingly, patients should be tested for NABs at 6 and 12 months of therapy and later for infusion-related adverse events or treatment failure. NABs can occur transiently and positive findings should therefore be confirmed within 3 months before deciding to switch therapy. Testing can be discontinued in patients who remain NAB negative during the first year of therapy.
## (s10) Alemtuzumab
(p10.0) Alemtuzumab is a recombinant, humanized monoclonal antibody directed against CD52, a cell surface antigen present at high levels on especially T and B lymphocytes. Alemtuzumab acts through antibodydependent cellular cytolysis and complement-mediated lysis following cell surface binding. The mechanism by which alemtuzumab exerts its therapeutic effects in MS is suggested to be by a depletion and repopulation of lymphocytes that reduces the potential for relapses and thereby delays disease progression [46]. Alemtuzumab is administered by intravenous infusion for two treatment courses. The initial treatment course is 12 mg/day for five consecutive days (60 mg total dose), and the second treatment course is 12 mg/day for three consecutive days (36 mg total dose) administered 12 months after the initial treatment course. Additional courses may be given 12 months after the latest treatment course if necessary. Based on the European Medicines Agency (EMA) licence alemtuzumab has indication as a first-line medication in active RRMS. Because the treatment increases the risk of secondary autoimmunity, most European neurologists would use this drug as a second-line preparation, however.

(p10.1) Two phase III trials of RRMS have shown that alemtuzumab 12, compared to interferon beta-1a 44 lg administered subcutaneously three times weekly, reduced the ARR by 49%-55%, the rate of disability progression by 30%-42% and MRI gadoliniumenhancing lesions by 61%-63% [47,48]. Alemtuzumab has currently not been studied in patients with CIS or PPMS and has not been demonstrated to be effective in SPMS [49,50].

(p10.2) Patients commonly experience infusion-associated reactions including flushing, nausea, headache, tachycardia, urticaria, rash, pruritus, pyrexia and fatigue [47][48][49][50]. Oral antiviral prophylaxis with aciclovir 200 mg twice daily (or equivalent) should be administered and continued for a minimum of 1 month after the last dose. Alemtuzumab treatment is associated with increased risk of upper respiratory tract infection and urinary tract infection. Alemtuzumab treatment may also result in the formation of autoantibodies and increased risk of autoimmune-mediated conditions (occurring a median of 32 months after the first treatment), including thyroid disorders (41%), immune thrombocytopenic purpura (3.5%) or, rarely, nephropathies (e.g. anti-glomerular basement membrane disease) (<1%) [51]. Based on the risk of autoimmune-mediated conditions, monthly blood and urine analyses are recommended for 4 years after the last dosing of alemtuzumab.
## (s11) Mitoxantrone
(p11.0) Mitoxantrone is a synthetic anthracenedione derivative and is mostly used in treating various malignancies. It interacts with nuclear DNA and is a potent immunosuppressive agent targeting proliferating immune cells, inhibiting proliferation and inducing apoptosis of T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, macrophages and other antigen-presenting cells.

(p11.1) Limited efficacy data are available, but controlled studies of highly active RRMS have shown significant efficacy of the treatment, as shown by a 60%-70% reduction in the relapse rate (compared with placebo or intravenous methylprednisolone) as well as reduced disability progression and MRI disease activity [52,53]. The largest phase III investigator-blinded study randomized patients with worsening RRMS and SPMS for 5 or 12 mg of mitoxantrone per square metre of body surface or placebo every 3 months for 2 years [54]. The treatment showed a 66% reduction in the ARR in the high-dose arm compared with placebo, and reduced disability progression and MRI disease activity. Mitoxantrone has not been included in treatment trials of patients with CIS or PPMS.

(p11.2) Side effects such as transient nausea, fatigue, mild hair loss (for days to a week) and menstrual disturbances are frequent (60%-70%) [54]. Additional side effects are urinary tract infection (about 30%) as well as elevated liver enzymes and leucopenia (about 15%-20%). Mitoxantrone-induced amenorrhoea and acute promyelocytic leukaemia have also been reported. The treatment induces transient leucopenia, with a nadir after about 10 days, and thus follow-up blood control is needed. Although not in the phase III trial, lethal congestive heart failure and therapy-related leukaemia have been reported, even years after treatment ends [55,56]. Due to the potential cardiotoxicity, the maximum cumulative dose is restricted to 120-140 mg/m 2 of body surface, and echocardiograms should be done before, during and after treatment. Mitoxantrone is teratogenic and is absolutely contraindicated in pregnancy. The use of mitoxantrone has rapidly decreased due to the risk of severe complications and the increasing number of alternative highly effective and less toxic treatment options.
