# Special Issue (April) A REVIEW OF EXISTING CLOUD AUTOMATION TOOLS

CorpusID: 64685713 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb7892111c28fd41d6eba0337e963afaddeca334](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb7892111c28fd41d6eba0337e963afaddeca334)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s1) LITERATURE SURVEY
(p1.0) Authors in this Juve and Deelman [1] paper say that Infrastructure as a Service clouds provide the ability to provision VMs on demand, but they do not give information for managing those resources which are provisioned. Hence, to use such clouds effectively, tools are needed to use which can help users to easily deploy applications in the cloud. The authors of this paper developed a system to create, configure, and manage the CM deployments in the cloud.

(p1.1) Due to variety of the operating system and applications, it becomes very difficult to deploy a large number of virtual machines in a short period. This Zhang et al. [2] paper proposes an automatic deployment mechanism based on cloud computing platform openstack. This system is responsible for the automatic deployment at operating system level as well as application level. They have developed an interactive dashboard for the users which helps them to deploy their systems and the applications without professional knowledge of cloud. This Callanan et al. [3] paper has presented the architecture of an environment migration framework for automating the migration of existing infrastructure, creation, and configuration in the cloud. They have discussed some challenges faced while migrating the applications to the cloud typically security as main along with the legal and compliance issues.

(p1.2) Compute, storage, and network are the primary resources of computing. Provisioning time for deployment of these resources is remarkably minimized by virtualization technology. However, to construct a cloudbased infrastructure, still only data center virtualization is not sufficient. If we go for only this data center virtualization technique, then it may generate virtual resource sprawl. In addition, the infrastructure which is cloud-based cannot construct by only virtual infrastructure. In other hand, physical infrastructure also needs to be automated. Hence, to automate and manage cloud-based infrastructure (virtual as well as physical resources), we need software. For management and automation of cloud-based infrastructure, different modules and their integration are discussed in cloud management and automation paper [4].
