# Dengue disease surveillance: an updated systematic literature review

CorpusID: 6657487 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/78fac8b8426bab0095723c255f65d07197d824f8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/78fac8b8426bab0095723c255f65d07197d824f8)

Fields: Environmental Science, Political Science, Medicine

## (s15) Alert signals 1 (triggers/indicators/thresholds) for epidemic response (Group A, C and D)
(p15.0) Predicting outbreaks through the introduction or shift of a dengue sero-/genotype: six studies (studies 3-8) investigated serotype changes as a dengue outbreak signal demonstrated a positive correlation with the number of reported cases or dengue incidence, although the lag times could extend up to 6 months. However, viral genome sequencing alone would, according to Schreiber (study 6), not have been sufficient to predict an outbreak.

(p15.1) But these events are highly site-specific and are influenced by herd immunity, population size, co-circulation of additional dengue viruses and potentially numerous other factors. Moreover, only those countries with reliable serotype-/genotype-specific surveillance would be able to monitor changes in any patterns. Genotypic shifts were used as an early warning signal in Singapore prior to the 2007 epidemic and initiated an early response (study 3). Taking into consideration the possibility that publication bias (i.e. that only positive results are likely to be published) would have excluded additional studies where serotype shifts were not associated with subsequent outbreaks and that numerous potential confounding factors would have been possible in all studies, it is not yet possible to draw any firm conclusions on the value of this as a measure in surveillance. Nonetheless, the sensitivity, specificity and positive predictive value of this parameter merit evaluation in prospective and comparative studies.

(p15.2) Predicting or detecting dengue outbreaks by syndromic surveillance data: Five studies investigated the value of syndromic surveillance for early outbreak detection. These included a comparison of community-based fever surveillance with school absenteeism in Peru (study 9), and two studies in French Guiana (studies 10 and 12) describing the advantages of reporting dengue cases using a syndromic case definition as compared to routine reporting. The prospective study in Peru indicated that community door-to-door fever surveillance had higher sensitivity than school absenteeism records. In French Guiana (study 10), the syndromic approach detected an outbreak 3-4 weeks earlier and was six times more sensitive than laboratory-based surveillance, but specificity was lower. However, in another study in French Guiana (11), the ideal reporting time of 60 min for a real-time syndromic surveillance approach was often not achieved due to barriers at data entry, while a risk of false alerts was expected, given the high sensitivity of the system. In Madagascar (14) and French Guiana (12), syndromic sentinel-based surveillance built on clinical syndromic case definitions showed promising results, increasing the sensitivity of dengue case detection in comparison with routine reporting and allowing the early detection of epidemic events.

(p15.3) Two studies investigated the value of data quantifying internet searches for dengue information carried out in a number of countries (Bolivia, Brazil, India, Indonesia and Singapore; studies 1 and 2). The curve of the search queries over time was similar to the epidemic curve constructed from surveillance data underlining the usefulness of this new and remarkably simple approach. Study 13 used a real-time electronic event-based approach based on Health Map to enhance timeliness, outbreak discovery and provide an added value for monitoring the ongoing spread of dengue.
