# A Review of the Status of Brain Structure Research in Transsexualism

CorpusID: 6793632 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/597e639e32a039f24bf65f162b65388e6197311b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/597e639e32a039f24bf65f162b65388e6197311b)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s5) Volume and Brain Compartments
(p5.0) MRI studies show that ICV in adult (Rametti et al., 2011b) and adolescent (Hoekzema et al., 2015) untreated homosexual MtFs is similar to male controls'. Moreover, GM, WM, and CSF volumes in homosexual MtFs do not differ from those of control males and are significantly greater than those of control females (Table 4).
## (s6) Cortex
(p6.0) There are two volumetric studies of the cortex using voxel-based morphometry (VBM) in adolescent and adult untreated MtFs (Table 5). These studies compare MtFs with male and female controls that show sex differences. Simon et al. (2013) have studied a small sample of untreated homosexual MtFs. Homosexual MtFs and female controls had less gray matter volume in the left somatosensory and primary motor cortices as well as the posterior cingulate and calcarine gyri and the precuneus than male controls and FtMs. These findings suggest that homosexual MtFs have a feminine cortical pattern. However, the results should be taken cautiously because of the small sample size and the brain statistical maps showing significance were at an uncorrected level (p\.001).

(p6.1) More recently, the gray matter of untreated androphilic GD adolescents has been addressed (Hoekzema et al., 2015). MtFs have smaller volume than male controls in the left superior posterior hemisphere of the cerebellum and smaller volume than female controls in the right inferior orbitofrontal cortex. Thus, untreated MtF adolescents differ from both male and female controls in some cortical regions.

(p6.2) CTh has also been used to investigate brain differences in transsexuals (Table 5). Zubiarre-Elorza et al. (2013) compared earlyonset untreated homosexual MtFs with female and male controls. MtFs did not differ in CTh from female controls but their CTh was greater than that of control males in the orbitofrontal, insular, and medial occipital regions of the right hemisphere. This report was the first to show the feminization of large portions of the cortex in early-onset homosexual MtFs and it concluded that MtFs had a feminine cortical thickness but differed from control males in regions that female controls did not (Table 5; Fig. 2b).
## (s7) White matter
(p7.0) Recently, white matter microstructure has been studied in early-onset homosexual MtFs using DTI (Table 5; Fig. 3a). There are sex differences in FA, males showing greater FA values in important brain fascicles such as the right and left superior longitudinal fasciculi (rSLF; lSLF), the inferior frontooccipital fasciculus (IFOF), the cingulum (Cin), the forceps minor (Fm), and the corticospinal tract (CST) (Rametti et al., 2011b). Interestingly, early-onset homosexual MtFs show demasculinized FA in all these brain fascicles because their FA values were statistically different from the values for both the male and female control groups. The MtF IFOF is masculine because its FA did not differ from male controls'. Curiously, the demasculinized fascicles seemtoberestrictedtotherighthemisphere (Table 5;Ramettietal., 2011b).
## (s9) The Brain of Nonhomosexual Male-to-Female Transsexuals Before Cross-Sex Hormone Treatment
(p9.0) All we know about the morphology of the brain of nonhomosexual MtFs comes from a single VBM study (Savic & Arver, 2011). Nonhomosexual MtFs have the same total intracranial volume as control males. They also show a larger gray matter volume in cortical regions in which the male and female controls did not differ in the study. These regions were the right parietotemporal junction, the right inferior frontal, and the insular cortices. It was concluded that their data did not support the notion that the nonhomosexual MtF brain was feminized.

(p9.1) With respect to subcortical structures, it was reported that untreated nonhomosexual MtFs had a relatively smaller putamen and thalamus than male and female controls although these two latter groups did not show sex differences in the two structures (Savic & Arver, 2011).
## (s11) Brain Morphology
(p11.0) Although thereare fewworksonthe brain morphology of FtMs as yet, several studies have described the gray and white matter of untreated homosexual FtMs. These works can give us an initial approach to the morphology of their brain (Rametti et al., 2011a;Zubiaurre-Elorza et al., 2013). In regards to the gross morphology, the intracranial volume of adolescent FtMs is similar to female controls' (Hoekzema et al., 2015).

(p11.1) There are only two works using VBM (Table 6). Simon et al. (2013) studied seven homosexual FtMs and found that these subjects and their male controls had larger volumes than female controls and MtFs in the left gyri: pre-and postcentral; posterior cingulate; and calcarine as well as the precuneus regions. These observations indicate that certain regions of the left hemisphere are masculine in FtMs. But the statistical maps were uncorrected.

(p11.2) Untreated androphilic adolescent FtMs have also been studied (Hoekzema et al., 2015), and they show less volume in the left superior medial frontal cortex than control females and less in the right insula than control males; this study shows that certain regions of the cortex of adolescent FtMs are different from both male and female controls.
## (s14) Theoretical and Functional Implications of the Brain Phenotype of Untreated Homosexual Transsexuals
(p14.0) Untreated homosexual MtFs and FtMs show a complex picture for the expression of sex differences in their brains (Tables 5, 6). Contrary to some popular ideas, the MtF brain is not completely feminized but presents a mixture of masculine, feminine, and demasculinized traits. This is better illustrated by the data on CTh and FA (Table 8). Moreover, the brain of homosexual FtMs is not uniformly masculinized but presents a mixture of feminine, defeminized, and masculinized morphological traits (Table 9). For both MtFs and FtMs, the morphological traits observed depend on the region and the type of measurement taken. Thus, the morphology of the brain of homosexual MtFs and FtMs strongly suggests that each one has its own phenotype, and that the phenotype is different from those of heterosexual males and females.

(p14.1) In terms of psychological presentation, people with an early onset of GD have much in common with individuals with somatic intersexuality (Meyer-Bahlburg, 2011). None of the above neuroimaging studies included subjects with signs of somatic intersexuality. MtFs and FtMs each have their own cerebral phenotype. This would suggest that early-onset homosexual transsexuals have an intersex condition restricted to the brain.''Brain hermaphroditism''was suggested in the early postmortem studies (Kruijver, Zhou, Pool, Hofman, Gooren, & Swaab, 2000).
## (s15) Comment on the Brain of Nonhomosexual Transsexuals
(p15.0) As noted above, there is only one morphological study on untreated nonhomosexual transsexuals in the literature (Savic & Arver, 2011). This study and our proposed phenotypes for homosexual MtFs and FtMs could help us take the first steps in discerning between homosexual and nonhomosexual transsexuals. Homosexual MtFs are female-like in a series of sexually dimorphic behaviors, while nonhomosexualMtFs are not (Blanchard, 1989a(Blanchard, , 1989b. It has also been hypothesized that the brain of homosexual and nonhomosexual MtFs would differ from that of males in different ways. In homosexual MtFs, the differences would involve sexually dimorphic structures and the nature of the differences would be a shift toward the female-typical patterns, while in nonhomosexual MtFs the differences themselves would not involve sexually dimorphic structures (Blanchard, 2008). Moreover, it was also suggested that''if there is any neuroanatomic intersexuality, it is in the homosexual group'' (Blanchard, 2008).
## (s19) Possible Mechanisms That Control Brain Alterations After Cross-Sex Hormone Treatment
(p19.0) With respect to the mechanisms, it should be remembered that the human brain contains receptors for androgen and estrogen (see above), as well as glucocorticoids (Kicman, 2008) and, what is more, it also possesses most of the enzymes involved in the biosynthesis and metabolism of sex steroids and glucocorticoids (Ö sterlund, Keller, & Hurd, 2000).

(p19.1) In relation to FtMs, it was suggested that the reported morphological increments might be due to the anabolic effects of testosterone . Testosterone has virilizing and anabolic effects that are inseparable. FtMs under hormonal treatment are natal females with supraphysiological levels of testosterone that might affect the normal metabolic mechanisms of androgens. There are several nonexclusive mechanisms involving the AR and ER that could account for the morphological increments observed in FtMs. Testosterone, and its reduced metabolite dihydrotestosterone,canactdirectlyviatheAR.Moreover,somereduced metabolites from dihydrotestosterone (3a diol and 3b diol) can also bind ER. In addition, testosterone is converted to estradiol in the brain via the p450 enzyme aromatase and then binds to ER. Human brain is known to express aromatase and reductase activities (Lephart, 1996;Ö sterlund et al., 2000;Pelletier, 2010).
## (s20) Clinical Consequences
(p20.0) Do cross-sex hormone treatment induced brain changes have clinical consequences? The few existing studies on transsexuals report on short-to medium-term treatment durations and during this period cross-sex hormone treatment seems to be reasonably safe for clinical variables associated with the vascular system, metabolism, and skeleton (Gooren, 2011;Wierckx et al., 2012). However, nothing is known about older transsexuals; long-term clinicalstudiesareyettobe published,andrisksmaybecomemore apparent as the duration of hormone exposure increases (Gooren, 2011). Up until now, neuropsychological research on cross-sex hormone treatment in transsexuals has been mainly focused on the effects of gonadal hormones on sexually dimorphic emotional and cognitive behaviors (van Goozen, Cohen-Kettenis, Gooren, Frijda, & van de Poll, 1995). From a clinical viewpoint, neuropsychological tests that are sensitive to subtle brain changes and tests that are sensitive to the cognitive functions subserved by the structures that experience the most significant changes after treatment are needed and have yet to be carried out.
## (s21) Postmortem Studies of the Brain of Male-to-Female Transsexuals
(p21.0) For the sakeof clarity,this review firstdiscussed in vivo studies on brains of MtFs and FtMs before and after cross-sex hormone treatment. However, historically, the first studies of the transsexual brain were done in postmortem specimens of cross-sex hormone-treated MtFs. These seminal studies are better understood after reading the previous sections.

(p21.1) Allthepostmortemstudies onMtFs havebeen done in Swaab's laboratory in the Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience. They patiently collected up to a dozen hypothalami and adjacent regions ofcross-sexhormone-treatedMtFsandoneFtMtranssexual.With respect to sexual orientation, their MtFs are a mixture of homosexual, nonhomosexual, and unknown sexual orientation and also a mixture of early-and late-onset GD (Garcia-Falgueras & Swaab, 2008).
