# INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 67458118 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0c4f7642b60c8192e60440393b2cdcc6a1407e49](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0c4f7642b60c8192e60440393b2cdcc6a1407e49)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Threats in the Internet are posing higher risk on Security of Information. Intrusion Detection is the process of monitoring and analyzing network traffic and events in the system to detect any vulnerabilities and attacks. Now Intrusion Detection has become the priority and an important task of Information Security administrators. A system deployed in a network is vulnerable to various attacks and needs to be protected against attacks [2]. Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) play a vital role in protecting organization's security. Intrusion is a deliberate unauthorized, illegal attempt to access, manipulate or taking possession of an Information System /Network to render them unreliable or unusable. Intrusion Detection is the process of finding important events occurring in a system and analyzing them for possible presence of Intrusion. Intrusion Detection Systems are implemented using Hardware and/or Software. The aim of an Intrusion Detection System (IDS) is to protect the system from unauthorized access and Intrusion Detection is the process of identifying various events occurring in a system/network and analyzing them for possible presence of Intrusion and responding to the malicious activities. Now most of the attacks/intrusions are network based and the network needs to be protected. Researchers have used various approaches such as data mining, soft computing, Machine Learning, Statistical Techniques, Bayesian Techniques, Artificial Neural Networks and Evolutionary Computing etc. for Network Anomaly Detection have achieved performance improvements. The combination of various approached have been used by researchers for further improving the performance. The growth of Internet can be well-understood by the following Fig. 1. In 2017 there are approximately around 1E+09 hosts across the globe and this keeps growing.

(p0.1) The growth of Internet has brought great benefits to the society at the same time the growing attacks on the IT Infrastructure are becoming an increasingly serious issue and needs to be addressed. Along with the growth of Internet attacks are also growing in parallel.  Fig. 2, it can be seen that the sophistication of attacks are increasing while the need for need of Intruder knowledge is reducing. Attacks range from simple viruses, worms to malwares, Denial of Service (DOS), Network Attacks and Ransomware Attacks. There are several type attacks that do not attack computers but rather attacks on the networks such as flooding. The recent "WannaCry worm travelled automatically between computers without user interaction.

(p0.2) Petya Attack: Petya worm spread during April 2016, this malware infected the master boot record of the computer by encrypting the file tables of NTFS file system. Once infected on the next boot expects a ransom is paid. Again in the month of June 2017, modified version of Petya using EternalBlue exploit and this was aimed to create disruption rather to generate profit.

(p0.3) The massive cyber-attack in history, the WannaCry malware majorly targeted healthcare and government infrastructure in the western countries. India too, felt the heat of WannaCry, however, the level of damage remained substantially less compared to other countries. Various researches have studied and surveyed Intrusion Detection System at various levels. The study of the existing literature reveals that there is a need for an up-to-date and detailed survey of Intrusion Detection Systems.
## (s5) ATTAKS AND ITS TAXONOMY
(p5.0) An attack is a set of operations that puts a system under security risk. Attacks can be classified into eight main categories [20]. Physical attacks: These attacks involve damaging the computers and network hardware. Infection: Some unwanted programmes are installed on the target system that may corrupt the system or utilize the system resources. Eg. Viruses, Worms and Malwares. Exploding: This category of attacks seeks to explode or overflow the target system with bugs. Eg. Buffer Overflow Probe: This type of attacks collect the information about the target system. Port Scanning, Sniffing. Cheat: Fake identities are used to get into the system. Eg. Session Hijacking, XSS, IP/MAC Spoofing Traverse: This category of attacks uses all possible ways to match the system credentials to get into the system. Eg. Brute Force, Dictionary Attacks. Concurrency: This system of attacks compromise the system availability by sending mass requests that the system cannot handle. E.g. Flooding, DoS, DDoS, Others: These are attacks which uses the known vulnerability/weakness to compromise the system. This does not require any professional skills. The target is the systems which are not configured properly Further attacks can be classified into passive and active. Passive attacks are launched to gather information and monitor network traffic. By using this information active attacks can be initiated. Port Scans, Sniffing are examples of passive attacks. Active attacks are classified into four categories by Defence Advanced Projects Agency (DARPA) namely DOS: Denial of Service Attacks are designed to disturb the host and availability of host or service is compromised. Probe: These attacks scan the computer or network to gather useful information about the hosts, valid IP address, active ports and OS etc. [21]. The information gathered are used to launch attacks. R2L: In this type of attacks the user who does not have account in the system gains local access. U2R: In this type of attacks the user who has local account gains privileges of super user account.
## (s30) De-Militarized Zone (DMZ):
(p30.0) Installing the firewall in-front of the DMZ, this enables the monitoring the traffic which are flowing to the public/internet-facing servers. Generally this is a second level deployment as this monitors the traffic already filtered by Gateway firewall.

(p30.1) Inside the Private/Corporate Network: Here the NIDS is deployed inside/within the corporate network. This will monitor the attacks emerging from inside as well as from outside. The scope of such deployments is very limited. A Network IDS can be deployed in two modes Inline Mode/Active: In inline mode the IDS is deployed in a strategic location where all traffic must pass through this IDS. In general, Inline IDSs are placed where the network firewalls and other security devices would be placed [25]. Out of Band/Passive Mode: In this mode the IDS monitors the copy of the actual network traffic and no traffic actually passes through the sensor. Passive sensors cannot stop any malicious packet instantaneously. Passive Sensors monitors the traffic by either Spanning Port or Network Tap. Hybrid (Host-Network): This combines the NIDS and HIDS approach and has the advantage of both the schemes. Target Based: Target based IDS is a variation of standard host based IDS. In systems where resource based auditing is a constraint, this approach is used. Critical components of the network are identified and the IDS is placed at the entry/exit points. Note: In the recent past, Intrusion detection research is mostly concentrated on anomaly based network intrusion detection [20].
## (s39) Statistical Moments (or) Mean and Standard Deviation Model:
(p39.0) In statistics mean, standard deviation or any other correlation is known as a moment. If any events moment is outside the specified confidence range then it is declared as anomalous. These models can learn the behaviour over a period of time and does not require any knowledge about the normal activity initially to set the limits. This model offers more flexibility than the threshold model [30].
## (s42) Artificial Neural Network (ANN):
(p42.0) It is an information processing model that is inspired by the way the information is processed in biological nervous systems such as brain. ANN consists of lots of processing elements called neurons working in unison to solve problems. ANN is also called as Neural Networks (NN). The main advantage of Neural Networks is that it can learn and adapt the behaviour to the changing condition [36]. ANN is very useful in detecting anomalies in network traffic.

(p42.1) Fuzzy Logic: The concept of Fuzzy Logic (FL) was conceived by Lotfi Zadeh, a Professor at the University of California at Berkeley. This method is used in situations where imprecise data needs to be processed. The data are considered as fuzzy sets. Fuzzy logic is a form of multi-valued logic derived from fuzzy set theory to deal with reasoning that is approximate rather than accurate. Fuzzy systems remains controversial among statisticians but this has achieved commercial applications.
## (s43) ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEMS
(p43.0) In this section different anomaly detection systems are discussed based on the core functionality. Application Layer Anomaly Detector (ALAD): ALAD [39] is designed to detect the attacks at application layer. A model on normal behaviour is built and this is used to detect anomalies. Anomalies are detected in inbound TCP connection to known ports. This falls under the category of Statistical based anomaly detector [40]. It uses a time-bound model. ALAD was trained and tested using DARPA dataset. 70 known attacks were detected out of 180 and the false alarm was 100.
## (s48) Fuzzy Intrusion Recognition Engine (FIRE):
(p48.0) This is an anomaly based IDS that uses fuzzy logic. It generates fuzzy sets for every observed feature which are in turn used to define fuzzy rules to detect individual attacks [15]. NETAD: NETAD like PHAD detects anomalies in network packets. PHAD takes into account only the first 48 bytes of each packet whereas NETAD use those 48 byte as one of the attributes. NETAD worked well with DARPA data on 18nattacks which are poorly detected by other IDS [48].
