# Eyelid Reconstruction Techniques : An Overview

CorpusID: 67152282 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/980c381e1b95ba21fe03f1b9c74d73c883580e10](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/980c381e1b95ba21fe03f1b9c74d73c883580e10)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) . Lateral semicircular flap (Tenzel flap)
(p3.0) For the central defects in the lower eyelid, which cannot be closed directly, a superiorly based semicircular flap can be fashioned from the lateral canthal area ( Figure  1, a-c). The flap is elevated in a suborbicularis plane up to the orbital rim and subcutaneously beyond this so as to avoid the zygomatic branches of the facial nerve. If further translation of the flap is required, the flap can be further extended and a back-cut can be utilized. 7 The flap is raised up to the periosteum and moved medially. The conjunctiva in the lateral fornix is dissected and advanced to suture to the margin. The central defect can be closed in layers. The lateral lid would be devoid of cilia.

(p3.1) For similar defects in the upper eyelid, the inverted semicircular flap is fashioned, that follows the downward curve of the lateral eyelid towards the orbital rim and then gently curves upward ( Figure 1, d-i). Once the wound edges can be apposed with minimal tension, the flap is secured by its deep tissues to the periosteum of the lateral orbital rim. This important step prevents the flap from sagging under its own weight, exacerbated by the temporary loss of muscle tone. The primary fullthickness eyelid defect is then closed directly, and the lateral canthus is reformed with a buried absorbable suture. The marginal edge of the flap need not be sutured to the mobilized conjunctiva.
## (s5) e. Cutler-Beard reconstruction
(p5.0) The Cutler-Beard flap (''bridge flap'') was first described in 1955. 12 The principle is to bring full-thickness lower eyelid tissue, harvested from 4 mm below the lower eyelid margin, underneath this remaining ''bridge'' of tissue and over the cornea to fill the upper eyelid defect (Figure 3a-d). The full-thickness flap is divided 4-8 weeks after surgery at the level of the newly reconstructed upper eyelid margin. The Cutler-Beard   19,20 Various modifications have been made to the original Cutler-Beard procedure to address such problems, including the implantation of a stiffener such as donor sclera, 20,21 ear cartilage, 13 and Achilles tendon 22 between the skin-muscle layer and the conjunctival layer of the lower eyelid. An alternative approach has been to raise flaps of only anterior or posterior lamellae from the lower eyelid and to use a free graft to reconstruct the other lamella. Tarsoconjunctival flaps can be raised from the lower eyelid as a reverse of the upper eyelid modified Hughes procedure. 23,24 f. Glabellar flap Defects in the medial canthal areas may involve the skin alone or MCT and/or the lacrimal drainage system. For the skin defect alone, the laissez Faire method which is spontaneous healing of the area is sometimes recommended. 25 The glabellar flap is a transposition flap raised from the glabellar region. The surrounding area is undermined to allow for the direct closure of the donor area and help in transposing the flap into the defect. The donor area is closed like an inverted "Y". It brings the medial ends of the eyebrow together. The MCT and lacrimal drainage system need not be repaired primarily in defects due to malignant lesions.
## (s7) h. Mustarde's cheek rotation flap
(p7.0) This flap is particularly useful for reconstruction in larger defects of the lower lid especially in long vertical defects. The flap is marked lateral to the defect  The flap is usually divided after 2 to 4 weeks, and the lower eyelid defect is then repaired by a secondary reconstructive procedure. This is useful for upper eyelid defects with differing lamellar defects or to preserve additional posterior lamella and eyelid margin in the lower eyelid. Bipedicled lower eyelid anterior lamellar (Tripier) flaps have also been reported with buccal mucous membrane lining. 31 However, the lack of tissue to replace tarsus results in a lack of rigidity in the reconstructed upper eyelid, making it prone to entropion.
## (s8) j. Non-bridging, Non-occlusive Techniques
(p8.0) To avoid occluding the eye with a bridge flap, vascularized tissue must be recruited from the periocular region to support both lamellae. This may be in the form of an anterior lamellar flap in conjunction with a posterior lamellar graft or bi-lamellar grafts supported by orbicularis mobilization (''sandwich flap''). 32,33 Autologous grafts for upper eyelid posterior lamellar reconstruction include tarsoconjunctiva, 26,27 and hard palate chondromucosa. 29,30 Buccal mucous membrane is another alternative, although this lacks rigidity. 34 k.
## (s10) Conclusion
(p10.0) Eyelid defects form one of the challenging areas of reconstruction because of the highly specialized anatomy. The reconstruction of full-thickness eyelid defects is best approached using an algorithm of techniques based on defect size. 35 This requires careful assessment of the defect, including horizontal measurement under gentle tension. Combination of several techniques may be needed in the repair of complex eyelid reconstructions. The availability of tissues, technical expertise, and the specific needs of the patient have to be kept in mind before choosing a particular method. The procedure which produces functional improvement and best cosmetic result and is most convenient for the surgeon, should be the procedure of choice.
