# bioengineering Microbial Enzyme Production Using Lignocellulosic Food Industry Wastes as Feedstock: A Review

CorpusID: 6942921 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6696a4e9a92cb0942b6b7d0a6dfeca0bc91fec90](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6696a4e9a92cb0942b6b7d0a6dfeca0bc91fec90)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Enzymes are biological catalysts found in all living systems. Enzymes are proteinaceous in nature and catalyse a variety of reactions. For centuries enzymes have involuntarily been used in the form of bacterial or plant extracts for making wine, cheese, bread, beer and vinegar, and for manufacturing commodities such as leather and linen. However, it has only been a few decades since purified enzymes have found extensive application in manufacturing processes [1]. A major issue with the application of enzymes in industrial processes is the cost associated with it. Large-scale enzyme production is a capital-intensive process and the application of enzymes in different manufacturing processes indirectly influences the cost of the finished product. Much of the annual operating cost of an enzyme production facility is attributed to plant equipment and installation ( Figure 1). However, 28% of the operating cost is contributed by raw materials [2].

(p0.1) Lignocellulose is a great source of cheap carbohydrates and thus has been used over the past decades as a raw material for the production of a range of high value products, such as bioethanol, organic acids, enzymes and biodegradable plastics [3]. Lignocellulose is made up of lignin and carbohydrate polymers, like cellulose and hemicellulose, along with pectin and traces of salts, minerals and ash [4]. Using food material for valorization has sparked a worldwide debate, encouraging scientists to look for other feasible alternatives [3]. Most of the processing waste generated by the 
## (s6) Food Industry Waste (Global Status)
(p6.0) Food waste is generated from the non-products flow of raw materials, whose collection and processing for reuse cost more than their economic value, and are thus discarded as waste. An estimated 89 million tonnes of food waste is produced every year in the European Union (EU)-27, with the manufacturing sector contributing to over 38% [18]. Waste produced by the agriculture and manufacturing sector is in a concentrated manner, which is easier to collect, distribute and valorise to form value-added products. Steps taken by the industry for higher sustainability, processing efficiency and improving green credentials have led to the development of innovative strategies for the valorization of food waste [19]. Considerable efforts are being made by the European Union, with the implementation of strict laws and high cost associated with the disposal of food waste as landfill, which encourages its application for the production of value-added products [3,18].

(p6.1) Most wastes generated from food processing industries are lignocellulosic in nature. Cellulose is a major polysaccharide found in lignocellulose and is made up of repeating glucose units. Besides cellulose, plant-based food wastes are rich in pectin, inulin, xylan, mannan, glucan, starch, etc., depending upon the nature of the waste product. Being rich in polysaccharides, lignocellulosic waste material is an obvious choice of raw material for the production of lignocellulose-degrading enzymes. Microorganisms produce enzymes that are specific to each polysaccharide component for the release of sugars that can be metabolized for growth energy and cell maintenance. Since they are a cheap source of carbohydrate, the efficiency of using lignocellulose as a raw material for industrial microbial processes is being extensively researched [20]. Lignocellulosic food waste has been studied as a potential media component for the production of various industrially important enzymes-cellulose-degrading enzymes, in particular, because of the abundance of cellulose in it. Several studies have reported the use of various lignocellulosic substrates. One of the most important applications of the utilization of lignocellulosic waste is for the production of lignocellulose-degrading enzymes viz. cellulase, hemicellulase and laccase. Laccase enzyme degrades lignin and is widely used in the textile, paper and pulp and petroleum industries, as well as in bioremediation [21]. Cellulase and hemicellulase, on the other hand, find applications in production of second-generation biofuels, bioethanol in particular. The on-site production of cellulase, coupled with the hydrolysis of biomass on the same location, is an important strategy for cost reduction in the development of sustainable ethanol production [22]. Table 1 summarizes the lignocellulosic sources that have been used as raw material for enzyme production. However, lignocellulosic substrates need to undergo certain upstream processes before they can be used as substrate for production processes. Structural constraints and component fractions present in lignocellulose do not support the prolific growth of microorganisms in order to produce the desired product via fermentation. The next section discusses the factors that influence the use of lignocellulose as a suitable raw material for enzyme production. 
## (s8) Lignocellulose as a Raw Material
(p8.0) Lignocellulose is essentially a complex polymer which is made up of polysaccharides and phenolic polymers (lignin). All plant matter is composed of lignocellulose, and lignin is the most recalcitrant substance found in them. It imparts physical strength to the plant cell wall. It is a complex polymer made up of coniferyl alcohol, synapyl alcohol and p-hydroxyphenyl alcohol [23]. The presence of lignin in lignocellulose prevents its effective enzymatic degradation and subsequent utilization of fermentable sugars by microbes [24]. This calls for effective measures for lignin removal through various pretreatment techniques [25,26]. The crystalline nature of lignocellulose is another major hurdle in its efficient utilization. Crystallinity of the biomass material is imparted by the presence of crystalline cellulose, which, if not converted into its amorphous form, is not susceptible to enzymatic hydrolysis [27,28].

(p8.1) Cellulose and hemicellulose are two components in the plant cell wall, which, when hydrolyzed, result in the release of fermentable sugars (glucose, xylose, galactose, etc.) [29]. Enzyme-producing microbes depend on glucose as their main carbon source. High cellulose content is therefore desired in a potential lignocellulosic substrate. In such cases, the presence of hemicellulose can interfere with cellulose breakdown, glucose formation and uptake [30]. However, the production of different enzymes is susceptible to the presence of specific substrates in the media composition. For example, the presence of xylans and arabinoxylans in substrates has been reported to boost xylanase production [31]. Also, uncommon sugars, such as fructooligosaccharides and inulin based fructans, facilitate better inulin production by several microbial species [32]. The availability of the lignocellulosic substrate and its cost are also important aspects in the choice of substrate.
## (s16) Submerged Fermentation
(p16.0) The submerged fermentation strategy is the most sought-out method for large-scale production of enzymes. Figure 3 represents a stirred tank reactor, which is one of the modes of submerged fermentations used for enzyme production using lignocellulose as substrate. It involves water-based medium within the reactor, which helps in maintaining the pH and temperature and provides provisions for aeration and agitation within the vessel. A sterile environment can be maintained within the reactor with lesser chance of contamination. Submerged fermentation maintains a homogenous environment, with the reactor facilitating better control over process parameters. While this helps optimization studies and the even distribution of nutrients and oxygen to the growing microbe, the presence of negative factors such as butylated hydroxytoluene, hydrogen peroxide and metal ions, which induce oxidative stress, can undermine the whole operation [55]. Several filamentous fungal species are employed for the production of various enzymes and bioactive compounds. Although submerged fermentation is employed for the cultivation of these microbes in the industry, several studies prove that it is not the best method available [56]. Submerged fermentation is not as economical as solid state fermentation due to the requirement of large and sophisticated equipment. A comparative study involving the production of biodiesel revealed that the capital investment required for submerged fermentation was 78% more than that of the solid state mode [57].

(p16.1) Bioengineering 2016, 3, 30 7 of 23 microbe, the presence of negative factors such as butylated hydroxytoluene, hydrogen peroxide and metal ions, which induce oxidative stress, can undermine the whole operation [55]. Several filamentous fungal species are employed for the production of various enzymes and bioactive compounds. Although submerged fermentation is employed for the cultivation of these microbes in the industry, several studies prove that it is not the best method available [56]. Submerged fermentation is not as economical as solid state fermentation due to the requirement of large and sophisticated equipment. A comparative study involving the production of biodiesel revealed that the capital investment required for submerged fermentation was 78% more than that of the solid state mode [57]. 
## (s17) Alternative Fermentation Modes
(p17.0) Enzyme production from lignocellulosic substrates essentially involves biomass pretreatment, followed by employing microorganisms specific to the enzyme that needs to be produced. In some cases, enzymatic hydrolysis of pretreated biomass is a key step in this process, which results in a hydrolysate with fermentable sugars. This hydrolysate can then be used as an additive, along with other media components, for enzyme production. Hydrolysis of lignocellulose either involves concentrated acid treatment or a cocktail of enzymes (cellulase and hemicellulase), which results in the release of two main reducing sugars: glucose and xylose. Other sugars that are released include arabinose, mannose and galactose. Rajagopalan and Krishnan [58] employed this strategy to produce α-amylase, using sugar cane bagasse hydrolysate. However, the inclusion of the enzymatic hydrolysis step depends upon the nature of the microbial digestion of the biomass. Certain microbes produce enzymes as a means of breaking down the polymeric structure of lignocellulose. In such cases, the predigestion of lignocellulose using enzymes is an unnecessary step, making the production process economically impractical.

(p17.1) Sequential solid state and submerged fermentation processes have gained popularity among researchers in recent years. This strategy involves a solid state pre-culture fermentation where lignocellulosic biomass is used as substrate. The biomass is enriched with nutrient broth to adjust the moisture content to 70%. Spores are then added in specific ratios with respect to the solid biomass content. The solids state fermentation is performed for 24 h after the fermentation medium is enriched with larger volumes of nutrient medium containing additional amounts of glucose, and rest of the process is performed in submerged conditions. This strategy was reported by [59] while employing Aspergillus niger for the production of cellulase, using sugarcane bagasse as substrate. 
## (s18) Alternative Fermentation Modes
(p18.0) Enzyme production from lignocellulosic substrates essentially involves biomass pretreatment, followed by employing microorganisms specific to the enzyme that needs to be produced. In some cases, enzymatic hydrolysis of pretreated biomass is a key step in this process, which results in a hydrolysate with fermentable sugars. This hydrolysate can then be used as an additive, along with other media components, for enzyme production. Hydrolysis of lignocellulose either involves concentrated acid treatment or a cocktail of enzymes (cellulase and hemicellulase), which results in the release of two main reducing sugars: glucose and xylose. Other sugars that are released include arabinose, mannose and galactose. Rajagopalan and Krishnan [58] employed this strategy to produce α-amylase, using sugar cane bagasse hydrolysate. However, the inclusion of the enzymatic hydrolysis step depends upon the nature of the microbial digestion of the biomass. Certain microbes produce enzymes as a means of breaking down the polymeric structure of lignocellulose. In such cases, the predigestion of lignocellulose using enzymes is an unnecessary step, making the production process economically impractical.

(p18.1) Sequential solid state and submerged fermentation processes have gained popularity among researchers in recent years. This strategy involves a solid state pre-culture fermentation where lignocellulosic biomass is used as substrate. The biomass is enriched with nutrient broth to adjust the moisture content to 70%. Spores are then added in specific ratios with respect to the solid biomass content. The solids state fermentation is performed for 24 h after the fermentation medium is enriched with larger volumes of nutrient medium containing additional amounts of glucose, and rest of the process is performed in submerged conditions. This strategy was reported by [59] while employing Aspergillus niger for the production of cellulase, using sugarcane bagasse as substrate.
## (s21) Isolation of Enzymes
(p21.0) Isolating the protein from a solid source is a compromise between quality and quantity. The best isolation measure should facilitate the release of the enzyme of interest while leaving behind tough contaminants (nucleic acids, bacteria and viruses). Care should also be taken whereby the protein extracted is not degraded/denatured during the process. Homogenization is the most popular method for protein extraction from the cellular environment. Another method used for cell disruption is ultrasonication. Ultrasonication facilitates the disruption of cells and exposes internal proteins to the growth medium. Ultrasonication techniques use high-frequency waves to cause cavitation on the microbial cell wall, thereby destroying it. However, prolonged exposure to ultrasound can denature the protein released upon cell lysis. Therefore, sonication cycles should be optimized in a manner where only cell disruption is achieved while the protein of interest is left intact [62]. The cell disruption technique is usually followed by centrifugation or filtration aimed at the clarification of the extract prior to column chromatography.

(p21.1) Characteristics of the isolation medium are determined by the conditions that are necessary for the stability of the protein released. The main factors that govern the preparation of the isolation medium are pH, detergents, reducing agents, chelators or metal ions, proteolytic inhibitors and bacterial contamination. The pH is usually chosen to be the value in which the enzyme exhibits maximum activity. However, this may not always be the case. In the case of trypsin, maximum activity is attained at pH 8-9, while the enzyme is most stable at pH 3 [63]. Detergents are used to relieve the enzyme of bonds to membranes by hydrophobic interactions. Several of the detergents used for isolation (such as Triton X-100 and Sodium dodecyl sulfate, SDS) do not denature the globular proteins or affect their catalytic activity. The use of detergents is usually limited to the isolation medium. Detergents, being amphiphatic molecules, aggregate to form 'micelles' at the critical micelle concentration (CMC). This can interfere with the purification process during column chromatography. Therefore, the concentration of detergent used during isolation must be lesser than CMC [64].

(p21.2) Many enzymes have exposed thiol groups which can oxidize when the protein is released from the cytosol to the growth medium during isolation. This is prevented by the addition of reducing agents such as mercaptoethanol, dithiothreitol (DTT), or ascorbic acid. The concentration of these reducing agents can normally be kept as low as 10-25 mM, while keeping the internal disulphide bonds intact [65]. Metal ions, proteases and bacterial contamination are three problems faced during enzyme isolation. The presence of metal ions leads to the enhanced oxidation of thiol groups and may form complexes with specific groups, which can cause problems. Heavy metals can be removed by treatment with chelating agents such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid (EGTA). EDTA is a buffer whose addition can change the pH of the buffer. Therefore, care should be taken to adjust the pH post addition of EDTA [66].

(p21.3) Proteases that are naturally present in the cell lysate pose a serious threat to the protein of interest. The simplest way to prevent the proteolytic action is by adding protease inhibitors. This can be a bit of a problem in large-scale processes, since proteolytic inhibitors are expensive. Nonetheless, other pragmatic measures to tackle this problem include the adsorption of proteases onto hydrophobic adsorbents and adjusting the pH to a value where proteases are rendered ineffective. Researchers have recently established that the addition of doxycycline indirectly inhibits proteolytic activity of tryptic peptidases [67]. The key to avoiding bacterial growth in enzyme preparation is following measures to ensure sterility. Some buffers, such as phosphate and acetate, among others, are more prone to supporting the growth of bacteria at neutral pH. The addition of antimicrobial agents to buffers whenever feasible is also a tactic to prevent contamination [68].
## (s23) Precipitation, Centrifugation and Ultrafiltration
(p23.0) Clarification of the cell lysate to remove all cell debris and other particles is achieved by centrifugation at high speeds. This is achievable at laboratory scale, where crude cell preparations can be attained at high speeds of 40,000 g to 500,000 g under refrigerated conditions. In order to complement centrifugation, microfiltration and ultrafiltration have emerged as advancements in filtration techniques to remove contaminating insolubles. Ultrafiltration is a protein separation technique that can separate protein fractions according to their molecular sizes (ranging from >1 to 300 kDa). This method is fast, reliable and inexpensive, while separating salts and other small molecules from protein fractions of larger molecular weight [69].

(p23.1) Precipitation of a desired protein is achieved by the addition of salts, organic solvents, or polymers, or by varying the pH or temperature of the solution. Antichaotropic salts are the most widely used salting out agents. They bind to water molecules, thereby increasing the hydrophobic effect, leading to the aggregation of protein molecules. The most common antichaotropic salt used for protein precipitation is ammonium sulphate [70]. Organic solvents, such as ethanol and acetone, are also used for protein precipitation. Organic polymers function the same way as organic solvents. Polyethylene glycol (PEG) is the most widely used organic polymer for this purpose. The solution, being viscous at high concentrations, can be diluted with buffer. PEG, being uncharged, can be used directly for ion exchange chromatography, to separate proteins [71].
## (s27) Expansion Bed Adsorption
(p27.0) Expansion bed adsorption for the purification of protein is a one-step method to remove cells and cell debris from large volumes of cellular homogenates. It is primarily a customized version of the fluidized bed reactor for protein separation. It involves a fluidized bed, where the adsorbent particles are subjected to an upward flow of liquid which keeps them suspended and separated. The cell and cell debris pass through the void present between the adsorbent particles. The total mixing in a fluidized bed reactor leads to the incomplete adsorption of target molecules onto the adsorbent particles. In a study involving this technique, β-galactosidase was purified in an expansion bed adsorption using Streamline-diethylaminoethanol (DEAE). Up to 65% of the total amount of enzyme was eluted, and, on analysis, the specific activity was found to have increased 12.6-fold [84].
## (s28) Membrane Adsorption
(p28.0) As the name suggests, this method utilizes a modified membrane to selectively adsorb protein molecules of interest. The advantage of this method over conventional column chromatography is that it circumvents the problems associated with diffusion. Convective flow through these membranes minimizes mass transport resistance, limiting it to film diffusion at the membrane matrix surface. This makes the adsorption-desorption cycle much easier, facilitating higher flow rates, thereby decreasing the operational span. Researchers at the Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University, demonstrated how high-capacity protein-adsorbing membranes can be created from poly (acrylic acid)-containing films by simply lowering the pH. Lowering the pH generated -COOH groups that form sites for ion exchange or for metal-ion complexes to get attached, which can selectively bind to target proteins. Subsequently, they were able to bind histidine6-tagged ubiquitin with >90% recovery from the cell extract [85].
## (s29) One-Step Immobilization and Purification
(p29.0) Enzymes can be immobilized and purified in a single step, and techniques that aid this process are becoming more and more popular. In general terms, a single interaction between the enzyme and the support material is all it takes to stabilize the enzyme, and, at other times, several interactions may be necessary for the protein molecule to remain attached to the support. However, as is obvious, the focus of enzyme immobilization should be multi-point or multi-subunit attachment to improve enzyme stability [86]. Enzyme immobilization and purification via one step can be achieved by following three different strategies:

(p29.1) (i) immobilization via one point; (ii) introduction of different domains; and (iii) immobilization using heterofunctional supports. Immobilization via one point employs custom-made supports that are specific to the target protein based on certain structural features by the formulation of heterofunctional supports to immobilize a specific enzyme via multipoint attachment and, the application of site-direct mutagenesis in the effort to introduce specific domains in the target protein molecule that show affinity to the heterofunctional supports. The immobilization of lipases on hydrophobic supports by means of interfacial activation is a special case.

(p29.2) An example of single point immobilization is the use of antigen-antibody interaction. This is a selective process with high levels of sensitivity, because only the target protein becomes immobilized. Monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies are used for this purpose. Two factors that govern the success of this procedure are (i) the immobilization of the target protein on the antibody and (ii) the prevention of any undesired adsorption. The use of monoclonal antibodies gives the user the flexibility to decide the orientation of the enzyme with respect to the support surface. This is an important feature since it permits the user to choose the orientation where the active site of the enzyme is fully exposed [87]. This may also help in safeguarding the enzyme if the site of attachment is a fragile region which can be inactivated by inhibitors. The immobilization yield following this procedure is 100% and an almost pure immobilized enzyme is achieved [88]. In some cases, the antibody is not specific to the target protein, but to a certain domain that has been introduced by site-directed mutagenesis. Using this step, the correct orientation of the target protein can be guaranteed. Also, any protein with the required domain can be immobilized on this support. In this case as well, the immobilization is almost 100%, with the achievement of total purity of the enzyme, but the stabilization is not that significant, since there is no interaction between the enzyme and the support material [89].

(p29.3) The second technique is by the introduction of different domains that induce affinity between the protein molecule and the support. These domains are peptides that are very small, e.g., cellulose-binding domain and other artificial peptides that are proteinaceous in nature like his-tag. In the case of lipases, it is possible to take advantage of specific catalytic mechanisms. Interfacial activation is a mechanism used by lipases to act on the surface of oil drops. Lipases have a very large hydrophobic active centre, which is protected by a lid which is a polypeptide chain, while exposing its hydrophilic exterior when in an aqueous environment. In this confirmation, the lipase is essentially closed. There is yet another form called the open form, where the hydrophobic catalytic centre is exposed; both forms shift between each other and are in equilibrium. So, in the presence of an oil drop, the lid is displaced exposing the hydrophobic catalytic core and the equilibrium taking up an open confirmation. This property of lipases where they can adsorb onto hydrophobic surfaces is called the interfacial activation [90][91][92].

(p29.4) Interfacial activation can be induced by the introduction of any form on hydrophobic substance, such as an oil drop or a hydrophobic support, or even a hydrophobic protein, for that matter. All these materials have been extensively used for the purification of lipases. The immobilization of lipases on a hydrophobic support at low ionic strength permits the stabilization of the open form on the enzyme in one single step and therefore is a much applied step for purification [93,94]. This process works only in low ionic strengths. High ionic strength during immobilization/purification favours the lipase to be in closed form and favours the adsorption of other proteins onto the substrate. The conventional adsorption process of lipase is not as efficient as interfacial activation [95]. Based on this criterion, lipases behave in different ways when it comes to adsorption on a hydrophobic support. Some lipases require highly hydrophobic supports, while others can only be adsorbed on mild ones. The nature of the group on the support can also be a determining factor for lipase purification. Usually, octyl agarose and sepabeadsdecaoctyl are supports that can contribute to lipase stability by 1000-fold [96]. This protocol is very simple and can easily be used on an industrial level. One of the most popular commercialized immobilized lipase preparations, Novozym 435, is prepared using this technique.

(p29.5) In some cases, immobilization of the protein by just one link between the enzyme and the support is desired, considering the risks involved, like desorption of some molecules, and to improve enzyme stability. In situations like these, heterofunctional groups are desired, with the tag interacting with one domain of the enzyme while other groups get involved in the formation of multipoint covalent bonds [97]. Heterofunctional supports are matrices with several functional groups on their surface, capable of physical and chemical interactions intended to interact with the protein of interest. Some of the groups present adsorbs the target protein, while the rest of the functionalities contribute to making the protein-support interaction irreversible. This strategy enables the purification of the protein by selective adsorption. This method is applicable to large proteins with multimeric subunits. Epoxides and glyoxyl groups are the chemically reactive groups used in this mode of immobilization/purification. Glyoxyl groups cannot immobilize proteins in neutral pH [98][99][100]. After adsorption, the enzyme may interact with the support groups to form covalent bonds contributing to an increase in stability. Increasing the pH can result in an increase in the reactivity of nucleophilic groups on the surface of the enzyme onto the support [101].
## (s30) Technical Problems
(p30.0) Low enzyme yield, low enzyme titre and low enzyme productivity are all mainly caused due to technical problems that prevent microorganisms to thrive on lignocellulosic hydrolysates. Some of these technical problems include the inability to control the C:N ratio due to the addition of nitrogen rich cellulases and hemicellulases, low sugar concentrations and the presence of 5-C and 6-C sugars, causing diauxic growth. However, the major issue associated with the use of lignocellulose for fermentation is the presence of microbial inhibitors: furfural, hydroxymethyl furfural, acetic acid, phenolic compounds and other chemical species. These compounds are a by-product of lignin breakdown during harsh pretreatments. The mechanism of how phenolic compounds inhibit growth is not understood completely. Vanillin, syringaldehyde, trans-cinnamic acid, and hydroxybenzoic acid are some of the compounds that inhibit enzyme activity [102].

(p30.1) The major methods that are used to eliminate the ill effects of inhibitors include (i) preventing the formation of inhibitors during pretreatment and hydrolysis, (ii) hydrolysate detoxification, (ii) development of microorganisms capable of tolerating them and (iv) neutralizing the toxic compounds. The formation of toxic compounds can be prevented by careful selection of the lignocellulosic material and the application of mild pretreatments. Certain chemicals can be used to detoxify the hydrolysate. Over-liming utilizes Ca(OH) 2 for lignocellulose pretreatment and is one of the most economical processes for detoxification [103]. Alriksson, Horvath [104] used NH 4 OH as a source of nitrogen as well as a measure against inhibitors. At pH 10.0, the addition of NH 4 OH resulted in a substantial removal of furfural and hydroxymethyl furfural concentrations, increasing the fermentation efficiency, as well. Enzyme immobilization is also an effective measure to tackle inhibitors [105].

(p30.2) Enzymes have been used for the removal of toxic compounds. Laccase and peroxidase enzymes obtained from Trametes versicolor have been effective in removing phenolic compounds from hemicellulose hydrolysate [106]. Certain microorganisms have the capability to metabolize enzyme inhibitors. Coniochaeta ligniaria NRRL30616, a fungal strain, is capable of metabolizing furfural, HMF and phenolic derivatives. C. ligniaria NRRL30616 was able to convert the toxic molecules either into biomass or into less harmful chemicals. Furthermore, a higher cellulose conversion rate was observed [107]. Vacuum evaporation is one of the most common physical methods used to remove inhibitors. It results in the complete removal of volatile fractions, such as acetic acid, furfural and vanillin. The drawback of this method is the concentration of non-volatile compounds lignin derivatives. Extraction can also be used to remove harmful phenolic compounds. Kim, Ximenes [108], found that phenolics present in the lignocellulose hydrolysate was responsible for reducing enzyme activity. Accordingly, upon removal of the same, complete enzyme activity was regained. The phenolic compounds can be removed by PEG surfactant, activated charcoal and/or ethyl acetate. 
