# A review of acoustic imaging methods using phased microphone arrays Part of the "Aircraft Noise Generation and Assessment" Special Issue A review of acoustic imaging methods using phased microphone arrays Part of the "Aircraft Noise Generation and Assessment" Special Issue

CorpusID: 69840714 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3a4345b524efe03d0ae514474e13be0e45ea6ea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3a4345b524efe03d0ae514474e13be0e45ea6ea)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Physics

## (s6) Reynolds number dependence
(p6.0) In standard wind-tunnel measurements, a sole discrepancy in Reynolds number at otherwise similar conditions can lead to a difference in results. The effect of a varying Reynolds number on the noise generated was investigated by Ahlefeldt [62]. Here, acoustic measurements were performed on a small-scale aircraft model in high-lift configuration at both a real-flight Reynolds number and a lower Reynolds number corresponding to the standard wind-tunnel conditions. Measurements were performed in the European Transonic Wind tunnel (ETW) which, due to its pressurized and cryogenic environment, enabled a variation of Reynolds number up to real-flight Reynolds numbers. Other parameters were kept unchanged. Thus, Reynolds number effects on aeroacoustic behavior were separated from the effects of model fidelity and Mach number M. Several sources with significant Reynolds number dependence were found and exemplary differences at selected Strouhal numbers are shown in Fig. 2. Several dominant sources can be found at the real-flight Reynolds number, but are not present at standard conditions. Contrary to that, sources are present in the standard measurement but not at the real-flight Reynolds number, as can be seen for example in the slat region. Locally integrated sources from the slat and the flap are shown in Fig. 3. The strong tonal components in the spectrum in the slat region measured at the standard wind-tunnel conditions (lower Reynolds number) disappeared at real-flight Reynolds numbers.
## (s19) Conventional beamforming (CFDBF)
(p19.0) The conventional beamforming [5,6] is a very popular method, since it is robust, fast, and intuitive. However, it suffers from the Sparrow resolution limit 1 [96] and presents a high sidelobe level, especially at high frequencies.
## (s23) CLEAN-SC
(p23.0) CLEAN-SC [11] is a frequency domain deconvolution technique developed by Sijtsma and based on the radioastronomy method CLEAN-PSF [122]. CLEAN-SC starts from the assumption that the CSM can be written as a summation of contributions from K incoherent sources:

(p23.1) Herein, p k are the N-dimensional acoustic "source vectors" representing the Fourier components of the signals from the kth source. The assumption of Eq. (10) is valid under the following conditions:

(p23.2) • The CSM is calculated from a large number of time blocks, so that the ensemble averages of the cross-products p k p * l , k ≠ l , can be neglected. • There is no decorrelation of signals from the same source between different microphones (e.g., due to sound propagation through turbulence). • All sound sources present are incoherent. • There is no additional incoherent noise.
## (s24) DAMAS
(p24.0) The deconvolution approach for the mapping of acoustic sources (DAMAS) is a tool for quantitative analysis of beamforming results that was developed in the NASA Langley Research Center by Brooks and Humphreys [8][9][10]. This method solves the following inverse problem in an attempt to remove the influence of the array geometry and aperture on the output of CFDBF:

(p24.1) where y ∈ ℝ J×1 is a column vector whose elements are the source autopowers of the J grid points of the source map obtained with CFDBF, Ã ∈ ℝ J×J is the propagation matrix whose columns contain the PSF at each of the J grid

(p24.2) (15) y =Ãx, 1 3 points, and x ∈ ℝ J×1 is a column vector containing the actual unknown source autopowers. Due to the finite resolution and the presence of sidelobes, x ≠ y . For practical cases, the number of grid points J is high and much larger than the number of actual sources K.

(p24.3) DAMAS considers incoherent sound source distributions and attempts to determine each source power by solving the inverse problem of Eq. (15), subject to the constraint that source powers are non-negative. The problem is commonly solved using a Gauss-Seidel iterative method, which typically requires thousands of iterations to provide a "clean" source map. Moreover, for practical grids, the large size of Ã can become an issue. The computation time of DAMAS employed this way is proportional to the third power of the number of grid points, J 3 . In most applications, Ã is singular and not diagonal dominant [127] and the convergence towards the exact solution is not guaranteed. DAMAS has no mechanism to let the iteration converge towards a welldefined result and the solution may depend on how the grid points and the initial values are ordered [127].
## (s26) Wavenumber beamforming
(p26.0) A different steering vector representation can be used to display the sources in terms of propagation characteristic, rather than source position (Eq. 3). The uniformly weighted steering vector can be written as follows:

(p26.1) which is the representation of a planar wave. In contrast to monopole sources, which cast a near-field-like pressure pattern on the array, the sources used for wavenumber beamforming are located at infinite distance and can, therefore, conveniently be characterized by their wavenumbers k x and k y as a plane wave. This type of beamforming is particularly useful when mechanisms resulting in different propagation speeds and directions are present, provided that far-field conditions apply. This technique has been used to distinguish between noise from a model and duct modes in a closedsection wind tunnel [52] and to characterize the turbulentboundary-layer propagation and the acoustic disturbances of a high-speed wind-tunnel flow [141][142][143] and of an aircraft boundary-layer flow [144]. (16) g j,n = exp −i k x,j x n + k y,j y n ,
## (s27) Linear programming deconvolution (LPD)
(p27.0) Linear programming deconvolution (LPD) [145] is basically a faster alternative than DAMAS to solve the inverse problem introduced in Eq. (15). It considers an additional constraint that no correct model of the beamform map Ãx would exceed the beamform source map obtained by CFDBF y anywhere. This difference ( y −Ãx ) represents the effect of uncorrelated sound sources that were present in the measurement but not in the model, such as background noise, microphone self noise, and long-range reflections [145]. Hence, an approach to obtain x is to maximize the model Ãx , subject to the constraint that it nowhere exceeds y .
## (s28) Robust adaptive beamforming (RAB)
(p28.0) Adaptive beamforming [146,147], also known as Capon or minimum variance distortionless response beamforming, can produce acoustic images with a higher spatial resolution than CFDBF and has been used in array signal processing for sonar and radar applications. This method uses a weighted steering vector formulation that maximizes the SNR:

(p28.1) It is natural to expect that adaptive beamforming could be helpful to locate aeroacoustic noise sources more accurately and better minimize the convolution effects [148], which, in turn, could produce array outputs of higher quality saving the computational efforts of the following deconvolution methods. However, Huang et al. [149] showed that adaptive beamforming is quite sensitive to any perturbations and its (17) 
## (s30) SODIX
(p30.0) SODIX (Source Directivity Modeling in the Cross-Spectral Matrix) is an extension of SEM that can model sound sources with arbitrary directivities. The method was initially developed for noise tests with engines in open static test beds to separate the various broadband sound sources of turbofan engines, which are known to have sizable directivities. However, the method can be applied to any problem where the directivities of the sound sources are of interest.

(p30.1) The source model of SODIX extends the point-source model of SEM by replacing the omnidirectional source amplitudes s j with individual source amplitudes D j,m , which are proportional to the sound pressure radiated from a source j to a microphone m. The least-squares optimization problem features the cost function:

(p30.2) A conjugate gradient method is used to determine the source amplitudes that minimize the cost function in Eq. (22). Equation (22) was first published by Michel and Funke [69,156] in 2008. The constraint of positive source amplitudes was considered similarly as in SEM (see Sect. 3.9) using D =d 2 and solving for d [71]. This modification also increases the robustness of SODIX and makes it converge from simple starting solutions, e.g., an energy-equivalent, constant source distribution that can be directly derived from the microphone signals.

(p30.3) To reduce the number of possible solutions and to support physical results, smoothing terms can be added to the cost function [69,71,156]. The smoothing terms prevent spurious peaks in the source amplitudes and can, therefore, also improve the dynamic range of the results.

(p30.4) The source model of SODIX is based on the two assumptions:  Both assumptions are valid for the sound propagation within a single lobe in the acoustic far field of a multipole source. The analysis of broadband noise during static engine tests with large linear microphone arrays demonstrated that SODIX can calculate reliable results over a wide range of angles around the engine [71,72]. Phase jumps between different radiation lobes become a problem mainly for tonal noise. They violate the second assumption in the source model and, therefore, lead to source distributions and directivities that are not representative. However, the outstanding capability of SODIX is the free modeling of the directivities of the sound sources: SODIX can not only account for the multipole characteristics of the sound sources, but also for directivities due to source interference within coherent sources, such as jet mixing noise.

(p30.5) As in the case of SEM (see Sect. 3.9), the main diagonal of the CSM can be removed from the calculations without violating any assumptions. This makes SODIX, like SEMWAN (see Sect. 3.9), suitable for closed-section wind-tunnel applications.
## (s31) Compressive-sensing beamforming
(p31.0) Compressive sensing [163,164] is a new paradigm of signal processing used in the field of information technology which reduces sampling efforts extensively by conducting L 1 optimization. Reference [165] provides a tutorial example to demonstrate this method for potential aeroacoustic applications. A compressive-sensing-based beamforming method has been developed recently for aeroacoustic applications [166], by assuming a spatially sparse distribution of flow-induced sound sources, S . In particular, a narrow-band compressive-sensing beamforming can be performed using a non-linear optimization algorithm, such as:

(p31.1) where, here, ( ⋅) denotes the estimation and is a noise parameter for which = 0 if the measurements are free of (23) arg min ||Ŝ|| 1 , subject to ||p − GŜ|| 2 ≤ , ≥ 0, noise. A more robust (but more complicated) form can be found in reference [166].

(p31.2) This method has been adopted in the identification of spinning modes for turbofan noise using microphone-array measurements. The required number of sensors can be much less than the number required by the sampling theorem as long as the incident fan noise is sparse in spinning modes [167][168][169].

(p31.3) It should be noted that compressive sensing, unlike the beamforming methods discussed, is an inverse method that aims to determine the phase and amplitude of the source distribution. The linear algebra problems at the core of inverse methods are often severely under-determined. Selecting a particular solution to display requires that the undetermined components of the solution be established somehow. The conventional approach of minimizing the L 2 norm of the solution can give solutions that look incorrect, because they have many small non-zero elements. Compressive sensing can be considered as a cosmetic improvement that tends to cluster the non-zero sources. If there is reason to believe that the true sources have this kind of distribution, then the compressive-sensing result may be more accurate than the conventional inverse solution. Several of the techniques discussed below are also inverse methods that handle the illconditioned problem in slightly different ways.

(p31.4) Compressive sensing [163,164] is a new paradigm of signal processing used in the field of information technology which reduces sampling efforts extensively by conducting L 1 optimization. Reference [165] provides a tutorial example to demonstrate this method for potential aeroacoustic applications. A compressive-sensing-based beamforming method has been developed recently for aeroacoustic applications [166], by assuming a spatially sparse distribution of flow-induced sound sources, S . In particular, a narrow-band compressive-sensing beamforming can be performed using a non-linear optimization algorithm, such as:

(p31.5) where, here, ( ⋅) denotes the estimation and is a noise parameter for which = 0 if the measurements are free of (23) arg min ||Ŝ|| 1 , subject to ||p − GŜ|| 2 ≤ , ≥ 0, noise. A more robust (but more complicated) form can be found in reference [166].

(p31.6) This method has been adopted in the identification of spinning modes for turbofan noise using microphone-array measurements. The required number of sensors can be much less than the number required by the sampling theorem as long as the incident fan noise is sparse in spinning modes [167][168][169].

(p31.7) It should be noted that compressive sensing, unlike the beamforming methods discussed, is an inverse method that aims to determine the phase and amplitude of the source distribution. The linear algebra problems at the core of inverse methods are often severely under-determined. Selecting a particular solution to display requires that the undetermined components of the solution be established somehow. The conventional approach of minimizing the L 2 norm of the solution can give solutions that look incorrect, because they have many small non-zero elements. Compressive sensing can be considered as a cosmetic improvement that tends to cluster the non-zero sources. If there is reason to believe that the true sources have this kind of distribution, then the compressive-sensing result may be more accurate than the conventional inverse solution. Several of the techniques discussed below are also inverse methods that handle the illconditioned problem in slightly different ways.
## (s32) Generalized inverse beamforming (GIBF)
(p32.0) The idea behind generalized inverse beamforming (GIBF) [13] is to reconstruct the CSM by a collection of partially coherent sources. Although a method exists which directly recovers the entire CSM [170], its computational cost drastically increases with the number of microphones. To reduce the computational time substantially, use of an eigenvalue decomposition can be made [see Eq. (7)]. This decomposition breaks the problem into N decoupled equations as follows:

(p32.1) where G ∈ ℂ N×J denotes an N × J matrix consisting of steering vectors g 1 … g J and S n represents a column vector of the complex source-amplitude distribution s 1 , … , s J ⊺ n corresponding to the nth eigenvector. Here, (⋅) ⊺ represents the transpose.

(p32.2) In general, the number of grid points J is larger than the number of microphones N. Therefore, Eq. (24) can be solved as an under-determined problem using generalized inverse techniques. The simplest method is to minimize an L 2 norm, and to generate a source map for each eigenvector by solving the following equation:

(p32.3) where generally ranges from 0.1 to 10% of the maximum eigenvalue of to numerically stabilize the matrix inversion (a systematic optimization method was proposed in [171]). This solution actually serves as an initial condition for the iterative method given below. The resolution of source maps generated by Eq. (25) is, however, still comparable to CFDBF [172]. To increase the resolution, it is crucial to minimize an L 1 norm by iteratively solving the following equation:
## (s34) Global optimization methods
(p34.0) In Ref. [175] a method is presented where the search for the locations and amplitudes of sound sources is treated as a global optimization problem. The search can be easily extended to more unknowns, such as additional geometrical parameters, and more complex situations with, for example, multiple sound sources or reflections being present. The method is essentially grid-free and can overcome the Sparrow resolution limit when sources are positioned close together.

(p34.1) The presence of sidelobes will, however, hamper the optimization as they act as local optima against which the global optimum needs to be found. In the literature, a number of mathematical methods are presented which allow for optimization problems with many unknowns and with the (29)

(p34.2) In Ref. [175] a method is presented where the search for the locations and amplitudes of sound sources is treated as a global optimization problem. The search can be easily extended to more unknowns, such as additional geometrical parameters, and more complex situations with, for example, multiple sound sources or reflections being present. The method is essentially grid-free and can overcome the Sparrow resolution limit when sources are positioned close together.

(p34.3) The presence of sidelobes will, however, hamper the optimization as they act as local optima against which the global optimum needs to be found. In the literature, a number of mathematical methods are presented which allow for optimization problems with many unknowns and with the (29)
## (s37) 3
(p37.0) This method can be extended to treat potentially coherent sources [151]. • Spectral estimation method (SEM): [152] is intended for the location of distributed sound sources. It offers a better dynamic range and spatial resolution than CFDBF.
## (s40) Closed wind tunnels
(p40.0) As mentioned before in Sect. 3.1, removing the main diagonal of the CSM can lead to cleaner results in closed wind tunnels. An example of this technique can be observed in Fig. 8 for a half-model of a Fokker 100 aircraft tested in the DNW-LST closed wind tunnel [61].
## (s43) Static engine noise tests
(p43.0) Exemplary SODIX results from static tests with a longcowl turbofan engine at low engine speed using a linear array with 248 microphones [72] are shown in Fig. 22. The microphones were aligned parallel to the engine axis on the test-bed floor at a distance of approximately 11.2 m to the engine axis. A linear grid of point sources with a spacing of x ≈ 0.25 between grid points is placed on the engine axis, where represents the acoustic wavelength.

(p43.1) The source map on the left of Fig. 22 shows the source directivities as a function of the source emission angle jm that is defined between the engine axis and the connection from a source j to a microphone m with jm = 0 • in flight direction. SODIX models strong sources at the axial positions of the intake and the nozzle. Jet sources appear close to the nozzle exit, which is reasonable for a Strouhal number of St = 4.6 . All sources present strong directivities with peak radiation angles in the forward arc for the intake and in the rear arc for the nozzle and the jet. The dynamic range of these results is greater than 20 dB.

(p43.2) To evaluate the contributions of the single sources in the far field, the source amplitudes were extrapolated to the positions of microphones at a distance of 150 ft = 45.72 m which are commonly used for noise certification purposes: with the assumption of an axisymmetric sound radiation of the engine, the source amplitudes, d 2 , at emission angles corresponding to the far-field microphones [gray lines in Fig. 22 (left)], are scaled according to the 1/r distance law, where r is the distance between the source and the observer. Dotted white lines around the positions of the intake and the nozzle indicate the parts of the source grid that are used for the calculation of the far-field contributions from the intake ( x = −5.4 m) and the nozzle ( x = 0 m) in Fig. 22 (left). The far-field contribution of the jet is calculated from all source downstream of the nozzle region.

(p43.3) The far-field results are shown in the right plot in Fig. 22. The intake dominates in the forward arc up to ≈ 75 • . The sound field radiated from the nozzle shows a maximum at ≈ 115 • and the jet-noise peaks at ≈ 125 • . The sum of all sources (SODIX total) agrees very well with the measured data of the far-field microphones.

(p43.4) The capability to model the directive sound sources of a turbofan engine makes SODIX a useful tool for the development and the validation of new engine technologies. Other methods, which often use monopole sources, would average the sound field over the aperture of the array and, therefore, lead to the inaccurate results.

(p43.5) Exemplary SODIX results from static tests with a longcowl turbofan engine at low engine speed using a linear array with 248 microphones [72] are shown in Fig. 22. The microphones were aligned parallel to the engine axis on the test-bed floor at a distance of approximately 11.2 m to the engine axis. A linear grid of point sources with a spacing of x ≈ 0.25 between grid points is placed on the engine axis, where represents the acoustic wavelength.

(p43.6) The source map on the left of Fig. 22 shows the source directivities as a function of the source emission angle jm that is defined between the engine axis and the connection from a source j to a microphone m with jm = 0 • in flight direction. SODIX models strong sources at the axial positions of the intake and the nozzle. Jet sources appear close to the nozzle exit, which is reasonable for a Strouhal number of St = 4.6 . All sources present strong directivities with peak radiation angles in the forward arc for the intake and in the rear arc for the nozzle and the jet. The dynamic range of these results is greater than 20 dB.

(p43.7) To evaluate the contributions of the single sources in the far field, the source amplitudes were extrapolated to the positions of microphones at a distance of 150 ft = 45.72 m which are commonly used for noise certification purposes: with the assumption of an axisymmetric sound radiation of the engine, the source amplitudes, d 2 , at emission angles corresponding to the far-field microphones [gray lines in Fig. 22 (left)], are scaled according to the 1/r distance law, where r is the distance between the source and the observer. Dotted white lines around the positions of the intake and the nozzle indicate the parts of the source grid that are used for the calculation of the far-field contributions from the intake ( x = −5.4 m) and the nozzle ( x = 0 m) in Fig. 22 (left). The far-field contribution of the jet is calculated from all source downstream of the nozzle region.

(p43.8) The far-field results are shown in the right plot in Fig. 22. The intake dominates in the forward arc up to ≈ 75 • . The sound field radiated from the nozzle shows a maximum at ≈ 115 • and the jet-noise peaks at ≈ 125 • . The sum of all sources (SODIX total) agrees very well with the measured data of the far-field microphones.

(p43.9) The capability to model the directive sound sources of a turbofan engine makes SODIX a useful tool for the development and the validation of new engine technologies. Other methods, which often use monopole sources, would average the sound field over the aperture of the array and, therefore, lead to the inaccurate results.
## (s70) Reynolds number dependence
(p70.0) In standard wind-tunnel measurements, a sole discrepancy in Reynolds number at otherwise similar conditions can lead to a difference in results. The effect of a varying Reynolds number on the noise generated was investigated by Ahlefeldt [62]. Here, acoustic measurements were performed on a small-scale aircraft model in high-lift configuration at both a real-flight Reynolds number and a lower Reynolds number corresponding to the standard wind-tunnel conditions. Measurements were performed in the European Transonic Wind tunnel (ETW) which, due to its pressurized and cryogenic environment, enabled a variation of Reynolds number up to real-flight Reynolds numbers. Other parameters were kept unchanged. Thus, Reynolds number effects on aeroacoustic behavior were separated from the effects of model fidelity and Mach number M. Several sources with significant Reynolds number dependence were found and exemplary differences at selected Strouhal numbers are shown in Fig. 2. Several dominant sources can be found at the real-flight Reynolds number, but are not present at standard conditions. Contrary to that, sources are present in the standard measurement but not at the real-flight Reynolds number, as can be seen for example in the slat region. Locally integrated sources from the slat and the flap are shown in Fig. 3. The strong tonal components in the spectrum in the slat region measured at the standard wind-tunnel conditions (lower Reynolds number) disappeared at real-flight Reynolds numbers.
## (s83) Conventional beamforming (CFDBF)
(p83.0) The conventional beamforming [5,6] is a very popular method, since it is robust, fast, and intuitive. However, it suffers from the Sparrow resolution limit 1 [96] and presents a high sidelobe level, especially at high frequencies.
## (s87) CLEAN-SC
(p87.0) CLEAN-SC [11] is a frequency domain deconvolution technique developed by Sijtsma and based on the radioastronomy method CLEAN-PSF [122]. CLEAN-SC starts from the assumption that the CSM can be written as a summation of contributions from K incoherent sources:

(p87.1) Herein, p k are the N-dimensional acoustic "source vectors" representing the Fourier components of the signals from the kth source. The assumption of Eq. (10) is valid under the following conditions:

(p87.2) • The CSM is calculated from a large number of time blocks, so that the ensemble averages of the cross-products p k p * l , k ≠ l , can be neglected. • There is no decorrelation of signals from the same source between different microphones (e.g., due to sound propagation through turbulence). • All sound sources present are incoherent. • There is no additional incoherent noise.
## (s88) DAMAS
(p88.0) The deconvolution approach for the mapping of acoustic sources (DAMAS) is a tool for quantitative analysis of beamforming results that was developed in the NASA Langley Research Center by Brooks and Humphreys [8][9][10]. This method solves the following inverse problem in an attempt to remove the influence of the array geometry and aperture on the output of CFDBF:

(p88.1) where y ∈ ℝ J×1 is a column vector whose elements are the source autopowers of the J grid points of the source map obtained with CFDBF, Ã ∈ ℝ J×J is the propagation matrix whose columns contain the PSF at each of the J grid

(p88.2) (15) y =Ãx, 1 3 points, and x ∈ ℝ J×1 is a column vector containing the actual unknown source autopowers. Due to the finite resolution and the presence of sidelobes, x ≠ y . For practical cases, the number of grid points J is high and much larger than the number of actual sources K.

(p88.3) DAMAS considers incoherent sound source distributions and attempts to determine each source power by solving the inverse problem of Eq. (15), subject to the constraint that source powers are non-negative. The problem is commonly solved using a Gauss-Seidel iterative method, which typically requires thousands of iterations to provide a "clean" source map. Moreover, for practical grids, the large size of Ã can become an issue. The computation time of DAMAS employed this way is proportional to the third power of the number of grid points, J 3 . In most applications, Ã is singular and not diagonal dominant [127] and the convergence towards the exact solution is not guaranteed. DAMAS has no mechanism to let the iteration converge towards a welldefined result and the solution may depend on how the grid points and the initial values are ordered [127].
## (s90) Wavenumber beamforming
(p90.0) A different steering vector representation can be used to display the sources in terms of propagation characteristic, rather than source position (Eq. 3). The uniformly weighted steering vector can be written as follows:

(p90.1) which is the representation of a planar wave. In contrast to monopole sources, which cast a near-field-like pressure pattern on the array, the sources used for wavenumber beamforming are located at infinite distance and can, therefore, conveniently be characterized by their wavenumbers k x and k y as a plane wave. This type of beamforming is particularly useful when mechanisms resulting in different propagation speeds and directions are present, provided that far-field conditions apply. This technique has been used to distinguish between noise from a model and duct modes in a closedsection wind tunnel [52] and to characterize the turbulentboundary-layer propagation and the acoustic disturbances of a high-speed wind-tunnel flow [141][142][143] and of an aircraft boundary-layer flow [144]. (16) g j,n = exp −i k x,j x n + k y,j y n ,
## (s91) Linear programming deconvolution (LPD)
(p91.0) Linear programming deconvolution (LPD) [145] is basically a faster alternative than DAMAS to solve the inverse problem introduced in Eq. (15). It considers an additional constraint that no correct model of the beamform map Ãx would exceed the beamform source map obtained by CFDBF y anywhere. This difference ( y −Ãx ) represents the effect of uncorrelated sound sources that were present in the measurement but not in the model, such as background noise, microphone self noise, and long-range reflections [145]. Hence, an approach to obtain x is to maximize the model Ãx , subject to the constraint that it nowhere exceeds y .
## (s92) Robust adaptive beamforming (RAB)
(p92.0) Adaptive beamforming [146,147], also known as Capon or minimum variance distortionless response beamforming, can produce acoustic images with a higher spatial resolution than CFDBF and has been used in array signal processing for sonar and radar applications. This method uses a weighted steering vector formulation that maximizes the SNR:

(p92.1) It is natural to expect that adaptive beamforming could be helpful to locate aeroacoustic noise sources more accurately and better minimize the convolution effects [148], which, in turn, could produce array outputs of higher quality saving the computational efforts of the following deconvolution methods. However, Huang et al. [149] showed that adaptive beamforming is quite sensitive to any perturbations and its (17) 
## (s94) SODIX
(p94.0) SODIX (Source Directivity Modeling in the Cross-Spectral Matrix) is an extension of SEM that can model sound sources with arbitrary directivities. The method was initially developed for noise tests with engines in open static test beds to separate the various broadband sound sources of turbofan engines, which are known to have sizable directivities. However, the method can be applied to any problem where the directivities of the sound sources are of interest.

(p94.1) The source model of SODIX extends the point-source model of SEM by replacing the omnidirectional source amplitudes s j with individual source amplitudes D j,m , which are proportional to the sound pressure radiated from a source j to a microphone m. The least-squares optimization problem features the cost function:

(p94.2) A conjugate gradient method is used to determine the source amplitudes that minimize the cost function in Eq. (22). Equation (22) was first published by Michel and Funke [69,156] in 2008. The constraint of positive source amplitudes was considered similarly as in SEM (see Sect. 3.9) using D =d 2 and solving for d [71]. This modification also increases the robustness of SODIX and makes it converge from simple starting solutions, e.g., an energy-equivalent, constant source distribution that can be directly derived from the microphone signals.

(p94.3) To reduce the number of possible solutions and to support physical results, smoothing terms can be added to the cost function [69,71,156]. The smoothing terms prevent spurious peaks in the source amplitudes and can, therefore, also improve the dynamic range of the results.

(p94.4) The source model of SODIX is based on the two assumptions:  Both assumptions are valid for the sound propagation within a single lobe in the acoustic far field of a multipole source. The analysis of broadband noise during static engine tests with large linear microphone arrays demonstrated that SODIX can calculate reliable results over a wide range of angles around the engine [71,72]. Phase jumps between different radiation lobes become a problem mainly for tonal noise. They violate the second assumption in the source model and, therefore, lead to source distributions and directivities that are not representative. However, the outstanding capability of SODIX is the free modeling of the directivities of the sound sources: SODIX can not only account for the multipole characteristics of the sound sources, but also for directivities due to source interference within coherent sources, such as jet mixing noise.

(p94.5) As in the case of SEM (see Sect. 3.9), the main diagonal of the CSM can be removed from the calculations without violating any assumptions. This makes SODIX, like SEMWAN (see Sect. 3.9), suitable for closed-section wind-tunnel applications.
## (s95) Compressive-sensing beamforming
(p95.0) Compressive sensing [163,164] is a new paradigm of signal processing used in the field of information technology which reduces sampling efforts extensively by conducting L 1 optimization. Reference [165] provides a tutorial example to demonstrate this method for potential aeroacoustic applications. A compressive-sensing-based beamforming method has been developed recently for aeroacoustic applications [166], by assuming a spatially sparse distribution of flow-induced sound sources, S . In particular, a narrow-band compressive-sensing beamforming can be performed using a non-linear optimization algorithm, such as:

(p95.1) where, here, ( ⋅) denotes the estimation and is a noise parameter for which = 0 if the measurements are free of (23) arg min ||Ŝ|| 1 , subject to ||p − GŜ|| 2 ≤ , ≥ 0, noise. A more robust (but more complicated) form can be found in reference [166].

(p95.2) This method has been adopted in the identification of spinning modes for turbofan noise using microphone-array measurements. The required number of sensors can be much less than the number required by the sampling theorem as long as the incident fan noise is sparse in spinning modes [167][168][169].

(p95.3) It should be noted that compressive sensing, unlike the beamforming methods discussed, is an inverse method that aims to determine the phase and amplitude of the source distribution. The linear algebra problems at the core of inverse methods are often severely under-determined. Selecting a particular solution to display requires that the undetermined components of the solution be established somehow. The conventional approach of minimizing the L 2 norm of the solution can give solutions that look incorrect, because they have many small non-zero elements. Compressive sensing can be considered as a cosmetic improvement that tends to cluster the non-zero sources. If there is reason to believe that the true sources have this kind of distribution, then the compressive-sensing result may be more accurate than the conventional inverse solution. Several of the techniques discussed below are also inverse methods that handle the illconditioned problem in slightly different ways.

(p95.4) Compressive sensing [163,164] is a new paradigm of signal processing used in the field of information technology which reduces sampling efforts extensively by conducting L 1 optimization. Reference [165] provides a tutorial example to demonstrate this method for potential aeroacoustic applications. A compressive-sensing-based beamforming method has been developed recently for aeroacoustic applications [166], by assuming a spatially sparse distribution of flow-induced sound sources, S . In particular, a narrow-band compressive-sensing beamforming can be performed using a non-linear optimization algorithm, such as:

(p95.5) where, here, ( ⋅) denotes the estimation and is a noise parameter for which = 0 if the measurements are free of (23) arg min ||Ŝ|| 1 , subject to ||p − GŜ|| 2 ≤ , ≥ 0, noise. A more robust (but more complicated) form can be found in reference [166].

(p95.6) This method has been adopted in the identification of spinning modes for turbofan noise using microphone-array measurements. The required number of sensors can be much less than the number required by the sampling theorem as long as the incident fan noise is sparse in spinning modes [167][168][169].

(p95.7) It should be noted that compressive sensing, unlike the beamforming methods discussed, is an inverse method that aims to determine the phase and amplitude of the source distribution. The linear algebra problems at the core of inverse methods are often severely under-determined. Selecting a particular solution to display requires that the undetermined components of the solution be established somehow. The conventional approach of minimizing the L 2 norm of the solution can give solutions that look incorrect, because they have many small non-zero elements. Compressive sensing can be considered as a cosmetic improvement that tends to cluster the non-zero sources. If there is reason to believe that the true sources have this kind of distribution, then the compressive-sensing result may be more accurate than the conventional inverse solution. Several of the techniques discussed below are also inverse methods that handle the illconditioned problem in slightly different ways.
## (s96) Generalized inverse beamforming (GIBF)
(p96.0) The idea behind generalized inverse beamforming (GIBF) [13] is to reconstruct the CSM by a collection of partially coherent sources. Although a method exists which directly recovers the entire CSM [170], its computational cost drastically increases with the number of microphones. To reduce the computational time substantially, use of an eigenvalue decomposition can be made [see Eq. (7)]. This decomposition breaks the problem into N decoupled equations as follows:

(p96.1) where G ∈ ℂ N×J denotes an N × J matrix consisting of steering vectors g 1 … g J and S n represents a column vector of the complex source-amplitude distribution s 1 , … , s J ⊺ n corresponding to the nth eigenvector. Here, (⋅) ⊺ represents the transpose.

(p96.2) In general, the number of grid points J is larger than the number of microphones N. Therefore, Eq. (24) can be solved as an under-determined problem using generalized inverse techniques. The simplest method is to minimize an L 2 norm, and to generate a source map for each eigenvector by solving the following equation:

(p96.3) where generally ranges from 0.1 to 10% of the maximum eigenvalue of to numerically stabilize the matrix inversion (a systematic optimization method was proposed in [171]). This solution actually serves as an initial condition for the iterative method given below. The resolution of source maps generated by Eq. (25) is, however, still comparable to CFDBF [172]. To increase the resolution, it is crucial to minimize an L 1 norm by iteratively solving the following equation:
## (s98) Global optimization methods
(p98.0) In Ref. [175] a method is presented where the search for the locations and amplitudes of sound sources is treated as a global optimization problem. The search can be easily extended to more unknowns, such as additional geometrical parameters, and more complex situations with, for example, multiple sound sources or reflections being present. The method is essentially grid-free and can overcome the Sparrow resolution limit when sources are positioned close together.

(p98.1) The presence of sidelobes will, however, hamper the optimization as they act as local optima against which the global optimum needs to be found. In the literature, a number of mathematical methods are presented which allow for optimization problems with many unknowns and with the (29)

(p98.2) In Ref. [175] a method is presented where the search for the locations and amplitudes of sound sources is treated as a global optimization problem. The search can be easily extended to more unknowns, such as additional geometrical parameters, and more complex situations with, for example, multiple sound sources or reflections being present. The method is essentially grid-free and can overcome the Sparrow resolution limit when sources are positioned close together.

(p98.3) The presence of sidelobes will, however, hamper the optimization as they act as local optima against which the global optimum needs to be found. In the literature, a number of mathematical methods are presented which allow for optimization problems with many unknowns and with the (29)
## (s101) 3
(p101.0) This method can be extended to treat potentially coherent sources [151]. • Spectral estimation method (SEM): [152] is intended for the location of distributed sound sources. It offers a better dynamic range and spatial resolution than CFDBF.
## (s104) Closed wind tunnels
(p104.0) As mentioned before in Sect. 3.1, removing the main diagonal of the CSM can lead to cleaner results in closed wind tunnels. An example of this technique can be observed in Fig. 8 for a half-model of a Fokker 100 aircraft tested in the DNW-LST closed wind tunnel [61].
## (s107) Static engine noise tests
(p107.0) Exemplary SODIX results from static tests with a longcowl turbofan engine at low engine speed using a linear array with 248 microphones [72] are shown in Fig. 22. The microphones were aligned parallel to the engine axis on the test-bed floor at a distance of approximately 11.2 m to the engine axis. A linear grid of point sources with a spacing of x ≈ 0.25 between grid points is placed on the engine axis, where represents the acoustic wavelength.

(p107.1) The source map on the left of Fig. 22 shows the source directivities as a function of the source emission angle jm that is defined between the engine axis and the connection from a source j to a microphone m with jm = 0 • in flight direction. SODIX models strong sources at the axial positions of the intake and the nozzle. Jet sources appear close to the nozzle exit, which is reasonable for a Strouhal number of St = 4.6 . All sources present strong directivities with peak radiation angles in the forward arc for the intake and in the rear arc for the nozzle and the jet. The dynamic range of these results is greater than 20 dB.

(p107.2) To evaluate the contributions of the single sources in the far field, the source amplitudes were extrapolated to the positions of microphones at a distance of 150 ft = 45.72 m which are commonly used for noise certification purposes: with the assumption of an axisymmetric sound radiation of the engine, the source amplitudes, d 2 , at emission angles corresponding to the far-field microphones [gray lines in Fig. 22 (left)], are scaled according to the 1/r distance law, where r is the distance between the source and the observer. Dotted white lines around the positions of the intake and the nozzle indicate the parts of the source grid that are used for the calculation of the far-field contributions from the intake ( x = −5.4 m) and the nozzle ( x = 0 m) in Fig. 22 (left). The far-field contribution of the jet is calculated from all source downstream of the nozzle region.

(p107.3) The far-field results are shown in the right plot in Fig. 22. The intake dominates in the forward arc up to ≈ 75 • . The sound field radiated from the nozzle shows a maximum at ≈ 115 • and the jet-noise peaks at ≈ 125 • . The sum of all sources (SODIX total) agrees very well with the measured data of the far-field microphones.

(p107.4) The capability to model the directive sound sources of a turbofan engine makes SODIX a useful tool for the development and the validation of new engine technologies. Other methods, which often use monopole sources, would average the sound field over the aperture of the array and, therefore, lead to the inaccurate results.

(p107.5) Exemplary SODIX results from static tests with a longcowl turbofan engine at low engine speed using a linear array with 248 microphones [72] are shown in Fig. 22. The microphones were aligned parallel to the engine axis on the test-bed floor at a distance of approximately 11.2 m to the engine axis. A linear grid of point sources with a spacing of x ≈ 0.25 between grid points is placed on the engine axis, where represents the acoustic wavelength.

(p107.6) The source map on the left of Fig. 22 shows the source directivities as a function of the source emission angle jm that is defined between the engine axis and the connection from a source j to a microphone m with jm = 0 • in flight direction. SODIX models strong sources at the axial positions of the intake and the nozzle. Jet sources appear close to the nozzle exit, which is reasonable for a Strouhal number of St = 4.6 . All sources present strong directivities with peak radiation angles in the forward arc for the intake and in the rear arc for the nozzle and the jet. The dynamic range of these results is greater than 20 dB.

(p107.7) To evaluate the contributions of the single sources in the far field, the source amplitudes were extrapolated to the positions of microphones at a distance of 150 ft = 45.72 m which are commonly used for noise certification purposes: with the assumption of an axisymmetric sound radiation of the engine, the source amplitudes, d 2 , at emission angles corresponding to the far-field microphones [gray lines in Fig. 22 (left)], are scaled according to the 1/r distance law, where r is the distance between the source and the observer. Dotted white lines around the positions of the intake and the nozzle indicate the parts of the source grid that are used for the calculation of the far-field contributions from the intake ( x = −5.4 m) and the nozzle ( x = 0 m) in Fig. 22 (left). The far-field contribution of the jet is calculated from all source downstream of the nozzle region.

(p107.8) The far-field results are shown in the right plot in Fig. 22. The intake dominates in the forward arc up to ≈ 75 • . The sound field radiated from the nozzle shows a maximum at ≈ 115 • and the jet-noise peaks at ≈ 125 • . The sum of all sources (SODIX total) agrees very well with the measured data of the far-field microphones.

(p107.9) The capability to model the directive sound sources of a turbofan engine makes SODIX a useful tool for the development and the validation of new engine technologies. Other methods, which often use monopole sources, would average the sound field over the aperture of the array and, therefore, lead to the inaccurate results.
