# A Review of Wearable IMU (Inertial-Measurement-Unit)- based Pose Estimation and Drift Reduction Technologies

CorpusID: 70056454 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b984cb2fdbaf8f8a93f47cc9281cc64f67b5bd6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b984cb2fdbaf8f8a93f47cc9281cc64f67b5bd6)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Physics

## (s0) Introduction (Heading 1)
(p0.0) Accurate tracking of the orientation of a rigid object is important in several domains, such as sports training, rehabilitation and animation [1][2][3][4]. Several technologies and approaches are available to produce motion tracking systems (trackers). However, most current sensing approaches for motion tracking need the availability of external sources, e.g., cameras for optical trackers, ultrasonic/electromagnetic transmitters for acoustic/electromagnetic trackers. Usually, the sources can operate only over relatively short distances, which makes the trackers highly susceptible to interference and line-of-sight occlusion (shadowing): hence, proper functioning of these trackers is only possible within carefully controlled experimental setups (motion analysis laboratories). This fact precludes, for instance, the quantitative assessment of the behavior of a human subject in unrestrained.
## (s5) Fusion of IMU Data
(p5.0) Although both accelerometer and gyroscope can work for orientation estimation alone, either of them have its own limitation in application [12]. Only when the IMU keeps still or moves in a very slow motion, the accelerometer is effective. High motion speed will bring high frequency noise to its acceleration measurement. On the other hand, the gyroscope works well only when the IMU rotates fast, for the drifts in still situation will be integrated through time and cause big errors. To solve the problem, like Kalman Filter, the most common data fusion algorithms, should be applied. The block diagram of orientation estimation principles for an IMU is shown in Fig. 2. There are several ways to fuse the IMU data. Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) is the most popular and famous algorithm . EKF use a state vector and a measurement vector which composed of rotation quaternion ⃗ of the femoral head and gyro bias vector ⃗ . ⃗ and ⃗ are noise vectors of accelerometer and magnetometer respectively. The state vector ⃗ could be expressed as

(p5.1) The nonlinearity is introduced by the exponential term in the matrix. By stacking the accelerometer ⃗ and magnetometer measurement vectors ⃗ , as shown in (20), the measurement vector ⃗ of the proposed Kalman filter is constructed.
