# A Review and Meta-Analysis of Age-Based Stereotype Threat: Negative Stereotypes, Not Facts, Do the Damage

CorpusID: 7111481 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f890af1011eb2b97e6da62f0a0f3ffa419600946](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f890af1011eb2b97e6da62f0a0f3ffa419600946)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s1) Experimental Differences
(p1.0) Experimental manipulations of ABST. A variety of manipulations have been used to test ABST. Some manipulations explicitly state negative expectations regarding aging whereas others subtly reference the relevance of the task to age stereotypes.

(p1.1) Previous meta-analyses of stereotype threat effects have compared explicit/implicit or blatant/subtle stereotype threat manipulations (Nadler & Clarke, 2011;Nguyen & Ryan, 2008). However, we propose that stereotype threat manipulations can be categorized more clearly based on their factual content versus allusion to a stereotype, which we label fact-based and stereotype-based manipulations, respectively.
## (s7) Retrieval and Independence of Effect Sizes
(p7.0) Multiple effect sizes obtained from different studies within an article were considered to be statistically independent. However, multiple effect sizes were sometimes obtained from individual studies whereby both control and nullification conditions were included in comparison with the threat condition. Effect sizes sharing participants (N) due to the inclusion of both baseline conditions (control and nullification) were considered to be independent tests based on the distinct comparison that they form with the threat condition.

(p7.1) In addition, some experiments included more than one type of dependent variable, each yielding its own effect size. Although all studies with multiple dependent variables measured them within the same session, the sequence of measurement is a potential confound; for example, effects may become weaker if measured later rather than earlier. Also, in Horton et al.'s (2010) study the ABST manipulation was followed by measures of walking speed, physical self-description, and recall performance. After that, measures of reaction time (RT), grip strength, and flexibility were counterbalanced. To try to accommodate effects of differences in sequential measurement position of any particular dependent measure we conducted separate analyses for dependent measures that were recorded at different points (placements) in the sequence. Specifically, we distinguished effect sizes from measures that were either the sole dependent variable or that were taken earliest in a sequence after the ABST manipulation (first placement), and those that were from studies with multiple dependent variables and where the measure was either in the second, or in third or subsequent placements in the sequence. We recognize that even this approach does not account for situations in which a series of performance measures is also preceded by or interspersed with other measures, such as evaluation apprehension (Chasteen et al., 2005), expected performance (Desrichard & Kopetz, 2005) or an Implicit Association Test (Hess et al., 2003). The implications of the inclusion and placement of other types of dependent variable could be investigated once there is a larger set of studies available but is beyond the scope of the present analysis.

(p7.2) Effect size, N, and degrees-of-freedom (df) were obtained for all tests of ABST and are summarized in Table 1. Positive effect sizes indicate that the performance outcomes were in line with stereotype threat predictions whereby threat reduced performance. The standard mean difference between conditions (d) was computed from means and standard deviations or from alternative effect sizes 
## (s12) Publication Bias
(p12.0) As identified by Rosenthal (1979), unattained unpublished studies may exist that represent a bias against the publication of nonsignificant results. Moderator analyses show that article status (published vs. not) significantly predicted variability in effect sizes (Q between (1) ϭ 6.73, p Ͻ .01). The effect size is significant in published research (mean d ϭ .42), but not in unpublished research (mean d ϭ Ϫ.03). This confirms that there is bias toward the publication of significant ABST results. Both published and unpublished work in this area has been included in all further analyses to better estimate the true effects.

(p12.1) Further tests were conducted on the combined published and unpublished studies to identify whether it is likely that additional unpublished studies still exist. A nonsignificant correlation between effect size and sample size, r(51) ϭ .04, p ϭ .79, and a nonsignificant result using Eggers's regression (␤ ϭ 5.23, p ϭ .36) suggest that our findings are not biased by the overrepresentation of smaller significant studies within the meta-analysis. A funnel plot (see Figure 1) also shows no obvious publication bias based on its symmetry around the population effect size. The plot shows that studies with lower standard errors (an indicator of precision) show less variability in effect sizes, as with an unbiased sample. Therefore, assuming we have a complete sample of unpublished studies, and given that these do not differ in sample size from the published studies, it seems reasonable to conclude that the most robust estimate of the overall meta-analytic effect size should include both published and unpublished studies.
## (s18) Age and Gender
(p18.0) Some previous research (Hess & Hinson, 2006; suggests that ABST would have stronger effects at the start than later in old age, due to the initially increased salience and significance of stereotypes of aging. Alternatively, the relevance of ABST might simply increase with age. Although both possibilities seem plausible, the present analysis is the first to test these possibilities meta-analytically, and revealed there were no effects of participant's age. Moreover, although older women were expected to experience greater ABST effects due to their potential to identify with two negatively stereotyped "threatened" groups, there was no support for that hypothesis either. As discussed below, these "null" findings do not rule out the possibility that age and gender moderate ABST, but they confirm that such moderation does not arise within the age range of the available studies.
## (s20) Comparison of Stereotype Threats
(p20.0) The ABST effect of .28 in the current meta-analysis is in line with Nguyen and Ryan's (2008) findings for gender (d ϭ .21) and race/ethnicity (d ϭ .32). Yet, Nadler and Clarke's (2011) metaanalysis found larger effects among African Americans (d ϭ .47), and Hispanic Americans (d ϭ .58), as did Walton and Spencer (2009) when combining effect sizes for both women and ethnic minorities (d ϭ .48). However, age and gender are not numerical minorities and they also cross-cut other category memberships. Therefore, lower average effect sizes may mask important variation due to other group memberships within levels of gender or age.

(p20.1) We found no effects of control versus nullification baselines on ABST, however, gender-based stereotype threat effects are greater when compared with nullification baselines, and ethnicity-based stereotype threat effects are greater when compared with control baselines (Nguyen & Ryan, 2008). These differences reinforce the point that differences in group characteristics can lead to differences in the experience of stereotype threat (Shapiro, 2011).
