# Paracetamol: a review with specific focus on the haemodynamic effects of intravenous administration

CorpusID: 723440 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/685811bf5b94d01a9e75c8a7a13525a2e29f9ffd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/685811bf5b94d01a9e75c8a7a13525a2e29f9ffd)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) IV Propacetamol
(p2.0) In its raw form, paracetamol has negligible solubility in water and, in aqueous mediums; it is highly sensitive to oxygen and light. As a result, the first formulation of IV paracetamol contained the active ingredient propacetamol hydrochloride. Intravenous propacetamol was produced by Bristol-Myers Squibb, France, in 1985 under the trade name Pro-dafalgan. Propacetamol is rapidly hydrolysed in a 1:1 ratio to produce paracetamol and N,N-diethylglycine by non-specific plasma esterases. Every 2 g of propacetamol yields a total of 1g paracetamol. Pro-dafalgan vials consist of a white, odourless crystalline propacetamol powder that requires reconstitution in a solvent such as glucose, water or sodium citrate. In solution, propacetamol is unstable and requires immediate infusion after reconstitution to avoid degradation. It was found to be an efficacious antipyretic and analgesic, able to produce a faster response compared to oral and rectal formulations (21). However, in the 1990s, several reports of contact dermatitis, due to the skin-sensitizing effects of the phenyl ester N,N-diethylglycine, and complaints of pain on infusion, prompted reconsideration of Pro-dafalgan (22). Its use has since been discontinued in medical practice.
## (s6) The haemodynamic effects of intravenous paracetamol
(p6.0) Most studies have focused on adverse effects associated with liver (33,34) and renal function (35,36), the impact of malnutrition and other rare occurring reactions such as thrombocytopaenia (37), anaphylaxis (38) or hypersensitivity and paracetamolinduced asthma (39). However, they are generally associated with chronic use and overdose, and are universal to paracetamol in general rather than the IV formulation in particular. The literature with respect to the acute side effects of IV paracetamol is limited; however these effects are clinically as important, if not more important, given how frequently the drug is administered intravenously to hospitalized patients.
## (s7) Intravenous paracetamol-induced hypotension
(p7.0) Adequate maintenance of haemodynamic stability is often a determining factor before a patient can be discharged from the intensive care unit. Recent studies have linked the use of IV paracetamol with transient hypotension in the critically ill (8,(10)(11)(12)(13)(14)(15)(16). This may also be clinically relevant to surgical patients. Preoperative risk factors have long been used as an indicator of postoperative morbidity risk. However, there are only a few studies correlating the impact of intraoperative haemodynamic changes to poorer outcomes in the postoperative recovery. Tassoudis et al. found that an increased incidence of intraoperative hypotensive events was associated with morbidity and longer hospital stays (17). Hypotension, even if transient, should therefore be avoided. Given that IV paracetamol is ubiquitously used in the hospital setting further studies are required to explore its haemodynamic effects in this setting.
## (s8) Paracetamol-induced hypertension
(p8.0) In a study comparing effervescent para-cetamol to normal oral paracetamol tablets, clinicians were warned of the potential for effervescent paracetamol to cause a rise blood pressure (42). The sodium content of effervescent paracetamol was implicated in this effect. Forman et al. conducted two studies that have established a relationship between the frequency of paracetamol use (oral tablets) and the incidence of hypertension in both male and female healthcare workers (43,44). A myriad of possible reasons for this effect were discussed, such as inhibition of vasodilatory prostaglandins and effects on endothelial function. However, the study failed to acknowledge the type of paracetamol tablet taken. This may be of considerable importance, because sodium content varies greatly. In fact, if participants in the study were taking Panadol Actifast (346 mg sodium per 2 tablets) at the manufacturer's recommended daily dosage, they would have ingested 1.38 g of sodium per day. It is therefore important to assess the effects of any additional compounds in all the formulations of paracetamol. This may be especially true for the IV formulations, considering its potential to cause hypotension.
## (s9) Mannitol -an understudied excipient
(p9.0) Given that the therapeutic effect of IV propacetamol and IV paracetamol is comparable, it is imperative to identify any differences between the formulations in order to diagnose any possible cause for the observed haemodynamic changes. The currently used preparation of IV paracetamol is ready-to-use and available in solution due to the addition of stabilizing compounds. There are currently four major pharmaceutical companies that offer formulations of IV paracetamol ( Table 3).

(p9.1) Of these, three companies utilize mannitol as the stabilizing compound. Pfizer is the only company that provides a mannitol-free infusion of IV paracetamol. Mannitol is secreted into the lumen of the nephron and causes a fluid shift resulting in increased urine production secondary to natriuresis. Due to osmotic forces, water is drawn from the peritubular blood and into the lumen of the nephron producing an increased volume of urine. Consequently, a reduction in blood volume may be expected to occur with the increased production of urine. Previously, mannitol was found to cause a redirection of systemic blood volume to the kidneys, which most likely exacerbates the subsequent decreased blood volume associated with its use (45). Hypovolaemia is a common cause of hypotension. The diuretic nature of mannitol, even in small doses, has been reported to cause episodes of transient hypotension (46). For the sake of consistency, studies that failed to observe haemodynamic changes but used (mannitol-free) IV propacetamol as a substitute for IV paracetamol should be considered separately in any analyses of the haemodynamic effects of IV paracetamol. IV paracetamol (Actavis), Perfalgan (Bristol-Myers Squibb) and Ofirmev (Cadence Pharmaceuticals) contain close to 4 g of mannitol within a single 1g/100mL infusion of IV paracetamol solution (Table 4).
## (s15) IV Paracetamol
(p15.0) Other studies suggest that IV paracetamol may continue to reduce blood pressure up to 120 minutes after infusion. However, without knowing exactly which formulation was offered, the reasons for hypotension and whether such changes are due to mannitol or paracetamol remains unclear.

(p15.1) While the diuretic effect of mannitol is likely to contribute to hypotension, mannitol may be useful in other clinical settings. These are summarized with their corresponding dosages in Table 4. IV paracetamol is administered in an infusion over a 15 minute time period. When the recommended dosage of mannitol is calibrated over the prescribed infusion time of IV paracetamol, the concentration of mannitol in a single dose of IV paracetamol exceeds the therapeutic range for the treatment of diuresis and oliguria and is within the therapeutic range for the treatment of intraocular pressure. In the absence of uraemia, mannitol has a half-life of 127 minutes (50). With such a high dose of mannitol in IV paracetamol, it appears that a single infusion may effectively administer pharmacologically viable concentrations of two pharmaceuticals. Whether IV paracetamol can induce a reduction in intraocular pressure remains unsubstantiated. However, it is plausible that the mannitol found in the IV paracetamol formulations may cause enough of a diuretic effect to induce hypotension.
