# Multiple sclerosis epidemiology in Latin America: An updated survey

CorpusID: 7298712 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5bf27075ef232d7f26965bb2ecd826fc66c2720c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5bf27075ef232d7f26965bb2ecd826fc66c2720c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Assessment of risk of bias
(p4.0) Methodological quality used in the reviewed studies and risk of bias was assessed by two reviewers using a modified checklist available in Strengthening the Reporting of Observational studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) 12 and in Fowkes and Fulton. 13 We estimated a bias risk summary considering six criteria: methods for selecting study participants, methods for measuring exposure and outcome variables, methods to control confounding, design-specific sources of bias, comparability among groups and statistical methods and declaration of conflicts of interest.
## (s6) Discussion
(p6.0) During the last decade, there has been a surge of interest in the epidemiology of MS in LATAM, and several investigations have begun to provide a reasonable estimate of the disease in the region. In this updated review of the frequency of MS in LATAM, we found that the incidence reported ranged from 0.15 to 3 cases per 100,000 personyears. Prevalence ranged from 0.75 to 38.2 cases per 100,000 inhabitants in 13 studies analyzed.

(p6.1) Reported prevalence and incidence of MS in the region were substantially lower than data found in developed countries, even we observed significant differences between countries from LATAM. 6 Reasons for these differences were attributed to certain environmental and genetic factors. 39,40 The distribution of population genetics in LATAM could account for the observed differences. As previously mentioned, a complex mixture between Andean natives with European and African immigrants resulted in a concentration of the Caucasian population in the southern regions of the continent whereas in Colombia and the northern region, the population is predominately Mestizo. 6 It is possible that the Caucasian population has a higher risk of MS than the non-Caucasian population as previously described. Risco et al. found a continental South-North gradient in LATAM between Panama and Argentina; however, they did not find a clear trend of increasing MS prevalence and latitude within Colombia, Ecuador or Argentina, suggesting that other human factors such as ethnicity play an important role in determining the geographic distribution of MS regardless of the impact of latitude. 6 Cabre et al. evaluated the role of migration in the frequency of the disease in French West Indies. 41 They found that the prevalence of MS was twice as high in Caucasian migrants as in non-migrants and that the prevalence was very high if this stay in a temperate region occurred before the age of 15 years. 41 A clear  dose-response relationship between the duration of residence out of the French West Indies and the prevalence of MS was also found. A possible explanation provided by authors was that migration of Caucasian genes into the Afro-Caribbean population could serve as a vector for the introduction in the French West Indies of possible infectious environmental factors operating, in particular, before the age of 15 years. These environmental changes may either trigger or protect from the disease. 41 Those findings were in line with other studies of Caucasian populations migrating from high-prevalence areas to low-prevalence areas, suggesting that the risk of acquiring the disease is determined before the age of 15 years (for populations from the United Kingdom who emigrated to South Africa 42 and for Jewish populations emigrating to Israel, for example 43 ). It is important to mention that prevalence is not, however, the best epidemiological instrument for evaluating the change in risk induced by migration.
