# A review of bus rapid transit implementation in India A review of bus rapid transit implementation in India

CorpusID: 73540964 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dccc45089ebe7adfb6e4fd37ccb03dcaaf9bce52](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dccc45089ebe7adfb6e4fd37ccb03dcaaf9bce52)

Fields: Engineering, Business, Economics

## (s2) PUBLIC INTEREST STATEMENT
(p2.0) Bus rapid transit systems (BRTS) have now become the most popular and cost-effective urban transit system options for both developed and developing countries. In India, this system came into existence since the year 2008. This paper attempts to give a detailed review of BRTS implementation in India. BRTS characteristics are illustrated and compared for eight cities of India where this system is in operation. A comprehensive documentation of these operating systems will provide a sound database to planners and decision makers who are actively involved with BRTS implementation in developed and developing countries.

(p2.1) The popularity of bus rapid transit system has increased in the past few years. It is now considered as a good solution for transportation problems in large and medium size cities. BRT is regarded as the revolution of most widespread public transit option (Jiang, Christopher Zegras, & Mehndiratta, 2012). BRT aims at providing a good level of service (LOS) in terms of operating speed. The BRT can run in three kinds of operating environments being semi exclusive, exclusive and grade separated (Transit Capacity and Quality of Service Manual (TCQSM), 2013). The implementation of the BRT is based on the physical characteristics of the corridor. The availability of sufficient right of way (ROW) is very important to establish a BRT corridor.

(p2.2) Past literature reports review and performance of various BRTS systems of the world. Reviews of systems running in China, Columbia, Turkey and Sweden etc. have been shown in the past work whereas a complete and comprehensive review to understand the implementation of BRT system in India is not yet reported in the literature. Therefore, this paper attempts to present a detailed review of BRTS implementation in eight cities of India. Both design and operational characteristic of the BRT systems running in India are reviewed. Finally paper ends with a conclusion reporting the important findings of the study.
## (s4) Regulatory context
(p4.0) Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JnNURM) was introduced by Government of India in the mid of year 2005. This mission had one of the initiatives that gave a start to BRTS in Indian cities. The mission was led by Ministry of Urban Development and the Ministry of Finance (India). BRTS in India followed a regulatory reform by formation of special purpose vehicle (SPV) in different cities for majorly handling the operation and maintenance of BRTS. Private partners were introduced in urban transportation to increase the efficiency of the system. Many transport authorities have lack of Institutional capacity (Talati & Talati, 2014). Competitive bidding is done to select a cost effective option. In-house work or arrangements create lot of liabilities on government institutions which turns out to be a very costly option. Talati and Talati (2014) reported that including private sector into urban transport projects allows the concerned authorities to spare funds for other institutional and development works. Two types of revenue models were followed for operation of BRT in India, these are the Gross Cost (GC) model and the Net Cost (NC) model. Table 3 illustrates the BRTS characteristics in terms of regulatory context. The GC model is either a route based or area based cost model. In GC model the private partner states the unit cost of service on the following criteria:
## (s6) Operating speed
(p6.0) BRT is an attractive public transit option because of its higher journey speed. Delay at signals and higher dwell times are a major cause of lower speeds. Average journey speed is one of the dominating operational measure to assess performance of BRTS (Currie & Delbosc, 2014). From the available data in Table 1 it can be concluded that the highest and the lowest journey speeds are observed in the case of Ahmedabad and Delhi BRTS respectively. Ahmedabad BRTS has adopted a very different phasing plan for the signals installed at the intersections of BRT corridor, the cycle time of these signals are planned in a way that the BRT lane signal goes green two times in one cycle time, although there is no priority signal installed but still this helps in reducing the overall travel time on the BRT corridor. By the available data it will be quite reasonable to comment that BRT facilities with a larger and dedicated network will have high average operating speed than the smaller segregated network. 
## (s8) System reliability
(p8.0) Reliability of transit service has been recognized as a significant determinant of quality of service. Liu and Sinha (2007) discussed three types of bus reliability measures. These are: TTR, waiting time reliability and headway regularity based reliability.

(p8.1) Indian BRT systems majorly have median busways which separates the buses from the other mix traffic. Dedicated BRT is considered to be 90% on schedule (Deng & Nelson, 2013), this is reasonably higher than the conventional transit system. India majorly has composite or hybrid BRT which is partially dedicated up to a certain stretch and then changes into mix traffic transit service due to limitation of ROW or due to elevated stretch. This sudden change from segregated to mix traffic facility results in reduced reliability of the system. Of the aforementioned three types of reliabilities, TTR and headway regularity can be estimated using the ITS data collected by the GPS fitted in the BRTS buses. There are various TTR measures as shown below:
