# Integration Readiness levels Evaluation and Systems Architecture: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 73560455 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/25222be3e28daac783199d77b701fef740671708](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/25222be3e28daac783199d77b701fef740671708)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s1) II.
(p1.0) METHODOLOGY Research methodology consisted in bibliographic research with qualitative analysis, comprising five topics. The first topic presents the TRL scale fundamentals and current limitations. In the second topic, the IRL scale is analyzed through an historical perspective and according to topics of interest for this research. The third topic presents methodologies and best practices related to TRL assessment process and the equivalent IRL assessment process. The fourth topic presents concepts about systems architecture and integration. The last topic shows selected concepts about the representation of dependencies in complex systems.

(p1.1) According to Cornford and Sarsfield (2004), the TRL scale is focused on a particular technology evaluation, and significant integration challenges may occur when a technology is included in a space system. So even that the technology is mature, using this technology in new applications may be challenging, and the TRL scale usually does not represent the challenge of integrating the technology in a space system. Olechowski, Eppinger and Joglekar (2015) investigated the use of the TRL scale in different industrial sectors through interviews and analyzes on industry standards and organizational guidelines. These authors (Olechowski et al., 2015) found that the TRL scale is widely used in different complex systems industries and identified fifteen challenges to improve the TRL scale utilization, categorized in three topics: system complexity, planning and review, and assessment validity. Subsequently, Tomaschek, Olechowski, Eppinger and Joglekar (2016) conducted a survey with TRL scale practitioners in different industries worldwide to identify, among the fifteen identified challenges, which were the most priority challenges. The survey results show that the four highest priority challenges are related to the systems complexity, and they are: representation of the integration between technologies, interfaces maturity, modifications in the system and system overall maturity.
## (s4) International Journal of Advanced Engineering Research and Science (IJAERS)
(p4.0) [ Vol-5, Issue-4, Apr-2018]  https://dx.doi.org/10.22161/ijaers.5.4.12  ISSN: 2349-6495(P) | 2456-1908(O) Nowadays, in addition to face the technical challenges in building such complex systems, engineers must also deal with changes in the political and economic context that influence the design and development of space systems. Hastings, et al. (2003) proposed that decisions in system architectures should help to address these uncertainties, with a focus on strategies such as flexibility and robustness that can lead designers to different optimization solutions to meet specifications or other specific criteria. Crawley, et al. (2004) suggested that system architectures are not static, but they evolve for long periods as technologies mature. They also evolve during the natural process of designing a system. These evolutionary patterns are useful for understanding the importance of the representation and the decisions involved in a system architecture.

(p4.1) In line with the previously described context that systems and their architectures face, Olechowski, Eppinger and Joglekar (2015) proposed that is important to update the TRL scale application methods. The argument is that since the current context of growing systems complexity, greater dynamics of innovation, the current use of TRL in decision-making and the current use in different organizational processes, are significantly different from the context experienced by NASA in the 1970s when the original TRL scale was created.
