# ETHNOMEDICINAL, PHYTOCHEMICAL AND PHARMACOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF FLACOURTIA JANGOMAS: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 73589530 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a72f257665b75ddd25234bf2845dda2b37b3fdf9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a72f257665b75ddd25234bf2845dda2b37b3fdf9)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s2) Origin and distribution
(p2.0) F. jangomas is lowland semi-cultivated fruit tree with uncertain wild confinement. Its wild organ is unknown however it is said to have originated from India and distributed throughout tropical regions of East Africa and tropical Asia. It is indigenous to North-eastern Terai region of Utter Pradesh, Bihar Maharashtra, Bengal, Assam and Orissa states and some parts of South India. It is often found in the Brahmaputra valley of Assam and adjoining areas of Northeast region of India [16]. It has naturalized in areas such as Hawaii, New
## (s8) Antidiabetic activity
(p8.0) Study on the effect of methanolic extract of F. jangomas leaves and stem (1:1) in alloxan-induced diabetic rats using glibenclamide as standard antidiabetic agent. Antidiabetic potency of the extract was assessed by fasting blood glucose (FBG) level. The result demonstrated that methanolic extract induces significant decrease of blood glucose level in diabetic rats and this effect was more potent after repeated dose (200 mg/kg and 400 mg/kg) administration, a marked reduction of blood glucose level in these rats was achieved after 14 d of treatment [53]. Efficacy of methanolic extract of F. jangomas leaf and stem combination (1:1) in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rats was also studied. Oral administration of methanolic extract for 21 d showed impressive (P<0.01) hypoglycemic activity and altered biochemical parameters specifically cholesterol and triglycerides were also found to be corrected significantly (P<0.05). Analysis of urine also revealed the absence of glucose and ketone traces in treated mice [54]. Another study also indicated the potentiality of methanolic extract of F. jangomas in treating hyperglycemic rats with elevated blood glucose level, body weight and serum lipid profiles along with liver and muscle glycogen level in normal and diabetic rats. Administration of methanol extract of the plant in a dose of 200 and 400 mg/kg significantly reduces the glucose level. However, low dose i.e. 100 mg/kg did not show significant reduction in blood glucose level. Therefore, the effectiveness of the extract depends on the dose and probably on the accumulative effect of active principles [55].
## (s9) Anti-amylase activity
(p9.0) The ethanolic extract of F. jangomas fruit in several findings suggested that phenolic synergies may play a role in mediating amylase inhibition and therefore have the potential to contribute to the management of type-2 diabetes [56].
## (s14) CONCLUSION
(p14.0) Medicinal plants have been used for centuries as remedies for human diseases because they contain components of therapeutic value. The curative properties of medicinal plants are attributable to the presence of various bioactive phytochemicals which may explain their traditional uses against various ailments. In this review article, effort has been taken to collect and compile the details regarding ethnomedicinal, phytochemical and pharmacological pharmacological facets of F. jangomas, a less explored plant [63]; however, has received interest owing to its diverse ethnomedicinal significance and presence of many biofunctional phytochemicals. Literature search has shown that the plant has immense medicinal uses in different systems of medicine in India as well as throughout the world. Bioactive chemical constituents isolated and characterized so far from the plant and a variety of pharmacological activities, including antibacterial, antifungal, analgesic, antidiabetic, antidiarrheal, anti-oxidant and cytotoxic activity are presented in this review. Phytochemical and pharmacological studies of the crude extracts and compounds isolated from F. jangomas have received much interest recently. Extensive research with regard to isolation and characterization of the active principles responsible for the activity and to understand the precise mechanism of the therapeutic action is required so that better, safer and cost-effective drugs can be developed. Pharmacological findings evidently indicate that the plant extract and some of its biofunctionl constituents can be formulated which will be useful to the society to venture in to a field of alternative systems of medicine.
