# Mobile Phone Applications for the Care and Prevention of HIV and Other Sexually Transmitted Diseases: A Review

CorpusID: 766395 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4dce02a209807a9848f8a8ec6e51116b7f129165](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4dce02a209807a9848f8a8ec6e51116b7f129165)

Fields: Medicine

## (s11) Discussion
(p11.0) In our review of Apple iTunes and Android Google Play apps, we found 55 unique apps that fostered HIV/STD prevention and care services. In general, these apps were underutilized and only a few apps received high user ratings. Apps primarily focused on providing disease information, and only 6 apps covered all 4 areas of a basic prevention strategy (knowledge raising, risk reduction, condom promotion, and testing). However, we also found examples of apps that used a tailored and/or interactive approach and apps that illustrated the potential for integrating mobile phone technologies into more comprehensive HIV prevention and care.

(p11.1) There are a number of benefits to using mobile phone apps to provide HIV/STD prevention and care services. Apps offer convenience to both the user and the developer because they provide a flexible way to reach a large audience at an affordable cost. Apps can provide individually tailored and interactive HIV/STD prevention interventions that are constantly accessible and allow the user to seek information while maintaining anonymity. Intervention customization and interactivity have been found to be important for effectiveness in behavior change interventions, including those that are technology based [55]. Well-designed mobile phone apps accommodate self-tailoring and personalization by allowing the user to choose which app features they wish to use and selecting messages and notifications they wish to receive through the app, email, or SMS. Unlike SMS and automated voice messages that are sent at specific times, the interactive functions of mobile phone apps are constantly available, allowing users to engage with the app at their convenience.
