# TRAINING OF POSTGRADUATE STUDENTS IN PATHOLOGY, CURRENT SCENARIO AND HOW IT CAN BE IMPROVED: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 78783514 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4b9f146c3429e5eb302dd3b25eabcaece1446463](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4b9f146c3429e5eb302dd3b25eabcaece1446463)

Fields: Education, Medicine

## (s3) METHODS TO IMPROVE:
(p3.0) The various observations and suggestions of eminent pathologists and clinicians in this field were as follows. [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9] 1. Providing a list of learning objectives as per Medical Council of India/Universities in a sequential manner and evaluating their achievement in a stepwise process. incomplete, inaccurate, inappropriate laboratory reports and hold discussions with the residents on the construction of good quality reports. 6. Sensitization to applications of molecular pathology and genomics: An attempt could at least be made to discuss the basis for the techniques and the common diagnostic and therapeutic applications of the common ones. If there is a regional laboratory that performs these tests, the trainees should be encouraged to go and observe them. 7. Research methodology and statistical analysis: They should be taught and tested as modules. 8. Exposure to experimental medicine/pathology laboratories: Most departments do not have the facilities for animal experimentation or tissue cultures. An attempt should be made to arrange visitation by trainees to centers where these are available to get a concept on how they run. 9. Clinical correlations: Many pathologists feel that writing a good report is the total activity of a pathologist. The trainees should be encouraged to think about the patient and develop the competence to build a clinical story based on a pathology image and vice versa. This should be a part of teaching and testing. 10. Electronic portfolio (e-portfolio): The trainees should be encouraged to develop an eportfolio of their learning activities. They should add to it and enhance it regularly. The eportfolio could be one vital segment of the overall evaluation of the trainee. 11. Developing algorithms for approach towards diagnosis: The algorithms can be computerized. This is more helpful than jumping to diagnostic conclusions. 12. The evaluations should be in multiple stages, at the end of first three months, first 6, 12, 18 and 24 months. A greater value should be attached to the in-course evaluation to reduce the tensions and subjectivity of an all or none final examination. The in-course assessment should monitor the communications skills and professional behavior in addition to cognitive skills. The faculty members should also be evaluated by the trainees regularly and should have regular meetings with the residents to discuss and resolve issues related to training.

(p3.1) 13. Professional behavior like coming to work on time, wearing the appropriate attire to work, compassionate attitude to patients, patient's relatives and colleagues, respect to peer and faculty, showing restraint when angry or provoked, handling professional disagreements without ill-feeling, actively listening to another's opinion, clear and concise speech at biopsy rounds, CPCs, responding accurately, briefly and politely to any queries, showing care for the laboratory area, instruments, slides, specimens, copies of reports, maintaining confidentiality, team-player spirit, leadership qualities, volunteering for community service, etc should be periodically evaluated with appropriate grades. 14. A curriculum model needs to be developed for training the students on the issues involved in setting up a private laboratories and how to handle them. Legal aspects of the practices of pathology also need to be introduced. 15. There needs to be a formal body charged with the oversight of the postgraduate training program in pathology across the country. It could set the curriculum, the standards of education and evaluation in addition to the quality control of the laboratories that are involved in this educational process. It could have a regional branch each for North, South, East and West or pass the charge to the state chapters of the IAPM, towards voluntarily establishing such a body and write the constitution and remit of this committee. Every meeting of the Annual Conference of IAPM Conference (APCON) should have at least one day dedicated to the meeting along with faculty involved in the training programs and representatives from the postgraduate residents. The committee could deliberate electronically on a monthly basis and the news and developments transmitted through an electronic newsletter on the website dedicated for pathology postgraduate training.

(p3.2) Jaiman S et al [10] in order to help a resident in objectively analyzing a career choice and organizing his/her thoughts he had compiled a series of 14 questions. The important factors considered are specialty priority, family, personal financial requirements, location, working conditions etc. Each question can be answered in five different ways. In order to assign more objectivity to the questionnaire he had allotted a score of 1 to 5 for each response [ Table 1]. Response point allocation is in ascending order: A has 1 point, B 2, C 3, D 4 and E has 5. Total score ranges from 14 to 70. Based on the score one can attempt at objectively define a future career strategy. [ Table 2].
