# Body Fluid Cytokine Levels in Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer's Disease: a Comparative Overview

CorpusID: 7810093 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/437f863a07ca7137ad416050d522c79f795e16f1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/437f863a07ca7137ad416050d522c79f795e16f1)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Cytokines are small signaling proteins with a large spectrum of functions in inflammatory processes and immune system regulation [1]. Therefore, they have been investigated in the context of neuroinflammation, a process accompanying and probably contributing to pathology in several neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease (AD) or Parkinson's disease (PD) [2][3][4][5]. One key feature of neuroinflammation is activation of microglia, which includes local changes of cytokine expression [2,3]. Additionally, systemic levels of cytokines may rise in response to aging and stress, known risk factors for neurodegeneration [6][7][8]. Susceptibility for inflammation rises with age and might be enhanced by each inflammatory event [9]. Furthermore, chronic inflammation and the delirium accompanying severe systemic infection have been shown to be risk factors for AD in the elderly, and vice versa, several risk factors for AD are also inducers of systemic inflammation [10][11][12][13]. As a consequence, levels of cytokines, their receptors and other proteins associated with immune responses in blood and CSF of AD patients have been frequently investigated to uncover mechanisms of neuroinflammation in dementia or in the context of biomarker research. However, much of the data obtained from different studies is controversial. Here, we give a comprehensive overview of published research in this field and discuss possible reasons behind the conflicting observations.
## (s2) Literature Overview
(p2.0) We included 118 PubMed-listed articles providing data explicitly on levels of immune signaling proteins-primarily cytokines and their receptors-in serum, plasma or CSF of patients with diagnosed MCI or AD in comparison to unaffected control groups. We excluded studies on cytokine levels in human or murine brain tissue, cytokine production by lymphocytes, cytokine polymorphisms or cytokine levels in other neurodegenerative diseases, like PD or frontotemporal dementia. In total, the 118 articles reported data on 66 cytokines, cytokine receptors and other proteins induced by cytokines or otherwise associated with inflammatory signaling and regulation. Table 1 gives a short summary of literature features: In general, about one third of the articles investigated MCI or other dementia types additional to AD. Plasma, serum and CSF were used in equal terms, and the most frequent method for cytokine determination was singleplex enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). By the last decade, multiplex assays and cytokine arrays were used with increasing frequency. A variety of cognition testing methods and diagnostic criteria were used in the different studies, although most articles noted the use of the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA) criteria and mini-mental state examination (MMSE) for patient characterization [14,15]. Supplementary 1 contains a more detailed description of the reviewed articles contents, investigated proteins and used methods.
## (s4) TNF Receptors
(p4.0) A different picture is drawn for soluble variants of the TNF receptors (sTNF-RI and sTNF-RII). The levels of both receptors are mostly reported as unchanged in the blood or CSF of AD patients in comparison to controls [32,33,50,65,75,80,81]. For MCI patients, however, data are controversial [32,80,82]. Follow up-studies show correlations of TNF receptor levels with risk of MCI to AD conversion [32,83]. It is possible that individuals with TNF receptor expression in the upper tertile are at increased risk of developing AD. Yet, the observed differences are too small to be used as reliable biomarkers.
## (s5) Soluble CD40 and CD40 Ligand
(p5.0) Another member of the TNF receptor superfamily, soluble CD40 (sCD40), is reported to be regulated in AD in a remarkably congruent manner: Three studies describe the elevation of sCD40 plasma levels in AD patients [84][85][86]. A fourth article by Buchhave et al. reports that levels of sCD40 positively correlate to risk of MCI to AD conversion [38]. Despite variances in effect strength between the studies, sCD40 might be an interesting target for biomarker research, especially since it has not been investigated in CSF of AD or MCI patients. Plasma levels of its binding partner CD40 ligand (CD40L) are described as not regulated in MCI patients and as upregulated in AD patients and might therefore represent another biomarker candidate [38,84].
## (s6) IL-1β
(p6.0) IL-1β is another frequently investigated target in AD, whereas only few reports describe levels in MCI. Interestingly, IL-1β is mostly described as not regulated in CSF of AD patients, while approximately 50 % of reports on serum or plasma levels describe upregulation [2,33,35,50,53,54,56,58,65,67,71,75,76,[87][88][89][90][91][92][93][94]. The other 50 % of the studies on IL-1β plasma levels in AD show slightly increased values in patients, which are yet not statistically significant due to high interindividual variances and overlaps between patients and controls. Furthermore, no study reports downregulation of IL-1β. Similar to TNF-α, it can be hypothesized that IL-1β is only elevated in subgroups of patients or during certain disease stages. Also, peripheral IL-1β might increase slowly during the time course of the disease. However, even if one of these hypotheses is correct, the effects visible in the periphery are probably small, as reflected by the large number of studies showing no significant changes between AD patients and controls. Therefore, it would be interesting to follow IL-1β-levels in AD patients' blood and CSF longitudinally.
## (s9) IL-18
(p9.0) So far, all cytokines described in this review appear to increase slowly with disease progression, while the respective receptors might be decreased. Nevertheless, some cytokines present a different picture. IL-18 has mostly been investigated in the plasma and with at first glance contradictory findings: several studies report no significant changes in IL-18 blood levels of both MCI-and AD patients, although always with a tendency to elevated levels [71,[115][116][117]. Two other studies show elevation of blood levels in AD [118,119]. Most of these studies differed in the used ELISA kit and/or in patient cohort characterization, which might be one reason for the observed differences. Yet, there may be another possibility: In a study of Motta et al., the patient cohort was divided according to MMSE into mild, modest, and severe AD subgroups. These authors showed that IL-18 levels were elevated in the early stages of the disease, but later dropped again to levels equal to those of controls [27]. After the initial rise, the following decline of IL-18 levels occurred in a disease progressiondependent manner. In other words, IL-18 levels reached a peak in mild AD patients and correlated positively with the MMSE afterwards. These findings would fit to several other studies (e.g., [117,119]) and support the concept of analyzing AD subgroups. They also support the theory of neuroinflammation as an early event in AD [120]. In this context, it is interesting to note that no study analyzing IL-18 reports effects in the plasma of MCI patients [71,116,117]. Together with the results of Motta et al., these findings may indicate that IL-18 levels are elevated in the early phases of AD, possibly during the turnover from "normal" MCI to AD. To our knowledge, only one study analyzed IL-18 levels in CSF of AD patients and found elevated levels of this cytokine [115]. It should further be mentioned that IL-18-binding protein (IL-18BP), a regulator of IL-18 function, has been described as downregulated in AD, indicating that the ratio of IL-18 and IL-18BP is influenced by regulation of both proteins [119]. Summarized, IL-18-and possibly its regulator IL-18BP-represent interesting candidates to be analyzed in plasma and especially CSF of well-characterized MCI and AD patients.

(p9.1) CCL2/MCP-1 MCP-1 has been analyzed in plasma and CSF of AD and MCI patients. Although results were again controversial, several studies find MCP-1 to be upregulated in the CSF of AD and also MCI patients [121][122][123]. In plasma, most articles report no regulation of MCP-1 [51,70,116,121]. Only one study conducted by Galimberti et al. investigated patients divided in MCI, mild-modest AD and severe AD groups and revealed elevated levels in MCI and mild-modest AD patients, while subjects with severe AD showed lower levels [29]. The effect strength was statistically significant, yet modest in size and there were large overlaps between the groups. However, MCP-1 levels correlated to MMSE after onset of MCI. This induction pattern is highly similar to the one described by Motta et al. for other cytokines and might be the result of innate immune activation in the early stages of AD, as mirrored by central and peripheral cytokine levels [27,124].
## (s10) CXCL10/IP-10
(p10.0) The 10-kDa interferon gamma-induced protein (IP-10) is reported to be elevated in the CSF of MCI patients [82,122]. After conversion from MCI to AD, CSF levels drop again and correlate over the time course of disease with MMSE scores and cognitive decline [82,122,123]. In contrast, plasma levels are uniformly reported to be unchanged in AD [70,116,121]. Therefore, IP-10 might resemble MCP-1 or IL-18 by showing a peak of CSF levels only in early disease stages.
## (s12) Cytokines with No or Marginal Changes in AD
(p12.0) Several cytokines have been intensively investigated in AD patients without finding an induction or regulation in blood or CSF. A good representative for this group is interleukin-2 (IL-2), which was analyzed in three studies on CSF and seven studies on plasma of AD patients [2,33,54,67,68,71,79,89]. As all of these studies uniformly reported no changes in CSF or plasma levels compared to controls, IL-2 is probably not regulated in AD. Similar findings have also been documented for its receptor IL-2R and some other cytokines like GM-CSF, IFN-γ, IL-1α, IL-1RA, and IL-3 (Supplementary 2). Still, some of these factors have barely been investigated in the CSF of AD or MCI patients and it cannot be excluded that changes might be visible in CSF which are undetectable in peripheral blood.
## (s14) Conclusions
(p14.0) Studies on proteins involved in immune signaling and regulation often present a heterogeneous picture. Methodical variances caused by use of different ELISA kits, might be one contributing factor to the observed discrepancies. Despite from various diluents and detection methods, capture or detection antibodies might recognize different antigens, resulting in the quantification of various protein isoforms. Comparative studies between numerous antibody-based single-and multiplex approaches for cytokine quantification and a better characterization of the epitopes recognized by the respective antibodies might therefore be desirable. As recently pointed out, use of serum or plasma biobanking conditions and sample handling may significantly affect the results of cytokine detection, which is why improvement of standardization between research groups should also be considered [141].
