# Hepatitis: A Review on Current and Future Scenario

CorpusID: 79988537 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4bfd761fa17a3d94dcace66b8da2656b94add5da](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4bfd761fa17a3d94dcace66b8da2656b94add5da)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Hepatitis is described as an inflammation of the liver [1][2][3][4][5]. It may be caused by drugs, alcohol use, or certain medical conditions. But in most cases, it is caused by a virus. This is known as viral hepatitis. The condition of hepatitis can be selflimiting or it can cause fibrosis i.e., scarring, cirrhosis or liver cancer. Hepatitis is the most common type of disease that occurs in the world. Along with virus other infections and toxic substances such as alcohol, certain drugs, and auto-immune disease can also cause hepatitis.

(p0.1) There are 5 different types of hepatitis viruses i.e., A, B, C, D and E along with X and G. The 5 main types are superlative regard because of the encumbrance of illness and death and they root the plausible for the paroxysm and communicable transmission. In precise, forms B and C bulge to perennial in disposition in millions of humans and in sync are the utmost common trivial of liver cirrhosis and cancers.

(p0.2) Hepatitis A and hepatitis E are emblematically induced by consumption of pestiferous water and food. Hepatitis B, hepatitis C and hepatitis D are ordinarily stimulated as an outcome of Parenteral, adjoin with infected bodily fluids. Usual modality of contagion for these viruses admit acknowledge of pestiferous blood/blood products, incursive medical procedures using befoul apparatus and for hepatitis B hauling from mother to child at birth, from clan members to adolescent and through erotic association.
## (s2) Transmission
(p2.0) Hepatitis A [5][6][7][8][9][10] is transmitted primarily through fecal-oral route; that is while a disinfected individual assimilate water or food that has been contaminated with the feces of an infected person.
## (s7) Hepatitis-B
(p7.0) Hepatitis-B is a virus infection which is caused by hepatitis-B virus and it assail the liver. So, it causes both chronic and acute diseases. In chronic infection liver cancer and liver [10][11][12][13][14] cirrhosis may occur and puts the citizenry at eminent jeopardy of death.

(p7.1) Children below 6 years of age, who defiled with hepatitis B, are most probably to acquire chronic infections. In 20-30% of adults when they are chronically infected may develop cirrhosis/liver cancer.
