# Detrimental impact of Microbiota- Accessible Carbohydrate-Deprived Diet on Gut and immune Homeostasis: An Overview

CorpusID: 808767 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f5ca4fb3151dbdc6ae2415b10fd10b7544e9270](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f5ca4fb3151dbdc6ae2415b10fd10b7544e9270)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s3) iMPACT OF LOw DieTARY MACs On GUT ePiTHeLiUM
(p3.0) The gut epithelium is a dynamic barrier ensuring the physical separation between the host and the gut microbiota while also enabling their communication (33). Epithelial integrity is a pillar of both gut and overall health. Indeed, increased gut permeability, linked to Western diet consumption and dysbiosis, facilitates translocation of bacterial products in the host (8). This might be a trigger for allergic, autoimmune, or endocrine diseases (25).
## (s4) Low Dietary MACs Contribute to Decreased epithelial integrity
(p4.0) Bacterially derived SCFAs ensure epithelial integrity by increasing transepithelial resistance (34), as well as promoting mucus secretion (35). SCFAs increase prostaglandin secretion by subepithelial myofibroblasts, which, in turn, promote epithelial mucin expression, a key component of the mucus layer (36). Butyrate, but neither acetate nor propionate, upregulated colonic mucin expression in vitro, by inhibiting HDAC activity (37). SCFAs have also been recently found to be critical for epithelium repair, through the direct activation of NLRP3 inflammasome in gut epithelial cells, leading to release of IL-18 (4). NLRP3 inflammasome activation is protective in a murine model of colitis induced by dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) (38). Mice fed on an MAC-deprived diet had significantly less IL-18, and worse DSS-induced colitis (4,39). Inflammasome activation is a two-step process involving both a priming and a trigger phase (39). While these phases are well characterized in macrophages, they remain elusive in epithelial cells. It was recently shown that fecal extracts, containing various microbial associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) could prime the NLRP3 inflammasome, and that acetate could trigger this pathway by inducing cell hyperpolarization secondary to increased intracellular Ca 2+ . Interestingly, fecal supernatants from low MAC-fed mice were less potent in priming NLRP3 inflammasome compare to those from high MACs probably due to the different MAMPs present (4). While most studies focus on SCFAs as critical in promoting beneficial effects of MACs in diseases, it is important to note that beneficial changes in the microbiota by itself is also critical, as treatment with SCFAs in drinking water only partially recapitulates the effects of MACs (4,22). Microbiota-accessible carbohydrate-induced microbiota changes can also directly impact epithelial integrity. As described above, under low-MAC conditions, some bacteria use the mucus layer as a source of energy. This phenomenon thins the mucus layer and impairs the epithelial barrier. This low MAC-induced gut permeability was associated with increased susceptibility to the epithelium-targeting pathogen Citrobacter rodentium suggesting that dietary MACs are key in fighting gastrointestinal infections (29).
## (s6) iMPACT OF LOw DieTARY MACs On iMMUne CeLLS AnD DiSeASe DeveLOPMenT
(p6.0) This section highlights several key studies examining the opposing effects of MAC deprivation vs. enrichment on the immune system. Diet composition, as well as changes in gut microbiota, can profoundly impact immune function, as a vast majority of immune cells are located in the gut lamina propria (41). Significant advances have been made in recent years to understand the impact of MACs on the immune system. However, much of the focus has been on high-MAC diets with little insight on the impact of MAC deprivation on the immune system. A comprehensive survey of MAC enrichment vs. deprivation is essential for deciphering how specific immune pathways are regulated under varied dietary habits, and whether MACs plays a preventative or corrective role in various diseases.
## (s7) Dendritic Cells
(p7.0) Short-chain fatty acids elicit numerous effects on the function and hematopoiesis of dendritic cells. Propionate was shown to alter DC precursors in the bone marrow, which attenuated their ability to promote Th2 effector cells in the lungs (32). Indeed, mice fed on a low-MAC diet developed exacerbated allergic airway inflammation.

(p7.1) Short-chain fatty acid, particularly acetate and butyrate, could also affect tolerogenic DC function (22). Under no-MAC feeding conditions, CD103 + dendritic cells had a diminished ability to generate a tolerogenic regulatory T cell (Treg), compared to high-MAC feeding conditions. Mice fed on a no-MAC diet exhibited severe clinical anaphylaxis compared to mice fed on a high-MAC diet in a model of food allergy. Protection by high-MAC diet was mediated through the enhancement of retinal-dehydrogenase activity in CD103 + dendritic cells, an enzyme required for the conversion of vitamin A into retinoic acid to promote Treg differentiation. As such, the protective effects of high-MACs on food allergy were abrogated in the absence of vitamin A in diet. Both the SCFA receptors such as GPR43 and GPR109A were indispensable for high-MAC-mediated protection against food allergy. Interestingly, mice fed on a control MAC diet (equivalent to recommended amount of 14 g/1,000 kcal/day) exhibited similar severity to food allergy to mice fed on a no-MAC diet. This suggests that, in this instance, high levels of MACs are necessary for optimal protection against development of food allergies rather than the recommended amount (22).

(p7.2) However, despite these beneficial effects of SCFAs in allergy, the role of SCFAs in tolerance is not clear; as a recent study has highlighted both beneficial and detrimental effects of SCFAs in experimental autoimmune diseases and antibody-induced arthritis, respectively (42). The mechanisms behind these differential effects in autoimmunity are yet to be determined.
## (s8) T Cells
(p8.0) Short-chain fatty acids have a broad impact on T cell function by directly promoting the differentiation of naïve T cells into Treg (23,43,44), Th1, and Th17 (45) and indirectly inhibiting Th2 differentiation (22).

(p8.1) Acetate has been shown to promote Treg differentiation by inhibiting the histone deacetylase HDAC9 in T cells, stimulating transcription of Foxp3 (5). This was a key mechanism in the protection against allergic airway inflammation as mice fed on no-MAC diet developed exacerbated disease. Treatment with acetate was also protective independently of GPR43, suggesting that the beneficial effects of MACs were solely based on HDAC inhibition.

(p8.2) Both acetate and butyrate promote the induction of Th1 and Th17 T cells. These effects were also dependent on HDAC inhibition and activation of the pathway mTOR-ribosomal protein S6 kinase, but independent of GPR41 and GPR43 signaling (45). Induction of Th1, Th17, and IL-10-producing T-cells by acetate and butyrate might be key in the beneficial effects of high MACs in C. rodentium infections (46).
