# Hyaluronan-Based Hydrogel Scaffolds for Limbal Stem Cell Transplantation: A Review

CorpusID: 80626621 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c36f1b7c361f4637714003f3bca01a3a22941b73](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c36f1b7c361f4637714003f3bca01a3a22941b73)

Fields: Engineering, Chemistry, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Karl Meyer and John Palmer were the first to extract hyaluronic acid (conjugate base hyaluronate) from bovine vitreous humor in 1934. They named it based on its appearance (hyalos: glass in Greek) and structure (uronic acid: one of sugar molecules) [1]. Endre Balazs later defined various forms of the molecule in 1986. The suggestion of "hyaluronan" (HA) by Balazs (1986) was found to fit well with the international nomenclature of polysaccharides and was subsequently adopted [2].

(p0.1) HA, a well-conserved biopolymer with a disaccharide repeat unit in mammalian species, is one of the main components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) with widespread presence in many tissues in the body. Its concentration varies widely in different tissues: e.g., HA concentration is much lower in lung ECM (15-150 µg/g) and the vitreous humor of the eye (200 µg/g) compared to in the ECM of The configuration and role of HA is determined by its size. This particularly affects its role in the ECM, where it provides structural and biochemical support to surrounding cells. HA can combine with other molecules, such as growth factors and cytokines. Hence, any structural change in the HA polymer can influence the extracellular microenvironment. High conservation of the structural features of HA across mammalian species illustrates the important role of HA in facilitating normal cellular function [3,7,8,25].

(p0.2) Two forms of HA have been classified based on size: low molecular weight (~200 kDa) and high molecular weight (~2000 kDa). Despite being composed of similar subunits they exhibit different biological activities. For instance, it has been proposed that high-molecular-weight HA is involved in reducing inflammatory responses, whereas low-molecular-weight HA induces expression of inflammatory mediators [19,[26][27][28].

(p0.3) Synthesis of HA chains in vertebrates is performed by a class of integral membrane proteins, HASs (HAS1, 2, and 3). These enzymes are site-specific and they distinguish HA from other GAGs [29]. Following HA synthesis, HAS enzymes help to extrude these space-occupying polymers into the extracellular space instead of letting them accumulate in cells [30]. High-molecular-weight HA is thought to be synthesized by HAS1 and HAS3 and low-molecular-weight HA by HAS2 [19,31,32].

(p0.4) The expression of particular HAS enzyme isoforms is controlled by the combination of genetic and environmental factors. In the latter case, for example, it was shown that the expression of the three HAS isoforms is stimulus-dependent [33]. The authors reported a transcriptional study in normal human lung fibroblasts (NHLFs; 2801-1), foreskin fibroblasts (AG 1519), mesothelial cell lines , and lung glioma cell lines (U-118 MG) in response to various growth factors: fetal calf serum (FCS), platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB), transforming growth factor-β1 (TGFβ1), and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA). They showed the expression of all three HAS isoforms in mesothelial cells, only HAS3 in mesothelioma cells, and HAS2 and HAS3 in both lung fibroblasts and glioma cell line. Moreover, mesothelial cells expressed the maximum level of HAS2 after 6 h of exposure to PDGF-BB, whereas two other isoforms were slightly induced. The expression of HAS2 was slightly reduced following 6 h exposure to TGFβ1 but was strongly reduced in the presence of hydrocortisone. However, there was no significant expression level of HAS1 and HAS3.

(p0.5) The half-life of HA in the body is short with a turnover time of hours to days, depending on the tissue. It is estimated that 5 g of a total 15 g HA in a 70 kg human is replaced per day. Enzymatic degradation of HA is mediated by hyaluronidases (there are six types in humans) through hydrolysis of disaccharides at hexosaminidic β (1,4) linkages. Epigenetic modifications are shown to be involved in the catabolism of HA [34]. For instance, Lokeshwar et al. [35] reported a strong influence on the expression of hyaluronidase 1 through methylation of its promoter at SP1/EGR1 binding sites.
## (s1) Interactions of HA with ECM Components and Cell Receptor Proteins
(p1.0) The ECM is the non-cellular portion of all mammalian tissues. It is responsible for physical scaffolding of cells and initiates biochemical and biomechanical processes that mediate morphogenesis, proliferation, differentiation, and homeostasis of tissues. These structural and functional roles are made possible by the inherent properties of ECM, concomitant with its direct interaction with cell surface receptors, as well as local binding and release of growth factors. The structure of the ECM is highly dynamic, and its normal function is dependent on enzymatic and non-enzymatic remodeling [44][45][46][47].
## (s6) Stem Cell-Based Therapy for Treatment of LSCD
(p6.0) The choice of treatment and rate of success for patients with LSCD depends on several factors, including the cause of the condition, size of the limbal injury (partial or total), number of eyes affected (unilateral or bilateral), and status of adjacent tissues (conjunctiva and eyelid). The ocular surface must also be prepared before treatment. Treatment options thus range from scraping off conjunctival epithelium covering the corneal surface in the case of early-stage partial LSCD to combining this mechanical debridement with stem cell-based therapy for total LSCD [71].

(p6.1) Treatment of LSCD aims to restore or replace normal functioning limbal stem cells to promote regeneration of the corneal epithelium. Traditionally, autologous (in the case of unilateral) or allogeneic (in the case of bilateral) grafts were the methods of choice. The ex vivo expansion of limbal stem cells from the healthy eye, as well as other potential sites for biopsy explant tissue, have been used for the production of autologous cell sheets on a scaffold to treat unilateral and bilateral LSCD. Alternate sites for autologous biopsy harvest include oral mucosal, epidermal, embryonic, umbilical cord, hair follicle bulge, immature dental pulp, and orbital fat-derived and bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells [65,72]. It is believed that the transplanted cells create a suitable microenvironment for self-regeneration of the corneal epithelium from remaining dormant endogenous stem cells. Additionally, transplanted stem cells may supply the limbus with new cells The etiology of LSCD can be classified as primary/hereditary (e.g., aniridia, dyskeratosis congenital, and neurotrophic keratopathy) and secondary/acquired (e.g., inflammatory ocular surface disease, and chemical and thermal burns) [65]. This condition is normally characterized by ingrowth of conjunctiva, photophobia, irritation, pain, blepharospasm, epiphora, severe visual impairment, and corneal blindness [63,65].

(p6.2) Additional mechanisms leading to LSCD include mutations in PAX6, a regulator of transcription with key role in the development of neural tissues, particularly the eye [66]. Other possible mechanisms are linked to growth factors involved in limbal stem cell modulation (e.g., EGF, IGF, FGF) and genes involved in the induction of differentiation, stratification, and maintenance (e.g., CXCR4, DKK2, and DKK4) [65,[67][68][69][70].
## (s7) Stem Cell-Based Therapy for Treatment of LSCD
(p7.0) The choice of treatment and rate of success for patients with LSCD depends on several factors, including the cause of the condition, size of the limbal injury (partial or total), number of eyes affected (unilateral or bilateral), and status of adjacent tissues (conjunctiva and eyelid). The ocular surface must also be prepared before treatment. Treatment options thus range from scraping off conjunctival epithelium covering the corneal surface in the case of early-stage partial LSCD to combining this mechanical debridement with stem cell-based therapy for total LSCD [71].
## (s8) HA-Based Hydrogel Scaffolds in the Treatment of LSCD
(p8.0) The most common cell carrier/support scaffold used in ocular surface reconstruction is the amniotic membrane. The drawbacks of limited transparency and mechanical strength, risk of disease transmission, poor standardization of preparation, and biological variability have encouraged the  [78,79]. Scaffolds used, to date, include several natural and synthetic polymer scaffolds such as fibrin, siloxane hydrogel contact lenses, human anterior lens capsules, collagen, plastic compressed collagen, crosslinked collagen, synthetic and natural fiber electrospun scaffolds and magnetically oriented scaffolds [80]. Studies indicating the biocompatibility of HA with human corneal epithelial cells (hCECs) suggest that HA-based hydrogel scaffolds may be suitable carriers for delivery of hCEC [81,82].
