# I n T h I s I s s u e 125 Rapid Molecular Panels: What Is in the Best Interest of the Patient? A Review of Patient Outcome Studies for Multiplex Panels Used in Bloodstream, Respiratory, and Neurological Infections 130 Lactococcus garviae Prosthetic Mitral Valve Endocarditis: a Case Report and Literature Review Rapid Molecular Panels: What Is in the Best Interest of the Patient? A Review of Patient Outcome Studies for Multiplex Panels Used in Bloodstream, Respiratory, and Neurological Infections

CorpusID: 80155515 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b462b205592f9d46e6311499a5127f152f98250](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b462b205592f9d46e6311499a5127f152f98250)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The raison d'être of an antimicrobial stewardship program (ASP) was stated succinctly by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) in an early guidance document on the subject: to "optimize clinical outcomes while minimizing unintended consequences of antimicrobial use, including toxicity, the selection of pathogenic organisms and the emergence of resistance" [1]. What ASP interventions are effective? A recent systematic review published by the Cochrane Collaboration affirmed the positive impact of empirical treatment adherence to published guidelines, de-escalation of antimicrobial treatment, a switch from intravenous to oral, therapeutic drug monitoring, and the use of restricted antimicrobial lists on clinical outcomes and hospital costs [2].
## (s1) RDTs in Bloodstream Infections
(p1.0) Bloodstream infections (BSIs) and their complications are associated with considerable morbidity and mortality. The wide spectrum of organisms to which BSIs are attributed, coupled with the urgency associated with BSI diagnosis, make rapid, highly sensitive, multiplexed assays attractive for this purpose. Not surprisingly, the impact of RDTs on patient care and outcomes has been most comprehensively studied in positive blood cultures. The goal of early provision of organism identification and antimicrobial susceptibility status is earlier optimization or discontinuation of antimicrobials. This, in turn, may translate into shorter LOS, reduced mortality, and decreased hospital costs. In addition, the FilmArray BCID has the ability to detect a limited group of antimicrobial resistance determinants, including mecA, vanA, and blaKPC. Verigene BC-GN also detects the extendedspectrum β-lactamase determinant blaCTX-M and the carbapenemase determinants blaNDM, blaIMP, blaVIM, and blaOXA-48. GenMark Diagnostics (Carlsbad, CA) recently announced CE Mark for ePlex Blood Culture Identification Gram-Positive and Gram-Negative Panels. Additionally, the recently FDA-cleared Accelerate Pheno assay (Accelerate Diagnostics, Tucson, AZ) uses time-lapse microscopy and image analysis to report antimicrobial susceptibility testing data for pre-defined panels of drugs on isolates in blood cultures within 6 hours.

(p1.1) Various systematic reviews, literature reviews, and commentaries have examined whether rapid testing in positive blood cultures improves patient outcomes [3,4,7,8]. In 2016, as part of updated guidelines on implementation of an ASP, IDSA and the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology (SHEA) performed a literature review focusing on this question [7]. Citing data based on implementation of FilmArray BCID, MALDI-TOF MS, PNA FISH assays, Xpert MRSA/SA BC, and the now unavailable BD GeneOhm StaphSR assay, the authors reported statistically significant reductions in time to initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy, rates of recurrence of bacteremia, LOS, mortality, and hospital costs when RDTs in positive blood cultures were coupled with ASP intervention. This resulted in a recommendation supporting the use of RDTs on positive blood cultures combined with ASP [7].

(p1.2) One study deserves specific mention. Banerjee and colleagues published a non-blinded, randomized, controlled trial with patients stratified into three arms: standard blood culture processing (n = 207), FilmArray BCID with a templated report (n = 198), and BCID with a templated report plus ASP intervention in the form of real-time audit and feedback (n = 212). While the study was not adequately powered to show differences in LOS, mortality, or hospital costs, they found that time from Gram stain report to appropriate antimicrobial de-escalation or escalation was shortest in the BCID plus ASP intervention arm [9]. Banerjee et al., therefore, provided much needed, high-quality evidence that documented the incremental additional benefit of coupling RDTs with ASP intervention in positive blood cultures.
## (s3) RDTs in Meningitis and encephalitis
(p3.0) There are three rapid assays that are FDA cleared for molecular detection of pathogens from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF Infections of the central nervous system represent some of the most concerning conditions encountered in clinical medicine, with mortality almost certain without treatment. Because of increased morbidity and mortality associated with delayed therapy in HSV encephalitis and bacterial meningitis, IDSA recommends that acyclovir be administered in patients presenting with encephalitis and that broad-spectrum antibiotics be initiated in suspected cases of bacterial meningitis without waiting for diagnostic testing [14][15][16][17]. As with their use in positive blood cultures, for the management of encephalitis and meningitis, RDTs facilitate optimization of antimicrobials that have already been started.

(p3.1) The opportunities for optimization of antimicrobial administration with implementation of these assays are clearest when HSV-1/ HSV-2 or enteroviruses are detected and correlate with a clinical picture of viral meningitis. A CSF sample that rapidly tests positive for enterovirus in a patient with aseptic meningitis may be reassuring to a clinical team and lead to expedited discontinuation of antibiotics and acyclovir if the patient appears well. Similarly, HSV meningitis is common with primary genital HSV infection, and early detection could lead to the discontinuation of antibiotics but continuation of acyclovir. Conversely, in non-critical patients with meningitis, a negative result for HSV-1/HSV-2 may prompt discussion of discontinuing this nephrotoxic and neurotoxic antiviral. It is worth noting that in patients with encephalitis, the sensitivity of HSV PCR can vary, particularly early in the course of the illness [18]. In this context, clinicians may be reluctant to alter acyclovir therapy without repeatedly negative HSV-1/HSV-2 test results.

(p3.2) Clinician action based on detection of a bacterial target is more complex, and clinical teams may be reluctant to adjust antimicrobials until conventional cultures and antimicrobial susceptibility testing results are available, particularly if a patient is pediatric or has fulminant meningitis. On the other hand, antimicrobial susceptibility in H. influenzae, L. monocytogenes, N. meningitidis, and S. agalactiae tends to be relatively predictable. Detection of these organisms may allow some degree of optimization of the broad-spectrum antimicrobial regimens that are typically started empirically when bacterial meningitis is suspected in an immunocompetent patient [16].

(p3.3) The clinical impact of implementing molecular HSV-1/HSV-2 testing for diagnosis of meningitis and encephalitis has been without controversy, given the poor sensitivity of historical viral culture [19]. However, data supporting the benefit of molecular RDTs in these cases are scarce. Using a retrospective quasi-experimental study design, Van and colleagues [20] recently described the effect of switching from the realStar alphaherpesvirus PCR kit, a multiplex PCR LDT that detects HSV-1, HSV-2, and varicella zoster virus, (alTona Diagnostics, Hamburg, Germany) that was performed once per day, 6 days per week, to the Simplexa HSV 1 and 2 Direct assay, which was performed on demand, 24 hours per day, 7 days per week. This study did not report any positive results, but among their 182 patients with suspected meningitis and/or encephalitis who were tested prior to rapid testing and 181 patients tested post-implementation, the study reported a decrease in the median duration of acyclovir therapy from 29.2 hours to 14.3 hours. The authors felt that, given evidence that renal toxicity and neurotoxicity typically occur within the first 48 hours of intravenous acyclovir administration, this reduction in acyclovir use associated with rapid HSV-1/HSV-2 testing had the potential to be clinically impactful [20].

(p3.4) The positive impact of batched enterovirus PCR LDTs on curtailing unnecessary antibiotic days and LOS is also well documented in the medical literature [21][22][23][24] but data demonstrating the incremental benefit of rapid, on-demand provision of enterovirus status by PCR has been limited to very small single-center studies using quasi-experimental designs [25,26].

(p3.5) Regarding bacterial detection in spinal fluid, the FilmArray Meningitis/Encephalitis assay (bioMérieux, Durham, NC) is the first FDA-cleared molecular assay that detects a panel of bacterial targets. Leber et al. reported that the assay detected H. influenzae and S. pneumoniae from CSF in culture-negative cases that were confirmed using another arbiter PCR assay [27]. Dien Bard and colleagues reported the same for cases of H. influenzae and L. monocytogenes infection [28]. Of note, in their clinical trial, Leber et al. also reported false-positive results for S. pneumoniae, S. agalactiae, and E. coli and a false-negative result for S. agalactiae. Others who have reviewed these results have remarked that institutions using FilmArray ME may wish to consider implementing clinician counseling by clinical laboratories and/or ASP to ensure that positive and negative results are interpreted appropriately [29].
## (s4) Patient satisfaction
(p4.0) In addition to clinical outcomes, an equally important measure of quality of care is patient satisfaction, as this may also be an independent determinant of patient outcomes. In other words, if patients are happy with their care, their clinical outcomes may be enhanced. The drivers of patient satisfaction are complex, but a variety of different measurement tools have attempted to incorporate the key elements. Data derived from the federally administered Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems survey have suggested that patient satisfaction with discharge planning may be associated with lower 30-day hospital readmission rates [30]. More timely and accurate determination of the agent responsible for an infectious condition has great potential to enhance a clinical team's ability to formulate an ideal discharge plan and counsel a patient about the clinical course after discharge. However, this, too, needs evaluation, and any positive impact of rapid testing would need to be weighed against the costs that might be incurred by the patient for the testing.
## (s5) Conclusions
(p5.0) Which test to choose, if any? In the management of BSIs, there appears to be sufficient evidence to support the use of rapid, multiplexed tests, if tightly coupled with ASP intervention. For patients with respiratory illness, however, we do not appear to have compelling published evidence to support the assertion that multiplexed, one-size-fits-all panels (whether rapid or not) are useful. Interestingly, at least one manufacturer has attempted to offer more flexible use of their respiratory panel. Finally, in patients with meningitis or encephalitis, molecular technologies have greatly enhanced our ability to detect the responsible agents, but we do not appear to have sufficient evidence to assert that rapid (panel or duplex) testing improves patient care or outcomes. As others have stated previously, we need high-quality, adequately powered studies to determine the impact of available assays on health care processes and patient outcomes [31]. Finally, specific patient populations (e.g., children versus adults and immunocompromised versus immunocompetent individuals) need to be considered and integrated into our decision processes [31,32].
