# Diabetes Today: Examining pharmaceutical, technological and behavioral interventions for Type 1 and Type 2-Review Article Diabetic Foot Ulcers and Vitamin D Status: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 81101717 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/13ddb78a82479cc395b178d6fc541313c8bb8a9f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/13ddb78a82479cc395b178d6fc541313c8bb8a9f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Risk Factors for Developing DFU
(p0.0) Peripheral vascular disease and diabetic neuropathy are the important risk factors associated with the development of DFU (Sinwar, 2015). In addition to diabetic neuropathy and peripheral vascular disease, foot deformities and prior history DFU are risk factors associated with the development of DFU (Monteiro-Soares, Boyko, Ribeiro, Ribeiro, & Dinis-Ribeiro, 2012). Furthermore, oxidative stress and inflammation have an important role in the pathogenesis of DFU (Sytze Van Dam, Cotter, Bravenboer, & Cameron, 2013). The role of 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) levels in oxidative stress and inflammation has been studied recently (Asemi, Hashemi, Karamali, Samimi, & Esmaillzadeh, 2013;Zubair, Malik, Meerza, & Ahmad, 2013). Treatment with vitamin D in type 2 DM has been associated with improved glycemic control (Lee et al., 2017). Can vitamin D be used as a game changer in the treatment and prevention of DFU and diabetic foot infections?
## (s3) Synthesis of Evidence Vitamin D Status and DFUs
(p3.0) Vitamin D is a pleiotropic micronutrient that is fat soluble. The active form of vitamin D, 1,25-(OH) 2 D functions as a ligand for an intracellular receptor and transcription factor VDR (Rosen et al., 2012;Vanchinathan & Lim, 2012). Most of the effects of vitamin D as 1,25-(OH) 2 D are mediated by VDR (Rosen et al., 2012). Vitamin D has nonskeletal effects that include effects on the skin. The skin contains all the units of the regulatory system of vitamin D, and vitamin D plays a key role in maintaining hair follicles and the skin barrier (Rosen et al., 2012). Vitamin D as 1,25-(OH) 2 D exerts prodifferentiative and antiproliferative effects on the keratinocytes on the skin (Bikle et al., 2004) that in turn provides defense against toxins and pathogens while preventing water loss from the skin (Rosen et al., 2012).

(p3.1) Studies have shown low levels of circulating 25(OH)D in patients with DFU (Asemi et al., 2013;Tiwari et al., 2013;Zubair et al., 2013). Low levels of circulating 25(OH)D can cause increased concentrations of inflammatory cytokines in patients with DFU and delay wound healing (Tiwari, Pratyush, Gupta, & Singh, 2014). Evidence from prior studies has concluded favorable effects of vitamin D in the healing of DFU (Gonzalez-Curiel et al., 2014;Razzaghi et al., 2017). Keratinocytes around a wound produce increased expression of the genes responsible for microbial pattern recognition receptors such as toll-like receptors that in turn results in increased expression of the antimicrobial peptide cathelicidin. The genes responsible for increased cathelicidin production are induced by 1,25-(OH) 2 D (Schauber et al., 2007). Cathelicidin is an antimicrobial peptide that promotes wound healing (Gonzalez-Curiel et al., 2014;Zhang, Wu, & Sun, 2013). Based on the literature available on vitamin D and DFU, three themes are identified below.

(p3.2) Vitamin D Status and DFU. Two studies reported a relationship between vitamin D deficiency and the presence of DFU. A prospective cohort hospital-based study by Zubair et al. (2013) revealed that the patients with DFU had a lower median serum level of 25(OH)D when compared with the patients without DFU (6.3 [4.2-11.1] vs. 28.0 [21.4-37.0] ng/ml). The study compared 162 diabetic patients with foot ulcers and 162 diabetic patients with no foot ulcers. The study also highlighted possible outcomes including a possible relationship between deficiency of vitamin D and DFU (Zubair et al., 2013). The study by Tiwari et al. (2013) also showed relatively lower 25(OH)D levels in patients with DFU as compared with those without DFU.
## (s5) Razzaghi et al.'s Study
(p5.0) The essence of this study is the potential use of vitamin D supplements in the clinical management of DFU. The study is a prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. The intervention group received 50,000 international units (IU) of vitamin D biweekly for 12 weeks. Vitamin D supplementation resulted in a significant improvement in the serum 25(OH)D levels of the intervention group (þ12.9 AE 10.0 vs. À1.8 AE 15.7 ng/ml, p < .001). The authors suggest that vitamin D supplementation may have an indirect role in the healing of DFU because of its beneficial effect on improving glycemic control (Razzaghi et al., 2017). Please see Appendix A for the detailed matrix.

(p5.1) Method. The trial was done by following the Declaration of Helsinki after getting informed consent from the subjects, and it was favored by the ethics committee at the research facility (Razzaghi et al., 2017). The study population and the sample are clearly defined in this study. Although the sample size was adequate (N ¼ 60, 30 controls and 30 intervention) based on a power analysis, the authors suggest that the sample size is relatively small. The authors measured the key variables using appropriate methods. The researchers describe specific instruments used in the study and the use of stringent methods for data collection by trained staff. The authors described the interventions adequately and did not mention any biases involved in data collection.

(p5.2) Results. The researchers employed appropriate statistical analyses based on the levels of measurement involved and the number of groups compared. The authors did not clearly mention the measures taken to avoid Type I and Type II errors. The authors reported statistical significance of all the findings and summarized the findings using tables. However, the authors do not mention the precision of the estimates or the effect size.
## (s7) Tiwari et al.'s Study
(p7.0) The study identified a cutoff value for 25(OH)D levels in patients with DM that put them at risk for developing diabetic foot infections. The study is a prospective cohort research study that involved a sample of 289 subjects that compared 125 diabetic subjects with diabetic foot infection to 164 diabetic patients without diabetic foot infection at two hospital-based clinics in India (Tiwari et al., 2013). Please see Appendix A for the detailed matrix.

(p7.1) Method. The trial was done by following the Declaration of Helsinki after getting informed consent from the subjects, and the study was approved by the Banaras Hindu University Institute Ethics Committee (Tiwari et al., 2013). The authors had clearly identified the population and the sample, and the sampling was not randomized (Tiwari et al., 2013). The authors did not mention any power analysis involved in the study. The key variables are measured using appropriate methods, and the interventions are described adequately.

(p7.2) Results. The researchers employed appropriate statistical analyses based on the levels of measurement involved and the number of groups compared. The authors did not mention any measures taken to avoid Type I and Type II errors. The authors reported statistical significance of all the findings and summarized the findings using tables. The authors did mention the precision of the estimates and the effect size with odds ratio and with confidence interval. The findings were presented in a way that can facilitate a metaanalysis.
## (s8) Gaps in Evidence
(p8.0) Based on the review of the literature, it is obvious that adequate evidence is not available to support the relationship between hypovitaminosis D and DFU. However, after a careful review of the literature, it can be inferred that vitamin D deficiency has been associated with DFU and diabetic foot infections. Available evidence on vitamin D and DFU suggests a negative correlation between 25(OH)D levels and the presence of DFU. Evidence also supports a negative relationship between 25(OH)D levels and diabetic foot infections. Interestingly, a study by Afarideh et al. (2016) showed an increase in circulating 25(OH)D levels in patients with active chronic DFU. As stated by the authors, this is the only study that showed increased 25(OH)D levels with DFU (Afarideh et al., 2016). The conflicting finding by Afarideh et al. (2016) suggests further clarification of the results. Further large-scale randomized controlled studies are necessary to confirm the relationship between 25(OH)D levels and DFU.

(p8.1) The literature available on vitamin D and DFU suggests vitamin D supplements to have the potential to accelerate the healing of DFU. Nevertheless, the literature does not recommend any specific dosage for vitamin D supplements for use in DFU. Literature supports an increased risk of diabetic foot infections with hypovitaminosis D. However, it is hard to find any literature that addresses the prophylactic use of vitamin D supplements in DM to prevent DFU or in DFU to prevent diabetic foot infections. The literature on vitamin D supplementation to improve wound healing is not sufficient to suggest that vitamin D supplementation alone improves wound healing. For example, Razzaghi et al. (2017) highlight that vitamin D may have an indirect effect on the healing of DFU because of its effects on improving serum glucose levels.

(p8.2) The Endocrine Society defines vitamin D deficiency as a serum 25(OH)D less than 20 ng/ml. Measuring serum 25(OH)D is the recommended assay for diagnosing vitamin D deficiency. The recommended treatment for vitamin D deficiency can be done with either vitamin D3 or vitamin D2 (Holick et al., 2011). The treatment for vitamin D deficiency is guided by the age-group, the presence of comorbidities, and so on. There are no current recommendations on vitamin D dosage for individuals with DFU who also have vitamin D deficiency. Adults who are vitamin D deficient should be treated with 6,000 IU of vitamin D2 or D3 daily for 8 weeks to achieve a serum 25(OH)D level of more than 30 ng/ml, and thereafter to be continued on 1,500 to 2,000 IU daily for maintenance therapy (Holick et al., 2011).
## (s9) Conclusion
(p9.0) In conclusion, very minimal data are available on the association between DFU and vitamin D deficiency (Zubair et al., 2013). There are insufficient data available on the presence of any standardized measures or guidelines about the correlation of low 25(OH)D levels with DFU and the significance of vitamin D in DFU. Data available on DM and DFU do not comment on the recommendations on vitamin D use in the prevention and treatment of DFU. Literature does not support the routine use of vitamin D in the treatment and prevention of diabetic foot infections. The literature available on the different types of DM and the role of vitamin D in the development of DFU is scarce. Further research is needed to confirm the relationship between DFU and vitamin D including the use of vitamin D in the management of DFU and diabetic foot infections. Despite the lack of strong evidence to recommending vitamin D in DM and DFU, it is not a bad idea to provide routine vitamin D supplements to patients with DM and DFU for its other benefits.  (Zubair et al., 2013) The authors indicate the strength of their recommendations including analysis of a relatively large study population and the availability of data on potential confounders to run multiple regression analyses to assess the impact of confounders on the results of the study (Zubair et al., 2013). The study design is not rigorous, provided the goals of the study. The sampling was not randomized. Although, the authors claim the sample to be relatively large (Zubair et al., 2013), they did not mention any power analysis involved in determining the sample size Tiwari et al. (2013) The study was focused on the clinical question of evaluating the presence and magnitude of deficiency of vitamin D in patients with diabetic foot infections

(p9.1) The study involved a sample of 289 subjects that compared 125 diabetic subjects with diabetic foot infection to 164 diabetic patients without diabetic foot infection at two hospital-based clinics in India. The sampling was not randomized
## (s11) Funding
(p11.0) The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.  (Tiwari et al., 2013). The sampling was not randomized (Tiwari et al., 2013). The authors do not mention any power analysis involved in determining the sample size
