# Int J cell Sci & mol biol Organ Transplantation: An Overview from History to Challenges

CorpusID: 81621566 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e20d6f62307aa0625e5ef50abd313f61e5f76f46](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e20d6f62307aa0625e5ef50abd313f61e5f76f46)

Fields: Medicine

## (s25) Xenograft
(p25.0) Transplantation occurs between two different species e.g. porcine heart valve. This type is unsafe as compared to others and rejection is very high. In addition, disease may also attack that person. A scientist name Eugene Gu study on transplant type that how heart of fetal can be transplanted into animal [18].
## (s29) Living related donor
(p29.0) Close relatives donate their organ and tissue to their family member because they don't see their loved ones in pain and disease. That's why they donate organ and free their relative from pain [16].
## (s30) Good samaitan
(p30.0) Some people donate their organ and tissues to unknown people and they do it for helping needy person and sometimes it is due to the need of money. Jesus Christian was the first people who donate their kidney to needy people [16][17][18][19].
## (s31) Financial Compensation
(p31.0) Now days, organ transplantation is a business and people sell and buy organs. This method is very common in worldwide but this is illegal because donor demand money e.g. 16,000$ for one kidney, 2000-4000$ in Iran. It is localized in some countries like Australia. This method of donation is only acceptable in case of kidney only because research on people reported that people will able to survive with one kidney. Gary Becker reported that free donation could solve the problems of that people who cannot able to buy organ. He also gives an approximate calculation about human organ prices. Average market price is 15,000$ for kidney, 32,000$ for liver. In USA, human organ sale is banned while in Iran, it is legal since 1988. About 40-50% people that live in different villages of Pakistan sale their one kidney for 2500$ [15].
## (s34) International Journal of Cell Science & Molecular Biology Transplant Rejection
(p34.0) It is common problem that seen after most transplants. It is due to the attack of immune system that protects our body from different pathogens attacks that causes disease. It works very accurately. When any foreign particle or pathogen enter in body then the immune system active and check that whether a particle is self or non-self. If it identifies as non-self, then release specific proteins that are antibody for the destruction of that foreign particle and also remove that particle [20]. When doctors do surgery and transplant organ into body then immune system recognize it as non-self because particle that attaches on organ are different to those that are naturally present or organ. So, it releases immune response for destroy organ [21]. Sometimes, blood transfusion reaction occurs that make clogs of blood. Rejection has commonly three types.
## (s37) Chronic rejection
(p37.0) It occurs after many years of transplantation. Immune system slowly damages the organ/tissue that is transplanted [22]. Perfect matching of recipient and donor can reduce the rejection risk. But perfect match is not possible. 100% perfect match mean genetically identical and genetically identical are only twins. So, a doctor refers some drugs that suppress immune response, and these are called immunosuppressant minimize the chances of blood transfusion reactions. Cornea is the only part where blood transfusion not occurs because blood is not present [23]. It also has two types.
## (s41) High Cholestrol
(p41.0) No symptoms occur at start but it's dangerous for health. It creates clogs and blocked the blood vessels. So, blood can't reach every site due to clog that causes many diseases like paralysis etc. [27].
