# A Review of Membrane-Based Biosensors for Pathogen Detection

CorpusID: 822236 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f7f3d0c9adec4d3c46adc5e8a7b47c7671c8e40](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f7f3d0c9adec4d3c46adc5e8a7b47c7671c8e40)

Fields: Chemistry, Biology, Medicine, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s1) OPEN ACCESS
(p1.0) Conventional microbiological to detect bacterial toxins [1][2][3][4]. The combination of PCR and ELISA has also been used for detection of pathogens [5,6] and their toxins [7,8]. These methods still require pre-enrichment to increase bacterial concentration above the detection threshold.

(p1.1) A biosensor is an analytical system designed to detect and/or quantify the presence of a specific biological analyte. A biosensor typically integrates a bio-recognition element with a transduction system, as well as electronic systems such as signal amplifiers, processors, and display. Biosensors have been looked upon as alternative for monitoring of bacterial cells and their toxins [9,10]. Platforms such as quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) [11], micromechanical resonators [12][13][14][15][16], flow cytometry [9,17], amperometry [18,19], and surface plasmon resonance (SPR) [20][21][22][23], have been considered. The specificity of biosensors is imparted by a probe such as a nucleic acid, an antibody, an enzyme, a cell or an artificial receptor. Different biological probes such as DNA [24], RNA [25], monoclonal [26,27] polyclonal antibodies [28], bacteriophages [19,[29][30][31][32][33] and their recombinant binding proteins [32,34] have been used for detection of bacteria.

(p1.2) Membranes are commonly used in a variety of biomedical applications. They are used as filters for the concentration and isolation of cells, viruses and bacteria, detection of proteins, DNA and RNA in western, Southern and northern blots respectively, and other tests such as direct epifluorescence technique (DEFT). Common materials for membranes include nitrocellulose and polycarbonate. Other materials such as lipid bilayer membranes are also of interest largely for their biomimetic properties. Such membranes are being incorporated into various sensors and biosensors in particular. These biosensors are being used to detect different compounds including proteins, DNA and RNA, bacterial cells and virus particles. Some of these sensors can be and have been used for the detection of pathogens.

(p1.3) This article reviews recent literature specific to the use of membranes for the detection of bacterial pathogens. The review is topically organized inasmuch as first covering the materials science and fabrication techniques employed for the realization of membranes. The next two sections then cover the different molecular probes and the linker chemistries that have been employed in conjunction with such membranes. The last section discusses some of the various platforms that have been used for the readout of these devices.
## (s5) Hybrid Membranes
(p5.0) While many membranes are clearly composed of organic or inorganic components, some hybrid membranes have inorganic and organic materials which are effectively fused together. One example is gold-coated polycarbonate track etched (PCTE) membrane filter which was used for Surface Enhanced Raman Spectrometry-based detection of Giardia [41].

(p5.1) One simple example of the hybrid membranes was a PDMS membrane coated with 20 nm gold to allow linking of thiols to the surface [44]. A different group also used gold, but the membranes where formed on the inorganic surface in this case. Liposomes were formed using 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DPPC), which is commonly found in cells and is therefore useful for a biomimetic application, to create a phospholipid membrane on the gold electrode surface. The liposomes were simply introduced in solution to the gold surface to form the membranes [90]. DPPC liposomes containing monosialoganglioside (GM1) have also been deposited on octanethiol attached to gold to form a GM1 containing phospholipid bilayer [86]. A similar method has been used except that the gold electrode was prepared using thiol-containing molecules octanethiol, 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphothioethanol or spacerlipid A (created by the authors), after which the phospholipid was deposited through vesicle fusion. Such assemblies were employed to detect the presence of Clavibacter through the monitoring of related cytotoxins [85].

(p5.2) Membrane formation can also be achieved through sol-gel methods. This was used to make nano-TiO2 and nano-TiO2-polyethylene glycol membranes. A solution of Ti(OBu)4 (with polyethylene glycol for the second membrane) in acetic acid was added to a solution of condensed HCl, water, DMF and alcohol and allowed to condense. The resulting gel was placed on the electrode by dip-coating [45].

(p5.3) Another interesting method involves the formation of a bilayer lipid membrane through the activation of an egg phosphatidylcholine, hexadecylamine and cholesterol solution by KCl on top of an agar-coated Teflon surface [87].
## (s6) Composite Membranes
(p6.0) Composite membranes consist of multiple different membranes which are sandwiched together vertically or side to side to form a complete sensor. One group used a sample application pad consisting of a glass fibre membrane, a conjugate release pad made of a glass membrane, a signal generation pad made of a nitrocellulose membrane, and an absorption pad made of a cellulose membrane. Such devices were employed to monitor the presence of bacterial pathogens such as E. coli 0157 and Yersinia pestis [47,49,50] (Figure 1).

(p6.1) A similar design consisted of sample and absorption pads made of cellulose membranes, a fiberglass membrane for the conjugate pad and a nitrocellulose membrane for the capture pad [48,91]. Instead of the visual output however, electrodes were also included beside the capture pad. Then polyaniline [91] (Figure 2) or iron oxide nanoparticle [48]-conjugated antibodies were used to detect the antigen, and form an electrical circuit. The liquid sample containing the E. coli is placed on the glass fiber membrane sample application pad. The solution flows towards the cellulose membrane absorption pad. Along its path HRP conjugated polyclonal antibody (HRP-pAb) enters the solution as it is released from the glass fiber conjugate release pad. Some of the HRP-pAb binds to the E. coli. The pathogen with attached HRP then binds to the monoclonal antibody (mAb) bound to the nitrocellulose membrane signal generation pad. Some unbound HRP-pAb binds to the pAb to HRP-pAb as a control; (B) A reaction then takes place with a substrate solution which is catalyzed by the HRP to produce a visible output. With permission from [47]. This solution flowed towards the absorption pad, also made of cellulose. Along the way the conductive material-conjugated antibodies were released from the fiberglass conjugate pad and bound to the pathogen. These pathogens then bound to the antibodies linked to the nitrocellulose capture pad and increased the conductivity of the circuit. With permission from [91].
## (s9) Linking Procedure
(p9.0) Another important aspect of biosensors is the method that is used to link the capture molecule to the surface, in this case a membrane. This is important because it can substantially affect the sensitivity and specificity of the biosensor. Glutaraldehyde is a simple short crosslinking molecule, and it is commonly used to link two amine groups together. Often one of these is a free amine group on an antibody. It was used to link antibodies to secondary amines in a polypyrrole containing polymer membrane [73,80], a nitrocellulose membrane [59,60,91], Biodyne B membranes [71] and polycarbonate membranes which were aminated using nitric acid and sodium borohydride [75]. Glutaraldehyde was also used to attach aminated DNA probes to an aluminum oxide surface aminated by 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane [36,38,40].

(p9.1) One group compared three linking procedures to attach protein phosphatase (PP) to Screen-printed carbon electrodes (SPEs). The first method, was performed using a sol gel formed by tetramethoxysilane (TMOS), methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMOS), polyethylene glycol (PEG600) and hydrocholic acid. This was mixed with the PP and deposited on the electrode. In the second method, glutaraldehyde was added to a solution of BSA and PP on the surface of the electrode. For the third method, photocrosslinkable poly (vinyl alcohol) bearing styrylpyridinium groups (PVA-SbQ) were mixed with the PP and applied to the electrode. As it resulted in the highest density of the PP enzyme on the surface, this method was also used on two other surfaces, Maxisorp microtiter wells and Ultrabind polyethersulfone affinity membranes [67].

(p9.2) Streptavidin and biotin is a pair of very tightly binding molecules which are commonly used in linking procedures [92]. Streptavidin is usually adsorbed directly to a surface, while the molecule of interest is linked to the biotin. For these sensors strepavidin was used exclusively for linking DNA or RNA to membrane surfaces, but it may be used for antibody linking as well. For instance, biotinylated DNA [61][62][63][64][65] or RNA [66] was linked to streptavidin adsorbed on the membrane surface.
## (s11) Electrical
(p11.0) Many transduction methods involve observation of a change in the electrical conditions in the system. Frequently, the simple act of binding of detection molecule and antigen can lead to a change in the electrical characteristics of the biosensor, including the potential, current, resistance, and/or impedance. Oligonucleotide hybridization on a positively charge nanomembrane [81] and glycoprotein binding to a membrane [90] were observed and quantified using electrodes and the resultant current vs. voltage (resistance) plot. Another group quantified bacterial binding to a membrane by recording the change in membrane resistance upon binding [73].

(p11.1) Impedance can likewise be used to record antibody-pathogen binding on a membrane. [37] In another case impedance spectroscopy was used to characterize the formation of spontaneously inserting anion channels from bacteria in biomimetic membranes [85].

(p11.2) A change in electrical current is often observed in transduction methods. Catalase-positive and -negative bacteria were identified by hydrogen peroxide consumption. The hydrogen peroxide was detected amperometrically using a graphite-Teflon-peroxidase-ferrocene electrode [69]. In another study, a change in current of the modified patch-clamp pipette electrode was recorded, which allows changes in concentration of nucleic acids to be determined [87]. Bacteria bound to membranes were detected electrochemically by cellular uptake of ferrocyanide through chronocoulometry [80]. Another group used antibodies to bind E. coli cells to a membrane. Horseradise peroxidase-conjugated antibodies were then used to detect the E. coli cells as in a sandwich ELISA (enzyme linked immunosorbent assay). NaI, ortho-phenylenediamine and hydrogen peroxidase substrates caused a current to develop which allowed for quantification of the E. coli cells [71].

(p11.3) Like the other electrical characteristics, potentiometric-based transduction methods are also common. The attachment of viruses to antibodies in a cellular membrane leads to a change in potential that can be recorded via electrodes [83,84].

(p11.4) One novel transduction method makes use of live cells which have been engineered to detect specific pathogens. Virus particles bind to specific antibodies which have been inserted into the cellular membrane. This results in a change in membrane potential which can be detected using an electrode and a voltmeter [82].
## (s13) Color Change
(p13.0) A visual colour change is one of the major optical transduction methods. In some cases it was used as a method of detection by the naked eye, while in others a reflectometer or absorbance measurement was performed for quantification. A number of experiments have been performed with liposome-conjugated DNA probes which were used to detect pathogen DNA/RNA. Short single stranded DNA or RNA probes were used to link single stranded DNA or RNA from the pathogen to a membrane. Subsequently, DNA-linked liposomes containing a dye were used to label the other end of the pathogen's DNA/RNA. The dye was then released, and the colour change was quantified via a reflectometer [61][62][63][64][65][66].

(p13.1) Another way to produce a visual colour change is through the attachment of gold [46] or carbon [55] nanoparticles to sensing molecules (Figures 3 and 4). Similar work was performed using commercially available carboxylated magnetic nanoparticles. These particles were coated with BSA using EDC/NHS chemistry. Through electrostatic attraction, gold nanoparticles were attached to the BSA on the magnetic nanoparticles. Subsequently, antibodies were attached to the composite nanoparticles through physical adsorption. These nanoparticles were used to bind to bacteria, and filtered through the membrane. The bacteria with bound particles were trapped while the unbound nanoparticles passed through the pores of the membranes. The bacteria were then detected by visual colour change caused by the aggregated gold nanoparticles, and this colour change was enhanced by the addition of hydroxylamine and HAuCl4 [77].

(p13.2) Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) is commonly used to catalyze colourimetric reactions. HRP-conjugated antibodies bind to the pathogen, and the addition of substrates such as tetramethylbenzidene [47,75] and SuperSignal West Femto [47] in addition to hydrogen peroxide allow the colourimetric reaction to take place. Protein phosphatases (PP) may also be used to catalyze colourimetric reactions, as seen in an experiment with Microcystins. Microcystins are toxic proteins produced by cyanobacteria such as Microcystis, Anabaena, Oscillatoria and Nostoc which inhibit the activity of protein phosphatases. In this experiment, PP were immobilized on the membrane surface, and microcysteins were introduced in solution. Subsequently, colourless p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP) was introduced in the PP. This converts the pNPP to yellow p-nitrophenol (pNP), which can be used to measure enzyme activity using a microplate reader, which in turn can be used to determine the presence of microcystins [67].

(p13.3) In a different experiment, lectin proteins on a membrane were used to bind bacterial cells. Subsequently, the oxidants menadione and ferranocyanide, and the respiratory substrates formate and succinate were introduced to the cells. Oxidation of the ferranocyanide led to a change in colour which was related to the quantity of bacteria [72].

(p13.4) Two of the most unusual transduction methods involved colour changes based directly on interaction with the molecule of interest. In the first, polydiacetylene liposomes with embedded ganglioside GM1 were used to detect cholera toxin. The cholera toxin binds to GM1, and the binding interaction causes conformational changes in the polymer backbone of the liposomes. This results in a change of the liposome colour [88]. Similarly, tricosadiynoic acid (TRCDA) vesicles change colour when exposed to lipolysaccharides from pathogens and other microorganisms [89].
## (s14) Light Emission
(p14.0) The emission of light is the other main transduction method used with membrane based pathogen detection. As with colour change, liposomes filled with fluorescent dye may be used for transduction. In this case fluorescent dye-filled liposomes attached to antibodies were mixed with antigen and electrokinetically concentrated using a voltage applied across the membrane before being introduced to the capture bed. Detergent was used to release the fluorescent dye for quantification through video recording (Figure 7) [76].

(p14.1) Other particles may also be linked to antibodies for transduction. CdSe/ZnS core/shell dendron nanocrystals were functionalized with antibodies and bound to antigen on the membrane surface creating a "sandwich". The crystals are photoluminescent, which allows for quantification of the antigen [70]. In a similar case, the secondary antibodies were conjugated to up-converting phosphor particles, a 980 nm laser was used to excite the phosphor particles and the resulting 541 nm wavelength luminescence was detected using a photomultiplier tube [50].
## (s15) Spectroscopic/Interferometric
(p15.0) Other than the inherent characteristics of the system, external light sources may also be used in transduction methods. In the first case, unusually, the mechanical deflection of the membrane was observed. A white light interferometer and a fiber optic interferometer where used to determine deflection of the membranes caused by the binding of the pathogen [44]. In the second case, membrane filters were used to capture bacteria and antibody-coated gold nanoparticles were used to label the bacteria, and were detected using surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy [41].
## (s16) Other
(p16.0) Aside from electrical and optical transduction systems, several other methods have also been used. A commercial leaky surface acoustic wave system was used to detect pathogen DNA [43] Surface acoustic wave biosensors generally emit a wave through a material via the piezoelectric effect. Binding of biomolecules to the surface of the sensor increases the mass of the material, which leads to a change in the velocity of the wave. This change in velocity can be observed in a number of different ways. One such method is to record the change in time it takes the wave to progress through the material.

(p16.1) Piezoelectric quartz crystals are also popular for mass sensing. The binding of molecules to the surface changes the resonant frequencies of the quartz crystal. This change in frequency can be used to determine the quantity of bound antigen. In this case quartz crystals were used determine the quantity of bound bacterial DNA and cholera toxin [45,86].

(p16.2) Magnetic beads coated with antibodies and used to simultaneously detect two virus strains. The beads were measured using a magnetic reader using two frequency magnetic excitation [53]. An oxygen meter was used to detect E. coli cells. HRP-conjugated antibodies specific to E. coli cells were immobilized onto nitrocellulose membranes. These membranes were fixed above Teflon membrane of the oxygen meter. Hydrogen peroxide was used to produce the oxygen, which was then recorded by the oxygen meter. The production of oxygen was amplified using 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) diammonium salt. When the E. coli cells were added to the solution, they reduced access of the HRP to hydrogen peroxide, decreasing the production of oxygen [57] (Figure 9). 
