# A review of novel analytical diagnostics for liquid biopsies: spectroscopic and spectrometric serum profiling of primary and secondary brain tumors

CorpusID: 8214058 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f5858a726cb031b3efd91e63613db25d5f4e6094](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f5858a726cb031b3efd91e63613db25d5f4e6094)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s1) Mass Spectrometry
(p1.0) Mass spectrometry (MS) provides information on the molecular weight of a compound. Samples are ionized and then fragment in a characteristic manner, allowing the structure to be determined from a mass spectrum. SELDI-MS and MALDI-MS are two spectrometry techniques that differ through the way the analyte is captured. They are the most common variations (Aebersold and Mann 2003) used for the analysis of biomolecules and have been used in proteomic profiling for the diagnosis, prognosis, and therapeutic monitoring of cancer.
## (s3) Clinical Translation
(p3.0) Currently the gold standard for the clinical validation of protein biomarkers are immunoassays such as ELISA, with MS and IR-based approaches becoming an appealing prospect as a result of the capability at dealing with multiplexed sample with a high analytical specificity and sensitivity.

(p3.1) However, the multiple advantages of using IR spectroscopy within clinics allow future research to involve validation and translation into clinical environments, taking into consideration all preanalytical factors that could jeopardize approval and limit clinical applications. Hand held instrumentation would allow spectra to be acquired within the clinic, significantly decreasing diagnosis time, improving patient treatment and management, and enable effective use of healthcare time and resources (Popescu 2010). Dorling and Baker, presented a schematic highlighting the potential for serum analysis using spectroscopy within a clinical environment, expanded further by   (Hughes and Baker 2016)see Figure 3.

(p3.2) There are many sample requirements that must be taken into account in order to validate a research project. An appropriate target population of a significant size must be used, normally with sample sizes increasing, the closer the discovery gets to being ready for clinics. Robust statistical analysis of validation data of potential biomarkers reduces the chance of bias.

(p3.3) There are current challenges with translating serum spectroscopic diagnostics to the clinic, demonstrated by the majority of studies performed involving small-scale laboratory-based experiments. To enable clinical translation, studies based on large populations are necessary. Focusing on procedural and instrumental standardization would enable regulatory requirements to be met. However, when moving from the laboratory to large clinical trials, funding issues and gaining regulatory approval can create a valley of death which hinders translation of promising techniques.
