# Accuracy of mucocutaneous leishmaniasis diagnosis using polymerase chain reaction: systematic literature review and meta-analysis

CorpusID: 8440815 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de8c4eccce68c6ab2e24d545b4993c4b977c5d81](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de8c4eccce68c6ab2e24d545b4993c4b977c5d81)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) RESULTS
(p1.0) At the end of the selection process, 14 papers were included based on the above-mentioned criteria (Fig. 1 One of the main reasons for heterogeneity among the selected papers was the composite reference standard used to define cases of MCL and controls. The patients were selected based on the compilation of clinical, epidemiological and parasitological criteria in only three studies. A common error observed in six papers was the inclusion of a PCR test to determine the inclusion and allocation criteria. Of the remaining studies, three used parasitological criteria, one used clinical criteria and one did not report the diagnostic criteria used.

(p1.1) One paper clearly stated the calculation of a sample size  considering only the expected sensitivity of the tested diagnostic methods. Seven papers used a case-control design, whereas the other onehalf of the papers used a cross-sectional/cohort design for the recruitment and allocation (Table III).

(p1.2) With respect to the type of samples analysed, three used blood samples, one used urine samples, one used  lesion scrapings, one used lesion aspirates, one used nasal swabs and biopsies and seven used tissue samples collected by biopsy. The data on the positivity and characteristics of the tests are detailed in Tables II, IV. The studies that exhibited greater accuracy for MCL using PCR were performed using tissue samples (Deborggraeve et al. 2008.

(p1.3) With respect to the properties of the diagnostic tests, specificity tended to be the highest. Ten papers had a specificity of 100% and two reported a specificity of less than 90%. The level of sensitivity reported in most of the papers was between 60-90%. Two papers reported sensitivities below 50% and one paper reported a sensitivity of 100%.

(p1.4) Critical analysis of the selected papers -The analysis was performed using the QUADAS tool (Fig. 2) and indicated that the largest amount of data not reported in the papers (a "no" response) were related to the last two questions, which inquired about inconclusive results and records for the loss of patients in the studies. The cases in which the response was ''unclear'' were most frequently observed for questions 10, 11 and 12, thus indicating that the selected papers did not obviously report whether the examiner was blind to the reference standard during the application of the evaluated test and vice versa. This result additionally indicated that most of the papers did not explicitly detail whether the data evaluated in the present study were consistent with the data used in clinical practice.
## (s3) Properties of the diagnostic tests -
(p3.0) The results revealed that the major factor responsible for the variations in diagnostic accuracy among the studies was the sensitivity value. It is difficult to assign a specific reason for increases or decreases in sensitivity. However, an unbiased analysis of the results supports the conclusion that specificity remains relatively stable even with extreme increases in sensitivity. Factors such as reductions in the molecular weight of the fragments amplified by primers and the use of commercial kits to extract DNA did not increase the proportion of false positive tests. This information was confirmed using an analysis of the generated the summary ROC curve (Fig. 4).

(p3.1) Random effects bivariate logit-normal sensitivity and specificity estimates are recommended for metaanalyses of diagnostic studies (Simel & Bossuyt 2009). However, these estimates are considered more complex methodologies (Simel & Bossuyt 2009). Some authors suggest that the use of univariate methods is not likely to result in significant changes. An analysis of the pooled results in the univariate and bivariate models confirmed similarities between the methods (Table V).

(p3.2) These results confirmed the high specificity of the PCR techniques for the diagnosis of MCL, which could be considered an important advantage compared with the unspecific immunological tests. In addition, the sensitivity was greater than the values described for the parasitological tests (Gomes et al. 2014b). These results confirm previous reports that consider PCR to be the most accurate method for the diagnosis of MCL (Gomes et al. 2014a).

(p3.3) Limitations -One of the most important limitations of this study is that we excluded studies with fewer than eight cases of MCL. This decision aimed to define a minimal relevance of studies because of an initial intention to include non-controlled studies and to use only simpler univariate methods of aggregation. This procedure was based on existing recommendations for sample size calculation in diagnostic test studies. As an example, a sample size of eight patients would only be sufficient if a low confidence interval inferior limit were set in association with an expected sensitivity level greater than 95%, which is not realistic for the diagnosis of MCL (Flahault et al. 2005, Bailly et al. 2014. We hypothesise that the existence of a considerable quantity of references with fewer than eight cases that fulfil all of the inclusion criteria is not probable. In addition, studies with a sample size that is insufficiently small would have a lower influence on the final result of the meta-analysis.

(p3.4) The use of QUADAS was selected instead of its more recent version QUADAS 2. Although the methods measure identical characteristics, the newer version allows a written description of four key domains (patient selection, index test, reference standard and flow/timing) (Whiting et al. 2011). Because we constructed a simplified tool that covered these domains and the domains related to molecular biology procedures (Table II), we decided to use the QUADAS for simplicity and to avoid the duplication of data collection. The absence of a third reviewer for the analysis of the QUADAS classification (Fig. 2) could have reduced the precision of this procedure. We reasonably considered that any mistake occurring during the classification would be highly influenced by an unclear description of the methodologies. In this case, the discrepancies were classified as "unclear".

(p3.5) The heterogeneous application of the composite reference standard in the selected papers ensures that it is difficult to separate the patients with CL or MCL. The simultaneous inclusion of these two forms of ATL was identified in nine studies, which may have increased the risk of bias during the extraction of the data from the stud- ies. After constructing the 2 x 2 table and calculating the sensitivity, specificity, predictive values and accuracy, the authors of previously selected papers were contacted by email to retrieve the incomplete data and confirm the accuracy of the data. This approach aimed to reduce possible discrepancies between the accomplishments of the study and the possible interpretations of the scientific paper.
## (s13) RESULTS
(p13.0) At the end of the selection process, 14 papers were included based on the above-mentioned criteria (Fig. 1 One of the main reasons for heterogeneity among the selected papers was the composite reference standard used to define cases of MCL and controls. The patients were selected based on the compilation of clinical, epidemiological and parasitological criteria in only three studies. A common error observed in six papers was the inclusion of a PCR test to determine the inclusion and allocation criteria. Of the remaining studies, three used parasitological criteria, one used clinical criteria and one did not report the diagnostic criteria used.

(p13.1) One paper clearly stated the calculation of a sample size  considering only the expected sensitivity of the tested diagnostic methods. Seven papers used a case-control design, whereas the other onehalf of the papers used a cross-sectional/cohort design for the recruitment and allocation (Table III).

(p13.2) With respect to the type of samples analysed, three used blood samples, one used urine samples, one used  lesion scrapings, one used lesion aspirates, one used nasal swabs and biopsies and seven used tissue samples collected by biopsy. The data on the positivity and characteristics of the tests are detailed in Tables II, IV. The studies that exhibited greater accuracy for MCL using PCR were performed using tissue samples (Deborggraeve et al. 2008.

(p13.3) With respect to the properties of the diagnostic tests, specificity tended to be the highest. Ten papers had a specificity of 100% and two reported a specificity of less than 90%. The level of sensitivity reported in most of the papers was between 60-90%. Two papers reported sensitivities below 50% and one paper reported a sensitivity of 100%.

(p13.4) Critical analysis of the selected papers -The analysis was performed using the QUADAS tool (Fig. 2) and indicated that the largest amount of data not reported in the papers (a "no" response) were related to the last two questions, which inquired about inconclusive results and records for the loss of patients in the studies. The cases in which the response was ''unclear'' were most frequently observed for questions 10, 11 and 12, thus indicating that the selected papers did not obviously report whether the examiner was blind to the reference standard during the application of the evaluated test and vice versa. This result additionally indicated that most of the papers did not explicitly detail whether the data evaluated in the present study were consistent with the data used in clinical practice.
## (s15) Properties of the diagnostic tests -
(p15.0) The results revealed that the major factor responsible for the variations in diagnostic accuracy among the studies was the sensitivity value. It is difficult to assign a specific reason for increases or decreases in sensitivity. However, an unbiased analysis of the results supports the conclusion that specificity remains relatively stable even with extreme increases in sensitivity. Factors such as reductions in the molecular weight of the fragments amplified by primers and the use of commercial kits to extract DNA did not increase the proportion of false positive tests. This information was confirmed using an analysis of the generated the summary ROC curve (Fig. 4).

(p15.1) Random effects bivariate logit-normal sensitivity and specificity estimates are recommended for metaanalyses of diagnostic studies (Simel & Bossuyt 2009). However, these estimates are considered more complex methodologies (Simel & Bossuyt 2009). Some authors suggest that the use of univariate methods is not likely to result in significant changes. An analysis of the pooled results in the univariate and bivariate models confirmed similarities between the methods (Table V).

(p15.2) These results confirmed the high specificity of the PCR techniques for the diagnosis of MCL, which could be considered an important advantage compared with the unspecific immunological tests. In addition, the sensitivity was greater than the values described for the parasitological tests (Gomes et al. 2014b). These results confirm previous reports that consider PCR to be the most accurate method for the diagnosis of MCL (Gomes et al. 2014a).

(p15.3) Limitations -One of the most important limitations of this study is that we excluded studies with fewer than eight cases of MCL. This decision aimed to define a minimal relevance of studies because of an initial intention to include non-controlled studies and to use only simpler univariate methods of aggregation. This procedure was based on existing recommendations for sample size calculation in diagnostic test studies. As an example, a sample size of eight patients would only be sufficient if a low confidence interval inferior limit were set in association with an expected sensitivity level greater than 95%, which is not realistic for the diagnosis of MCL (Flahault et al. 2005, Bailly et al. 2014. We hypothesise that the existence of a considerable quantity of references with fewer than eight cases that fulfil all of the inclusion criteria is not probable. In addition, studies with a sample size that is insufficiently small would have a lower influence on the final result of the meta-analysis.

(p15.4) The use of QUADAS was selected instead of its more recent version QUADAS 2. Although the methods measure identical characteristics, the newer version allows a written description of four key domains (patient selection, index test, reference standard and flow/timing) (Whiting et al. 2011). Because we constructed a simplified tool that covered these domains and the domains related to molecular biology procedures (Table II), we decided to use the QUADAS for simplicity and to avoid the duplication of data collection. The absence of a third reviewer for the analysis of the QUADAS classification (Fig. 2) could have reduced the precision of this procedure. We reasonably considered that any mistake occurring during the classification would be highly influenced by an unclear description of the methodologies. In this case, the discrepancies were classified as "unclear".

(p15.5) The heterogeneous application of the composite reference standard in the selected papers ensures that it is difficult to separate the patients with CL or MCL. The simultaneous inclusion of these two forms of ATL was identified in nine studies, which may have increased the risk of bias during the extraction of the data from the stud- ies. After constructing the 2 x 2 table and calculating the sensitivity, specificity, predictive values and accuracy, the authors of previously selected papers were contacted by email to retrieve the incomplete data and confirm the accuracy of the data. This approach aimed to reduce possible discrepancies between the accomplishments of the study and the possible interpretations of the scientific paper.
## (s25) RESULTS
(p25.0) At the end of the selection process, 14 papers were included based on the above-mentioned criteria (Fig. 1 One of the main reasons for heterogeneity among the selected papers was the composite reference standard used to define cases of MCL and controls. The patients were selected based on the compilation of clinical, epidemiological and parasitological criteria in only three studies. A common error observed in six papers was the inclusion of a PCR test to determine the inclusion and allocation criteria. Of the remaining studies, three used parasitological criteria, one used clinical criteria and one did not report the diagnostic criteria used.

(p25.1) One paper clearly stated the calculation of a sample size  considering only the expected sensitivity of the tested diagnostic methods. Seven papers used a case-control design, whereas the other onehalf of the papers used a cross-sectional/cohort design for the recruitment and allocation (Table III).

(p25.2) With respect to the type of samples analysed, three used blood samples, one used urine samples, one used  lesion scrapings, one used lesion aspirates, one used nasal swabs and biopsies and seven used tissue samples collected by biopsy. The data on the positivity and characteristics of the tests are detailed in Tables II, IV. The studies that exhibited greater accuracy for MCL using PCR were performed using tissue samples (Deborggraeve et al. 2008.

(p25.3) With respect to the properties of the diagnostic tests, specificity tended to be the highest. Ten papers had a specificity of 100% and two reported a specificity of less than 90%. The level of sensitivity reported in most of the papers was between 60-90%. Two papers reported sensitivities below 50% and one paper reported a sensitivity of 100%.

(p25.4) Critical analysis of the selected papers -The analysis was performed using the QUADAS tool (Fig. 2) and indicated that the largest amount of data not reported in the papers (a "no" response) were related to the last two questions, which inquired about inconclusive results and records for the loss of patients in the studies. The cases in which the response was ''unclear'' were most frequently observed for questions 10, 11 and 12, thus indicating that the selected papers did not obviously report whether the examiner was blind to the reference standard during the application of the evaluated test and vice versa. This result additionally indicated that most of the papers did not explicitly detail whether the data evaluated in the present study were consistent with the data used in clinical practice.
## (s27) Properties of the diagnostic tests -
(p27.0) The results revealed that the major factor responsible for the variations in diagnostic accuracy among the studies was the sensitivity value. It is difficult to assign a specific reason for increases or decreases in sensitivity. However, an unbiased analysis of the results supports the conclusion that specificity remains relatively stable even with extreme increases in sensitivity. Factors such as reductions in the molecular weight of the fragments amplified by primers and the use of commercial kits to extract DNA did not increase the proportion of false positive tests. This information was confirmed using an analysis of the generated the summary ROC curve (Fig. 4).

(p27.1) Random effects bivariate logit-normal sensitivity and specificity estimates are recommended for metaanalyses of diagnostic studies (Simel & Bossuyt 2009). However, these estimates are considered more complex methodologies (Simel & Bossuyt 2009). Some authors suggest that the use of univariate methods is not likely to result in significant changes. An analysis of the pooled results in the univariate and bivariate models confirmed similarities between the methods (Table V).

(p27.2) These results confirmed the high specificity of the PCR techniques for the diagnosis of MCL, which could be considered an important advantage compared with the unspecific immunological tests. In addition, the sensitivity was greater than the values described for the parasitological tests (Gomes et al. 2014b). These results confirm previous reports that consider PCR to be the most accurate method for the diagnosis of MCL (Gomes et al. 2014a).

(p27.3) Limitations -One of the most important limitations of this study is that we excluded studies with fewer than eight cases of MCL. This decision aimed to define a minimal relevance of studies because of an initial intention to include non-controlled studies and to use only simpler univariate methods of aggregation. This procedure was based on existing recommendations for sample size calculation in diagnostic test studies. As an example, a sample size of eight patients would only be sufficient if a low confidence interval inferior limit were set in association with an expected sensitivity level greater than 95%, which is not realistic for the diagnosis of MCL (Flahault et al. 2005, Bailly et al. 2014. We hypothesise that the existence of a considerable quantity of references with fewer than eight cases that fulfil all of the inclusion criteria is not probable. In addition, studies with a sample size that is insufficiently small would have a lower influence on the final result of the meta-analysis.

(p27.4) The use of QUADAS was selected instead of its more recent version QUADAS 2. Although the methods measure identical characteristics, the newer version allows a written description of four key domains (patient selection, index test, reference standard and flow/timing) (Whiting et al. 2011). Because we constructed a simplified tool that covered these domains and the domains related to molecular biology procedures (Table II), we decided to use the QUADAS for simplicity and to avoid the duplication of data collection. The absence of a third reviewer for the analysis of the QUADAS classification (Fig. 2) could have reduced the precision of this procedure. We reasonably considered that any mistake occurring during the classification would be highly influenced by an unclear description of the methodologies. In this case, the discrepancies were classified as "unclear".

(p27.5) The heterogeneous application of the composite reference standard in the selected papers ensures that it is difficult to separate the patients with CL or MCL. The simultaneous inclusion of these two forms of ATL was identified in nine studies, which may have increased the risk of bias during the extraction of the data from the stud- ies. After constructing the 2 x 2 table and calculating the sensitivity, specificity, predictive values and accuracy, the authors of previously selected papers were contacted by email to retrieve the incomplete data and confirm the accuracy of the data. This approach aimed to reduce possible discrepancies between the accomplishments of the study and the possible interpretations of the scientific paper.
