# Tuberculosis and pneumonia in HIV- infected children: an overview

CorpusID: 860223 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b07e840778c50c3b0211f13aaac91944d3c5c29c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b07e840778c50c3b0211f13aaac91944d3c5c29c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Prevention
(p3.0) The most important tools we have to mitigate the HIVassociated risk of developing TB infection and disease are (i) access to ART for adults and children with HIV; and (ii) use of IPT. In the Children with HIV Early Antiretroviral Therapy (CHER) trial, conducted in Cape Town and Johannesburg, South Africa, TB occurred in 8.3% of children receiving early ART (initiated before12 weeks of age) and in 20% of children receiving delayed ART (commenced only after specific clinical and immunologic criteria were met) [29]. When ART is initiated in older children, reductions in presumed and confirmed incident TB of 32-70% are documented [8]. Nevertheless, HIV-infected children have more TB than their uninfected peers, including in low-burden settings [8,30]. A transient increase in risk can also be expected in the first 3 months of therapy as part of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) [31,32].

(p3.1) Though there is a decline in the number of children commencing ART only when they are severely immunocompromised, this situation is still common. In 2010 in Asia, Africa and South America, 63% of HIV-infected children in low-income countries, 66% in low-middle-income and 58% in upper-middle-income countries were already severely immunocompromised when commencing ART, compared with 19% of HIV-infected children in the United States [33]. Access to ART with broad penetration into the community will impact the epidemiology of TB, because there will be a decrease in adult cases of pulmonary disease. This is already clear from the decline in adult and pediatric TB cases in South Africa as the adult ART uptake increased. In Soweto, South Africa, ART access in TB in HIV-uninfected children declined from 18.7 to 11.0 per 100,000 [34].
## (s5) Treatment
(p5.0) The potential drug interactions between the TB therapy and ART are well known and, in general, TB therapy should not change. A dual treatment plan should consider the following questions:

(p5.1) 1) What is the suspected or confirmed susceptibility pattern of M. tuberculosis and which drugs should be used? 2) Are alternative rifamycins to rifampicin available? 3) Which ART regimen is preferred AND can a suppressive regimen be given safely? 4) What are the potential drug interactions AND can adjustments be made if rifampicin is the only rifamycin available?

(p5.2) In the absence of ART, high mortality in HIV-infected children with TB was reported [49,54] and continued with delayed ART initiation, especially when TB was the presenting diagnosis. Most deaths occurred within the first 2 months of delayed ART initiation and were not always directly TB-related [28].
