# Oxygenation, Ventilation, and Airway Management in Out-of-Hospital Cardiac Arrest: A Review

CorpusID: 8674823 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1b9c31ce8cbeab4879d103668e326704d68e836f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1b9c31ce8cbeab4879d103668e326704d68e836f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Oxygenation in Cardiac
(p2.0) Arrest. Oxygen requirements in cardiac arrest and in the period after return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) have been extensively studied during recent years. Maximizing oxygen delivery (DO 2 ) is paramount during the period of cardiac arrest and ineffective 2 BioMed Research International circulation for aerobic metabolism and synthesis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) [4,5]. High paO 2 does not cause intracellular or tissue hyperoxia at this time. The consensus is that, during cardiac arrest, 100% oxygen should be delivered to victims in order to increase arterial and tissue pO 2 [6,7]. Debate continues as to whether oxygen should be delivered via bag-mask ventilation, tracheal tube, supraglottic airway devices or via passive oxygenation [8,9]. What is more controversial is the most appropriate oxygen fraction (FiO 2 ) to deliver once restoration of spontaneous circulation has been achieved [10]. Oxygenation strategies in the post-ROSC period are described in detail in another section of this paper.
## (s3) Concept of Passive
(p3.0) Oxygenation. The concept of continuous passive flow of oxygen to the airway was developed on animal models (dogs) in 1982 [11]. Same authors showed that anesthetized and paralyzed dogs may be oxygenated using this method for a relatively long period [12]. Passive oxygenation was first described in humans in 1991 [13]. Brochard and colleagues used specially equipped tracheal tubes with inserted microcannulas which allowed delivery of a constant flow of concentrated oxygen in ICU patients during disconnections of their breathing circuit. This study was followed by Saïssy et al. who evaluated passive insufflation of oxygen in adult patients during cardiac arrest outside the healthcare facilities [14]. The design of this study was prospective, randomized, and controlled. In total, 48 persons were managed using passive oxygenation, while, in the control group, another 47 patients were ventilated with intermittent positive pressure ventilation. There were no differences in the main outcomes studied-percentage of patients with ROSC or number of victims surviving until hospital admission.
## (s4) Airway Management Strategies.
(p4.0) Management of the patent airway during OHCA may be divided into basic and advanced. Basic airway management consists of the manual relieving of upper airway obstruction ("triple maneuver"), bag-valve mask ventilation (BMV), or the insertion of oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airway [6,7]. Techniques of advanced airway management include the insertion of a supraglottic airway device (SAD) [23], tracheal intubation [24], insertion of Combitube [25], or cricothyrotomy [26]. For many years, all resuscitation algorithms and protocols recommended early tracheal intubation as a part of prehospital advanced life support (ALS). Arguments favoring early tracheal intubation mainly revolved around expectations for better control of the airway, protection against upper airway obstruction, decreased risk for aspiration of gastric contents, and better control of carbon dioxide removal [25]. The strategy of airway management in OHCA in adult patients has gradually shifted towards less invasive techniques during the last decade. ERC guidelines from 2010 recommend performing prehospital tracheal intubation only if a competent intubator is present at the site of OHCA, and with only minimal interruption of chest compressions [6,8]. AHA guidelines recommend using the most familiar device for the rescuer and conclude that an insertion of supraglottic airway device may be an equivalent to bag-mask ventilation or tracheal intubation [7].
## (s5) Tracheal Intubation.
(p5.0) The major concerns associated with prehospital tracheal intubation in OHCA include a low success rate, long duration of intubation attempts with interruption of chest compressions, and unrecognized tube misplacement or inadvertent esophageal insertion [27]. The total success rate of prehospital tracheal intubation performed by nonphysicians varies between 75 and 90% [26][27][28]. Jones and colleagues found that 5.8% of all patients intubated outside hospital had their tracheal tube outside the trachea [29]. Bair et al. reported a 2% incidence of incorrect positioning of the tracheal tube at admission to hospital, unrecognized by paramedics [30]. Other authors reported an even higher incidence of tracheal tube malpositioning-6.7% of esophageal intubation and 10.7% of endobronchial intubation [31]. The correct positioning of the tracheal tube inside the trachea should be always confirmed by an etCO 2 detection device. An esophageal detector device can be used to avoid esophageal placement [32]. Wang et al. evaluated the impact of intubation errors in the out-of-hospital setting on patient outcome [33]. One or more errors were reported in 22.7% of patients (failed tracheal intubation in 15%, multiple attempts in 3%, and tube malpositioning also in 3%). However, these errors were not directly linked to increased mortality. Difficulties with, and failures of, tracheal intubation in the prehospital environment may be caused by conditions which are often far from ideal-too little or too much light, patient position, and lack of space-and exacerbated by the low exposure of many paramedics to regular tracheal intubation. The average incidence of tracheal intubation performed by individual EMS providers is estimated at between 1 and 4 per annum [27,34]. The incidence of difficult intubation in prehospital medicine is over 10%, with independent contributing factors being obstructed airway, intubation on the floor, and a distance between hyoid bone and tip of the chin less than 4.5 cm [35].

(p5.1) Attempts for tracheal intubation may cause significant interruption to chest compressions during CPR for OHCA. The median duration of interruptions caused by tracheal intubation was 109.5 s, with more than one-third of patients requiring more than two attempts for successful tracheal intubation [36]. Another study evaluated the number of attempts needed for successful tracheal tube placement in the prehospital setting [37]. More than one attempt was required in more than 30% of patients. Cumulative success rate in OHCA for the first three intubation attempts was 69.9%, 84.9%, and 89.9%, respectively. However, the success rate for tracheal intubation was significantly higher in OHCA patients than in the scenario of nonarrested subjects requiring sedation. Egly et al. studied the influence of prehospital intubation on survival of patients with OHCA [38]. Retrospective analysis included 1515 cases of OHCA. Patients with ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia who were intubated showed lower survival rate to discharge while, in the whole cohort, there was no difference found between intubated and nonintubated subjects.

(p5.2) Some countries, as Germany, Austria, or the Czech Republic, have physicians trained in anesthesia or emergency medicine available as part of a coordinated prehospital ambulance service response. The risks associated with tracheal intubation amongst these services are therefore lower, with the first pass and overall success rates being higher.
## (s6) Supraglottic Airway Devices.
(p6.0) Several studies have compared the insertion of a supraglottic airway device (SAD) with conventional tracheal intubation in cardiopulmonary resuscitation in the adult population. Percieved benefits of an alternative airway management using an SAD in cardiac arrest include a shorter time of device insertion and higher success rates than tracheal intubation when performed by paramedics and other nonanesthesiologists [23]. Most published studies are nonrandomized mainly due to ethical reasons.
## (s7) Bag-Valve Mask Ventilation.
(p7.0) Bag-valve mask ventilation (BMV) is a fundamental basic airway skill. During its application with a self-inflating bag, maintenance of a patent upper airway is mandatory. This can be achieved with a "triple maneuver" (jaw thrust and neck extension) or with the insertion of an oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airway [25]. BMV is an easy method, often applicable without difficulty by paramedics or even by laypersons. Using intermittent positive pressure ventilation, the main adverse effects associated with BMV are stomach distension, airway leak (up to 40%), and lack of protection of the airway against aspiration [50]. Regurgitation may occur in 12.4% of patients ventilated with BMV during OHCA while insertion of LMA may decrease this risk to 3.5% [50]. Another study showed an even higher incidence of this complication-20% of patients regurgitated at the scene and 24% of all resuscitated persons had radiological findings of aspiration on chest X-ray after admission to hospital [55]. All patients were intubated at the scene. A prospective population-based study (All-Japan Utstein Registry) evaluated 649,359 patients with OHCA [56]. Primary outcome of this trial was neurological outcome related to different airway management technique during CPR and prehospital emergency care after ROSC. In total, 57% of patients were managed using bag-mask valve ventilation while 37% of them had inserted a supraglottic airway device and only 6% underwent prehospital tracheal intubation. BMV was associated with a significantly higher chance for neurologically favorable outcome than tracheal intubation or supraglottic airway device insertion. No difference in terms of neurologically intact survival was reported between patients receiving tracheal intubation or a supraglottic airway device.

(p7.1) In another smaller study, a group of patients with OHCA managed using BMV showed a comparable rate of survival without neurological deficit compared to patients who underwent prehospital tracheal intubation [57].
## (s9) Hyperventilation and the Effect of Positive Airway Pressure.
(p9.0) Hyperventilation and intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) "per se" have negative effects on circulation during CPR and after ROSC [69]. Positive airway and intrathoracic pressures during the mechanical inspiration phase of the breathing cycle cause a significant decrease in venous return to the thoracic cavity, reducing preload to the right heart [70]. Hyperinflation results not only in a fall in cardiac output and performance of the right ventricle, but also cause a significant reduction in coronary perfusion pressure [69] enhancing hypotension [71]. In published studies, most paramedics ventilated patients at a higher frequency and at higher inspiratory pressures than recommended [72]. A special device-impedance threshold device (ITD)-has been developed in order to reduce intrathoracic pressures, with a resulting improvement in venous return and coronary blood flow during CPR [73,74]. A valve inside the ITD closes during chest wall recoil and helps to create a negative intrathoracic pressure as low as −13 mmHg [75]. Various clinical studies have assessed the effect of ITD on survival and neurological outcome after OHCA. In total, seven randomized controlled trials have assessed the ITD in prehospital emergency care. A study by Plaisance et al. showed better coronary perfusion and higher diastolic pressures in patients treated with ITD valve [76] while another trial compared the use of ITD with a sham device during CPR in twentytwo patients with OHCA and showed marked improvement in systolic pressure in the ITD group [77]. Use of the ITD combined with active compression-decompression was associated with increased hospital admission and short-term survival rates [78,79]. Aufderheide et al. compared ITD with a sham device during standard CPR in 230 patients [71]. The subgroup of people who presented with a pulseless electrical activity (PEA) showed higher 24 h survival, while there was no difference in patients with VF or asystole. A meta-analysis based on available trials [80] concluded that the use of ITD may improve short-term outcome after OHCA. None of the studies evaluated hospital discharge rate in terms of neurological deficit. A robust multinational study unfortunately did not confirm the conclusions of this meta-analysis [81]. The authors evaluated 8,718 patients with OHCA randomly allocated to an active treatment with ITD and to sham group and found no differences in survival, ROSC, or recovery without neurological dysfunction. Similar concerns were also reported by some animal studies. These trials reported either no positive effect of ITD [82,83] or indeed a worse outcome in the ITD groups [84].
## (s12) Ventilation and Carbon Dioxide Tension after ROSC.
(p12.0) Controlled ventilation affects carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) tension in the vascular system. Cardiac arrest is typically associated with profound metabolic acidosis. Previously, strategies have recommended hyperventilation after ROSC with the aim of decreasing PaCO 2 and thus stabilizing the pH of arterial blood. However, a deleterious effect on brain circulation is seen if hyperventilation results in hypocapnia [94]. Cerebral hyperperfusion occurs immediately after ROSC and can persist for up to 30 minutes. The subsequent period is characterized by significantly reduced cerebral blood flow. Hypocapnia during this period potentiates vasoconstriction, which can further aggravate postresuscitation hypoxic brain injury [7]. On the other hand, insufficient CO 2 removal is associated with hypercapnia contributing to the vasodilation of cerebral vessels and elevated intracranial pressure (ICP).

(p12.1) Falkenbach et al. highlighted the effect of postresuscitation therapeutic hypothermia on PaCO 2 level [95]. Hypothermia decreases metabolic rate and carbon dioxide production. In their multicenter study, approximately 45% of patients experienced hypocapnia or hypercapnia, both of which negatively affect brain perfusion. The results of this study support the necessity of frequent and regular optimization of ventilator settings in the first 48 hours after OHCA. A number of studies have evaluated the effects of hypercapnia and hypocapnia on outcomes in adult patients after cardiac arrest. The database of the Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society (16,542 patients) has shown higher mortality and lower discharge rates in hypocapnic patients when compared with normocapnic and hypercapnic victims [96]. Roberts and colleagues analyzed adult cardiac arrest registry data from 193 victims and found that 69% of them experienced pathological values of PaCO 2 after OHCA [97]. Both hypocapnia and hypercapnia were associated with worsened neurological outcome. Lee et al. studied the relationship between blood gas tensions and outcome in 213 patients after OHCA treated with therapeutic hypothermia [98]. Hypocapnia was associated with higher in-hospital mortality; both hyperoxemia and hypoxemia were associated with worsened neurological outcome.

(p12.2) ERC guidelines suggest maintaining normocapnia during postresuscitation care [6]. AHA 2010 guidelines recommend monitoring of CO 2 tension with capnography and arterial blood gas analysis and keeping its level within the physiological range (PaCO 2 40-45 mmHg; PetCO 2 35-40 mmHg) [7].
## (s13) Conclusions
(p13.0) During last decade, many papers have evaluated the issues of respiration, oxygenation, and airway management in OHCA. Some of them have been high-quality randomized controlled trials, moving the science of resuscitation forward and changing established algorithms and resuscitation protocols. The main finding arising from these studies is that, in OHCA of cardiac origin in adults, significantly interrupting chest compressions for the purposes of advanced airway management have a negative impact on patient survival and neurological outcome [36,99]. These findings have prompted changes in BLS of adult patients with OHCA of nontraumatic origin. CAB (circulation-airway-breathing) has evolved from ABC [100] with the development of a new resuscitation philosophycardiocerebral resuscitation (CCR) [101,102].

(p13.1) Passive oxygenation has its advocates, but one can object that its main beneficial effect is actually in minimizing the interruption of chest compressions in comparison with advanced airway management techniques.

(p13.2) The role of extracorporeal techniques on survival in patients after OHCA remains unclear. A few studies have demonstrated its benefit in patients with persisting cardiac arrest and with reactive pupils, though other trials have failed to report any significant benefit with this technique.

(p13.3) The choice of airway management technique in OHCA remains controversial. Although bag-valve mask ventilation has been repeatedly associated with better survival-including better neurological function than advanced techniques of airway management, the risk of regurgitation and aspiration cannot be underestimated. Tracheal intubation in the hands of experienced operators is still a reliable method. The evidence would suggest, however, that it should not be employed by individuals with low skills, limited experience, or infrequent exposure [37,103]. The insertion of a supraglottic airway device in OHCA is probably associated with worse patient outcomes than other methods of airway management.

(p13.4) A few studies have explored the harmful effects of hyperoxemia, hyperventilation, and excessive chest inflation on patient outcome following OHCA. A significant number of these studies were performed on animal models with a small number of probands, and their interpolation to humans is difficult [104,105]. Initial studies related to the use of an impedance threshold device (ITD), which protects against lung hyperinflation and helps to create a negative intrathoracic pressure, were promising in patients with OHCA of cardiac origin [73]. Unfortunately, a recent large trial did not show any beneficial effect of ITD on long-term survival with good neurological function [81].

(p13.5) The deleterious effects of pathological PaCO 2 values after ROSC on neurological outcome have been repeatedly described. Dyscarbia is a very common finding during therapeutic hypothermia in the postresuscitation period due to the decreased metabolic demand of patients [95]. Clinicians should maintain PaCO 2 in the upper physiological values after ROSC.
