# A Survey on Video Summarization Techniques

CorpusID: 86551835 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9bade31b7e1d1210167e51f7f253926d28679071](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9bade31b7e1d1210167e51f7f253926d28679071)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Now days, video surveillance technology has become in every sphere of our life. But automated video surveillance generates huge quantities of data, which ultimately does rely upon manual inspection at some stage. Video Shortening has been a field of active research for a long time. However, the main focus was on either minimizing storage usage by compressing or removing redundant frames without loss of actual content. Improvement in video capturing devices and increasing popularity of social media, there are huge volumes of videos being captured and uploaded every second. Creating highlights of sports matches and many more are the fields where video summarization plays an important role. For example the sports highlights from cricket video using techniques of character reorganization. A short video summary is synthesized that includes the frames for the significant events termed as Highlights. The process of sports highlights generation is automated resulting in a summary for the viewer that reduces the time and space requirements [2] [8]. Due to the increasing volume of video content on the Web, and the human effort in use to process it, new technologies need to be researched in order to develop well-organized indexing and search techniques to manage effectively and efficiently the huge amount of video data. As the name implies, video summarization is a mechanism to produce a short summary of a video to offer to the user a artificial and helpful visual abstract of video sequence, it can either be a images (key frames) or moving images (video skims). Video summarization can be represented into two modes: A static video summary (story-board) and a dynamic video skimming. In one hand, static video summary represents a video sequence in a static imagery form (one or more selected representative frames from the original video, or a synthesized image generated from the selected key frames).
## (s6) C. Live Light Approach
(p6.0) Live light means Online Video high Lighting (Live Light). In this work, author proposes online video highlighting for generating short video summary of an unedited and unstructured video. Live light enables viewer to understand the video without watching the entire sequence. The live-light scans through the video stream split into a collection of video segments After processing of first few segments, it starts to make its own dictionary which will be kept updated for new video segment, the current version of dictionary sparsely reconstructed using group spare coding. If the small reconstruction error occurs that means content is already in current dictionary and this segment excluded from summary and the algorithm mores to next segment. On other hand, if the new video segment cannot be sparsely reconstructed that means high resolution error is occurred which mean that the unknown content from previous video data and update the dictionary according to video data [11].
