# A Survey on Multicarrier Communications: Prototype Filters, Lattice Structures, and Implementation Aspects

CorpusID: 875676 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b4d5db99097b71feac6051abdac863f8559b3787](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b4d5db99097b71feac6051abdac863f8559b3787)

Fields: Engineering, Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) The explosion of mobile applications and data usage in the recent years necessitate the development of adaptive, flexible, and efficient radio access technologies. To this end, multicarrier techniques have been extensively used over the last decade for broadband wireless communications. This wide interest is primarily due to their appealing characteristics, such as the support for multiuser diversity, simpler equalization, and adaptive modulation and coding techniques.

(p0.1) Among many other multicarrier techniques, orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) dominates the current broadband wireless communication systems. On the other hand, OFDM also suffers from several shortcomings such as high spectral leakage, stringent synchronization requirements, and susceptibility to frequency dispersion. Transition from the existing OFDM-based multicarrier systems to the next generation radio access technologies may follow two paths. In the first approach, existing OFDM structure is preserved, and its shortcomings are addressed through appropriate solutions [1]. Considering backward compatibility advantages with existing technologies, this approach has its own merits. The second approach follows a different rationale based on a generalized framework for multicarrier schemes [2], [3], which may lead to different techniques than OFDM. In this survey, we choose to go after the second approach since it provides a wider perspective for multicarrier schemes, with OFDM being a special case. Based on this strategy, the goals of the paper are listed as follow:

(p0.2) • To provide a unified framework for multicarrier schemes along with Gabor systems by emphasizing their basic elements: what to transmit, i.e., symbols, how to transmit, i.e., filters, and where/when to transmit, i.e., lattices; • To extend the understanding of existing multicarrier schemes by identifying the relations to each other; • To review the existing prototype filters in the literature considering their utilizations in multicarrier schemes; • To understand the trade-offs between different multicarrier schemes in practical scenarios; • To pave the way for the further developments by providing a wider perspective on multicarrier schemes. The survey is organized as follow: First, preliminary concepts and the terminology are presented in Section II. Various multicarrier schemes are provided in Section III, referring to the concepts introduced in Section II. Then, known prototype filters are identified and their trade-offs are discussed in Section IV. Useful tools and metrics to evaluate the filter performances are investigated in Section V, transceiver design issues for multicarrier schemes are investigated in Section VI, and, finally, the paper is concluded in Section VII.
## (s2) A. Fundamentals
(p2.0) In the classical paper by C. Shannon [29], a geometrical representation of communication systems is presented. According to this representation, messages and corresponding signals are points in two function spaces: message space and signal space. While a transmitter maps every point in the message space into the signal space, a receiver does the reverse operation. As long as the mapping is one-to-one from the message space to the signal space, a message is always recoverable at the receiver. Based on this framework, a waveform corresponds to a specific structure in the signal space and identifies the formation of the signals. Throughout this survey, the signal space is considered as a time-frequency plane where time and frequency constitute its coordinates, which is a wellknown notation for representing one dimensional signals in two dimensions [11], [12]. When the structure in signal space relies on multiple simultaneously-transmitted subcarriers, it corresponds to a multicarrier scheme. It is represented by

(p2.1) where m is the time index, k is the subcarrier index, X mk is the symbol (message) being transmitted, N is the number of subcarriers, and g mk (t) is the synthesis function which maps X mk into the signal space. The family of g mk (t) is referred to as a Gabor system, when it is given by

(p2.2) where p tx (t) is the prototype filter (also known as pulse shape, Gabor atom), τ 0 is the symbol spacing in time, and ν 0 is the subcarrier spacing. A Gabor system implies that a single pulse shape is considered as a prototype and others are derived from the prototype filter via some translations in time and modulations in frequency, as given in (2). The coordinates of the filters form a two dimensional structure in the time-frequency plane, known as lattice. Assuming a linear time-varying multipath channel h(τ, t), the received signal is obtained as

(p2.3) where w(t) is the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). Then, the symbolX nl located on time index n and subcarrier index l is obtained by the projection of the received signal onto the analysis function γ nl (t) as
## (s3) B. Symbols
(p3.0) Without loss of generality, the transmitted symbols are denoted by X mk ∈ C, where C is the set of all complex numbers. As a special case, it is possible to limit the set of X mk to real numbers, i.e. X mk ∈ R, where R is the set of all real numbers. One may choose X mk as a modulation symbol or a part of the modulation symbol, e.g. its real or imaginary part or a partition after a spreading operation. In addition, it is reasonable to consider finite number of elements in the set, based on the limited number of modulation symbols in digital communications. Note that the set of the symbols may be important for the perfect reconstruction of the symbols since its properties may lead one-to-one mapping from message space to the signal space [29], as in signaling over Weyl-Heisenberg frames, faster-than-Nyquist signaling, or partialresponse signaling [23], [24], [30], [31].
## (s4) C. Filters
(p4.0) In digital communication, symbols are always associated with pulse shapes (also known as filters). A pulse shape essentially corresponds to an energy distribution which indicates the density of the symbol energy (in time, frequency, or any other domain). Hence, it is one of the determining factors for the dispersion characteristics of the signal. At the receiver side, the dispersed energy due to the transmit pulse shape is coherently combined via receive filters. Thus, the transmit and receive filters jointly determine the amount of the energy transfered from the transmitter to the receiver. Also, they determine the correlation between the points in the lattice, which identify the structure of the multicarrier scheme, i.e., orthogonal, biorthogonal, or non-orthogonal.

(p4.1) 1) Matched Filtering: If the prototype filter employed at the receiver is the same as the one that the transmitter utilizes, i.e., p tx (t) = p rx (t), this approach corresponds to matched filtering, which maximizes signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). As opposed to matched filtering, one may also use different prototype filters at the transmitter and receiver, i.e., p tx (t) = p rx (t) [16].

(p4.2) 2) Orthogonality of Scheme: If the synthesis functions and the analysis functions do not produce any correlation between the different points in the lattice, i.e., g mk (t), γ nl (t) = δ mn δ kl , where δ is the Kronecker delta function, the scheme is either orthogonal or bi-orthogonal. Otherwise, the scheme is said to be non-orthogonal, i.e., g mk (t), γ nl (t) = δ mn δ kl . While orthogonal schemes dictate to the use of the same prototype filters at the transmitter and receiver, bi-orthogonal schemes allow to use different prototype filters at the transmitter and the receiver.

(p4.3) A nice interpretation on orthogonality and bi-orthogonality is provided in [18]. Let R be a Gram matrix given by R QQ H where Q H is a block-circulant matrix in which the columns consist of the modulated-translated vectors generated by an initial filter p(t). Then, the relation between the filters at the transmitter and the receiver for orthogonal and biorthogonal schemes can be investigated by
## (s12) D. Multicarrier Schemes with Spreading Approaches
(p12.0) Spreading operation is commonly used to reduce the peakto-average-power ratio (PAPR) in multicarrier schemes, in which modulation symbols are mapped to the multiple points in the lattice. One way to interpret and generalize the spreading operation in multicarrier systems (e.g., as in SC-FDMA [52] and filter-bank-spread-filter-bank multicarrier (FB-S-FBMC) [53]) is to consider another Gabor system that spreads the energy of the modulation symbols into multiple subcarriers. In other words, as opposed to using single Gabor system at the transmitter and receiver, two Gabor systems combined with serial-to-parallel conversions are employed at the transmitter and the receiver. For example, it can be said that SC-FDMA, which allows better PAPR characteristics and frequency domain equalization (FDE) along with CP utilization [54]- [57], employs an extra Gabor system equipped with a rectangular filter and δ(Λ) = 1 to spread the modulation symbols at the transmitter (i.e., discrete Fourier transformation (DFT)) and de-spread them at the receiver (i.e., inverse DFT). On the contrary, in OFDM, since there is no spreading of the modulation symbols in frequency domain, employed prototype filter for spreading is a Dirac function.
## (s13) E. Milestones for Orthogonal Schemes
(p13.0) Having discussed the different variations of multicarrier systems in the earlier subsections, this subsection provides a brief history on the development of aforementioned multicarrier systems. Earlier works related to orthogonal multicarrier schemes actually date back to 1960s [58], [59], which utilize a bank of filters for parallel data transmission. In [58], Chang presented the orthogonality condition for the multicarrier scheme schemes considering band-limited filters. This condition basically indicates that the subcarriers can be spaced half of the symbol rate apart without any interference. This scheme has then been re-visited by Saltzberg in 1967 [59] by showing the fact that Chang's condition is also true when the time and frequency axes are interchanged, based on OQAM. Indeed, Chang and Saltzberg exploits the lattice staggering for their multicarrier schemes which includes the basics of CMT and SMT. However, the idea of parallel transmission suggested in [58] and [59] were unreasonably expensive and complex for large number of data channels at that time. In [60], through the use of DFTs, Weinstein and Ebert eliminated the banks of subcarrier oscillators to allow simpler implementation of the multicarrier schemes. This approach has been later named as OFDM, and it has become more and more popular after 1980s due to its efficient implementation through fast Fourier transformation (FFT) techniques and FDE along with CP utilization [61] compared to other multicarrier schemes. On the other hand, Weinstein's DFT method in [60] limits the flexibility on different baseband filter utilization while modulating or demodulating the subcarriers, but instead used a time windowing technique to cope with the spectral leakage. In [62], by extending Weinstein's method, Hirosaki showed that different baseband filters may also be digitally implemented through DFT processing by using a polyphase network (PPN) [63], [64]. Several other developments over the last two decades have demonstrated low complexity and efficient implementations of lattice staggering, paving the way for its consideration in the next generation wireless standards (see e.g., [2], [15], [65], and the references listed therein).
## (s15) A. Design Criterion: Energy Concentration
(p15.0) In practice, limiting a pulse shape in time decreases the computational complexity and reduces the communications latency, which are inversely proportional to the filter length. However, using shorter or truncated filter may cause high sidelobes in the frequency domain. Prolate spheroidal wave functions (PSWFs) address this energy-concentration trade-off problem through obtaining a time-limited pulse with minimum out-of-band leakage or a band-limited pulse with maximal concentration within given interval. There are severals ways to characterize PSWFs [75]. A convenient definition for the prototype filter design is that PSWFs, {ψ n,τ,σ (t)}, is a family that includes the orthogonal functions which are optimal in terms of the energy concentration of a σ-bandlimited function on the interval [−τ, τ ], where n is the function order. In the family, ψ 0,τ,σ (t) is the most concentrated pulse and the concentration of the functions decreases with the function order. In other words, ψ n,τ,σ (t) is the most concentrated function after ψ n−1,τ,σ (t) and it is also orthogonal to ψ n−1,τ,σ (t). Hence, if one provides the filter length and the bandwidth (where the pulse should be concentrated) as the design constraints, the optimum pulse becomes ψ 0,τ,σ (t) constructed based on these constraints.

(p15.1) PSWFs have many appealing properties [67], [71]. For example, they are the eigenfunctions of the operation of firsttruncate-then-limit-the-bandwidth. Therefore, these functions can pass through this operation without any distortion or filtering effect excluding the scaling with a real coefficient, i.e, eigenvalue, which also corresponds to the energy after this operation. Assuming that the energy of the pulse is 1, eigenvalues will always be less than 1. Also, PSWFs correspond to an important family when τ = σ → ∞, known as Hermite-Gaussian functions which are the eigenfunctions of Fourier transformation. Hermite-Gaussian functions provide optimum concentration in time and frequency at the same time. Hence, they are able to give isotropic (same) responses in time and frequency. We also refer the reader to the detailed discussions on the properties of PSWFs in [66], [68]- [70], [75], [76] In the following subsections, the prototype filters that target time-frequency concentration are discussed. Their characteristics are inherently related with the PSWFs.

(p15.2) 1) Prolate Window: Prolate window addresses the energy concentration in frequency for a given filter length and bandwidth. In time domain, its expression corresponds to ψ 0,τ,σ (f ) or 0th order Slepian sequence in time for the discrete case [70]. This issue is explained as a sidelobe minimization problem in [2], as shown in TABLE I. The time and frequency characteristics of prolate window are given in Fig. 5.

(p15.3) 2) Kaiser Function: An efficient solution for a filter with finite length is proposed by Jim Kaiser by employing Bessel functions to achieve an approximation to the prolate window [72], [81]. It offers a suboptimal solution for the out-of-band leakage. A favorable property of Kaiser filter is its flexibility to control the sidelobes and stop-band attenuation, through a single design parameter β with a closed-form expression. The expression is given in TABLE I where I 0 (x) denotes the zeroth order modified Bessel function of the first kind. 
## (s19) 3) Optimal Finite Duration Pulses:
(p19.0) Although prolate window is an optimally-concentrated filter in terms of minimum sidelobe energy for a given filter length and bandwidth, it does not satisfy the Nyquist criterion that ensures zero-interference between the points in the lattice. Considering this fact, Vahlin exploits PSWFs to realize a new family which is referred as optimal finite duration pulse (OFDP) [74] by generalizing the optimization procedure given for single carrier, presented in [73]. The aim is to achieve a Nyquist filter in both time and frequency with the maximum energy in the main lobe for a given bandwidth and filter length. In order to develop these pulses, as summarized in TABLE I, Vahlin chooses the signal representation of OFDPs as the linear combinations of the PSWFs and formulates the constraints as an optimization problem to find the weights a l for lth PSWF for a given interval, using Lagrange multipliers and calculus of variations. Since only the even-indexed prolate functions are even-symmetrical, only a 2l are considered through the optimization procedure. By applying similar optimization procedure, OFDP has been utilized in [65]. Also, another optimization procedure which is based on deriving the composite matched filtering response of OFDP filter instead OFDP itself is suggested in [83] to reduce the optimization complexity.
## (s21) B. Design Criterion: Rapid-Decay
(p21.0) Even though PSWFs provide the optimum solution for the energy concentration problem, they do not address the rapiddecaying of the sidelobes, as can be seen in Fig. 5. Decaying of the sidelobes is related with the smoothness of a filter. It is known that smoothness is measured by the number of continuous derivatives. If the mth derivative of a function is impulsive, the sidelobes of the function in frequency falls at |ω| −m or 6m dB/octave, where ω is the angular frequency [79], [81], [87].
## (s22) 1) Raised-Cosine Function (Hanning Filter):
(p22.0) The Hanning filter whose shape is captured through a period of cosine function, is a smooth function in time. The zeroth and first order derivatives of the Hanning filter are continuous. Hence, sidelobes fall at 1/ |ω| 3 per octave, which corresponds to 18 dB/octave.

(p22.1) 2) Tapered-Cosine Function (Tukey Filter): Tapered-cosine function is a filter where the time-frequency localization is controlled by the roll-off factor (α). While tapered-cosine function where α = 0 results in rectangular shape, the shape becomes a raised-cosine function, i.e., Hanning filter, when α = 1. Hence, it provides a function family where the decaying range is between 6 dB/octave to 18 dB/octave.

(p22.2) 3) Root-Raised-Cosine Function: RRC is typically utilized to satisfy Nyquist criterion after matched filtering. It is derived from the raised-cosine filter. RRC where α = 1 is known as half-cosine function (HCF), which is employed in [2], [15], [36], [65], [84]. It provides a good compromise for time/frequency behavior; its relaxed transition bands allow approximation through a relatively short time-domain filter, while achieving high attenuation in the stop-band [2]. On the other hand, RRC filter with α = 0 becomes a sinc function. While sinc function results in minimal bandwidth, it is very susceptible to truncation in time.
## (s24) 5) Modified Kaiser Function:
(p24.0) Since Kaiser window is not a continuous function, it decays at the rate of 1/|ω|. In order to provide faster decaying, Kaiser window is modified to obtain  zeros at |t| = 1/2 [82].
## (s26) D. Design Criterion: Channel Characteristics and Hardware
(p26.0) Radio channel may hurt the orthogonality of the multicarrier schemes due to its dispersive characteristics in frequency and time, and causes inter-symbol interference (ISI) and intercarrier interference (ICI). In order to combat with ISI and ICI, one may design pulse optimized to minimize interference among the points in the lattice.

(p26.1) 1) Rectangular Function: Rectangular function distributes the symbol energy uniformly in time domain. It is the prototype filter for conventional CP-OFDM scheme. It provides an effective solution to combat with ICI and ISI in timeinvariant multipath channels via an extension on its duration   at the transmitter. This approach exploits the uniformity of rectangular function.

(p26.2) 2) Channel-based Pulses: Prototype filters can be designed to perform best for given channel characteristics. One of the methods is to use of optimally weighted combinations of the Hermite-Gaussian functions to construct new pulse shapes that are suitable for doubly dispersive channels. For example, in [92], the nulls in the ambiguity surface, which correspond to zero-interference regions, are widened using the Hermite-Gaussian functions to increase the robustness of the scheme in doubly dispersive channels. In [16], Hermite-Gaussian family is utilized as a basis to minimize ICI and ISI, while in [93], they are utilized to maximize the signal-to-interference ratio (SIR) considering biorthogonal schemes.

(p26.3) Based on different considerations, e.g. maximum signal-tointerference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) [21] and minimum ISI and ICI [22], [94], optimum pulses can be constructed using the Gaussian function itself an initial filter. As opposed to data communications, in [95], two prototype filter design procedures are proposed by relaxing the orthogonality constraint of the prototype filter for preamble transmission.

(p26.4) In addition to above considerations, one may design a prototype filter considering the hardware constraints. For example, a prototype filter which addresses the PAPR and timing jitter problems by minimizing the tails of the prototype filter is proposed in [96], which is shown in Fig. 8.
## (s34) B. Equalization
(p34.0) In a wireless communication medium, the transmitted signal arrives at the receiver after passing though a time-varying multipath channel. The multipath environment and the mobility disperse the transmitted signal both in time and frequency, which causes self-interference between the symbol in the lattice. As shown in [106] and analytically expressed in (28), the structure of the self-interference is related with the transmit filter, time and frequency dispersion characteristics of the communication medium, and the receive filter. An equalizer deals with the problem of removing the self-interference to accurately extract the desired symbols.
## (s35) regions.
(p35.0) For the schemes where δ(Λ) > 1, as in faster-than-Nyquist, partial-response signaling, or Weyl-Heisenberg frames, equalizers heavily deal with the intentional overlapping between the symbols rather than channel itself. Hence, the equalizers tend to be complex in such scenarios. For these schemes, the equalization process is combined with approaches that utilizes the discreteness of symbol, e.g., successive interference cancellation (SIC) [45], [46], [50], MLSE [51], or subspace classification [23].
## (s36) C. Time-Frequency Synchronization
(p36.0) The robustness of the multicarrier schemes against time/frequency synchronization errors, i.e., carrier frequency offset (CFO) and timing offset (TO), mainly depends on the null regions in the ambiguity surfaces. For example, CP utilization of the conventional OFDM scheme provides a wider null-region in time which increases the robustness of the scheme against timing errors. However, it does not provide any precaution against CFO. In Fig. 11, SIR performances of various filters are given for different TO and CFO values, using the expression in (24). Three main conclusions can be drawn from Fig. 11:
## (s38) E. Channel Estimation
(p38.0) Channel estimation methods for the multicarrier schemes which allow orthogonality in complex domain, e.g., CP-OFDM, are extensively available in the literature [132]. However, there are limited number of studies for the schemes with lattice staggering, and further work is needed to develop effective algorithms. Conventional approach for channel estimation is to transmit known symbols in the form of pilots or preambles:
## (s43) I. Complexity Analysis
(p43.0) One of the important criteria for the adoption of FBMC in the future wireless standards is whether it can yield sufficiently better gains than existing techniques such as OFDM, at the cost of a reasonable complexity increase. The complexity of FBMC has been investigated in the literature from different perspectives in [40], [62], [89], [113], [119], [156]- [160].

(p43.1) As discussed in [89], a major factor for complexity increase in FBMC is due to the replacement of IFFT/FFT in OFDM with the filter banks. When the Split-Radix algorithm is used, number of real multiplications required to implement FFT/IFFT operations over N subcarriers is given by [89], [161] C FFT/IFFT = N (log 2 (N ) − 3) + 4 .

(p43.2) On the other hand, for FBMC systems, complexity of synthesis and analysis filterbanks need to be separately investigated. The IFFT at the synthesis filterbank processes only real or imaginary samples (which are never complex), while the FFT in the analysis filterbank processes complex samples.
