# A REVIEW ON PHYTOSOMES: NOVEL APPROACH FOR HERBAL PHYTOCHEMICALS

CorpusID: 89694295 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1d64b2d527a67236e98dc8c5e35f9b488032a272](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1d64b2d527a67236e98dc8c5e35f9b488032a272)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry, Biology

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Most of the biologically active constituents of plants are polar or water soluble but due to the problem in absorption, restricts the utilization of these type of compounds which ultimately decreases the bioavailability.

(p0.1) For improvement of bioavailability, herbal products must have proper homeostasis between hydrophilic (for absorption into gastrointestinal tract fluid) and lipophilic (to cross lipid bio membrane balance) [1]. Plant preparations are widely used in traditional as well as modern medicine system. During the traditional time, various pharmacological studies have been carried out with many plants extracts and their constituents to check their therapeutic application. Over the past year, great advancement has been made for the development of novel drug delivery system (NDDS) for various plant extracts and their active constituents. Novel drug delivery such as targeted drug delivery which directly channels the active entity on the site of action and such delivery system could offer targeted and sustained release of drug so that pharmacological effect could be achieved at lower dose. The development in the area of herbal medicine started earlier to cure human diseases with lesser side effects [2].
## (s1) PREPARATION OF PHYTOSOME
(p1.0) Phytosomes are generally prepared by adding accurate amount of phospholipid, i.e., Soya lecithin with herbal extracts in an aprotic solvent. Soya lecithin contains main constituent, i.e., Phosphatidylcholine which is having a dual function. Phosphatidyl part is lipophilic in nature and choline part is hydrophillic in nature. The choline part attached with hydrophilic chief active constituents, where as phosphatidyl part lipid soluble compound attached with choline bound complex. It results in the formation of lipid complex with better stability and bioavailability [6].
## (s12) PREPARATION TECHNIQUES FOR PHYTOSOMES
(p12.0) a. Phytosome vesicles were made by thin layer rotary evaporator vacuum method. The phytosomal complex was mixed in anhydrous ethanol in 250 ml round bottom flask. The flask was attached to a rotary evaporator. The solvent will evaporate at a temperature about 60°C forming thin layer film around the flask. The film is hydrated by phosphate buffer having pH 7.4, and the lipid layer will peel off in phosphate buffer forming vesicle suspension. The phytosomal suspension was subjected to probe sonication with 60% amplitude. Phytosomal suspension will be stored in the refrigerator for 24 hrs, before characterization [51]. b. Phospholipid, i.e., soya lecithin was reacted with polyphenolic extract in an equal ratio with 5 mL of dichloromethane (DCM) with stirring until evaporate. Once the DCM was evaporated 5 mL of n-hexane, was added to the thin film with stirring and left in a fume hood for complete removal of the solvent. After complete removal of n-hexane, the thin film was hydrated and sonicated for desired phytosomal complex [52]. c. Weigh accurate amount of phospholipid and polyphenolic extract.
