# A review on health benefits of kombucha nutritional compounds and metabolites

CorpusID: 90806994 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd2da06842b31703376ae6f616eaa45115049f7b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd2da06842b31703376ae6f616eaa45115049f7b)

Fields: Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Kombucha definition
(p1.0) Kombucha is the name of the beverage obtained from the fermentation of tea, mainly black tea (there are also other varieties that can be used as a base for its preparation, such as green and oolong tea, also known as blue tea); with added sugar as a substrate for fermentation. Although this beverage has originally been prepared using tea, it is possible to find variations made with infusions like mint, lemon balm or jasmine. The taste of the beverage is slightly acidic and slightly carbonated, which provides greater acceptance among consumers. Some metabolic products of Symbiotic Culture of Bacteria and Yeast (SCOBY), like acetic acid and other organic acids, posses antibacterial activity and prevents contamination of the drink by pathogenic bacteria (Watawana, Jayawardena, Gunawardhana, & Waisundara, 2015).
## (s2) Preparation of kombucha
(p2.0) This beverage is prepared by fermenting sugared tea with a SCOBY (Jayabalan, Malbaša, Lončar, Vitas, & Sathishkumar, 2014). Its flavour is slightly sweet and sour at the same time, plus it may contain traces of carbon dioxide (Nummer, 2013).

(p2.1) The typical production of kombucha beverage is based on black, green or oolong tea. For its production, 5 g of tea leaves per litre of water may be used, then, sugar is added, which will serve as a substrate for tea fermenting bacteria and yeasts. Approximately 50 g of sugar per litre of water is enough. Before adding the SCOBY or a bit of prepared kombucha, the beverage should be at a temperature close to 20°C. It is extremely important to use sanitized utensils and work in clean areas while making kombucha, in order to have control over the growth of microorganisms and to prevent unwanted contamination (Watawana et al., 2015). Likewise, it is important to control pH levels during fermentation of kombucha, and preferably stop this process when a pH level of 4.2 is reached, since the overproduction of acetic acid may be counterproductive (Kovacevic et al., 2014). Other food safety methods include pasteurizing the final product to prevent overproduction of alcohol and carbon dioxide, as well as the addition of 0.1% of sodium benzoate and 0.1% of potassium sorbate as food preservatives, and finally, keeping it refrigerated (Watawana et al., 2015).
## (s3) Fermentation
(p3.0) Kombucha fermentation period is typically known to require a minimum of 3 days to a maximum of 60 days, depending on cultural practices (Watawana et al., 2015). The fermentation of kombucha is carried out at room temperature, optimizing fermentation time. Sucrose is used as the main carbon source in a concentration of 5-20%, providing the media and nutrients necessary for microorganism development. A SCOBY or the resulting liquid at a 10% concentration from a previous fermentation may be used as starter culture for fermentation .

(p3.1) According to , the variables of the fermentation process, such as time, temperature and sucrose concentration, will determine the final concentration of organic substances such as acids and pH. Organic acids produced during this fermentation process diminished the tea's pH value, which leads to a lack of oxygen induced by the acidity. Due to this, the number of possible pathogenic microbial cells, if any, diminishes, resulting in a safe beverage for consumption, despite having a microbial origin (Watawana et al., 2015).
## (s6) Chemical components of kombucha and their beneficial effects
(p6.0) Chemical assays of kombucha beverage have indicated the presence of a variety of compounds, including organic acids, mainly acetic, gluconic, and glucuronic acid (GlcUA), although citric, L-lactic, malic, tartaric, malonic, oxalic, succinic, pyruvic, and usnic acids may also be found; sugars (sucrose, glucose, and fructose), water soluble vitamins (B 1 , B 2 , B 6 , B 12 , C), amino acids, biogenic amines, purines, pigments, lipids, proteins, hydrolytic enzymes, ethanol, acetic acid bacteria and lactic acid bacteria, carbon dioxide, polyphenols, minerals (manganese, iron, nickel, copper, zinc, plumb, cobalt, chromium, and cadmium), anions (fluoride, chloride, bromide, iodide, nitrate, phosphate, and sulphate), D-saccharic acid-1,4-lactone (DSL), and metabolic products of yeasts and bacteria (Jayabalan, Malbaša, et al., 2014, Jayabalan, Malini, et al. 2010.

(p6.1) The presence and quantity of the chemical components are variable, mainly depending on the microorganisms of the symbiotic culture used for fermentation of kombucha, as well as fermentation time and temperature, sucrose content, Table 3. Flavonoid components of black and green tea (dry weight, %).
## (s7) Vitamins
(p7.0) Regarding the vitamin content of this beverage, Bauer-Petrovska and Petrushevska-Tozi (2000) analysed a brew of kombucha beverage prepared with 70 g of sucrose and 5 g/ L of black tea, finding the following values of B vitamins: 74 mg/100 mL of vitamin B 1 , 52 mg/100 mL of vitamin B 6 and 84 mg/100 mL of vitamin B 12 . Meanwhile, Malbaša, Lončar, Vitas, and Čanadanović-Brunet (2011) reported that the content of vitamin B 2 was 8.3 mg/100 mL, while the concentration of vitamin C constantly increased, reaching 28.98 mg/L on the tenth day of fermentation.
## (s9) Polyphenols
(p9.0) Polyphenols are active substances with more than one phenol structural unit per molecule. They represent the largest group of phytochemicals and they are the most abundant antioxidants present in the diet. Total intake of polyphenols can be up to 1 g/day (Scalbert, Johnson, & Saltmarsh, 2005). Moreover, they play a role in preventing several diseases related to oxidative stress, such as cancer, CVDs, and neurodegenerative diseases (Manach, Scalbert, Morand, Rémésy, & Jiménez, 2004). They modulate the activity of a variety of enzymes and cell receptors as a means of defence against oxidative stress caused by reactive oxygen species (Tsao, 2010). Main dietary polyphenol sources include fruits, vegetables, cereals, legumes, natural fruit juices, tea, coffee, and red wine (Scalbert et al., 2005).

(p9.1) The protective effect of kombucha beverage is mainly due to polyphenol activity, compounds produced during fermentation, and the synergistic effect of the different compounds found in the tea (Jayabalan, Subathradevi, Marimuthu, Sathishkumar, & Swaminathan, 2008). Total polyphenol content in kombucha tea shows a linear increase during fermentation time (Chu & Chen, 2006). As an example, both epicatechin (EC) and epigallocatechin (EGC) are found predominantly in the tea (Manach et al., 2004). A higher level of EC (~150%) was found on day 12 of fermentation of kombucha made with green tea, and of EGC (~115%) on the same day of one made with black tea (Jayabalan, Marimuthu, & Swaminathan, 2007).
## (s10) D-saccharic acid-1,4-lactone (DSL)
(p10.0) D-saccharic acid-1,4-lactone (DSL) is a component derived from D-glucaric acid (product of the GlcUA pathway), which has detoxifying and antioxidant properties (Bhattacharya, Gachhui, & Sil, 2012;ŻÓłtaszek, Hanausek, Kiliańska, & Walaszek, 2008). DSL content in kombucha has been found to range between 57.99 and 132.72 μg/mL, depending on the origin of the product. The highest DSL value was found on the eighth day of fermentation and diminished afterward. It was established that lactic acid bacteria had a positive effect on DSL production, in symbiosis with Gluconobacter genus bacteria (Yang et al., 2010).
## (s11) Ethanol
(p11.0) According to Chen and Liu (2000), ethanol concentration in kombucha increases with fermentation time, reaching an approximate maximum value of 5.5 g/L on the 20th day of fermentation, followed by a slow reduction.

(p11.1) The entire chemical composition of kombucha beverage, including residual sugar concentration, carbon dioxide, and organic acids, is what finally determines its flavour and depending on the fermentation time, different flavours will be obtained. It has been observed that kombucha tea with higher acetic acid concentration produces a more acid and astringent flavour, meanwhile, another with more gluconic acid produces a milder flavour. Therefore, by controlling fermentation conditions it is possible to obtain the desired quality in kombucha tea (Chen & Liu, 2000).

(p11.2) The French paradox is the observation of low coronary heart disease (CHD) death rates despite the high intake of dietary cholesterol and saturated fat. It was proposed by French epidemiologists in the 1980s, particularly for wine drinking in France, where a high intake of dietary cholesterol and saturated fat, daily consumption of wine, but low CHD death rates were observed. The French paradox states that moderate alcohol consumption has a protective effect against CHD, since it raises high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol concentrations (Ferrières, 2004). Since the daily consumption of ethanol in a lower concentration can protect the human body from CVDs, the consumption of kombucha, which has a low concentration of ethanol, could also have a role in preventing CVDs.
## (s13) Glucuronic acid (GlcUA)
(p13.0) GlcUA plays a role in xenobiotic liver detoxification, as it has the ability to combine with toxin molecules to favour their elimination from the organism, which makes it very important as an auxiliary on liver functions. It is as well involved in endobiotic elimination. One of this endobiotics is bilirubin, which is how GlcUA (by means of glucuronidation) prevents these pigment's toxic effects and impedes inhibition of a variety of enzymes involved in protein and carbohydrate metabolism. Most of the bilirubin is excreted through bile and only a small portion of conjugated bilirubin is excreted through urine, which is why a high level of bilirubin in urine is an indicator of damage somewhere along the process of glucuronidation .

(p13.1) GlcUA also takes part in polyphenols' increased bioavailability. Phenols conjugate with GlcUA, improving its transport and bioavailability. The UGT1A isoform of the glucuronosyltransferase family, located in the bowels, is the one that takes part in polyphenol glucuronidation. Polyphenols are secreted via bile into the duodenum, where they are subjected to the activity of β-glucuronidase (which promotes deglucuronidation, separating in this case the polyphenol from GlcUA by hydrolysing its glycosidic bond) and are then reabsorbed. This enterohepatic circulation can lead to a longer presence of polyphenols in the body, where they carry out its antioxidant activity preventing different diseases related to oxidative stress .

(p13.2) Several steroid hormones and vitamin D derivatives, such as estrogens, androgens, glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, progestogens and cholecalciferol are essential for health. They regulate immune functions, decrease inflammatory response, balance extracellular fluid volume, among others (Cutolo et al., 2014). Deficiencies and/or excesses of steroid hormones have undesirable effects on health. Glucuronidation can prevent both scenarios: it prevents deficiencies by increasing steroid water solubility, therefore improving its transport and bioavailability; and prevents excesses by facilitating the elimination of excess steroids .

(p13.3) As a constituent of glucuronidation, GlcUA is also important for biotransformation and protection of fatty acids from lipid peroxidation. Especially, polyunsaturated fatty acids, which are essential compounds for the body, essential components of cell membranes and precursors of eicosanoids. Polyunsaturated fatty acids are susceptible to react with reactive oxygen species, triggering chain reactions that damage the fatty acid molecule. Peroxidation has been considered a risk factor for the development of certain pathologies, such as atherosclerosis, kidney damage and Parkinson's disease (Mylonas & Kouretas, 1999).

(p13.4) Kombucha consumption prevents polyunsaturated fatty acid oxidation in the human body, due to its GlcUA content that takes part in glucuronidation, increasing polyphenol bioavailability, which neutralizes free radicals that promote lipid peroxidation (Jayabalan et al., 2008).

(p13.5) GlcUA is necessary for many body functions since it is a constituent of various essential polysaccharides in the body, glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). GAGs are a series of compounds formed by dimers consisting of an amino sugar (D-Glucosamine or D-Galactosamine) and a uronic acid (D-glucuronic acid or L-iduronic acid), except for keratan sulphate which contains a galactose molecule instead of an acid. They are bound to sulphate groups in variable proportions and covalently bind to proteins, forming proteoglycans, except for hyaluronic acid which is not sulphated (Mylonas & Kouretas, 1999). Different GAGs are formed depending on the constituents of the dimer.

(p13.6) Glycosaminoglycans molecules are part of the extracellular matrix of all the body organs and they have multiple functions. GlcUA is part of the following GAGs: hyaluronic acid, chondroitin sulphate, heparin and dermatan sulphate. They all have structural functions, except for heparin, which is a non-structural GAG. Hyaluronic acid serves as a lubricant and shock absorber, and it is present in higher concentrations in the vitreous fluid in the eye, conjunctive tissue, synovial fluid of joints and cartilage (Frati-Munari, 2012;.

(p13.7) Chondroitin sulphate is mostly present in bones and cartilage, in the latter it binds to collagen and keeps fibres in a strong network; it also helps to prevent joint problems, being helpful in the relief of osteoarthritis. Heparin is an intracellular compound and a potent anticoagulant produced by mast cells. Dermatan sulphate is present in higher concentrations in the vascular endothelium, connective tissue, cartilage, skin, cornea, and bones. L-iduronic acid is the predominant uronic acid present in dermatan sulphate, and it is an epimer of D-glucuronic acid, although a variable amount of β-D-glucuronic acid is also present (Frati-Munari, 2012;.

(p13.8) Moreover, GlcUA is a precursor of L-ascorbic acid (vitamin C) in kombucha beverage, since it is synthesized from L-gulonic acid, which is involved in the metabolic pathway of GlcUA. Thus, GlcUA concentration in kombucha increases its antioxidant activity as well .

(p13.9) Actually, there are published data describing the similarity of GlcUA contained in kombucha and the acid produced in the human body by metabolic pathways. Preliminary studies carried out by Jayabalan et al. (personal communication) did not find similarity. As previously discussed, the concentration and presence of GlcUA in kombucha tea is basically determined by the strains and species that acts by symbiosis. Meaning that the GlcUA concentration in kombucha is exhibited due to the specific SCOBY microorganisms.
