# Island ecosystem services: insights from a literature review on case-study island ecosystem services and future prospects

CorpusID: 90212387 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c6fd0d2c8723e0f3720c33450d4c9cd052cdaf47](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c6fd0d2c8723e0f3720c33450d4c9cd052cdaf47)

Fields: Business, Geography, Environmental Science

## (s2) Literature search strategy
(p2.0) Our literature search was conducted between September 2014 and March 2015 using Web of Science (Clarivate Analytics, US). To identify relevant publications, we used the search string 'island* AND ecosystem*' together with IES specific terms on the article title, abstract and keywords. No restriction on publication date was set. We recognised that there might be publications covering similar issues that do not use the term 'ecosystem services' (Liquete et al. 2013). Thus the keywords used in the search strings for each thematic area were designed to be as general as possible. The search criteria were developed on the basis of a pilot study conducted between August and September 2014 which showed that many papers investigating islands' ecosystems and their services did not use the term 'ecosystem services' and that several studies investigated the ecology and biogeography of islands. Table 1 indicates how the search criteria were constructed, and lists the terminology adopted by three widely used ES nomenclatures (MA, 5 TEEB 6 and CICES 7 ) for the IES considered in the present study.
## (s6) Results
(p6.0) The number of papers discussing IES has increased reaching a peak in 2010 ( Figure 1a). The selected studies were widely distributed across the five oceans ( Figure 1b), with 56 countries represented. However, the islands of the Pacific Ocean (116) and Atlantic Ocean (85) were considered more frequently (Supplemental data Appendix B). The majority of the papers were research articles (254) and most of them presented quantitative analysis of ecosystems and services attributes (185) ( Figure 1c). Most of the papers (139) considered the pressures acting on island ecosystems and IES. In descending order, the other themes considered were the management of islands' ecosystems and IES (94), biophysical quantification (28), local knowledge and stakeholder involvement (28), IES valuation (21), IES trade-offs (13) and bundles (6) ( Figure 1d). Papers dealing with a range of island ecosystems were in the majority ( Figure 2). Many studies did not identify specific island ecosystems, treating the island as one ecosystem (152).

(p6.1) Studies including coastal (66) and marine (13) ecosystems accounted for the highest number of studies including stakeholders' ecological knowledge or stakeholder participation, and these made up 12% and 38%, respectively, of all studies in those habitats. For terrestrial island habitats, even lower proportions were recorded supporting the earlier observations that ecosystem service research with stakeholder involvement and social science techniques are underrepresented in existing literature (Seppelt et al. 2011;Liquete et al. 2013).

(p6.2) Publications dealing with drivers and pressures acting on island ecosystems were in the majority, and they accounted for the majority of the papers dealing with coastal (39), urban (4), forest (15), cultivated (12) and dryland (5) ecosystems. Even though this cohort had a global distribution (Supplemental data Appendix C), most of the studies dealing with drivers and pressures were from small islands located within the Atlantic Ocean and the Pacific Ocean (Table 2). Water pollution and habitat loss and degradation were identified as the most studied pressures on large islands' ecosystems, whilst change in the habitat quality and the introduction of alien species were the most frequently recorded pressures in small islands. Pressures that impact similar set of habitats were grouped using matrices linking the drivers and pressure with habitats ( Figure 3a) and with IES ( Figure 3b). Habitat loss and degradation was strongly associated with coastal habitats, and to a lower extent with cultivated, forest and inland water ecosystems. Alien species and water pollution have been analysed as drivers mainly in inland water, and studies dealing with erosion were mainly from forest and coastal habitats ( Figure 3a). Two main sets of clusters primarily affect ecosystem services, with the main cluster of drivers and pressures including erosion and habitat loss and degradation. These were strongly linked with recreation and tourism, gene pool protection and erosion prevention IES. The other drivers and pressures were grouped in a second cluster, where the strongest links were recorded between alien species and erosion prevention, gene pool protection and water purification IES, whilst recreation and tourism IES were associated resource use and cultural change ( Figure 3b).

(p6.3) The papers investigating recreation and eco-tourism IES (84) were the most prevalent within the data set ( Figure 4a). This contrasts with results from global reviews of ecosystem services, in which regulating services were always the most frequently studied group (Martínez-Harms and Balvanera 2012; Schägner et al. 2013). Whilst we carried out a literature search for five case studies of IES, the final data set contained several publications that also investigated other IES. Gene pool protection, defined as the maintenance of nursery populations and communities, was in fact the second most prevalent IES even though none of the search terms targeted this IES. A network analysis was thus carried out to investigate the links between these services ( Figure 4b). Strong linkages were recorded between gene pool protection IES and the other services investigated in this literature review, supporting the notion that island biodiversity contributes significantly to the well-being of inhabiting communities. Weaker links were recorded between other IES because few studies investigate how these co-vary across spatio-temporal scales or the management of multiple IES.

(p6.4) Most of the papers considered more than one ecosystem type, in the sense that they dealt with 'whole islands', suggesting interdependence and that ecosystem service delivery may depend on various ecosystems (see Figures 2 and 5). However, in those papers where a specific focus was identified, coastal ecosystems were the most frequently considered, with shore and coral reef habitats most often discussed. Studies carrying out biophysical assessment of IES (28) or the valuation of IES (21) were relatively evenly distributed between different IES categories ( Figure 6). The studies investigating recreational and eco-tourism IES were the most common (16), followed by those investigating gene pool protection (10). The small number of papers that quantify the contribution of biodiversity to ecosystem services suggests an important knowledge gap, a situation that is also reflected in the literature (De Groot et al. 2010b).

(p6.5) Only a relatively small fraction of the studies actually quantified the contribution of ecosystems to the delivery of IES and its value to society ( Figure 6). Most of the studies discuss different management strategies and pressures arising from human use of these services. This indicates the need for increasing scientific evidence that identifies the importance of biodiversity components in underpinning the delivery of the services in small islands, and which may be used within management plans and strategies. Previous research provides evidence of generally positive association between biodiversity and ecosystem services, allowing researchers to identify key biodiversity attributes that improve ecosystem service delivery (Harrison et al. 2014). However, studies that quantify the link between biodiversity and IES represented a small proportion   No studies investigating the social dimension were found for erosion prevention and pollination. Similarly, very few valuation studies were found. This supports the findings of Liquete et al. (2013), who also detected that studies on valuation methodologies, the analysis of beneficiaries and hence the contribution of ecosystem services to human well-being were underrepresented in the marine and coastal literature.
## (s9) Pollination
(p9.0) Pollination is important for delivering key benefits in the form of a marginal increase in production of market-based or subsistence crops, fibre, forage, timber and non-timber forest products, and through the reproduction of wild plants that play a role in other ecosystem services (Kremen et al. 2007). A total of 23 studies investigated pollination in small islands. Most considered several island ecosystems (11), while a few focussed specifically on forest (6) and dryland (3) ecosystems. Only two of the studies dealt with cultivated ecosystems whilst no studies investigated crop pollination. The majority (15) investigated drivers and pressures affecting pollination services. Our review suggests that generally the ecology of pollination remains relatively poorly studied, even though many islands are biodiversity hotspots and the conservation of pollinators is important for ensuring the reproduction of endemic plants (Anderson 2003;Potts et al. 2006;Nielsen et al. 2011;Chamorro and Heleno 2012). The value of animal pollinators was emphasised in a study of plant assemblages pollinated by bats by Scanlon et al. (2014), who found that they coincided with habitats valued by humans for medicinal, cultural and economic uses.

(p9.1) Island pollination networks often have high degree of generalisation caused by the asymmetrical plantpollinator relationships (Cox et al. 1993) and depauperate pollinator fauna on islands compared to continental communities (MacArthur and Wilson 1967). Even relatively large and isolated temperate island groups such as New Zealand have smaller pollinator faunas compared to mainland areas (Lloyd 1985). Pollination interaction webs in the Mauritius were observed to be dominated by a few abundant and generalised species even though several rare and specialised species were also recorded (Kaiser-Bunbury et al. 2009). The loss of a generalist pollinator may therefore be a significant threat for the reproduction and survival of island plant species. Plants on remote islands are also reproductively isolated, have evolved towards dependence on few indigenous pollinators and demonstrate an inability to adjust to the loss of pollinators (Cox et al. 1993). Flying foxes (Pteropus sp.) pollinate several plant species in South Pacific Oceanic Islands, and their decline is hypothesised to lead to a cascade of linked plant extinctions. Bird pollination was associated with a higher fruit set for flowers from New Zealand (Anderson 2003), whilst in another study from the island of Lesvos, bee diversity and the provision of pollination services were associated with habitats with high floral diversity and availability of floral resources (Potts et al. 2006).

(p9.2) Threats to plant-pollinator interactions on many islands are mostly driven by alien species and their direct and indirect competition for pollination (plants) and for floral resources (animals) (Kaiser-Bunbury et al. 2010). Two studies from this review investigated the effect of invasive plants on pollination services. The abundance of the invasive Solanum elaeagnifolium Cavanilles has a negative impact on pollination services and seed set of the native Glaucium flavum Crantz on Lesvos Island, and the presence of the invasive significantly increased pollen limitation (Tscheulin and Petanidou 2013). The invasive Opuntia spp. was also found to modify the number of links between plants and pollinators in the Canary and Balearic Islands, but by linking to generalist natives, Opuntia spp. remained peripheral and the pollination network was not affected unless invasion is intense (Padrón et al. 2009). Alien plants may be facilitated by generalist pollinators, hence resulting in the integration of the invading plants in resident communities (Kaiser-Bunbury et al. 2010). Similarly, native pollinators might be outcompeted by an invasive pollinator, depending on its exploitative or competitive superiority (Traveset and Richardson 2006). A wide range of potential host plants and the ability to achieve large population sizes are important traits that increase the competitiveness of the invading pollinators (Groom et al. 2014). The introduction of managed species, such as the honey bee Apis mellifera and Bombus terrestris was observed to result in lower visitation of flowers by native pollinators and the displacement of the latter (Kato and Kawakita 2004;Ishii et al. 2008). The introduced A. mellifera were observed to lead to lower nectar-feeding activity and pollination services by two endemic birds in the Mauritius, and to a lower reproductive success of these native birds. Honey bees were also less efficient pollinators; reduced setting of seed in native plants potentially reduced their reproductive success (Hansen et al. 2002). On the other hand, the removal of an invasive nectar thief and arthropod predator, Vespula pensylvanica Saussure, in Hawaii resulted in an increase in bee visitation, especially from introduced honeybees, and in an increased fruit production of an endemic tree (Hanna et al. 2013). This finding supports the observation that introduced pollinator species may be acting as a substitute for threatened or extinct island pollinators, and hence the eradication of the newly established species is not always the best strategy for the conservation of plant diversity in island systems. The reintroduction of native species from outlying islands (Abe et al. 2008) or the introduction of functional replacement species (Kaiser-Bunbury et al. 2010) have also been suggested as a potential management strategy.

(p9.3) Pollination IES are susceptible to habitat disturbance (Kaiser-Bunbury et al. 2010), indirectly threatening plant diversity and food provisioning. Small populations in fragmented landscapes are subject to higher competition from invading species for pollinators, and native trees were characterised by pollination limitation and decreased fruit production in La Réunion (Indian Ocean) (Gigord et al. 1999). Higher intensity of land use management is associated with lower pollinator diversity. In a study from South Island, New Zealand, pollinator diversity declined as pollinators with a narrow diet, large body size, solitary behaviour and a preference for nonfloral larval food were the first pollinators to be lost (Rader et al. 2014). These observations suggest that more intensively managed or disturbed landscapes are characterised by common or exotic plant species with generalised pollination requirements.

(p9.4) Literature discussing the biophysical processes underpinning pollination IES was poorly presented in this study, while there is some evidence that pollination IES are highly valued by island communities. Habitat loss and degradation and the introduction of alien species were identified as key pressures acting on pollinator diversity and pollination IES.
## (s10) Freshwater
(p10.0) The physical characteristics of islands mean that freshwater is often a scarce and vulnerable resource (UNEP 2014). Most studies dealt with island inland water (54), coastal (12) or several island ecosystems (13). This set investigated water provisioning and quality regulation (16), and its links to gene pool protection (13), food provisioning (11), recreation and tourism (3), climate regulation (3), nutrient cycling (2), erosion prevention (1) and cognitive development (1).
