# Clinicopathological characteristics in the differential diagnosis of hepatoid adenocarcinoma: A literature review

CorpusID: 9531109 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73f4b190e6f4ac4ea72ad605a2fe5ed68a2bd4e0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73f4b190e6f4ac4ea72ad605a2fe5ed68a2bd4e0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) LITERATURE REVIEW
(p1.0) All articles cited in the Medline/PubMed database from January 2001 to December 2011 were searched to identify relevant medical literature, and the search terms included "hepatoid adenocarcinoma", "AFP-producing tumor", "α fetoprotein-producing tumor" and "α fetoproteinproducing gastric cancer". In addition, a manual search of all relevant articles was conducted. All studies with full text were included. The search limits were: (1) type of article: all types; (2) 
## (s5) 323
(p5.0) January 21, 2013|Volume 19|Issue 3| WJG|www.wjgnet.com Table 1  ditions including HAC, so AFP is not suggested for diagnosis of HCC nowadays [18] . Diagnosis of HCC should be based on dynamic image studies (such as computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging) and/or liver tumor biopsy, and the typical dynamic image of HCC shows intense arterial uptake followed by "washout" of contrast in the venous and/or delayed phases [18] . Even in liver tumors with elevated AFP, secondary malignancies still should be considered especially when the presentations of imaging studies are atypical, and liver tumor biopsy is recommended for differential diagnosis. In addition, risk factors such as liver cirrhosis, chronic hepatitis B or chronic hepatitis C infection can usually be found among patients with HCC, but those risk factors may not be observed among patients with HAC. Once AFPproducing metastatic liver tumors are found, an intensive search for primary tumor origin should be initiated.

(p5.1) HAC is a very aggressive neoplasm with metastasis in a high proportion of patients at the time of diagnosis. Lymph nodes and the liver are the most common sites of metastasis. Once metastatic HAC is suspected, panendoscopy should be arranged because the stomach is the most common origin of HAC. HCC with metastasis to the stomach has been reported [11] , and a clinical challenge of differentiating primary tumor origin arises when liver and gastric tumors are found simultaneously. Pathology markers, especially IHC stains, may provide clues to make a correct diagnosis. In addition, finding the tumor origin may be challenging when no tumor can be detected in the liver and/or stomach, so other organs positive for both CK18 and CK19 stains (100%), and only a small proportion of HAC patients showed positive stains for CK20 (25%) and CK7 (15.4%). High proportions of HAC tumors were positive for pancytokeratin (AE1/AE3) stain (92.3%) and α1-antitrypsin (α1-AT) stain (91%), and 62.5% of HAC patients were positive for CD10 antigen. In addition, positive glypican 3 (GPC-3) staining ( Figure 2C) was found in all HAC patients (100%).
## (s8) Pathological presentation
(p8.0) Because HAC bears a striking morphologic similarity to HCC in histology and IHC stains, HCC could be mistakenly diagnosed when liver tumors are the only initial finding, especially in regions with a high incidence of HCC. However, HAC and HCC differ in histologic presentation, and specific findings suggesting HAC may provide important clues. Kodama et al [19] described two histologic types of HAC: one was the medullary type, characterized by polygonal cells arranged in a solid nest or sheets, with scattered large pleomorphic or multinucleated giant cells, and the other was well-differentiated papillary or tubular type with clear cytoplasm. However, two types of HAC sometimes coexist in a single tumor. If polygonal tumor cells proliferating in both trabecular and intestinal-like structures are found in HE staining, HAC should be considered (Figure 1).

(p8.1) HAC usually secretes some special chemomediators, so it could be characterized by some IHC stains ( Table  2). As an AFP-producing tumor, HAC is commonly > 90% stained for AFP regardless of organ origin ( Figure  2A). Although AFP is a characteristic stain for identifying HAC, it can also cause confusion in differentiating HAC from HCC. AFP, a well-known tumor marker of HCC, is usually secreted by HCC and gonadal tumors, and AFP can be positive in tissues of these tumors [20,21] . Hep Par 1, a highly specific marker of HCC, may help in the differ-ential diagnosis between HAC and HCC ( Figure 2B), but some HAC tumors can still present with positive staining. In addition, although a low percentage of gastric HAC was stained positive for Hep Par 1 (Table 2), high percentages of non-gastric HAC such as HAC of the gallbladder and urinary bladder were stained positive. However, due to the small case numbers of non-gastric HAC, large cohort studies are needed to confirm this finding. Moreover, other tumors such as adrenal cortical carcinoma, yolk sac tumor, colonic adenocarcinoma, lung carcinoma, ovarian carcinoma and endocervical adenocarcinoma may be occasionally positive for Hep Par 1 stain [22] .

(p8.2) The proportion of HAC with a positive CEA stain was high in both gastric (75%) and non-gastric HAC (75%-100%), but it can also be positive in HCC and other metastatic adenocarcinoma of the liver [23] arising from the gastrointestinal tract such as the colon [24,25] , stomach [26] and pancreas [27] . Among epithelial markers, AE1/AE3, CK18 and CK19 are usually positive for HAC (92.3%, 100% and 100%, respectively), but the proportions of positive CK20 and CK7 stains are low (25% and 15.4%, respectively). CK7 and CK20 have diagnostic value in differentiating the tumors of unknown primary sites, and epithelial neoplasms with negative staining for CK7 and CK20 include adrenal cortical carcinoma, germ cell tumor, prostate carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma, and HCC [28] . In the differential diagnosis between HAC and HCC for AFP-producing liver tumors, HAC is strongly suggested if AE1/AE3, CK18 and C19 stains show strong positive findings.

(p8.3) Regarding other IHC stains for HAC such as α1-AT, α1-antichemotrypsin, CD10, CDX2, MUC1, PLUNC and GPC-3 have been reported to be promising in the differential diagnosis of HAC [12] . For example, Sentani et al [29] reported that positive PLUNC staining was observed in all six gastric HAC, and PLUNC staining was also detected in both liver metastases. Furthermore, PLUNC staining was not observed in 52 cases of HCC, and it was a novel marker that might well distinguish HAC from HCC. However, case numbers in the literature were small (Table 2), and further studies to confirm sensitivity and specificity will be crucial.
