# Functional genomics tools applied to plant metabolism: a survey on plant respiration, its connections and the annotation of complex gene functions

CorpusID: 9669553 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4529b01607f07ef41594d2953eab9d113c506d30](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4529b01607f07ef41594d2953eab9d113c506d30)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Metabolism represents one of the most important and most likely the best characterized network within biological systems. From pioneering studies defining key metabolic pathways, subsequent decades of enzymology characterizing the catalytic and regulatory properties of enzymes, through to more recent genetic studies of metabolism, there is an unprecedented density of both mechanistic and descriptive data relating to metabolic behavior. Advances in the understanding of metabolic regulation and control, however, still suffer from insufficient research concerning the mode of operation of metabolic networks, and plant respiratory metabolism provides an illustrative example of this problem. Due to the crucial roles of mitochondria in meeting the energy demands of the cell whilst simultaneously being involved in amino acid metabolism and photorespiration, precise control of mitochondrial metabolism and function is crucial for cellular homeostasis, and unsurprisingly mitochondrial dysfunction leads to diverse metabolic and phenotypic consequences . However, despite the fact that the major respiratory pathways in plants were elucidated decades ago (Beevers, 1961), our current knowledge about their regulation and control, and how this relates to whole plant physiology, is still limited (Fernie et al., 2004). Unsurprisingly then, considerable research effort is being devoted to elucidating the metabolic basis of the regulation of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and the mitochondrial electron transport chain Fahnenstich et al., 2008;Fukushima et al., 2009;Araújo et al., 2010;Tomaz et al., 2010;Zell et al., 2010) as well as their interactions with photosynthesis , photorespiration (Bauwe et al., 2010(Bauwe et al., , 2012, and nitrate assimilation (Foyer et al., 2011).

(p0.1) Given the complex patterns of regulation and the interactions between respiratory metabolism and other processes uncovered by such studies, it is likely that only through the use of modelbased approaches we will be able to understand how the individual components of metabolism (e.g., enzymes and metabolites) work together to produce a functioning system, and in this way truly understand the function of individual components of that system. In this context systems biology offers the promise of a better understanding of respiratory metabolism and its role within the metabolic network.
## (s3) INSIGHTS INTO PLANT RESPIRATORY METABOLISM OBTAINED FROM METABOLITE PROFILING
(p3.0) The term metabolome can be defined as the total small-molecule complement of a cell, and metabolomics is therefore the study of all small molecules or metabolites presents in a cell or organism (Oliver et al., 1998;Tweeddale et al., 1998). Although no single analytical system is ever likely to cover the whole metabolome technological developments have considerably extended our ability to analyze complex biological systems, facilitating the simultaneous detection of different compound classes with diverse chemical properties (Osorio et al., 2012). Gas chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (GC-MS) is a versatile and widely applied technique in modern metabolomic studies and allows the identification and quantification of a relatively broad range of compounds, including organic and amino acids, sugars, sugar alcohols, phosphorylated intermediates, and lipophilic compounds (Fiehn et al., 2000;Roessner et al., 2001;Weckwerth, 2003;Lisec et al., 2006;, resulting in fairly comprehensive coverage of the central pathways of primary metabolism. Metabolite profiling using LC-MS and capillary electrophoresis-MS can complement the analysis by GC-MS for certain classes of metabolite. Of particular note, tandem MS methods for the quantification of phosphorylated sugars (Lunn et al., 2006;Luo et al., 2007;Hasunuma et al., 2010), Calvin-Benson cycle intermediates (Arrivault et al., 2009) and cell wall precursors (Alonso et al., 2010), which are difficult to analyze by GC-MS, have recently been developed.

(p3.1) Due in part to these technological advances application of metabolite profiling to plant biology is becoming increasingly common, including diagnostic and descriptive analyses of metabolic responses to genetic and/or environmental perturbations, the use in annotation of gene function and in systems biology Guy et al., 2008;Fernie and Schauer, 2009). Recently, metabolite profiling has, in particular, been used to generate significant insight into plant respiratory metabolism and its interactions with photosynthesis. Despite recognition of the importance of mitochondrial metabolism our understanding of the complex pathways through which organic acids are metabolized as well as how these pathways are regulated in vivo remains far from complete (Fernie et al., 2004;Sweetlove et al., 2007;Fait et al., 2008;Møller and Sweetlove, 2010). As part of attempts to remedy this issue, the operation and role of the TCA cycle in illuminated leaves has received particular interest (Krömer, 1995;Raghavendra and Padmasree, 2003;Noguchi and Yoshida, 2008;Nunes-Nesi et al., 2011). The precise mode of operation of the TCA cycle in the light remains somewhat obscure, in part because whilst TCA cycle flux in the light is reduced through inhibition of pyruvate dehydrogenase carbon skeletons deriving from TCA cycle intermediates are still required for nitrogen assimilation. In attempt to address this apparent contradiction, a process of systematic suppression of TCA cycle enzymes through reverse genetics was undertaken. Metabolite profiling of the transgenic lines generated through this process indicated the importance of the TCA cycle in metabolism in illuminated leaves . However, these experiments have also revealed a surprising complexity in the response to these manipulations, with suppression of some enzymes leading to increased photosynthesis (Carrari et al., 2003;Nunes-Nesi et al., 2005;Araújo et al., 2011b), others leading to decreased photosynthesis ) and yet others having no effect (Studart-Guimarães et al., 2007;Sienkiewicz-Porzucek et al., 2008, 2010Sulpice et al., 2010a;Araújo et al., 2012b). Several of the more recent studies from this investigation, highlighting the importance of information obtained from metabolite profiling experiments, are discussed here.

(p3.2) Antisense inhibition of the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) complex in tomato led to alterations in whole plant development that were linked to reductions in total amino acid and nitrate pools despite unaltered photosynthesis (Araújo et al., 2012b). These results clearly imply that OGDH plays an important role in both the TCA cycle and nitrogen assimilation and suggest a novel role for this enzyme in whole plant development and fruit maturation. Furthermore, as was reported for succinyl-CoA ligase antisense plants (Studart-Guimarães et al., 2007), the OGDH antisense plants displayed increased GABA shunt flux, presumably in compensation for decreased succinate production via the TCA cycle (Araújo et al., 2012b). However, it is important to stress that such a compensatory response also caused significant shifts in cellular pools of amino acids and nitrate that were detected by metabolite profiling.

(p3.3) Antisense inhibition of the iron-sulfur subunit of the SDH in tomato plants, on the other hand, resulted in increased photosynthesis and whole plant biomass via an organic acid-mediated effect on stomatal aperture. These results contrast with those obtained for antisense inhibition of fumarase, where decreased photosynthesis and biomass were observed Araújo et al., 2011b). Furthermore, measurement of apoplastic organic acid levels in SDH and fumarase antisense plants, revealed a negative correlation between the levels of fumarate and stomatal conductance, though the influence of fumarate appears to be weaker than that of malate (Araújo et al., 2011b). These results provided strong evidence to support that modulation of malate and fumarate concentration can greatly influence stomatal function. Thus, metabolite profiling has aided in the identification of novel interactions between the TCA cycle and photosynthesis, stomatal function and nitrogen metabolism. Further work is clearly required in order to establish the regulatory mechanisms involved in such responses.

(p3.4) Protein degradation during plant development and substrate deficiency can be an important source of substrate for respiratory metabolism, however, our current understanding of the regulation of the classical and alternative pathways of respiration under these conditions is still limited. The combination of genetic approaches with GC-MS-based metabolite profiling has greatly improved our understanding of the complex metabolic interactions observed during dark-induced senescence (Ishizaki et al., 2005(Ishizaki et al., , 2006Araújo et al., 2010Araújo et al., , 2011a. These studies have demonstrated that during dark-induced senescence there is a significant accumulation of amino acids and TCA cycle intermediates. Moreover, it has also been demonstrated that both isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase and D-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase provide electrons to the plant ubiquinol pool via the electron transfer flavoprotein (ETF)-ETF:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (ETF/ETFQO) complex (Engqvist et al., 2009;Araújo et al., 2010). Given that the chlorophyll breakdown intermediate phytanoyl-CoA accumulates dramatically both in knockout mutants of the ETF/ETFQO complex and of isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase following growth in extended dark periods it was suggested that chlorophyll breakdown could be important for the supply of carbon and electrons during this process. However, metabolic analyses of phytanoyl-CoA 2-hydroxylase knockout mutants under the same extended darkness regime as previously used suggest that phytol and phytanoyl-CoA enzyme does not primarily function as a substrate of the ETF/ETFQO pathway (Araújo et al., 2011a). These studies also showed that these mutants were not compromised in their ability to withstand significant extension of the dark period but do accumulate phytanoyl-CoA and to a lesser extent 2-hydroxyglutarate as well as sharing some of the other metabolic features of mutants of the ETF/ETFQO complex following darkinduced senescence treatment. In summary, the results obtained through this work indicated that both isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase and 2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase essentially account for the entire electron input via the ETF complex.
## (s4) CONTRIBUTIONS OF METABOLIC FLUX ANALYSIS TO OUR UNDERSTANDING OF PLANT RESPIRATION
(p4.0) Metabolic flux ultimately underpins both plant growth and development and for this reason experiments that provide insight into metabolic flux, as well as its regulation and control, can be valuable tools to both improve our understanding of biological systems and aid in the discovery of gene function. Feeding experiments using both 13 C-and 14 C-labeled precursors have been used extensively to delineate metabolic pathways, but may also be used to investigate and quantify metabolic flux. Labeling experiments with 14 C offer high sensitivity and fractionation of labeled metabolites and biomass components can readily indicate the fate of metabolized radiolabel. Accordingly, feeding experiments with www.frontiersin.org 14 CO 2 demonstrated the effect of reduced malate dehydrogenase activity on photosynthetic carbon assimilation in tomato leaves, and revealed that ascorbate feeding led to increased photosynthesis and altered assimilate partitioning in these transgenic lines (Nunes-Nesi et al., 2005). Quantifying the release of 14 CO 2 from the metabolism of different isotopomers of 14 C-glucose can also provide information about the relative activity of different primary metabolic pathways (Nunes-Nesi et al., 2005). This method has been used extensively to identify changes in metabolic flux in plants with altered TCA cycle enzyme activities; for example, decreased carbon entry into the TCA cycle was identified in tomato plants with decreased SDH and OGDH activity (Araújo et al., 2011b(Araújo et al., , 2012b, which are in good agreement with measurements of respiration and the results of metabolite profiling experiments.

(p4.1) Labeling experiments with stable isotopes can be used for similar ends, however since detection of label incorporation is in these cases carried out by mass spectrometry or Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy it is possible to determine both enrichment and location of incorporation of label in individual metabolites without laborious chemical cleavage. This method was used to investigate the fate of 13 C-labeled glutamate in leaves of tomato plants with decreased succinyl-CoA ligase, and revealed that TCA cycle flux was maintained in these plants by diversion of carbon through the GABA shunt (Studart-Guimarães et al., 2007). Additionally, in vivo NMR spectroscopy can be used to monitor such labeling experiments in real-time. For example, tracing the metabolism of 13 C-pyruvate by mitochondria isolated from Arabidopsis plants with reduced manganese superoxide dismutase activity revealed decreased TCA cycle flux (Morgan et al., 2008), most likely as a result of decreased TCA cycle enzyme activity caused by oxidative damage.

(p4.2) Whilst the experiments described above may provide valuable qualitative information about metabolic flux, the number of fluxes that can be quantified using these approaches is typically quite limited. Steady state metabolic flux analysis (Wiechert, 2001;Ratcliffe and Shachar-Hill, 2006) on the other hand allows the absolute quantification of metabolic fluxes in medium size networks, permitting the degree to which a particular environmental condition or gene product controls or regulates multiple fluxes to be determined. In this way, steady state flux analysis has been able to provide important insights into the relationship between photosynthesis and respiration in developing seeds. Labeling experiments and metabolic modeling indicated that developing green embryos are able to decrease losses of fixed carbon during oil synthesis by both refixing CO 2 released by respiration (Schwender et al., 2006), and reducing the need for TCA cycle flux through the use of photosynthesis to meet energy demands (Allen et al., 2009). Although these experiments effectively revealed a new function for RuBisCO, steady state analysis can also be used to reveal the effect of alterations in gene expression. This method has been widely applied for the discovery of gene function in microorganisms (Blank et al., 2005;Fischer and Sauer, 2005), and its feasibility in plants was demonstrated by experiments using Arabidopsis embryos (Lonien and Schwender, 2009) that revealed how flux is rerouted in embryos deficient in two plastidic pyruvate kinase isoforms.

(p4.3) The lack of wider adoption of steady state flux analysis as a tool in plant systems biology is in part due to the strict requirements for an experimental system that can obtain metabolic and isotopic steady state, which limits such experiments to tissue culture and isolated organs. Therefore, the so called instationary flux analysis (Wiechert and Nöh, 2005;Young et al., 2008) has the potential to allow quantification of metabolic flux in networks that do not reach isotopic steady state, by incorporating measurements of labeling dynamics and metabolite pool sizes into the modeling process. Recent work has demonstrated the feasibility of this approach for flux quantification in photoautotrophic organisms (Young et al., 2011), whilst the necessary technological approaches for carrying out this work in plants have already been developed (Arrivault et al., 2009;Hasunuma et al., 2010), suggesting that this method may be used in the discovery of gene function in higher plants in the relatively near future.
## (s5) INTEGRATION OF PROFILING DATA: FROM DIAGNOSTICS TO SYSTEMS BIOLOGY
(p5.0) Whilst investigation of the transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome alone may be highly informative, cellular physiology and the regulation of plant respiratory metabolism is the result of complex interactions between transcripts, proteins, and Frontiers in Plant Science | Plant Systems Biology metabolites. Bearing that in mind straightforward relationships between these components of the metabolic network are therefore not to be expected. Thus, despite the apparent easy understanding of simple relationships between changes in transcripts, proteins, metabolite, and downstream biological functions, quite often there is a major discordance. This apparent discrepancy can often be explained by quantitative analysis of the data sets and information about translational regulation and protein turnover. These incoherencies are not only due to technical issues but also related to the complexity and structure of metabolic networks. Accordingly, some priorities in metabolic research to reduce these problems have recently been proposed (Fernie and Stitt, 2012). For this reason recent research into plant metabolism has often included the usage of modeling and correlation based approaches, and interactions between the results obtained using different post-genomic techniques (Figure 1 and Table 1) are expected.

(p5.1) Such studies have the ability to reveal previously unappreciated and complex interactions between transcripts, proteins, metabolites, and fluxes. In this way, a recent study was able to uncover a potential signaling role for leucine; a combination of extensive metabolite profiling and transcript profiling demonstrated a correlation between expression of a subset of transcripts and the levels of this amino acid (Hannah et al., 2010). An ability to simultaneously quantify components of the metabolic network can also provide information about the relationship between different components of central carbon metabolism and resource allocation. For example, by exploiting the natural variation present in different accessions of Arabidopsis (Sulpice et al., , 2010b, it was possible to detect correlations between enzyme activities, metabolite abundances, and biomass. These studies indicate the presence of a strong negative correlation between starch and biomass, whilst the relative proportion of protein invested in enzymes is positively correlated to biomass accumulation. The relationship between transcripts, metabolites, and fluxes in plant respiratory metabolism was investigated in Arabidopsis cell suspension cultures subjected to menadione treatment (Baxter et al., 2007). The combinatory analysis of these parameters identified a transient reconfiguration of metabolism, involving down-regulation of the TCA cycle and amino acid biosynthesis, apparently working to avoid wasting energy under conditions of oxidative stress. Such methods may also have biotechnological applications. For example, metabolite:transcript correlations identified in potato tubers have revealed target genes for metabolic engineering of sucrose metabolism (Urbanczyk-Wochniak et al., 2003).
