# The foraging behaviour of honey bees, Apis mellifera: a review

CorpusID: 9969906 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a52ec22762a9eed0d3e03ac26d8f22a3a621068b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a52ec22762a9eed0d3e03ac26d8f22a3a621068b)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Under normal colony conditions, the forager bees are workers with an age of over 21 days, at which time they shift to perform Out-colony tasks including water, nectar, pollen or resin collection.The division of labour and the change of the nurse bees to perform foraging tasks were suggested to be impacted by colony factors (Huang and Robinson 1996), elevated levels of the foraging gene (Amfor) (Ben-Shahar et al. 2003) and/or the variations in the abundance of mRNA (Whitfield et al. 2003) in the worker's brain.Also, many other factors were suggested to have a key role in the shifting of worker bees from In-colony tasks to Out-colony tasks.The anticipation of the commencement of foraging is associated with an increased titre of juvenile hormone (JH) in foragers which is not affected by foraging experience but by diurnal variations (Elekonich et al. 2001).Further, Schulz et al. (2002) found higher octopamine concentrations in the antennal lobes of the bee brain in foragers compared to nurses regardless of the age.They also found that changes in octopamine are modulated by juvenile hormone.The earlier age of foraging activity commencement (shifting to Out-colony tasks) was found to be affected by bovine insulin treatments (Mott and Breed 2012).In another study, and under reduced brood rearing activity a delay in foraging commencement and death was found to be associated with increased vitellogenin levels (Amdam et al. 2009).Generally, the foraging skills and the number of forager workers are increased with age (Dukas and Visscher 1994).Additionally, the forager bees have different n-alkane profiles than the nurse bees with a higher quantity of n-alkane which may help the forager bees to tolerate the ambient conditions (Kather et al. 2011).Still more studies are required to elucidate the mechanisms influencing the shifting of the nurse bees to forager bees.After the change to foraging, a worker begins a new part of her life outside the colony in combination with different foraging tasks and interactions with the environment as explained in the next paragraphs.
## (s1) Foraging tasks
(p1.0) The forager bees can be classified into two categories; scout bees which search for the best food resource and the reticent bees which wait in the beehive until the scout bees return and give them information about the food source by dancing.The reticent bees, in general, range from 40-90% of the total forager population (Nest and Moore 2012).This organization is important in saving time and the efforts of the honey bee foragers.Liang et al. (2012) found extensive differences between honey bee food scouts and the other foragers with regard to brain gene expression including catecholamine, glutamate, and γ-aminobutyric acid signaling.Under some ecological conditions, a temporal shift from foraging activity to sleeping (napping) may occur (Klein and Seeley 2011).The night sleep of forager bees is very important and night sleep deprivation may impact the navigation memory of honey bees (Beyaert et al. 2012).
## (s3) Foraging distance
(p3.0) The energy hypothesis which suggests that foragers estimate the feeder distance (food resource) based on the spent energy during foraging flight is now considered to be incorrect and another hypothesis based on optical flow was suggested (Esch and Burns 1996).Both hypotheses can be considered as integrated explanations inasmuch as the energy spent during flight as well as the speed motion of the ground image received by the retina are both essential for estimating distance as well for distance calculation.The mean foraging distance for A. m. carnica was 1526.1 m while foraging distances of pollen-collecting bees had a mean of 1743 m in simple landscapes and 1543.4 m in complex landscapes (Steffan-Dewenter and Kuhn 2003).The mean of foraging distances for small colonies of A. m. mellifera was 670 m and for large colonies it was 620 m in July, while the values were 1430 m for small colonies and 2850 m for large colonies in August (Beekman et al. 2004).Hagler et al. (2011) found that the foraging range of honey bees ranged from 45 m to 5983 m.Under desert conditions, water foragers can fly up to 2 km from their colonies to collect water (Visscher et al. 1996).It seems that the foraging distance for colonies in the same region is impacted by race, colony strength, food resource, month and the time of the day.
## (s6) Factors impacting foraging activity
(p6.0) There are many factors that can impact foraging activity.These factors can be divided into two major groups: in-colony factors and out-colony factors.The first group (in-colony factors) include: queen presence and case (virgin or mated).Higher foraging activity with less pollen collection was found in colonies headed by virgin queens than colonies headed by mated queens while lower foraging activity and pollen collection were found in queenless colonies than in colonies with a mated or virgin queen (Free et al. 1985b).Also, foraging activity is impacted by colony strength and brood rearing activity (Amdam et al. 2009;Abou-Shaara et al. 2013), and the degree of pollen need (Weidenmuller and Tautz 2002).Beehive type also has an impact on the foraging activity of honey bees (Abou-Shaara et al. 2013).The infection of honey bee foragers with diseases and parasites such as Nosema sp. or Varrao destructor may result in the inability of foragers to return to their colonies or increased time to return (Kralj and Fuchs 2006;Kralj and Fuchs 2010).The genotype of honey bee strains (e.g.high and low pollen-hoarding bees) strongly affected foraging behaviour for nectar or for pollen (Pankiw et al. 2002).The inheritance of high pollen-hoarding behaviour is a recessive trait unlike honey storing behaviour, which shows a more dominant pattern (Page et al. 1995).Beside these factors, ovariole number can influence nectar collection by honey bee workers (Siegel et al. 2012).

(p6.1) With regard to out-colony factors, the availability of suitable plant resources has a great impact on foraging activity, and forager bees have a preference for some resources over others (see, preference of honey bees paragraph).Moreover, Fulop and Menzel (2000) found that the reward volume (e.g.sucrose solution or nectar) has an impact on foraging activity and that bees can perceive the amount of reward from the feeding source.
## (s9) Disadvantages of foraging activity
(p9.0) Despite the great importance of foraging behaviour there are also some disadvantages associated with this activity.Honey bee foragers are able to transmit the bacteria Erwinia amylovora, the cause of fire blight of apple and pears (Keitt 1941).Also, as found by Boylan-Pett et al. (1991) forager bees play a key role in the transmission and spread of pollen-borne blueberry leaf mottle virus (BBLMV).This virus has the ability to remain infectious within honey bee colonies for at least 10 days.Honey bees are not effective pollinators of some plants; for example, Mackenzie (1994) found that bumble bees were better than honey bees in cranberry pollination (Vaccinium macrocarpon Ait).Bee-to-bee contact can also result in the transmission of bee parasites from one forager to another.Moreover, honey bees can transmit different mite species from plant to plant or even to their colonies.Foragers can also collect the poisonous pollen of some plant species and subsequently store these pollens in their colonies with harmful consequences for the colony's health.
