# AN OVERVIEW OF L 1 OPTIMAL TRANSPORTATION ON METRIC MEASURE SPACES

CorpusID: 119266179 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ceed288bcdcaf0b61072e23f7e39912b92d1766](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ceed288bcdcaf0b61072e23f7e39912b92d1766)

Fields: Mathematics

## (s4) 2.2.
(p4.0) Isoperimetric profile function. Given a m.m.s. (X, d, m) as above and a Borel subset A ⊂ X, let A ε denote the ε-tubular neighborhood

(p4.1) The isoperimetric profile, denoted by I (X,d,m) , is defined as the point-wise maximal function so that

(p4.2) If K > 0 and N ∈ N, by the Lévy-Gromov isoperimetric inequality (1.6) we know that, for Ndimensional smooth manifolds having Ricci ≥ K, the isoperimetric profile function is bounded below by the one of the N -dimensional round sphere of the suitable radius. In other words the model isoperimetric profile function is the one of S N . For N ≥ 1, K ∈ R arbitrary real numbers the situation is more complicated, and just recently E. Milman [41] discovered what is the model isoperimetric profile. We refer to [41] for all the details. Here we just recall the relevance of isoperimetric profile functions for m.m.s. over (R, | · |): given K ∈ R, N ∈ [1, +∞) and D ∈ (0, +∞], consider the function

(p4.3) Then from [41, Theorem 1.2, Corollary 3.2] it follows that for N -dimensional smooth manifolds having Ricci ≥ K, with K ∈ R arbitrary real number, and diameter D, the isoperimetric profile function is bounded below by I K,N,D and the bound is sharp. This also justifies the notation.
## (s14) Absolute continuity.
(p14.0) The results presented here are taken from [11]. The condition (A.2) can be stated also in the following way: for every compact set C ⊂ T

(p14.1) Lemma 5.3. Let m be a Radon measure and m q = r q g(q, ·) ♯ L 1 + ω q , ω q ⊥ g(q, ·) ♯ L 1 be the Radon-Nikodym decomposition of m q w.r.t. g(q, ·) ♯ L 1 . Then there exists a Borel set C ⊂ X such that

(p14.2) and ω q = m q C for q-a.e. q ∈ Q.

(p14.3) Proof. Consider the measure λ = g ♯ (q ⊗ L 1 ), and compute the Radon-Nikodym decomposition

(p14.4) Then there exists a Borel set C such that ω = m C and λ(C) = 0. The set C proves the Lemma. Indeed C = ∪ q∈Q C q where C q = C ∩ R(q) is such that m q Cq = ω q and g(q, ·) ♯ L 1 (C q ) = 0 for q-a.e. q ∈ Q.

(p14.5) Theorem 5.4 (Theorem 5.7, [11]). Assume (A.2) to hold and the space to be non-branching. Then (R.2) holds true, that is for q-a.e. q ∈ Q the conditional measure m q is absolute continuous with respect to g(q, ·) ♯ L 1 .

(p14.6) The proof is based on the following simple observation.

(p14.7) Let η be a Radon measure on R. Suppose that for all A ⊂ R Borel with η(A) > 0 it holdŝ

(p14.8) Then η ≪ L 1 .

(p14.9) Proof. The proof will use Lemma 5.3: take C the set constructed in Lemma 5.3 and suppose by contradiction that m(C) > 0 and q ⊗ L 1 (g −1 (C)) = 0. In particular, for all t ∈ R it follows that q ⊗ L 1 (g −1 (C t )) = 0.

(p14.10) That gives a contradiction.

(p14.11) The proof of Theorem 5.4 inspired the definition of inversion points and of inversion plan as presented in [19], in particular see Step 2. of the proof of Theorem 5.3 of [19]. : MCP(K, N ). The presentation of the following results is taken from [18]. The same results were already proved in [11] using more involved arguments and different notation.
## (s15) Weak Ricci curvature bounds
(p15.0) In this section we additionally assume the metric measure space to satisfy the measure contraction property MCP (K, N ). Recall that the space is also assumed to be non-branching.

(p15.1) Lemma 5.5. For each Borel C ⊂ T and δ ∈ R the set

(p15.2) Proof. The proof follows straightforwardly from Lemma 4.1. The set (C × {ϕ = c}) ∩ Γ is trivially a subset of Γ and whenever (x 0 , y 0 ), (

(p15.3) We can deduce the following Corollary 5.6. For each Borel C ⊂ T and δ ∈ R define

(p15.4) If m(C δ ) > 0, there exists a unique ν ∈ OptGeo such that

(p15.5) From Corollary 5.6, we infer the existence of a map T C,δ depending on C and δ such that

(p15.6) Taking advantage of the ray map g, we define a convex combination between the identity map and T C,δ as follows:

(p15.7) Since C ⊂ T , the map (T C,δ ) t is well defined for all t ∈ [0, 1]. We then define the evolution of any subset A of C δ in the following way:

(p15.8) In particular from now on we will adopt the following notation:

(p15.9) So for any Borel C ⊂ T compact and δ ∈ R we have defined an evolution for compact subsets of C δ . The definition of the evolution depends both on C and δ.

(p15.10) Remark 5.7. Here we spend a few lines on the measurability of the maps involved in the definition of evolution of sets assuming for simplicity C to be compact. First note that since Γ is closed and C is compact, we can prove that also C δ is compact. Indeed from compactness of C we obtain that ϕ is bounded on C and then, since C is bounded, it follows that also C × {ϕ = c} ∩ Γ is bounded. Since X is proper, compactness follows. Moreover

(p15.11) hence if A is compact, the same holds for (T C,δ ) t (A) and

(p15.12) is m-measurable.

(p15.13) The next result gives quantitative information on the behavior of the map t → m(A t ). The statement will be given assuming the lower bound on the generalized Ricci curvature K to be positive. Analogous estimates holds for any K ∈ R.

(p15.14) Proposition 5.8. For each compact C ⊂ T and δ ∈ R such that m(C δ ) > 0, it holds

(p15.15) for all t ∈ [0, 1] and A ⊂ C δ compact set.

(p15.16) Proof. The proof of (5.2) is obtained by the standard method of approximation with Dirac deltas of the second marginal. Even though similar arguments already appeared many times in literature, in order to be self-contained, we include all the details. For ease of notation T = T C,δ and C = C δ .

(p15.17) Step 1. 

(p15.18) is d 2 -cyclically monotone. Consider then A i,I := A ∩ E i,I and the approximate evolution

(p15.19) and notice that A i,I,0 = A i,I . Then by MCP(K, N ) it holds

(p15.20) Taking the sum over i ≤ I in the previous inequality implies

(p15.21) where T I (x) := y i for x ∈ E i,I . From d 2 -cyclically monotonicity and the non-branching of the space, up to a set of measure zero, the map T I is well defined, i.e. m(E i,I ∩ E j,I ) = 0 for i = j. It follows that for each I ∈ N we can remove a set of measure zero from A and obtain

(p15.22) As before consider also the interpolated map T I,t and observe that A I,t = T I,t (A). Since also A is compact we obtain

(p15.23) Step 2.

(p15.24) Since C is a compact set, for every I ∈ N the set Λ I is compact as well and it is a subset of C × {ϕ = δ} that can be assumed to be compact as well. By compactness, there exists a subsequence I n and a compact set Θ ⊂ C × {ϕ = δ} compact such that

(p15.25) where d H is the Hausdorff distance. Since the sequence {y i } i∈N is dense in {ϕ = δ} and C ⊂ T is compact, by definition of E i,I , necessarily for every (x, y) ∈ Θ it holds ϕ(x) + ϕ(y) = d(x, y), ϕ(y) = δ.

(p15.26) Hence Θ ⊂ Γ ∩ C × {ϕ = δ} and this in particular implies, by upper semicontinuity of m along converging sequences of closed sets, that m(A t ) ≥ lim sup n→∞ m(A In,t ) .

(p15.27) The claim follows.

(p15.28) As the goal is to localize curvature conditions, we first need to prove that almost every conditional probability is absolutely continuous with respect to the one dimensional Hausdorff measure restricted to the correct geodesic. One way is to prove that Proposition 5.8 implies (A.2) and then apply Theorem 5.4 to obtain (R.2) (approach used in [11]). Another option is to repeat verbatim the proof of Theorem 5.4 substituting the translation with the evolution considered in Proposition 5.8 and to observe that the claim follows (approach used in [18]). So we take for granted the following Proposition 5.9. Assume the non-branching m.m.s. (X, d, m) to satisfy MCP(K, N ). Then (R.2) holds true, that is for q-a.e. q ∈ Q the conditional measure m q is absolute continuous with respect to g(q, ·) ♯ L 1 .

(p15.29) To fix the notation, we now have proved the existence of a Borel function h : Dom (g) → R + such that

(p15.30) Using standard arguments, estimate (5.2) can be localized at the level of the density h: for each compact set A ⊂ T

(p15.31) h(q, s)L 1 (ds),

(p15.32) for q-a.e. q ∈ Q such that g(q, σ) ∈ T . Then using change of variable, one obtains that for q-a.e. q ∈ Q:

(p15.33) for L 1 -a.e. s ∈ P 2 (g −1 (R(q))) and σ ∈ R such that s + |σ − s| ∈ P 2 (g −1 (R(q))). We can rewrite the estimate in the following way:

(p15.34) for L 1 -a.e. s ≤ τ ≤ σ such that g(q, s), g(q, τ ), g(q, σ) ∈ T . Since evolution can be also considered backwardly, we have proved the next  N ). For q-a.e. q ∈ Q it holds:

(p15.35) for σ − < s ≤ τ < σ + such that their image via g(q, ·) is contained in R(q).

(p15.36) In particular from Theorem 5.10 we deduce that (5.4) {t ∈ Dom (g(q, ·)) : h(q, t) > 0} = Dom (g(q, ·)), in particular such set is convex and t → h(q, t) is locally Lipschitz continuous.
