# Magnetic Catalysis: A Review

CorpusID: 118087122 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2665d6fa7df5c5e4d1784c29810c0698159cd618](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2665d6fa7df5c5e4d1784c29810c0698159cd618)

Fields: Physics

## (s5) Magnetic catalysis in 2+1 dimensions
(p5.0) Now, let us consider a Nambu-Jona-Lasinio (NJL) model in 2 + 1 dimensions, in which the magnetic catalysis of symmetry breaking is realized in its simplest possible form [99,102]. When using the reducible representation of Dirac algebra, given by Eq. (6), one finds that the kinetic part of the massless Dirac theory is invariant under a global U(2) flavor symmetry. The generators of the symmetry transformations are given by

(p5.1) The NJL-type Lagrangian density, with the interaction term invariant under the U(2) flavor symmetry, can be written down as follows:

(p5.2) where G is a dimensionfull coupling constant. This theory is nonrenormalizable, but can be viewed as a low-energy effective theory with a range of validity extending up to a certain ultraviolet energy scale set by a physically motivated choice of the cutoff parameter Λ .
## (s22) Concluding Remarks
(p22.0) We hope that this review of magnetic catalysis is sufficient to convey the main idea of the phenomenon in terms of simple and rather general physics concepts. From the outset, this review was never meant to be comprehensive. Here we concentrated only on the bare minimum needed to understand the phenomenon as a consequence of the underlying dimensional reduction of the fermion-antifermion pairing in a magnetic field [99,102,100,101]. For further reading and for deeper insights into various aspects of the magnetic catalysis, it is suggested that the reader refers to the original literature on the topic. Over nearly 20 years of research, there has been a lot of progress made in our understanding of magnetic catalysis. A rather long list of research papers at the end of this review is a pretty objective proof of that. At present, it is evident that the key features of the underlying physics are well established and understood. At the same time, it is also evident that there are still many theoretical questions about the applications of magnetic catalysis under various conditions, where factors other than the magnetic field may also play a substantial role.
