# A review of the D1/D5 system and five dimensional black hole from supergravity and brane viewpoints

CorpusID: 119524369 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d37989fb16424caa28de1d7bb0bfc55ebb41a515](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d37989fb16424caa28de1d7bb0bfc55ebb41a515)

Fields: Physics

## (s18) Definition of the microstates
(p18.0) Let us now concentrate on the maximally twisted sector alone. The states |i are now defined as [63,64] 

(p18.1) where C(n, i) are normalization constants ensuring unit norm of the state. |0 represents the NS ground state. The present discussion is also valid in the Ramond sector, in which case the ground state will have an additional spinor index but will not affect the S-matrix. We have also suppressed for simplicity the fermion creation operators which can be trivially incorporated.
## (s26) Minimal scalar
(p26.0) The absorption cross-section and emission rate of a particular field depend on how the field propagates and backscatters from the geometry of the black hole. We will therefore look at the equation of propagation of scalar fluctuations.

(p26.1) Consider type IIB Lagrangian compactified on T 5 [68,69]:

(p26.2) Here a, b, . . . = 5, . . . , 9, µ, ν, . . . = 0, 1, . . . , 4

(p26.3) A (K)a are the KK vector fields. The terms denoted by . . . represent "shifts" in the field strengths which are not important for either the background geometries or fluctuations we are going to consider.

(p26.4) This Lagrangian can be obtained from type IIB Lagrangian in 10 dimensions simply by repeating compactification on a circle several times [68] (can also be obtained by duality on 11 dimensional supergravity).

(p26.5) We will start with an example of a simple minimal scalar.

(p26.6) The near-extremal metric of the five-dimensional black hole is a classical solution of the above Lagrangian. Consider the 10-dimensional form of the metric. Let us consider an offdiagonal metric fluctuation on T 4 viz.

(p26.7) where h ab has only off-diagonal entries, say h 89 .

(p26.8) With this rescaling, the field h ab is canonically normalized; that is, the quadratic part of the Lagrangian involving h ab is

(p26.9) It couples only to the five-dimensional metric, and is hence a minimal scalar.

(p26.10) For the semiclassical analysis [63,67,70], all we need is the equation for propagation of the fluctuation ϕ ≡ h ab on the black hole metric, namely

(p26.11) For the five-dimensional black hole metric discussed earlier the equation becomes for the s-wave mode:

(p26.12) The idea behind the absorption calculation is very simple. In terms of ψ = r 3/2 R the above equation becomes

(p26.13) The shape of the potential is given by (Fig 2). Absorption is caused by the tunnelling of an  It is not possible to solve the wave equation exactly. However, we can devise near and far zones where the potential simplifies enough to admit known solutions. If the zones have an overlap region then matching the near and far wave-functions and their radial derivatives will provide the solution for our purpose. We will work in the following range of frequency and parameters [70] r 0 , r n ≪ r 1 , r 5

(p26.14) T R,L = 1/β R,L have been defined in (91). The far and near solutions will be matched at a point r m such that r 0 , r n ≪ r m ≪ r 1 , r 5 ,

(p26.15) Far zone (r ≥ r m ):

(p26.16) Here the potential V w becomes (in terms of ρ = wr)

(p26.17) This gives a Bessel equation, so that

(p26.18) For ρ → ∞ it is easy to read off the parts proportional to e ±iwr .

(p26.19) Near zone (r ≤ r m ):

(p26.20) Here we have

(p26.21) which is a Hypergeometric equation, with solution

(p26.22) The temperatures T R,L are given by

(p26.23) These expressions agree with (91).

(p26.24) Now we impose the condition on the near solution that the wave at the horizon should not have any outcoming component: it should be purely ingoing (no "white hole"). This requires B = 0.
