# A review of piroplasmid infections in wild carnivores worldwide: importance for domestic animal health and wildlife conservation

CorpusID: 13146671 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e0dd66b928bc3e21f5d50f27829d3e1656a9f509](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e0dd66b928bc3e21f5d50f27829d3e1656a9f509)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s14) Knowledge gaps and future research perspectives
(p14.0) To better understand the role of wild carnivores in the epidemiology of piroplasmoses and to determine eventual conservation threats for endangered carnivores, it is imperative that research be conducted to fill the gaps existing in the knowledge of the natural history of the different species of piroplasmids. These gaps may include:

(p14.1) The exact determination and classification of the causative agent for diverse piroplasmid infections in wildlife. The identity of the vector/s and/or reservoir/s for many agents (e.g. Cytauxzoon sp. in Europe, Asia, and South America, and for "B. microti-like" or R. vitalii). These data are extremely important to understand the disease dynamics of piroplasmoses and to determine potential distribution areas of the disease. The investigation of the critical role of ticks in the dynamics of piroplasmoses. For some piroplasmids, such as Cytauxzoon spp. in Eurasia, the competent vector is still unknown. It is also necessary to determine the ability of ticks to serve as reservoirs in the absence of the vertebrate host, and the duration of infectivity in the tick vector [3]. The confirmation of the competence of suspected wild reservoirs to infect the tick vector through xenodiagnosis. The investigation of alternative ways of piroplasmid transmission (transplancental, direct) and its role in the maintenance of piroplasmids in the wild in the absence of a tick vector. Improved economical and sensitive serological tests for use in the cases where parasites may be difficult to detect by direct methods, and epidemiological surveys in wild populations. Improvement of the available molecular biology tools for characterization of piroplasmids infecting wild carnivores, and for comparison with domestic animal-derived sequences.

(p14.2) To better understand the role of wild carnivores in the epidemiology of piroplasmoses and to determine eventual conservation threats for endangered carnivores, it is imperative that research be conducted to fill the gaps existing in the knowledge of the natural history of the different species of piroplasmids. These gaps may include:

(p14.3) The exact determination and classification of the causative agent for diverse piroplasmid infections in wildlife. The identity of the vector/s and/or reservoir/s for many agents (e.g. Cytauxzoon sp. in Europe, Asia, and South America, and for "B. microti-like" or R. vitalii). These data are extremely important to understand the disease dynamics of piroplasmoses and to determine potential distribution areas of the disease. The investigation of the critical role of ticks in the dynamics of piroplasmoses. For some piroplasmids, such as Cytauxzoon spp. in Eurasia, the competent vector is still unknown. It is also necessary to determine the ability of ticks to serve as reservoirs in the absence of the vertebrate host, and the duration of infectivity in the tick vector [3]. The confirmation of the competence of suspected wild reservoirs to infect the tick vector through xenodiagnosis. The investigation of alternative ways of piroplasmid transmission (transplancental, direct) and its role in the maintenance of piroplasmids in the wild in the absence of a tick vector. Improved economical and sensitive serological tests for use in the cases where parasites may be difficult to detect by direct methods, and epidemiological surveys in wild populations. Improvement of the available molecular biology tools for characterization of piroplasmids infecting wild carnivores, and for comparison with domestic animal-derived sequences.
## (s40) Knowledge gaps and future research perspectives
(p40.0) To better understand the role of wild carnivores in the epidemiology of piroplasmoses and to determine eventual conservation threats for endangered carnivores, it is imperative that research be conducted to fill the gaps existing in the knowledge of the natural history of the different species of piroplasmids. These gaps may include:

(p40.1) The exact determination and classification of the causative agent for diverse piroplasmid infections in wildlife. The identity of the vector/s and/or reservoir/s for many agents (e.g. Cytauxzoon sp. in Europe, Asia, and South America, and for "B. microti-like" or R. vitalii). These data are extremely important to understand the disease dynamics of piroplasmoses and to determine potential distribution areas of the disease. The investigation of the critical role of ticks in the dynamics of piroplasmoses. For some piroplasmids, such as Cytauxzoon spp. in Eurasia, the competent vector is still unknown. It is also necessary to determine the ability of ticks to serve as reservoirs in the absence of the vertebrate host, and the duration of infectivity in the tick vector [3]. The confirmation of the competence of suspected wild reservoirs to infect the tick vector through xenodiagnosis. The investigation of alternative ways of piroplasmid transmission (transplancental, direct) and its role in the maintenance of piroplasmids in the wild in the absence of a tick vector. Improved economical and sensitive serological tests for use in the cases where parasites may be difficult to detect by direct methods, and epidemiological surveys in wild populations. Improvement of the available molecular biology tools for characterization of piroplasmids infecting wild carnivores, and for comparison with domestic animal-derived sequences.

(p40.2) To better understand the role of wild carnivores in the epidemiology of piroplasmoses and to determine eventual conservation threats for endangered carnivores, it is imperative that research be conducted to fill the gaps existing in the knowledge of the natural history of the different species of piroplasmids. These gaps may include:

(p40.3) The exact determination and classification of the causative agent for diverse piroplasmid infections in wildlife. The identity of the vector/s and/or reservoir/s for many agents (e.g. Cytauxzoon sp. in Europe, Asia, and South America, and for "B. microti-like" or R. vitalii). These data are extremely important to understand the disease dynamics of piroplasmoses and to determine potential distribution areas of the disease. The investigation of the critical role of ticks in the dynamics of piroplasmoses. For some piroplasmids, such as Cytauxzoon spp. in Eurasia, the competent vector is still unknown. It is also necessary to determine the ability of ticks to serve as reservoirs in the absence of the vertebrate host, and the duration of infectivity in the tick vector [3]. The confirmation of the competence of suspected wild reservoirs to infect the tick vector through xenodiagnosis. The investigation of alternative ways of piroplasmid transmission (transplancental, direct) and its role in the maintenance of piroplasmids in the wild in the absence of a tick vector. Improved economical and sensitive serological tests for use in the cases where parasites may be difficult to detect by direct methods, and epidemiological surveys in wild populations. Improvement of the available molecular biology tools for characterization of piroplasmids infecting wild carnivores, and for comparison with domestic animal-derived sequences.
