# Dry, aligning, dilute, active matter: A synthetic and self-contained overview

CorpusID: 189762178 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d08bbeeff21d452cb1516762c761dd200bf8198](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d08bbeeff21d452cb1516762c761dd200bf8198)

Fields: Physics, Computer Science

## (s7) Hydrodynamic theories for the 3 basic DADAM classes
(p7.0) Numerous works on active matter are performed at the hydrodynamic level of a few partial differential equations (PDEs) governing the evolution of 'slow' fields representing the large-scale dynamics of the system at stake. One can either consider stochastic or deterministic PDEs. Here, we mostly discuss deterministic hydrodynamic equations, from which a lot can be learnt. However, it is clear that even though such deterministic PDEs do include some (mean-field) effects of the noise at play at the microscopic level, they cannot account for all fluctuations. In particular they cannot display the anomalously strong fluctuations shown in the previous section to dominate the ordered liquid phases of DADAM systems.

(p7.1) There exist different ways to arrive at hydrodynamic equations. Here we first discuss this in general, before describing our favorite method, the Boltzmann-Ginzburg-Landau (BGL) approach, pioneered and developed by Eric Bertin and collaborators (Bertin et al., 2006;Bertin et al., 2009;Peshkov et al., 2014). Finally, the rest of this section is devoted to studying the solutions of the hydrodynamic equations derived using the BGL method for the 3 basic classes of DADAM.
## (s9) Boltzmann-Ginzburg-Landau approach to DADAM
(p9.0) Construction of the Boltzmann equation. In the context of the Vicsek-style models representing the 3 basic DADAM classes, given the constant speed v 0 of particles, it is convenient to deal with the angular variable θ rather than with the velocity v = v 0 e(θ). Even though it is possible to treat discrete-time dynamics, we consider here the more traditional case of continuous time. To this end, we coarse-grain continuous time models, inspired by the discrete time dynamics defined by Eqs. (0.2), in which particles align their velocities in a Vicsek-style way and undergo tumbles at a finite rate λ.

(p9.1) Following , all 3 models are described by the following Boltzmann equation governing f (r, θ, t):

(p9.2) where summation over repeated greek indices is assumed and q αβ (θ) = e α (θ)e β (θ) − 1 2 . Eq. (0.6) is nothing but a"master equation" counting gains and losses to f (r, θ, t). The first line corresponds to the general form of free motion dynamics: particles are moving at a mean speedv along their orientation, and they diffuse with isotropic diffusion constant D 0 and anisotropic diffusion constant D 1 . Coefficientsv, D 0 and D 1 are in general unknown, but can be computed for simple Vicsek-style microscopic dynamics. Considering only the free motion of particles, the distribution f obeys in general

(p9.3) where g is a distribution of velocity angles θ v coding motion along/against polarity. Expanding the r.h.s. of Eq. (0.7) to second order in v 0 ∆t and sending ∆t → 0 we get

(p9.4) where . . . v denotes the average over the distribution g, D 0 = lim ∆t→0 v 2 0 ∆t/4, and D 1 = 2D 0 . In the polar Vicsek and self-propelled rods classes, g polar (θ v − θ) = δ(θ v − θ). Therefore, the dominant term of the expansion is the drift at constant speed v 0 such thatv = v 0 and D 0 = D 1 = 0. On the other hand, for active nematics particles that experience fast velocity reversals, g apolar (θ

(p9.5) . That way the drift term in Eq. (0.8) cancels and the dominant contribution to the free motion is given by the diffusion terms:v = 0, D 0 = lim ∆t→0 v 2 0 ∆t/4 and D 1 = 2D 0 . The second line of Eq. (0.6) describes the dynamics of particle orientations. In the self-propelled rods class, particles can undergo velocity reversals at a slow rate a without destroying the local order. Finally the two last terms are the integrals accounting for angular self-diffusion and collision events, that we define now. In order to account for the finite-time dynamics of Vicsek-style models, the self-diffusion integral considers tumbling events occurring at a rate λ, thus

(p9.6) where P η is the angular noise distribution of variance η 2 . As for any Boltzmann approach, the collisional integral is derived under the binary collision assumption, which states that in a dilute system collisions of more than two particles are rare and thus negligible 6 . For its derivation, we consider a particle 1 located at position r with an orientation θ 1 and compute the number of collisions N c per unit volume and unit time it experiences with a particle 2 of orientation θ 2 . This quantity is given by the collisional cross section N c = 2r 0 |v rel |f (2) (r, θ 1 , θ 2 , t) , (0.10)

(p9.7) where r 0 is the interaction radius, |v rel | = v 0 K(θ 2 − θ 1 ) is the speed of particle 2 in the reference frame of 1, and f (2) is the two-body distribution. In order to have a closed equation for the single-particle distribution, we now need to work under the molecular chaos hypothesis 7 which ensures that the states of particles 1 and 2 are uncorrelated prior to the collision, such that

(p9.8) The collisional integral gathers loss and gain terms that thus read 6 We take the limit where the collisional mean free path is much larger than the radius of interaction: ρ −1/2 0 r 0 . 7 This approximation is supposedly valid when the typical flight distance v 0 /λ is much larger than the radius of interaction r 0 . However, as discussed earlier its validity needs to be nuanced due to the aligning nature of the interactions.

(p9.9) where Ψ(θ 1 , θ 2 ) is the post collisional alignment rule and the noise is drawn from the same distribution P η as in the self-diffusion integral 8 .

(p9.10) Let us now specify the functions that enter in Eq. (0.12) for the three models considered here. In the polar/Vicsek and self-propelled rods classes, the kernel of interaction K(θ 2 − θ 1 ) is simply given by

(p9.11) while, because of velocity reversals, it takes a π-periodic form for active nematics:

(p9.12) The alignment rule Ψ, because of global rotational invariance, obeys Ψ(θ 1 , θ 2 ) = θ 1 + H(θ 2 − θ 1 ). In the case of polar (or ferromagnetic) alignment, the function H thus reads H ferro (∆) = ∆ 2 ∀∆ ∈ (−π; π] , (0.14a) and is 2π-periodic. On the contrary, if particles align with a nematic symmetry,

(p9.13) and it is π-periodic. For convenience, we now make the Boltzmann equation (0.6) dimensionless by applying the rescalings t → λ −1 t , ∂ x,y → λv −1 0 ∂ x,y (polar/Vicsek and self-propelled rods) ,

(p9.14) such that the polar and active nematics classes have only two control parameters: the variance η 2 of the noise distribution and the dimensionless densityρ 0 ≡ 2r 0 v 0 ρ 0 λ −1 . The self-propelled rods class shows an additional free parameter: the dimensionless reversal rateã ≡ aλ −1 . In the following we will drop the tildes in order to lighten the notations.

(p9.15) Angular Fourier mode expansion. Since the variable θ is 2π-periodic, it is natural to expand the distribution f in terms of angular Fourier modes,

(p9.16) with f −k (r, t) = f * k (r, t) (we use the * superscript to denote complex conjugates). The first modes correspond to the complex representations of the density ρ, momentum w = ρv and nematic S = ρQ fields:

(p9.17) As we will see below, when working near the onset of orientational order we have smooth angular variations of f (r, θ, t) and the modes f k beyond f 1 and f 2 quickly decay to zero as k increases. This will be useful below to obtain hydrodynamic equations, which are closed equations for the first few modes.

(p9.18) We now re-express the Boltzmann equation Eq. (0.6) as a hierarchy of PDEs governing the evolution of the modes f k . In what follows and for simplicity, space and time dependencies of the functions will be implicit. The drift term in Eq. (0.6) becomes 2π 0 dθ e ıkθ cos(θ)

(p9.19) where we have used the complex gradient = ∂ x + ı∂ y . The Laplacian operator in (0.6) does not depend on θ, thus ∆f (θ) simply transforms as ∆f k with ∆ = * . The anisotropic diffusion, on the other hand, becomes 2π 0 dθ e ıkθ Tr cos 2 (θ) − 1 2 cos(θ) sin(θ)

(p9.20) where Tr denotes the trace operator.

(p9.21) On the r.h.s. of Eq. (0.6), the exchange term modeling slow velocity reversals takes the form of a damping of odd modes:

(p9.22) while the self-diffusion integral, whose gain part is given by the convolution product of f and the noise distribution P η , simply becomes

(p9.23) Finally, we derive the expression of the Fourier transform of the gain term of the collisional integral. We first expand P and f (θ 2 ) and apply the change of variable 

(p9.24) with the mode coupling function

(p9.25) The corresponding loss part can be computed in a similar way. After collecting all the terms, we obtain the following hierarchy

(p9.26) In the next sections we detail the procedure used to truncate and close this hierarchy in a controlled way, leading to hydrodynamic equations for the three classes.

(p9.27) Polar/Vicsek class. For this case, the hierarchy reads

(p9.28) with J polar k,q = ρ 0 (P k I polar k,q − I polar 0,q ) and the coefficients

(p9.29) (0.20)

(p9.30) Eq. (0.19) admits the trivial disordered solution ρ = 1 and f k>0 = 0. The linear stability of this solution to space-independent perturbations is given by

(p9.31) such that it will remain stable whenever all µ k 's are negative and unstable if at least one of them is positive. Computing these coefficients, it can be shown that only µ 1 = P 1 − 1 + 4 π P 1 − 2 3 ρ 0 can become positive at low noises and large densities. Below the line µ 1 = 0 in the (ρ 0 , η) plane (see Fig. 0.10), the polar order |f 1 | thus grows, and close to the transition we can thus assume that |f 1 | ≈ ε with ε 1. In order to compute the associated scaling of the higher modes, let us write explicitly the first equations of the hierarchy,

(p9.32) Each k > 1 mode takes non-zero values due to its nonlinear coupling with f 1 but is maintained small because of the negative linear coefficients µ k . From the above equations, we thus have |f 2 | ≈ |f 1 | 2 , ..., |f k | ≈ |f 1 f k−1 | ∀k > 1 such that |f k | ≈ |f 1 | k ≈ ε k ∀k ≥ 1 close to the transition 9 . Moreover, the continuity equation imposes that |∂ t ρ| ≈ | * f 1 | while the pressure in the polar field equation gives |∂ t f 1 | ≈ | ρ|. Therefore, |δρ| = |ρ − 1| ≈ |f 1 | ≈ ε. We then immediately obtain from the mass conservation that ∂ t ≈ ≈ ε α , and finally α = 1 is determined compensating |

(p9.33) Thus, there is a unique scaling ansatz that allows one to attribute an ε order to each term of the hierarchy. Truncating it at the first nontrivial order ε 3 , we obtain equations for ρ, f 1 and f 2 . Moreover, in the f 2 equation, the ∂ t f 2 term is negligible compared to the leading order terms, such that f 2 can be enslaved:

(p9.34) Replacing f 2 by this expression in the f 1 equation we finally get the closed hydrodynamic equations for the polar/Vicsek class

(p9.35) Active nematics class. In this case particles reverse their velocities at a fast rate, therefore the Boltzmann hierarchy only shows spatial diffusion. Moreover, since the problem has a full nematic symmetry, all the odd modes of the distribution f can be set to zero (Bertin et al., 2013;Ngo et al., 2014). One is left with:

(p9.36) with J an k,q = ρ 0 (P 2k I an k,q − I an 0,q ) and the coefficients

(p9.37) From the symmetry of the alignment, the field responsible for the transition from disorder to nematic order is now the second mode of the distribution f 2 . Indeed, the only linear coefficient that can be positive (at low noise and large densities) is now µ 2 = P 2 −1+ 8 15π [5(2 √ 2−1)P 2 −7]ρ 0 . Using similar arguments as for the polar/Vicsek class, we can arrive at the following unique scaling ansatz close to the onset of nematic order

(p9.38) such that space and time now scale diffusively. Truncating the hierarchy (0.24) up to order ε 3 , we get equations for ρ, f 2 and f 4 . Similarly to the polar class, f 4 can be enslaved to f 2 , which leads to the following hydrodynamic equations

(p9.39) Self-propelled rods class. This class also shows nematic alignment, but no or slow velocity reversals. The free motion in the Boltzmann hierarchy thus takes the form of a drift at constant speed 10

(p9.40) with J rods k,q = ρ 0 (P k I rods k,q − I rods 0,q ) and

(p9.41) (0.28)

(p9.42) The ordering field in this case remains f 2 as witnessed by the associated linear coefficient µ 2 = P 2 − 1 + 16 15π [5(2 √ 2 − 1)P 2 − 7]ρ 0 which becomes positive at large densities and low noises. From the symmetry of the motion, the scaling ansatz necessary to truncate the hierarchy for this class is then derived assuming a ballistic scaling for space and time: ≈ ∂ t . It is unique and reads Peshkov et al., 2012) |f

(p9.43) The hierarchy (0.28) truncated at order ε 3 thus includes equations for ρ, f 1 , f 2 , f 3 and f 4 . Enslaving the two highest modes to the other, we finally get the rather complicated equations

(p9.44) with 10 It can be shown that the active nematics hierarchy (0.24) is recovered in the limit of large reversal rate a imposing v 2 0 ∼ a (Mahault et al., 2018).
