# Efficacy of melanoma patients treated with PD-1 inhibitors Protocol for an overview, and a network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials

CorpusID: 195812117 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/64765d281e82403aec7c57736e8694ea674d6ebd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/64765d281e82403aec7c57736e8694ea674d6ebd)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Assessment of risk of bias of included RCTs in identified SRs
(p6.0) For each embedded RCTs, their risks of bias will be assessed by the Cochrane's risk of bias tool. [16] The evaluation tool includes 6 aspects:

(p6.1) 1. selection bias: random sequence generation, allocation concealment; 2. performance bias: Blinding of participants and personnel; 3. detection bias: Blinding of outcome assessment; 4. Incomplete outcome data: result data integrity; 5. Reporting bias: selective reporting; 6. Other biases: other important biases that do not include the above. For each result, "Low" (Low bias risk), "High" (High bias risk) and "Unclear" (Uncertain bias or lack of relevant information) will be made based on the above six evaluation criteria.

(p6.2) For each embedded RCTs, their risks of bias will be assessed by the Cochrane's risk of bias tool. [16] The evaluation tool includes 6 aspects:

(p6.3) 1. selection bias: random sequence generation, allocation concealment; 2. performance bias: Blinding of participants and personnel; 3. detection bias: Blinding of outcome assessment; 4. Incomplete outcome data: result data integrity; 5. Reporting bias: selective reporting; 6. Other biases: other important biases that do not include the above. For each result, "Low" (Low bias risk), "High" (High bias risk) and "Unclear" (Uncertain bias or lack of relevant information) will be made based on the above six evaluation criteria.
## (s21) Assessment of risk of bias of included RCTs in identified SRs
(p21.0) For each embedded RCTs, their risks of bias will be assessed by the Cochrane's risk of bias tool. [16] The evaluation tool includes 6 aspects:

(p21.1) 1. selection bias: random sequence generation, allocation concealment; 2. performance bias: Blinding of participants and personnel; 3. detection bias: Blinding of outcome assessment; 4. Incomplete outcome data: result data integrity; 5. Reporting bias: selective reporting; 6. Other biases: other important biases that do not include the above. For each result, "Low" (Low bias risk), "High" (High bias risk) and "Unclear" (Uncertain bias or lack of relevant information) will be made based on the above six evaluation criteria.

(p21.2) For each embedded RCTs, their risks of bias will be assessed by the Cochrane's risk of bias tool. [16] The evaluation tool includes 6 aspects:

(p21.3) 1. selection bias: random sequence generation, allocation concealment; 2. performance bias: Blinding of participants and personnel; 3. detection bias: Blinding of outcome assessment; 4. Incomplete outcome data: result data integrity; 5. Reporting bias: selective reporting; 6. Other biases: other important biases that do not include the above. For each result, "Low" (Low bias risk), "High" (High bias risk) and "Unclear" (Uncertain bias or lack of relevant information) will be made based on the above six evaluation criteria.
