# A Comparative Survey of Recent Natural Language Interfaces for Databases

CorpusID: 195316636 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c4e3955219e8b008e4a14fbd0a1aac17cdba568d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c4e3955219e8b008e4a14fbd0a1aac17cdba568d)

Fields: Computer Science, Linguistics

## (s27) QUEST (QUEry generator for STructured sources)
(p27.0) QUEST (Bergamaschi et al, 2013) is a keyword-based NLI to translate input questions into SQL. It combines semantic and statistical ML techniques for the translation.

(p27.1) The first step is to determine how the keywords in the input question correspond to elements of the database (lookup). In contrast to SODA, QUEST uses two Hidden Markov Models (HMM) to choose the relevant elements (ranking). The first HMM is a set of heuristic rules. The second HMM is trained with user feedback. The next step is to identify the possible join paths to connect all the relevant elements from the previous step. QUEST selects the most informative join paths (similar to SODA's step 4). The most informative join paths are those that contain tuples in the database. In the third step, QUEST decides which combination of keyword mapping and join path most likely represents the semantics the users had in mind when formulating the keyword question.

(p27.2) The strength of QUEST is the combination of user feedback and a set of heuristic rules during the ranking. This allows the system to learn from the users over time. A weakness of QUEST is that it is not able to handle concepts such as 'good movie'.

(p27.3) QUEST (Bergamaschi et al, 2013) is a keyword-based NLI to translate input questions into SQL. It combines semantic and statistical ML techniques for the translation.

(p27.4) The first step is to determine how the keywords in the input question correspond to elements of the database (lookup). In contrast to SODA, QUEST uses two Hidden Markov Models (HMM) to choose the relevant elements (ranking). The first HMM is a set of heuristic rules. The second HMM is trained with user feedback. The next step is to identify the possible join paths to connect all the relevant elements from the previous step. QUEST selects the most informative join paths (similar to SODA's step 4). The most informative join paths are those that contain tuples in the database. In the third step, QUEST decides which combination of keyword mapping and join path most likely represents the semantics the users had in mind when formulating the keyword question.

(p27.5) The strength of QUEST is the combination of user feedback and a set of heuristic rules during the ranking. This allows the system to learn from the users over time. A weakness of QUEST is that it is not able to handle concepts such as 'good movie'.
## (s32) QuestIO (QUESTion-based Interface to Ontologies)
(p32.0) QuestIO (Damljanovic et al, 2008) is an NLI to query ontologies using unconstrained natural language. It automatically extracts human-understandable lexicalization from the ontology. Therefore, the quality of the semantic information in the ontology has to be very high to contain enough human-understandable labels and/or descriptions. For example, the attribute Movie.Release-Date would be extracted as 'Release Date', which is a human-understandable label. In contrast, the attribute Movie.OriginalLang would result in 'Original Lang', where the token 'Lang' is a shortened version for 'Language' and is not human-understandable.

(p32.1) QuestIO translates the input question with three steps: In the first step, the key concept identification tool identifies all tokens which refer to mentions of ontology resources such as instances, classes, properties or property values. This is similar to the dependent phrases of NLQ/A. In the next step, the context collector identifies patterns (e.g., key phrases like 'how many') in the remaining tokens that help the system to understand the query (similar to independent phrases of NLQ/A). The last step identifies relationships between the ontology resources collected during the previous steps and formulates the corresponding formal query. After executing the query, it will be sent to the result formatter to display the result in an user-friendly manner.

(p32.2) The automatic extraction of semantic information out of the ontology is both a strength and a weakness of QuestIO. It is highly dependent on the development of the human-understandable labels and descriptions, without them QuestIO will not be able to match the input questions to the automatic extracted information.

(p32.3) QuestIO (Damljanovic et al, 2008) is an NLI to query ontologies using unconstrained natural language. It automatically extracts human-understandable lexicalization from the ontology. Therefore, the quality of the semantic information in the ontology has to be very high to contain enough human-understandable labels and/or descriptions. For example, the attribute Movie.Release-Date would be extracted as 'Release Date', which is a human-understandable label. In contrast, the attribute Movie.OriginalLang would result in 'Original Lang', where the token 'Lang' is a shortened version for 'Language' and is not human-understandable.

(p32.4) QuestIO translates the input question with three steps: In the first step, the key concept identification tool identifies all tokens which refer to mentions of ontology resources such as instances, classes, properties or property values. This is similar to the dependent phrases of NLQ/A. In the next step, the context collector identifies patterns (e.g., key phrases like 'how many') in the remaining tokens that help the system to understand the query (similar to independent phrases of NLQ/A). The last step identifies relationships between the ontology resources collected during the previous steps and formulates the corresponding formal query. After executing the query, it will be sent to the result formatter to display the result in an user-friendly manner.

(p32.5) The automatic extraction of semantic information out of the ontology is both a strength and a weakness of QuestIO. It is highly dependent on the development of the human-understandable labels and descriptions, without them QuestIO will not be able to match the input questions to the automatic extracted information.
## (s95) QUEST (QUEry generator for STructured sources)
(p95.0) QUEST (Bergamaschi et al, 2013) is a keyword-based NLI to translate input questions into SQL. It combines semantic and statistical ML techniques for the translation.

(p95.1) The first step is to determine how the keywords in the input question correspond to elements of the database (lookup). In contrast to SODA, QUEST uses two Hidden Markov Models (HMM) to choose the relevant elements (ranking). The first HMM is a set of heuristic rules. The second HMM is trained with user feedback. The next step is to identify the possible join paths to connect all the relevant elements from the previous step. QUEST selects the most informative join paths (similar to SODA's step 4). The most informative join paths are those that contain tuples in the database. In the third step, QUEST decides which combination of keyword mapping and join path most likely represents the semantics the users had in mind when formulating the keyword question.

(p95.2) The strength of QUEST is the combination of user feedback and a set of heuristic rules during the ranking. This allows the system to learn from the users over time. A weakness of QUEST is that it is not able to handle concepts such as 'good movie'.

(p95.3) QUEST (Bergamaschi et al, 2013) is a keyword-based NLI to translate input questions into SQL. It combines semantic and statistical ML techniques for the translation.

(p95.4) The first step is to determine how the keywords in the input question correspond to elements of the database (lookup). In contrast to SODA, QUEST uses two Hidden Markov Models (HMM) to choose the relevant elements (ranking). The first HMM is a set of heuristic rules. The second HMM is trained with user feedback. The next step is to identify the possible join paths to connect all the relevant elements from the previous step. QUEST selects the most informative join paths (similar to SODA's step 4). The most informative join paths are those that contain tuples in the database. In the third step, QUEST decides which combination of keyword mapping and join path most likely represents the semantics the users had in mind when formulating the keyword question.

(p95.5) The strength of QUEST is the combination of user feedback and a set of heuristic rules during the ranking. This allows the system to learn from the users over time. A weakness of QUEST is that it is not able to handle concepts such as 'good movie'.
## (s100) QuestIO (QUESTion-based Interface to Ontologies)
(p100.0) QuestIO (Damljanovic et al, 2008) is an NLI to query ontologies using unconstrained natural language. It automatically extracts human-understandable lexicalization from the ontology. Therefore, the quality of the semantic information in the ontology has to be very high to contain enough human-understandable labels and/or descriptions. For example, the attribute Movie.Release-Date would be extracted as 'Release Date', which is a human-understandable label. In contrast, the attribute Movie.OriginalLang would result in 'Original Lang', where the token 'Lang' is a shortened version for 'Language' and is not human-understandable.

(p100.1) QuestIO translates the input question with three steps: In the first step, the key concept identification tool identifies all tokens which refer to mentions of ontology resources such as instances, classes, properties or property values. This is similar to the dependent phrases of NLQ/A. In the next step, the context collector identifies patterns (e.g., key phrases like 'how many') in the remaining tokens that help the system to understand the query (similar to independent phrases of NLQ/A). The last step identifies relationships between the ontology resources collected during the previous steps and formulates the corresponding formal query. After executing the query, it will be sent to the result formatter to display the result in an user-friendly manner.

(p100.2) The automatic extraction of semantic information out of the ontology is both a strength and a weakness of QuestIO. It is highly dependent on the development of the human-understandable labels and descriptions, without them QuestIO will not be able to match the input questions to the automatic extracted information.

(p100.3) QuestIO (Damljanovic et al, 2008) is an NLI to query ontologies using unconstrained natural language. It automatically extracts human-understandable lexicalization from the ontology. Therefore, the quality of the semantic information in the ontology has to be very high to contain enough human-understandable labels and/or descriptions. For example, the attribute Movie.Release-Date would be extracted as 'Release Date', which is a human-understandable label. In contrast, the attribute Movie.OriginalLang would result in 'Original Lang', where the token 'Lang' is a shortened version for 'Language' and is not human-understandable.

(p100.4) QuestIO translates the input question with three steps: In the first step, the key concept identification tool identifies all tokens which refer to mentions of ontology resources such as instances, classes, properties or property values. This is similar to the dependent phrases of NLQ/A. In the next step, the context collector identifies patterns (e.g., key phrases like 'how many') in the remaining tokens that help the system to understand the query (similar to independent phrases of NLQ/A). The last step identifies relationships between the ontology resources collected during the previous steps and formulates the corresponding formal query. After executing the query, it will be sent to the result formatter to display the result in an user-friendly manner.

(p100.5) The automatic extraction of semantic information out of the ontology is both a strength and a weakness of QuestIO. It is highly dependent on the development of the human-understandable labels and descriptions, without them QuestIO will not be able to match the input questions to the automatic extracted information.
