# royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsif Constructing living buildings: a review of relevant technologies for a novel application of biohybrid robotics

CorpusID: 198980764 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ae4fe5aef597a630f40d7e99178a3b9415380e4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ae4fe5aef597a630f40d7e99178a3b9415380e4)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s41) Discussion
(p41.0) Living organisms as building components have to be considered not only as continually growing entities, but also as dynamic, open systems that change structurally and morphologically in time. Many species are subjected to regular changes. For instance in plant organs, mechanical properties change due to the seasons and the developmental stages, and annual plants do not disappear after dying but will continue to mechanically impact the system. In a living system, certain animal depositions and plant organs not only develop but may spontaneously be withdrawn if they are no longer fulfilling their intended role. Planning and coordination of biohybrid construction processes will involve cycles of spatial expansion and reduction.

(p41.1) Living organisms sense and respond to environmental changes by adjusting their internal processes to overcome threats and to take advantage of changed conditions. Organisms successfully realize their developmental programmes due to their plasticity. In addition, organisms actively shape their environment. For example, trees change light conditions for their lower branches, they change the soil structure, underground water conditions, and the ambient air. The QR-code gamepad DK2 and OVRvision Figure 11. Augmented reality interfaces for user interaction with simulations of biohybrid living construction [318]; image from [318] and used with license. (Images reprinted from fig. 8 (subfigures a and b) of the Frontiers in Robotics and AI paper of von Mammen et al. [318], DOI, open access. Used with Creative Commons license CC BY 4.0. Authors holding the image copyright approved the license at publishing.) (Online version in colour.) activities of living plants change the originally provided conditions, such that future growth is not guaranteed. In biohybrid construction, environmental conditions and the physiological reactions of organisms will have to be monitored and perhaps modulated continually, on long timescales and large spatial scales.

(p41.2) The artificial elements of a biohybrid system also influence the environment. There are intentional influences, by stimulating physiological reactions or providing scaffolds, but there can also be side effects. For example, robots will increase the temperature locally due to waste heat, influencing animal behaviours and plant generative organs in close proximity. This may not be harmful; flowers generate complex heat patterns to attract and assist pollinators towards flowers. In biohybrid construction the system will need to autonomously deal with non-anticipated situations-a pervasive challenge throughout robotics, which is not yet solved. One advantage of approaching this challenge within a biohybrid system is that many actions may be required only on intermediate and long timescales, compared to typical robotics applications.
