# Using Deep Learning to Solve Computer Security Challenges: A Survey *

CorpusID: 209324068 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4f3f6ccafc2c0da44fd6013be700a8071281691c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4f3f6ccafc2c0da44fd6013be700a8071281691c)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s8) Key findings from a closer look
(p8.0) From a close look at the very recent applications using Deep Learning for solving securityoriented program analysis challenges, we observed the followings:

(p8.1) • Observation 1: All of the works in our survey used binary files as their raw data.

(p8.2) Phase II in our survey had one similar and straightforward goal -extracting code sequences from the binary. Difference among them was that the code sequence was extracted directly from the binary file when solving problems in static program analysis, while it was extracted from the program execution when solving problems in dynamic program analysis.

(p8.3) • Observation 2: Most data representation methods generally took into account the domain knowledge.

(p8.4) Most data representation methods generally took into the domain knowledge, i.e., what kind of information they wanted to reserve when processing their data. Note that the feature selection has a wide influence on Phase II and Phase III, for example, embedding granularities, representation learning methods. Gemini [12] selected function level feature and other works in our survey selected instruction level feature. To be specifically, all the works except Gemini [12] vectorized code sequence on instruction level.

(p8.5) • Observation 3: To better support data representation for high performance, some works adopted representation learning.
