# Guidelines for the Search Strategy to Update Systematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering

CorpusID: 208211463 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88d81fba50ecc372f39c5c0811b3a6e5f2972abc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88d81fba50ecc372f39c5c0811b3a6e5f2972abc)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s7) SLR for evaluating the guidelines
(p7.0) The first step of our evaluation was to select a suitable SLR, requiring both an original SLR and an update of the original SLR. We wanted an SLR that had a well-motivated update, and we used the results from a separate line of research that investigated how to determine when the update of SLRs is well-motivated [42]. In [42], we identified six SLRs that are well-motivated to update and that have been updated (see Table 4). As can be seen from Table 4, two SLRs (SLR2 and SLR6) include both an original conference publication and an extended journal version of the original SLR. In both cases, the extended journal version, which is published later, covers the same search span used in the conference paper version. SLR2 is the SLR used in Section 4.1, and hence it cannot be selected at this stage. To decide upon which of the other SLR candidates to choose, we formulated a set of criteria to make an informed decision, as described in Section 3.2.

(p7.1) The SLR referred to as SLR4 used forward snowballing to update the original SLR, and hence SLR4 is not suitable for our intended comparison. It leaves four candidate SLRs. The four candidate SLRs all provide sufficient information to find and use the primary studies when doing forward snowballing, and hence the number of candidates is still four. The authors' knowledge concerning computer games and serious games is limited, and therefore SLR1 is not a suitable candidate for that reason. It leaves three candidate SLRs. Emilia Mendes is a co-author of the original SLR for SLR4, and Claes Wohlin is a co-author of the original SLR for SLR6. It leaves only SLR5 as a candidate, and hence SLR5 was selected for replicating the update using forward snowballing and accordingly evaluate the proposed guidelines.
