# Radar and Communication Co-existence: an Overview

CorpusID: 202561030 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd6e46880757904ae5b9b41fab42a6e48bf7d31d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd6e46880757904ae5b9b41fab42a6e48bf7d31d)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s5) 4)
(p5.0) A multi-antenna transmitter wherein each antenna transmits a train of unsophisticated signals, amplitude-modulated by the slow-time code. In this case, P r = 1 and the N ×M T space-time code matrix G = [g 1 , . . . , g M T ] is the degree of freedom at the transmitter side [17]. Radars use radio waves to determine the range, angle, or velocity of objects. The operation of a typical MIMO radar receive chain is summarized in the box of Page 4. The radar range resolution is dictated, for a given Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), by the transmit bandwidth, i.e., 1/T r in (1). The velocity resolution is determined by the duration of coherent integration, i.e., N T in (2). In situations 1) and 3) no Doppler processing is undertaken, mainly due to the fact that typical single-pulse durations are too short to allow measuring the Doppler shift induced by targets in moderate radial motion. In settings 2) and 4) moving objects generate steering vectors and Doppler shifts up to 1 T can be unambiguously measured. Likewise, pulse trains with Pulse Repetition Time (PRT) T generate range ambiguities whereby scatterers located at distances corresponding to delays which are integer multiples of T contribute to the same range cell.

(p5.1) The signal model for the communication system is simpler in that we just have to distinguish between the case of single and multiple transmit antennas. In particular, we assume that the communication system operates on the same frequency band as the radar, occupying a fraction B L of its dedicated bandwidth. Setting T c = L/B, the signal radiated by the i-th transmit element is written as

(p5.2) where v i (p) is the data sequence to be transmitted, and ψ L (·) satisfies the Nyquist criterion with respect to T c = LT r . The situation of full spectral overlap corresponds to L = 1.

(p5.3) We note that there may be a multiplicity of narrow-band communication systems, each occupying a fraction of the radar bandwidth.

(p5.4) Assume that the radar and the communication receivers are equipped with M R and N R receive antennas, respectively. The signal at the j-th antenna of the radar receiver (RX) can be cast in the form

(p5.5) where a i,j is the target complex backscattering coefficient, including the path loss and the phase shift due to the target angle and position with respect to the transmit and receive antennas; u CR i,j (t) is the response of the channel from the communication Transmitter (TX) to the radar RX; τ i,j is the delay of the target from the i-th TX to the j-th RX; a I i,j (t) is the response of the clutters; * is the convolution operation; and n R,j (t) denotes the noise at the j-th RX antenna. Likewise, the signal received at the j-th antenna of the communication RX is given by

(p5.6) where h i,j (t) is the channel response from the i-th communication TX to the j-th communication RX; u RC i,j (t) is the response of the interfering channel from radar TX to communication RX; and n C,j (t) denotes the noise of the j-th communication RX antenna.
## (s31) 4)
(p31.0) A multi-antenna transmitter wherein each antenna transmits a train of unsophisticated signals, amplitude-modulated by the slow-time code. In this case, P r = 1 and the N ×M T space-time code matrix G = [g 1 , . . . , g M T ] is the degree of freedom at the transmitter side [17]. Radars use radio waves to determine the range, angle, or velocity of objects. The operation of a typical MIMO radar receive chain is summarized in the box of Page 4. The radar range resolution is dictated, for a given Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), by the transmit bandwidth, i.e., 1/T r in (1). The velocity resolution is determined by the duration of coherent integration, i.e., N T in (2). In situations 1) and 3) no Doppler processing is undertaken, mainly due to the fact that typical single-pulse durations are too short to allow measuring the Doppler shift induced by targets in moderate radial motion. In settings 2) and 4) moving objects generate steering vectors and Doppler shifts up to 1 T can be unambiguously measured. Likewise, pulse trains with Pulse Repetition Time (PRT) T generate range ambiguities whereby scatterers located at distances corresponding to delays which are integer multiples of T contribute to the same range cell.

(p31.1) The signal model for the communication system is simpler in that we just have to distinguish between the case of single and multiple transmit antennas. In particular, we assume that the communication system operates on the same frequency band as the radar, occupying a fraction B L of its dedicated bandwidth. Setting T c = L/B, the signal radiated by the i-th transmit element is written as

(p31.2) where v i (p) is the data sequence to be transmitted, and ψ L (·) satisfies the Nyquist criterion with respect to T c = LT r . The situation of full spectral overlap corresponds to L = 1.

(p31.3) We note that there may be a multiplicity of narrow-band communication systems, each occupying a fraction of the radar bandwidth.

(p31.4) Assume that the radar and the communication receivers are equipped with M R and N R receive antennas, respectively. The signal at the j-th antenna of the radar receiver (RX) can be cast in the form

(p31.5) where a i,j is the target complex backscattering coefficient, including the path loss and the phase shift due to the target angle and position with respect to the transmit and receive antennas; u CR i,j (t) is the response of the channel from the communication Transmitter (TX) to the radar RX; τ i,j is the delay of the target from the i-th TX to the j-th RX; a I i,j (t) is the response of the clutters; * is the convolution operation; and n R,j (t) denotes the noise at the j-th RX antenna. Likewise, the signal received at the j-th antenna of the communication RX is given by

(p31.6) where h i,j (t) is the channel response from the i-th communication TX to the j-th communication RX; u RC i,j (t) is the response of the interfering channel from radar TX to communication RX; and n C,j (t) denotes the noise of the j-th communication RX antenna.
