# A survey of parameterized algorithms and the complexity of edge modification *

CorpusID: 210839434 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd8126eb05e2f591b8eb1a0382fa6d5dcb4fe5ff](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd8126eb05e2f591b8eb1a0382fa6d5dcb4fe5ff)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s18) Theorem 2.3 ([7]). Let G be a hereditary class of graphs characterized by graph H. Then unless ETH fails,
(p18.0) • If H has less than two edges, then G-Edge Deletion is solvable in polynomial time. Otherwise, the problem cannot be solved in time 2 o(k) · n O(1) unless ETH fails.

(p18.1) • If H has less than two non-edges, then G-Edge Completion is solvable in polynomial time.

(p18.2) Otherwise, the problem cannot be solved in time 2 o(k) · n O(1) unless ETH fails.

(p18.3) • If H has less than three vertices, then G-Edge Editing is solvable in polynomial time. Otherwise, the problem cannot be solved in time

(p18.4) Even more recently, such kind of results where extended to the question of the existence of approximation algorithms [18]: when H is 3-connected and has at least two non-edges, then there does not exist any poly(OPT)-approximation algorithm running in parameterized subexponential time (in OPT), unless ETH fails, for H-free edge deletion as well as H-free edge completion. Moreover, the same holds for H being a cycle on at least 4 vertices or a path on at least 5 vertices. With previous results, this solves all cases of paths and cycles except the cograph edge deletion problem, for which [18] suggests the existence of a parameterized subexponential approximation algorithm, because of the existence of a kernel to the problem [149].

(p18.5) Among the most interesting open questions in the topic of subexponential parameterized algorithms is to explain why some problems admit such algorithms, which we saw is an exceptional case. In particular, one can ask whether the existence of a polynomial kernel is a prerequisite for a H-free Modification problem to admit a subexponential time algorithm. Actually, there are examples of problems that admit subexponential time algorithms and that do not have polynomial kernels under the assumption of NP ⊆ coNP/poly, but these problems are not of the H-free Modification type. Indeed, it is easy to come up with problems that trivially or-cross-composes, like the or-Minimum Fill-In which asks whether a graph has a connected component that can be completed to a chordal graph. This problem cannot have a polynomial kernel under NP ⊆ coNP/poly, but does admit a subexponential time algorithm, simply by running the algorithm by Fomin and Villanger [122] for each connected component. However, the or-Minimum Fill-In problem is not of the H-free Modification type and it turns out that for all such problems that we know to admit a subexponential time algorithm, we also have polynomial kernels-with the possible exception of Interval Completion for which existence of a polynomial kernel remains open.

(p18.6) Open problem 2.20. Does there exist an H for which H-free Completion or H-free Editing is solvable in time 2 o(k) n O(1) but does not admit a polynomial kernel unless NP ⊆ coNP/poly?

(p18.7) Finally, another important question to address is about the tools used to show lower bounds. Many results are established on complexity hypotheses that are not as reliable as the assumption that P = N P , such as, for example, the assumption that NP ⊆ coNP/poly. It would be highly desirable to develop the necessary techniques to fond more of these results on the sole hypothesis that P = N P .

(p18.8) Open problem 2.21. Which lower bounds can be shown assuming only P = N P ?
## (s44) Open problem 4.4. Investigate the parameterized complexity of variants of DCF(S) and EECG for directed graphs.
(p44.0) Besides vertex degree constraints, it could be interesting to consider edge degree constraints or combined vertex and edge degree constraints. In particular, Mathieson [218] considered a number of problems of this type. For a edge weighted graph, the weighted degree of a vertex is defined as the sum of weights of incident edges. Respectively, the weighted sum of an edge is the sum of the vertex degrees of its end-points. Mathieson [218] considered the following problems for edge weighted graphs:

(p44.1) • Weighted Edge Degree Constraint Editing, where for each edge, it is given a list of weighted degrees, and the aim is to obtain a graph, by at most k modification operations, such that every vertex has a degree from its list.

(p44.2) • Weighted Bounded Degree Editing, where a degree bound for each vertex is given, and the aim is to obtain a graph, by at most k modification operations, such that the weighted degree of a vertex does not exceed its bound.

(p44.3) • Weighted Edge Regularity Editing, where for each vertex, it is given a list of weighted degrees, and for each pair of vertices, it is given a set of feasible sizes of the set of common neighbors, and the aim is to obtain a graph, by at most k modification operations, such that every vertex has the weighted degree from its list and for every edge, the size of the set of common neighbors is feasible.

(p44.4) • Weighted Strongly Regular Editing, that is a variant of Weighted Edge Regularity Editing, where additionally a second set of allowed sizes of the set of common neighbors is given for each pair of vertices, and for every pair of nonneighbors of the modified graph, the size of the set of common neighbors should belong to this set.

(p44.5) The allowed modification operations are vertex deletions, edge deletions and edge additions. Mathieson presented the essentially complete picture of the complexity of these problems parameterized by the number of modification operations k and/or the upper bound of the feasible degrees for various combinations of allowed operations: the cases when the problems are W[1]-hard, FPT, have polynomial kernels or do not have them up to some conjectures are distinguished. He also investigated special cases, in particular, the unweighted problems (i.e., the problems for unit weights) and the case when the sets of feasible degrees are singletons. Additionally, the structural parameterization by the treewidth of an input graph was considered. We do not discuss the details of these results, because they proved to be similar to the results about DCS(S) and are obtained by similar techniques. Another direction of research would be to consider the discussed problems for graph classes. Up to now, a very little work was done in this direction. Dabrowski et al. [83] considered variants of DCF(S) and EECG for planar graphs. More precisely, they considered the problems that asks for a given planar graph G, a degree function f : V (G) → N 0 and two non-negative integers k e and k v , whether it is possible to obtain a (connected) graph G from G with d G (v) = f (v) for v ∈ V (G ) by deleting at most k v vertices and at most k e edges. Notice that G is not required to be planar. They proved that these problems have polynomial kernels when parameterized by k v + k e . In fact, more general kernalization results were obtained as it is shown that it could be assumed that vertices and edges have costs and the task is to delete at most k v and k e to satisfy degree restriction and achieve the minimum total cost of deleted vertices and edges. This result is obtained via the protrusion decomposition/replacement techniques introduced by Bodlaender et al. [29].
## (s74) Beyond forbidden subgraphs
(p74.0) In Section 2, we considered editing problems whose task is to obtain a graph belonging to a given hereditary graph class, that is, a graph class defined by a family of forbidden induced subgraphs. Here we survey some variations and generalizations of these problems.

(p74.1) Besides forbidding induced subgraphs, it is possible to forbid other structures. In particular, there is a plethora of results for graph classes defined by families of forbidden minors or topological minors. However, these problems have been mainly investigated for vertex deletions and the results about edge deletions are corollaries. Therefore, we do not consider them in this survey. The situation is different if we forbid containment of some graphs as immersions. A graph H is an immersion of G if there is an injective mapping of the vertices of H to the vertices of G and a mapping of the edges of H to pairwise edge-disjoint paths of G such that for every two adjacent vertices u and v of H, the edge uv is mapped to a path of G whose end-vertices are the images of u and v. For a family of graphs F, a graph G is F-immersion free if H is not an immersion of G for every H ∈ F. In [131], Giannopoulou et al. initiated the study of the F-Immersion Deletion problem. Given a (finite) family of graphs F, the task is to decide whether a graph G can be made F-immersion free by at most k edge deletions. Giannopoulou et al. [131] proved that if F consists of connected graphs and at least one graph in the family is planar, then F-Immersion Deletion admits a linear kernel when parameterized by k and can be solved in time 2 O(k) poly(n).
