# A Survey: Intrusion Detection System for Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs)

CorpusID: 226419872 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/665b394ebe0cc1c161ee84e8ace7dd9d8aa4028d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/665b394ebe0cc1c161ee84e8ace7dd9d8aa4028d)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s1) Security Requirements in VANETs
(p1.0) Security in VANET is critical due to vulnerabilities exist during information transmission in VANET, which causing VANET exposed to the attacks. In order to maintain a secure vehicular communication and networks, VANET security system should satisfy with the requirements. Some of the requirements are essential for all networks, but some are definite for VANET only [5]. Those requirements are: 2.1. Authentication: in order to allow the communication between vehicles which sending and receiving information, VANET should authenticate each of them. This process may comprise the identification of the sender identity and the legitimacy of the sender to use the network [5]. Authenticity involves proof of identity. Users should be able to identify each other's identity with which they are interacting. It can be verified through authentication process so the unauthorized entity cannot participate in the communication.
## (s2) Availability
(p2.0) : is defined as the degree of the VANET system that must be operable and available when needed.

(p2.1) A fast response time also must applicable for some applications [5]. 2.3. Privacy: is one of the most important requirements in VANET. Privacy must ensure that the identity of the drivers and the location of the vehicles are not being exposed [5]. An attacker can easily intercept the message passing from sender to the receiver so that privacy can be leaked and content can be modified. So that secure message passing is required in VANET. 2.4. Integrity: the information exchange in between the sender and the receiver should be free from the alteration attacks. Thus, information can be trusted [5]. The message must not be altered in transit; it should be received at receiver node same as it is sent at sender node. Integrity guarantees that message has not been altered by unauthorized persons while in transmission.
