# Violence against women in the Covid-19 pandemic: A review of the literature and a call for shared strategies to tackle health and social emergencies

CorpusID: 229332327 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7619079ca156f261be1985ac9b1e18221cdf41e1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7619079ca156f261be1985ac9b1e18221cdf41e1)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine, Political Science

## (s5) Study selection
(p5.0) During the electronic database research process, about 80 articles were identified as potentially relevant. Forty-two (42) papers fulfilled the inclusion criteria (i.e. relation between COVID-19 pandemic and violence against women) and were included in the review, as reported in Table 1.

(p5.1) The remaining articles were excluded because they dealt with psychiatric outcomes after the COVID-19 outbreak or with the maltreatment of children and the related consequences in the COVID-era, and consequently they were not pertinent to the purpose of the study.

(p5.2) Complete author agreement (A.V. and G.B.) regarding included and excluded studies was achieved.

(p5.3) During the electronic database research process, about 80 articles were identified as potentially relevant. Forty-two (42) papers fulfilled the inclusion criteria (i.e. relation between COVID-19 pandemic and violence against women) and were included in the review, as reported in Table 1.

(p5.4) The remaining articles were excluded because they dealt with psychiatric outcomes after the COVID-19 outbreak or with the maltreatment of children and the related consequences in the COVID-era, and consequently they were not pertinent to the purpose of the study.

(p5.5) Complete author agreement (A.V. and G.B.) regarding included and excluded studies was achieved.
## (s25) Study selection
(p25.0) During the electronic database research process, about 80 articles were identified as potentially relevant. Forty-two (42) papers fulfilled the inclusion criteria (i.e. relation between COVID-19 pandemic and violence against women) and were included in the review, as reported in Table 1.

(p25.1) The remaining articles were excluded because they dealt with psychiatric outcomes after the COVID-19 outbreak or with the maltreatment of children and the related consequences in the COVID-era, and consequently they were not pertinent to the purpose of the study.

(p25.2) Complete author agreement (A.V. and G.B.) regarding included and excluded studies was achieved.

(p25.3) During the electronic database research process, about 80 articles were identified as potentially relevant. Forty-two (42) papers fulfilled the inclusion criteria (i.e. relation between COVID-19 pandemic and violence against women) and were included in the review, as reported in Table 1.

(p25.4) The remaining articles were excluded because they dealt with psychiatric outcomes after the COVID-19 outbreak or with the maltreatment of children and the related consequences in the COVID-era, and consequently they were not pertinent to the purpose of the study.

(p25.5) Complete author agreement (A.V. and G.B.) regarding included and excluded studies was achieved.
