# Influential Factors and Evaluation Methods of the Performance of Grouted Semi-Flexible Pavement (GSP)-A Review

CorpusID: 237694325 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d9c88be55ea4f54d051d8541a32336922d4dfa0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d9c88be55ea4f54d051d8541a32336922d4dfa0)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Computer Science

## (s25) Compressive Strength Prediction Model
(p25.0) Compressive strength of GSP is assessed by Cube compressive strength test. The values have a linear relationship with that of grouted hydrated cement mortar [137]. The expression is shown as below:

(p25.1) is the compressive strength of cement mortar; is the compressive strength of GSP. And the relationship can be illustrated in Figure 4: 

(p25.2) was the void rate of OMA (20%~30%); was the resilient modulus of GSP.

(p25.3) Compressive strength of GSP is assessed by Cube compressive strength test. The values have a linear relationship with that of grouted hydrated cement mortar [137]. The expression is shown as below:

(p25.4) is the compressive strength of cement mortar; is the compressive strength of GSP. And the relationship can be illustrated in Figure 4: 

(p25.5) was the void rate of OMA (20%~30%); was the resilient modulus of GSP.
## (s74) Compressive Strength Prediction Model
(p74.0) Compressive strength of GSP is assessed by Cube compressive strength test. The values have a linear relationship with that of grouted hydrated cement mortar [137]. The expression is shown as below:

(p74.1) is the compressive strength of cement mortar; is the compressive strength of GSP. And the relationship can be illustrated in Figure 4: 

(p74.2) was the void rate of OMA (20%~30%); was the resilient modulus of GSP.

(p74.3) Compressive strength of GSP is assessed by Cube compressive strength test. The values have a linear relationship with that of grouted hydrated cement mortar [137]. The expression is shown as below:

(p74.4) is the compressive strength of cement mortar; is the compressive strength of GSP. And the relationship can be illustrated in Figure 4: 

(p74.5) was the void rate of OMA (20%~30%); was the resilient modulus of GSP.
