# Pseudogene Transcripts in Head and Neck Cancer: Literature Review and In Silico Analysis

CorpusID: 237324218 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e19f449a62a70b0977a23d03a74730522fd81d2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e19f449a62a70b0977a23d03a74730522fd81d2)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s14) Co-Expression Networks and GO Enrichment Analysis
(p14.0) We performed co-expression network and GO enrichment analyses to map the relationship between pseudogenes and other genes in the genome. After analyzing 19,406 proteincoding genes and 31 pseudogenes, our co-expression networks contained 14,379 genes organized in 36 modules, with an average of 399 genes per module (median: 140 genes; range: 35-3645 genes; Supplementary Dataset S2).

(p14.1) From the 31 most deregulated pseudogenes from HNC and its subtypes, 14 of them (SPATA31D5P, SPATA31C2, DNM1P47, NBPF25P, HSP90AB2P, NXF4, ZNF658B, POTEA, MROH5, HLA-H, DPY19L2P1, DPY19L2P3, GBA3, and PNLIPRP2) were present in our network across 8 modules (light yellow, red, dark magenta, orange, black, salmon, ivory, and dark olive green). Although the other pseudogenes of interest did not show a coexpression profile similar enough to other genes to be assigned to a module according to the parameters used to build this network, they are still important for further studies in HNC based on our previous TCGA data analysis.

(p14.2) We chose to highlight three modules (light yellow, red, and dark magenta) that contain genes well-known to be involved in head and neck carcinogenesis based on two important reviews [76,77]. However, the other five modules also presented relevant gene associations that should be evaluated in further studies.

(p14.3) The light-yellow module contained the greatest number of pseudogenes (NBPF25P, HSP90AB2P, ZNF658B, and DPY19L2P3). Interestingly, this module also contains 12 genes known to participate in head and neck carcinogenesis (CASP8, involved in apoptosis; NOTCH2 and NOTCH3, involved in cell differentiation; TRAF3, involved in antiviral response; RB1 and HRAS, involved in cell cycle control and proliferation; PTEN, involved in apoptosis and cell cycle control; CUL3 and NFE2L2, involved in oxidative stress response; EP300, involved in chromatin remodeling, and the transcription factors IGF1R and TP63) [76,77], suggesting that these genes may directly or indirectly interact with the pseudogenes in this module and play a role in HNC (Figure 2A). In addition, the light-yellow module is enriched in GO terms related to tumor development, such as regulation of cell communication, cellular response to stress, and intracellular transport ( Figure 2B). The potential relationship between the described pseudogenes and genes in this module has not been explored in the literature yet.
