# Designing Pedagogically Effective Haptic Systems for Learning: A Review

CorpusID: 237830216 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2553ba49f1840362ada02ffb41a12b0e2793fb83](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2553ba49f1840362ada02ffb41a12b0e2793fb83)

Fields: Education, Computer Science

## (s3) STEM
(p3.0) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and vis izing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, req conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically sec ary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of ha can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel wa learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary te through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], improving learning outcomes.

(p3.1) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and vis izing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, req conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically sec ary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of ha can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel wa learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary te through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], improving learning outcomes.
## (s6) STEM
(p6.0) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and visualizing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, require conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be seen with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically secondary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of haptics can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a real and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel way for learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary terms through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], thus improving learning outcomes.

(p6.1) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and visualizing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, require conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be seen with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically secondary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of haptics can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a real and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel way for learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary terms through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], thus improving learning outcomes.
## (s14) Venipuncture
(p14.0) Intravenous (IV) catheter insertion is one of the most commonly performed medical procedures [26]. While it is one of the most common, it is also deemed one of the most complex procedures learned by nurses [26]. Serious complications in patients such as infiltration, phlebitis, or pain can be avoided when the IV is inserted with proficiency [26]. Traditional methods of teaching IV insertion include didactic instruction followed by hands-on practice on either a real or simulated arm. These educational methods can be time consuming, cost ineffective, limited in variability, faculty intensive, and may be painful for the training procedure recipient. A literature review conducted by McWilliams and Malecha [26] compared traditional IV insertion instructional methods with haptic IV simulators in terms of their outcomes. he authors found that haptic IV simulators were at least equally as effective as traditional methods of teaching IV insertion and provide a cost-effective alternative to previous instructional methods [26].

(p14.1) Intravenous (IV) catheter insertion is one of the most commonly performed medical procedures [26]. While it is one of the most common, it is also deemed one of the most complex procedures learned by nurses [26]. Serious complications in patients such as infiltration, phlebitis, or pain can be avoided when the IV is inserted with proficiency [26]. Traditional methods of teaching IV insertion include didactic instruction followed by hands-on practice on either a real or simulated arm. These educational methods can be time consuming, cost ineffective, limited in variability, faculty intensive, and may be painful for the training procedure recipient. A literature review conducted by McWilliams and Malecha [26] compared traditional IV insertion instructional methods with haptic IV simulators in terms of their outcomes. he authors found that haptic IV simulators were at least equally as effective as traditional methods of teaching IV insertion and provide a cost-effective alternative to previous instructional methods [26].
## (s35) STEM
(p35.0) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and vis izing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, req conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically sec ary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of ha can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel wa learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary te through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], improving learning outcomes.

(p35.1) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and vis izing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, req conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically sec ary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of ha can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel wa learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary te through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], improving learning outcomes.
## (s38) STEM
(p38.0) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and visualizing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, require conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be seen with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically secondary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of haptics can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a real and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel way for learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary terms through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], thus improving learning outcomes.

(p38.1) The STEM field is composed of disciplines that require abstract thinking and visualizing. Certain disciplines within the STEM field, such as biology or chemistry, require conceptual understanding of the microscopic and/or atomic world, which cannot be seen with the naked eye. The STEM discipline can largely be classified as biologically secondary information, according to the updated Cognitive Load Theory [11]. The use of haptics can provide an embodied avenue of interacting with "invisible" subject matter in a real and tangible way. This form of embodied learning using haptics provides a novel way for learners to engage with biologically secondary information via biologically primary terms through their physicality and innately understandable sensorimotor processing [17], thus improving learning outcomes.
## (s46) Venipuncture
(p46.0) Intravenous (IV) catheter insertion is one of the most commonly performed medical procedures [26]. While it is one of the most common, it is also deemed one of the most complex procedures learned by nurses [26]. Serious complications in patients such as infiltration, phlebitis, or pain can be avoided when the IV is inserted with proficiency [26]. Traditional methods of teaching IV insertion include didactic instruction followed by hands-on practice on either a real or simulated arm. These educational methods can be time consuming, cost ineffective, limited in variability, faculty intensive, and may be painful for the training procedure recipient. A literature review conducted by McWilliams and Malecha [26] compared traditional IV insertion instructional methods with haptic IV simulators in terms of their outcomes. he authors found that haptic IV simulators were at least equally as effective as traditional methods of teaching IV insertion and provide a cost-effective alternative to previous instructional methods [26].

(p46.1) Intravenous (IV) catheter insertion is one of the most commonly performed medical procedures [26]. While it is one of the most common, it is also deemed one of the most complex procedures learned by nurses [26]. Serious complications in patients such as infiltration, phlebitis, or pain can be avoided when the IV is inserted with proficiency [26]. Traditional methods of teaching IV insertion include didactic instruction followed by hands-on practice on either a real or simulated arm. These educational methods can be time consuming, cost ineffective, limited in variability, faculty intensive, and may be painful for the training procedure recipient. A literature review conducted by McWilliams and Malecha [26] compared traditional IV insertion instructional methods with haptic IV simulators in terms of their outcomes. he authors found that haptic IV simulators were at least equally as effective as traditional methods of teaching IV insertion and provide a cost-effective alternative to previous instructional methods [26].
