# Survey and Performance Analysis of Deep Learning Based Object Detection in Challenging Environments

CorpusID: 236950954 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50400b478dda3eebb966f71e8d8f90718a0e2854](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50400b478dda3eebb966f71e8d8f90718a0e2854)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s6) RFB-Net
(p6.0) Currently, existing state-of-the-art detection algorithms use pre-trained backbones based on Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) to extract low-level and high-level features. Instead of relying on a pre-trained backbone, RFB-Net is inspired by the Receptive Fields (RFs) structure in the human visual system. RFB-Net considers the relationship between size and eccentricity of RFs to enhance features. Figure 10 illustrates the main building block of RFB-Net. Figure 10. The explained architecture of RFB [56]. RFB is inspired by Receptive Fields (RFs) in human visual system. RFB considers the relationship between the size and eccentricity of receptive fields into account to enhance the features. (a) RFB is identical to Inception, responsible for simulating the RFs of multiple sizes, and (b) part reproduces the relation between the RF size and eccentricity in the human visual system by using smaller kernels. Reprinted from [56].

(p6.1) Existing state-of-the-art generic object detection algorithms do not perform well on images captured at low light because most low-level features are merged with the background. To tackle this problem, Yuxuan et al. [57] fused contextual information in the backbone to avoid loss of low-level contextual features. Lower spatial feature maps with higher spatial feature maps are fused to preserve low-level features, maximizing pre-trained channel information.

(p6.2) The second problem with images captured in low light is that when these images are passed through conventional hierarchical convolutions, the resulting edges and features are not very rich with information. Therefore context fusion is incorporated in the backbone part of the network. The aim is to compensate for the information loss during the lower to higher-level convolution process. Low-level feature maps of the network are selected and interpolated to the identical shape of its successive feature maps. The resulting feature map is rich in contextual information, combining high-level features and low-level features. The authors merged RFB-Net [56] as a base architecture with the proposed modifications.
## (s52) Conclusions
(p52.0) With the rapid computational advances, noticeable improvements have been observed by employing deep learning-based object detection algorithms in challenging environments. This paper comprehensively reviews the relevant approaches that have attempted to identify objects under challenging scenarios through deep neural networks and provides an empirical performance analysis of currently employed object detection algorithms. Moreover, the advantages and limitations of all explained techniques are provided. Furthermore, this work describes all the relevant datasets currently exploited to resolve the problem of object detection under challenging environments. This work discusses the well-known evaluation criteria and presents a performance analysis of explained methodologies and object detection algorithms by benchmarking recent object detection algorithms on challenging datasets of ExDark [97], CURE-TSD [92], and Reside [98]. In the end, we highlight the current open issues and present future direction that can enhance the research of object detection under challenging environments. 
