# Variable Speed Limit and Ramp Metering for Mixed Traffic Flows: A Review and Open Questions

CorpusID: 233652955 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ed73f71e9c2d976159a06f79b534e9add6257fe](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ed73f71e9c2d976159a06f79b534e9add6257fe)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Computer Science

## (s16) Impact of AVs and CAVs on the Fundamental Diagram
(p16.0) As mentioned, Table 1 summarizes obtained research results on the impact of AVs and CAVs on fundamental diagram without control algorithms. In [76], an evaluation of the impact of AVs on an existing motorway, national road network, and urban network (Dublin city center) was presented. AVs were formulated as Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) level of automation 2, and CAVs were formulated as SAE level of automation 4 with Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control (CACC). Tested scenarios included penetration rates from 0% to 70% with mixed SAE levels of automation. CAVs showcased gradual improvement in safety and efficiency. Satisfactory and realistic results were observed at penetration rates of around 20% to 40%. The motorway scenario proved to be the one most affected by CAVs. At low CAV penetration rates, traffic congestion and conflict situations were increased in some regions of the motorway networks.

(p16.1) In [77], the flow-density relation, Time-to-Collision (TTC), acceleration rate distributions, and speed difference distributions were analyzed under different penetration rates of CAVs from 0% to 100% and with two different time headways. The total number of incidental situations in the mixed traffic flow under different CAV penetration rates was reduced. The traffic flow was significantly increased by about 2000 veh/h in the case of the desired time headway of 0.5 s, while in the case of 1.1 s, the increase was measured to be close to 500 veh/h. The results of acceleration rate distributions and speed difference distributions of the mixed traffic flow indicate that the increase in penetration rates of CAVs smoothed both acceleration and speed significantly.

(p16.2) In [78], lane capacity was analyzed for different AV and CAV penetration rates. Lane capacity was increased by 8.6% when the AV penetration was increased from 0% to 100%. When the CAV penetration rate was increased from 0% to 100%, lane capacity was increased by 188.2%. When the mixed traffic flow consists of CAVs and HDVs, the lane capacity increases approximately linearly from 2046 veh/h/lane to 6450 veh/h/lane as the CAV penetration rate increased from 0% to 100%.

(p16.3) In [79], the influence of AVs in mixed traffic flow and the influence of autonomous driving levels on the fundamental diagram were analyzed. The results show that as the AV penetration rate increased with higher automation level, the capacity of the overall network increased and the ρ c value on a single road was higher. The ρ c value was increased by almost 48% from no AVs to 100% AVs in mixed traffic flow.

(p16.4) In [80], Cellular Automata (CA) model was used to analyze the impact of CAVs on the fundamental diagram on a single-lane road. CA was used to partition the road into cells, where a vehicle may or may not be present in a cell. The results show that with 70% of CAVs, the ρ c value was increased by about 37%, while the capacity under the ρ c was increased by about 42%.

(p16.5) In [81], the impact of AVs with different penetration rates on the fundamental diagram was analyzed. As the AV penetration rate increased, the speed-density curve shifted to the right, resulting in a higher ρ c value. Therefore, increasing the AV penetration rate increased the mean speed at the same density, thus increasing the traffic flow. The free-flow speed was increased by about 34% with 100% AV penetration rate, while the increase in capacity under ρ c was measured to approximately 30%.

(p16.6) In [82], the impact on traffic flow and density of Connected Vehicles (CVs) and AVs was analyzed under different penetration rates from 0% to 100% and three scenarios. In the first scenario, the effect of CV penetration rate was tested. The mainline flow was set to 1800 veh/h/lane in the first and second set of simulations. The throughput was increased as the CV and AV penetration rates increased. At low penetration rates of 0% to 50%, the results on the relationship between flow and density were inconsistent. At higher penetration rates, no breakdown or scatter was observed in the flow-density relationship. The second scenario analyzed the effects of AVs on throughput and scatter in the flowdensity relationship. The results were similar to the first scenario, with the exception of a smaller scatter at 50% and 70% AV penetration rates. The third scenario analyzed the simultaneous effects of AVs and CVs on throughput and scatter in flow-density relation. Six combinations of different penetration rates of CVs and AVs were analyzed. The mainline flow was set to 2200 veh/h/lane. The scatter in flow-density relationship was increased once the number of CVs surpassed the number of AVs, except in the scenario with a high CV penetration rate.

(p16.7) In [83], another analysis of the impact of AVs on fundamental parameters (q, ρ and v) was performed. According to [83], the standard capacity values for a single lane of 2200 veh/h could increase traffic capacity to about 3900 veh/h in an 100% AV penetration rate scenario. This conclusion was made based on the changed headway time gap parameter for the following vehicle to 0.5 s. According to the authors [83], this very short following distance already occurs in up to 20% of all following distances, depending on the traffic conditions. Table 2 demonstrates that VSL in mixed traffic flow scenarios has been broadly studied. In this subsection, we provide an overview of each study, starting with the earliest ones. To facilitate the evaluation of the surveyed methods, we grouped them according to their working concepts (optimization, rule-based, RL and others).
## (s26) RL-Based Merging Control
(p26.0) In [108], a merging control method was presented that allows AVs to merge into congested motorways using Multi-Policy Decision Making (MPDM) with passive Actor-Critic (pAC). The method does not require forward simulation as it uses estimated state values learned with pAC. The pAC uses the 3-vehicle systems to learn the merging control policy. Therefore, the ego-vehicle cannot always handle the condition changes due to the maneuvers for the adjacent vehicles. This approach was compared with quadratic programming and Z-learning. The pAC with the NN achieved a 97% success rate by combining an approximate nearest neighbor to mitigate the imbalance and sparsity of the data. The combined MPDM with pAC achieved a success rate of 92%, which is comparable to a real HDV merging decisions.

(p26.1) In [111], a DRL architecture for learning an on-ramp merging control policy was proposed. The long short-term memory architecture was implemented in the driving environment to account for the influence of historical and interactive driving behaviors. In the use case of ramp merging, the driver can selectively provide control inputs while the automated driving system tries to maximize the reward and achieve an effective merging maneuver [111].
