# Finding Critical Scenarios for Automated Driving Systems: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 239016131 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7eac16f6e5c63fd983155947b18f1721af87beaf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7eac16f6e5c63fd983155947b18f1721af87beaf)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s13) Scenario Representation
(p13.0) Menzel et al. [22] classified scenario representations into three levels of abstraction, namely functional scenario, logical scenario and concrete scenario. Functional scenario and logical scenario describe scenario spaces on two different levels of abstraction, while concrete scenario describes a particular scenario.

(p13.1) Functional scenario: A scenario space representation on a semantic level with linguistic scenario notations. [22] "The vocabulary used for the description of functional scenarios is specific for the use case and the domain and can feature different levels of detail." [22] Logical scenario: A scenario space representation on a state-space level with parameter ranges in the state space. Each parameter correlates to one influential factor. The parameter ranges can optionally be specified with probability distributions. A logical scenario includes a formal notation of the scenario space. [22] Additionally, "the relations of the parameter ranges can optionally be specified with the help of correlations or numeric conditions." [22] In this paper, it is assumed that a logical scenario cannot fully reflect its corresponding functional scenario since relevant parameters cannot be completely listed.

(p13.2) Concrete scenario: A parameterized representation of a particular scenario. Each concrete scenario is an instantiation of a logical scenario, with a concrete value for each parameter. [22] According to a concrete scenario, an executable scenario can be constructed, which can be either a simulation model or a real test. An executable scene refers to an image from a camera or a point cloud from a LiDAR.

(p13.3) In the rest of this paper, functional scenario, logical scenario and concrete scenario are also used to denote a scenario space or a scenario represented with the corresponding levels of abstraction. Fig. 4 depicts the transitions between the three levels of abstraction, which are defined as follows:

(p13.4) Reasoning: This refers to the methods that reason (inductively or deductively) about critical functional scenarios based on knowledge, experience, and information described in the ODD.

(p13.5) Formalization: Using input from the ODD definition, a functional scenario will be formalized and parameterized to a logical scenario with all the parameter definition and their value ranges. In this paper, even though the formalized logical scenario contains more information than its functional scenario, it represents a smaller scenario space since not all the influential factors may have been identified and considered.

(p13.6) Instantiation: In this phase sampling or optimization approaches are used to instantiate the concrete scenario by naive search or guided search methods.

(p13.7) Construction: The concrete scenarios will be converted into executable scenarios with the help of formats like OpenX (OpenDRIVE, OpenSCENARIO) [9], for use in simulators.

(p13.8) Since an ODD is also a scenario space, ODD definitions can also be classified as functional ODD or logical ODD, explained as follows:

(p13.9) • Functional ODD: It describes the entire intended ODD on a high level of abstraction. e.g. a particular highway in Stockholm in sunny weather.

(p13.10) • Logical ODD: It refers to a parameterized ODD description. It can support the design of the ODD exit detection algorithm. It can also support the formalization of functional scenarios.

(p13.11) Similar as the relation between a functional scenario and its logical scenario, functional ODD represents a bigger scenario space. The misalignment between the functional ODD and the logical ODD constitutes a major source of specification insufficiency. In the rest of this paper, ODD refers to the functional ODD. In Fig. 4, it is the logical ODD that supports the formalization of a functional scenario.
## (s16) Related Survey Papers
(p16.0) While there is a vast amount of literature on various aspects of CSI methods, there are much fewer related survey papers. Other related topics, although outside the scope of this review, are briefly introduced in Section 8.

(p16.1) According to our literature search, to the best of our knowledge, related relevant survey papers are [32] and [33]. Neurohr et al. [32] reviewed and analyzed the literature about the scenario-based testing method for automated vehicles. The authors presented fundamental arguments, principles and assumptions of the scenario-based approach. They also proposed a generic framework (from scenario elicitation to test evaluation) for scenario-based testing and analyzed in detail the individual steps based on the reviewed articles. As a result, they presented various considerations for using and implementing scenario-based testing to support automated vehicle homologation.

(p16.2) Riedmaier et al. [33] performed a survey of scenariobased approaches for safety assessment of automated vehicles. The authors provided an overview of various approaches. They also developed a taxonomy for the scenariobased approach and compared the summarized methods with each other. In the end, this paper integrated the formal verification with the scenario-based approach as an alternative concept.

(p16.3) The differences between this paper and those two survey papers are:

(p16.4) • This paper is dedicated to CSI methods, which is a subset of the focus of the other papers' scenariobased methods.

(p16.5) • This paper provides a systematic literature review.

(p16.6) • This paper provides a taxonomy for critical scenarios identification approaches.  
## (s22) Literature search and selection
(p22.0) The primary studies for this literature review are collected through an iterative process with automatic search and snowballing as shown in Fig. 8. This section describes the details of how we conducted each stage. Stage 1: A comprehensive initial search string can reduce the number of iterations to determine the final search string as described in Stage 3. To better define the initial search strings, an initial set of relevant studies was gathered from two sources. The first source was publications from recent relevant research projects including AutoDrive, Prystine, Pegasus, Enable-S3 and AdaptIVe. The second source are the relevant papers included in the two relevant survey papers  Fig. 8. The stages to collect the primary studies. The numbers on the arrows indicate the numbers of studies given to the next stage [32], [33] introduced in Section 2.6. The initial set contains 151 potentially relevant studies. After being filtered by the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 49 studies remained.

(p22.1) Stages 2 and 6: To filter a given set of potentially relevant studies, we reviewed the title abstract and author keywords of each paper with respect to the inclusion and exclusion criteria defined in Section 3.1. After reviewing, each paper was labelled as either "included", "excluded" (together with the violated criterion) or "unclear". Unclear studies were further checked by going through their introduction, conclusion and some other parts. When necessary, a discussion among multiple researchers would be conducted to determine the inclusion of an unclear study.
