# Digitalization of learning in Saudi Arabia during the COVID-19 outbreak: A survey

CorpusID: 235441178 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8267a4f877d602fd831e5235d7c5616c21f8c0d5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8267a4f877d602fd831e5235d7c5616c21f8c0d5)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Education

## (s14) Results and discussion
(p14.0) The COVID-19 outbreaks have forced many countries to shut down their educational institutions, schools, and universities, leading to a paradigm shift in the process of education, whereby face-to-face classrooms were transformed into virtual ones. However, Teras et al. in Ref. [75] have concluded that many institutions failed to determine the correct technology to deliver the learning materials to the students. This study provided a review of the implemented leading technologies in delivering the learning materials, focusing on the country's most initially affected, to assist the affected institutions in digitalizing their learning during this pandemic. Technologies of education implemented in China, Italy, India, the USA, Spain, Germany, and South Korea were accordingly reviewed.

(p14.1) Equally, there are potential challenges in shifting to online learning. First, for many faculty members and students, the technologies may appear foreign. Another challenge is the lack of internet access particularly in some areas. Also, traditional classrooms and online learning have significantly different quality, and such differences may impede Table 1 The distribution of the sample members based on the study variables.  Table 2 Correlation coefficients between paragraphs and the overall degree and the domain to which they belong. the transition to online classes. Saudi Arabia was considered as the main focus of the survey for the effectiveness of distance learning during the 2020 spring semester, where 300 undergraduate students were surveyed on their opinions of distance learning. The responses to the survey indicated that distance learning was effective in providing the required knowledge to the students during the outbreak of COVID-19, the study findings can encourage educational institutions to digitalize their learning materials in the future.

(p14.2) Maheshwari [76] concluded that online learning in developing countries is still at its infancy stage. Where, many students faced difficulties to learn due to different learning styles, lack of self-confidence, poor internet connectivity, underdeveloped instructional design. All these factors are impacting student learning intentions in the future. Hence, based on the results of his study, online learning might be impacted due to poor connectivity and slow connection. Thus, in our point of view, the lack of interaction and poor internet connection are the major factors affecting comfortable and successful learning, therefore, hindering an effective learning environment with fast and more accessible internet.

(p14.3) The study sample was 300 students, including Saudis and international students who were involved in online classes (physics and mathematics). It was found that 63% of students expressed satisfaction towards LMS and other available e-learning tools, while 18% expressed dissatisfaction, and 19% were neutral toward it. With the aid of teachers and online tools, 75% of students found it easy to understand course materials. The rest found it difficult to be understood. Similarly, this also applies to 67% of students who found that the assignments were easy to understand and could be completed easily, especially with the assistance of the teachers.

(p14.4) However, long-term incorporation of online learning into university curricula and attention to quality is required. The future steps should focus on:

(p14.5) 1. The continuous development of open educational platforms that permit access to the high quality of education resources.  Table 4 The internal consistency coefficient of Cronbach's alpha and stability for domains and the total score of the questionnaire.     2. Conducting qualitative and quantitative research for evaluating the existing models of e-learning focusing on its long-term use and sustainability. 3. Developing the instructors' skills for e-learning, and professional staff skills to support instructors' and online systems. 4. Encouraging cooperation between civil society, international organizations, universities, private sector, and other participants, for promoting high-quality e-learning.

(p14.6) As in some related studies as in Ref. [49], again this brought our survey to the question of "whether the transition is adequately good for the students" Within the context of most universities in Saudi Arabia, the transition into distance and online learning from traditional face-to-face learning had an effect on the adequacy for a student's satisfaction.

(p14.7) Hence, the following subsections further present and discuss the study results as well as questionnaire correction procedures.

(p14.8) The COVID-19 outbreaks have forced many countries to shut down their educational institutions, schools, and universities, leading to a paradigm shift in the process of education, whereby face-to-face classrooms were transformed into virtual ones. However, Teras et al. in Ref. [75] have concluded that many institutions failed to determine the correct technology to deliver the learning materials to the students. This study provided a review of the implemented leading technologies in delivering the learning materials, focusing on the country's most initially affected, to assist the affected institutions in digitalizing their learning during this pandemic. Technologies of education implemented in China, Italy, India, the USA, Spain, Germany, and South Korea were accordingly reviewed.

(p14.9) Equally, there are potential challenges in shifting to online learning. First, for many faculty members and students, the technologies may appear foreign. Another challenge is the lack of internet access particularly in some areas. Also, traditional classrooms and online learning have significantly different quality, and such differences may impede Table 1 The distribution of the sample members based on the study variables.  Table 2 Correlation coefficients between paragraphs and the overall degree and the domain to which they belong. the transition to online classes. Saudi Arabia was considered as the main focus of the survey for the effectiveness of distance learning during the 2020 spring semester, where 300 undergraduate students were surveyed on their opinions of distance learning. The responses to the survey indicated that distance learning was effective in providing the required knowledge to the students during the outbreak of COVID-19, the study findings can encourage educational institutions to digitalize their learning materials in the future.

(p14.10) Maheshwari [76] concluded that online learning in developing countries is still at its infancy stage. Where, many students faced difficulties to learn due to different learning styles, lack of self-confidence, poor internet connectivity, underdeveloped instructional design. All these factors are impacting student learning intentions in the future. Hence, based on the results of his study, online learning might be impacted due to poor connectivity and slow connection. Thus, in our point of view, the lack of interaction and poor internet connection are the major factors affecting comfortable and successful learning, therefore, hindering an effective learning environment with fast and more accessible internet.

(p14.11) The study sample was 300 students, including Saudis and international students who were involved in online classes (physics and mathematics). It was found that 63% of students expressed satisfaction towards LMS and other available e-learning tools, while 18% expressed dissatisfaction, and 19% were neutral toward it. With the aid of teachers and online tools, 75% of students found it easy to understand course materials. The rest found it difficult to be understood. Similarly, this also applies to 67% of students who found that the assignments were easy to understand and could be completed easily, especially with the assistance of the teachers.

(p14.12) However, long-term incorporation of online learning into university curricula and attention to quality is required. The future steps should focus on:

(p14.13) 1. The continuous development of open educational platforms that permit access to the high quality of education resources.  Table 4 The internal consistency coefficient of Cronbach's alpha and stability for domains and the total score of the questionnaire.     2. Conducting qualitative and quantitative research for evaluating the existing models of e-learning focusing on its long-term use and sustainability. 3. Developing the instructors' skills for e-learning, and professional staff skills to support instructors' and online systems. 4. Encouraging cooperation between civil society, international organizations, universities, private sector, and other participants, for promoting high-quality e-learning.

(p14.14) As in some related studies as in Ref. [49], again this brought our survey to the question of "whether the transition is adequately good for the students" Within the context of most universities in Saudi Arabia, the transition into distance and online learning from traditional face-to-face learning had an effect on the adequacy for a student's satisfaction.

(p14.15) Hence, the following subsections further present and discuss the study results as well as questionnaire correction procedures.
## (s47) Results and discussion
(p47.0) The COVID-19 outbreaks have forced many countries to shut down their educational institutions, schools, and universities, leading to a paradigm shift in the process of education, whereby face-to-face classrooms were transformed into virtual ones. However, Teras et al. in Ref. [75] have concluded that many institutions failed to determine the correct technology to deliver the learning materials to the students. This study provided a review of the implemented leading technologies in delivering the learning materials, focusing on the country's most initially affected, to assist the affected institutions in digitalizing their learning during this pandemic. Technologies of education implemented in China, Italy, India, the USA, Spain, Germany, and South Korea were accordingly reviewed.

(p47.1) Equally, there are potential challenges in shifting to online learning. First, for many faculty members and students, the technologies may appear foreign. Another challenge is the lack of internet access particularly in some areas. Also, traditional classrooms and online learning have significantly different quality, and such differences may impede Table 1 The distribution of the sample members based on the study variables.  Table 2 Correlation coefficients between paragraphs and the overall degree and the domain to which they belong. the transition to online classes. Saudi Arabia was considered as the main focus of the survey for the effectiveness of distance learning during the 2020 spring semester, where 300 undergraduate students were surveyed on their opinions of distance learning. The responses to the survey indicated that distance learning was effective in providing the required knowledge to the students during the outbreak of COVID-19, the study findings can encourage educational institutions to digitalize their learning materials in the future.

(p47.2) Maheshwari [76] concluded that online learning in developing countries is still at its infancy stage. Where, many students faced difficulties to learn due to different learning styles, lack of self-confidence, poor internet connectivity, underdeveloped instructional design. All these factors are impacting student learning intentions in the future. Hence, based on the results of his study, online learning might be impacted due to poor connectivity and slow connection. Thus, in our point of view, the lack of interaction and poor internet connection are the major factors affecting comfortable and successful learning, therefore, hindering an effective learning environment with fast and more accessible internet.

(p47.3) The study sample was 300 students, including Saudis and international students who were involved in online classes (physics and mathematics). It was found that 63% of students expressed satisfaction towards LMS and other available e-learning tools, while 18% expressed dissatisfaction, and 19% were neutral toward it. With the aid of teachers and online tools, 75% of students found it easy to understand course materials. The rest found it difficult to be understood. Similarly, this also applies to 67% of students who found that the assignments were easy to understand and could be completed easily, especially with the assistance of the teachers.

(p47.4) However, long-term incorporation of online learning into university curricula and attention to quality is required. The future steps should focus on:

(p47.5) 1. The continuous development of open educational platforms that permit access to the high quality of education resources.  Table 4 The internal consistency coefficient of Cronbach's alpha and stability for domains and the total score of the questionnaire.     2. Conducting qualitative and quantitative research for evaluating the existing models of e-learning focusing on its long-term use and sustainability. 3. Developing the instructors' skills for e-learning, and professional staff skills to support instructors' and online systems. 4. Encouraging cooperation between civil society, international organizations, universities, private sector, and other participants, for promoting high-quality e-learning.

(p47.6) As in some related studies as in Ref. [49], again this brought our survey to the question of "whether the transition is adequately good for the students" Within the context of most universities in Saudi Arabia, the transition into distance and online learning from traditional face-to-face learning had an effect on the adequacy for a student's satisfaction.

(p47.7) Hence, the following subsections further present and discuss the study results as well as questionnaire correction procedures.

(p47.8) The COVID-19 outbreaks have forced many countries to shut down their educational institutions, schools, and universities, leading to a paradigm shift in the process of education, whereby face-to-face classrooms were transformed into virtual ones. However, Teras et al. in Ref. [75] have concluded that many institutions failed to determine the correct technology to deliver the learning materials to the students. This study provided a review of the implemented leading technologies in delivering the learning materials, focusing on the country's most initially affected, to assist the affected institutions in digitalizing their learning during this pandemic. Technologies of education implemented in China, Italy, India, the USA, Spain, Germany, and South Korea were accordingly reviewed.

(p47.9) Equally, there are potential challenges in shifting to online learning. First, for many faculty members and students, the technologies may appear foreign. Another challenge is the lack of internet access particularly in some areas. Also, traditional classrooms and online learning have significantly different quality, and such differences may impede Table 1 The distribution of the sample members based on the study variables.  Table 2 Correlation coefficients between paragraphs and the overall degree and the domain to which they belong. the transition to online classes. Saudi Arabia was considered as the main focus of the survey for the effectiveness of distance learning during the 2020 spring semester, where 300 undergraduate students were surveyed on their opinions of distance learning. The responses to the survey indicated that distance learning was effective in providing the required knowledge to the students during the outbreak of COVID-19, the study findings can encourage educational institutions to digitalize their learning materials in the future.

(p47.10) Maheshwari [76] concluded that online learning in developing countries is still at its infancy stage. Where, many students faced difficulties to learn due to different learning styles, lack of self-confidence, poor internet connectivity, underdeveloped instructional design. All these factors are impacting student learning intentions in the future. Hence, based on the results of his study, online learning might be impacted due to poor connectivity and slow connection. Thus, in our point of view, the lack of interaction and poor internet connection are the major factors affecting comfortable and successful learning, therefore, hindering an effective learning environment with fast and more accessible internet.

(p47.11) The study sample was 300 students, including Saudis and international students who were involved in online classes (physics and mathematics). It was found that 63% of students expressed satisfaction towards LMS and other available e-learning tools, while 18% expressed dissatisfaction, and 19% were neutral toward it. With the aid of teachers and online tools, 75% of students found it easy to understand course materials. The rest found it difficult to be understood. Similarly, this also applies to 67% of students who found that the assignments were easy to understand and could be completed easily, especially with the assistance of the teachers.

(p47.12) However, long-term incorporation of online learning into university curricula and attention to quality is required. The future steps should focus on:

(p47.13) 1. The continuous development of open educational platforms that permit access to the high quality of education resources.  Table 4 The internal consistency coefficient of Cronbach's alpha and stability for domains and the total score of the questionnaire.     2. Conducting qualitative and quantitative research for evaluating the existing models of e-learning focusing on its long-term use and sustainability. 3. Developing the instructors' skills for e-learning, and professional staff skills to support instructors' and online systems. 4. Encouraging cooperation between civil society, international organizations, universities, private sector, and other participants, for promoting high-quality e-learning.

(p47.14) As in some related studies as in Ref. [49], again this brought our survey to the question of "whether the transition is adequately good for the students" Within the context of most universities in Saudi Arabia, the transition into distance and online learning from traditional face-to-face learning had an effect on the adequacy for a student's satisfaction.

(p47.15) Hence, the following subsections further present and discuss the study results as well as questionnaire correction procedures.
