# Potential therapeutic effect of Shufeng Jiedu capsule and its major herbs on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): A review

CorpusID: 245582870 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/13e633fc63aa4f94894f3f1794b1392f0e83f703](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/13e633fc63aa4f94894f3f1794b1392f0e83f703)

Fields: Medicine

## (s15) Active ingredients of SFJDC with antiviral activity
(p15.0) The acetone extract of Radix Bupleuri (the dried roots of Bupleurum chinense) has been reported to exhibit a significant antiviral effect on acute respiratory tract infections with H1N1 virus infection, the mechanism of which may be related to its suppression of influenza A virus-induced regulation of activation normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES) secretion (55). Moreover, saikosaponins (a, b 2 , c, and d), the main active ingredient of Radix Bupleuri, exerted definitive antiviral activity against human coronavirus-229E by interfering with the early stage of viral replication, including absorption and penetration of the virus (56). These results suggest that Radix Bupleuri may have therapeutic benefits for the treatment of viral infectionassociated diseases.

(p15.1) Fallopia japonica and its active components, resveratrol and emodin, have been shown to suppress influenza virus replication in A549 cells (57). Moreover, they preferentially inhibit the replication of multiple subtypes of influenza A virus. Mechanistically, Fallopia japonica, emodin, and resveratrol could upregulate the expression of interferon beta (IFN-β) through Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) and downregulate the expression of hemagglutinin and neuraminidase (57). Additionally, the anti-viral activity of resveratrol was abolished when supplemented with neutralizing anti-IFN-β antibodies or a TLR9 inhibitor in A549 cells, indicating that resveratrol may inhibit influenza virus replication by acting synergistically with IFN-β.

(p15.2) Forsythoside A is a major active constituent of Forsythia suspensa fruits. The antiviral activity of forsythoside A was confirmed by infecting primary chicken embryo kidney cells with infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) infection. The results indicate that forsythoside A inhibited the replication of avian IBV infection in vitro in a dose-dependent manner (58).

(p15.3) Glycyrrhizin is an active component of Glycyrrhiza uralensis. High concentrations of glycyrrhizin (4,000 mg/L) have been demonstrated to completely block SARS-CoV-2 replication (59,60). Glycyrrhizin can also inhibit the adsorption and penetration of the virus (59).

(p15.4) Indirubin, a bisindole alkaloid, is the main active ingredient in Isatis indigotica. A previous study demonstrated that indirubin significantly decreased the susceptibility of restrained mice to influenza H1N1 virus owing to the lowered mortality and reduced viral replication in the lungs (31). Mechanistically, indirubin maintained the morphology and function of mitochondria following influenza A virus infection and enhanced IFN-β production by promoting the mitochondrial antiviral signaling pathway (31). 6.2. Potential anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative activities of SFJDC on the inflammatory/immune response to SARS-CoV-2
## (s18) Network pharmacology tools to analyze the mechanism of SFJDC prevention and treatment of COVID-19
(p18.0) More recently, to identify new candidates with potential activity against SARS-CoV-2 viral targets, several studies employed computer modeling to explore the mechanism of SFJDC using network pharmacology and molecular docking technology. In this section, the active ingredients of SFJDC for the treatment of COVID-19 were predicted by network pharmacology methods, including quercetin, resveratrol, emodin, and phillyrin.

(p18.1) Among the viral proteins of SARS-CoV-2, 3C-like protease (3CLpro), a protease highly conserved among coronaviruses, is an attractive target for antiviral inhibitors owing to its indispensable role in viral replication and gene expression of viral proteins (78). Thus, molecules that can inhibit SARS-CoV-2 3CLpro would hinder viral replication and represent appropriate candidates for the development of low-toxicity drugs against this devastating pathogen. Quercetin has been reported to interact with 3CLpro using biophysical techniques and bind to the active site in molecular simulations (79). In particular, the study revealed a significant inhibition by quercetin of 3CLpro with a docking binding energy corresponding to -6.25 kcal/ mol (79). Consistently, protein-chemical interactions suggest quercetin is a promising drug candidate against COVID-19 and other SARS-like viral infections (80).

(p18.2) Recently, network pharmacology and bioinformatics analysis were conducted to uncover the pharmacological mechanisms of resveratrol against COVID-19 (81). A significant overlap in geneontology (GO) terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways was found between SFJDC targets and SARS-CoV-2 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (81). The shared targets were highly enriched in inflammationrelated pathways, including the IL-17 signaling pathway, NF-κB signaling pathway, and TNF signaling pathway (81). Resveratrol has also been suggested to be a promising drug candidate against COVID-19 through protein-chemical interactions (80). Collectively, these studies revealed that resveratrol is a promising therapeutic candidate for COVID-19 and highlighted the probable key targets and pathways involved.
