# Molecular aspects of Omicron, vaccine development, and recombinant strain XE: A review Omicron infection along with COVID-19 and it also discusses on XE recombinant variant and on infectivity of BA.2 subvariant of Omicron

CorpusID: 249709872 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/07c306711c6cacad68c409412e68b7dbcb6557ab](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/07c306711c6cacad68c409412e68b7dbcb6557ab)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s0) | OMICRON-VARIANT OF CONCERN
(p0.0) The variant Omicron exhibits an unusually high volume of mutations in the Spike region and key specific mutations of Omicron includes, N440K, G446S, G339D, E484A, A76V, Q493R, Q498R, G496S, T547K, Y505H, N679K, H655Y, N764K, N856K, D796Y, Q954H, S375F, L981F, N969K, S371L, L212I, and S373P which was revealed through the analysis of its genomic sequence. 14 This change is said to enhance Omicron's severity, infectivity, immune escape, higher binding affinity, and higher transmissibility, thus making Omicron a deadly variant. 15 The viral structure of the SARS-CoV-2 promotes four protein genes that include, M-protein that binds to the host body's protein and structures the shape of the virus, N-protein/Nucleocapsid protein modulates signaling, cell replication cycle and immune response of host towards SARS-CoV-2 infection, E-protein/ Envelope protein which portraits itself as an area for the production and maturation of the virus and the S protein/S-Glycoprotein which divides itself into the region of the head (S1) and stem (S2) with a ratio of 3:2 where, the S1 region houses the N-terminal domain (NTD), two C-terminal domain (CTD), and receptor-binding domain (RBD) that is crucial for new variants in conjunction with host receptor, Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). The efficiency and transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 depends on the interaction of ACE2 receptor. 16,17 ACE2 acts as a mediator that facilitates the interaction between itself and SARS-CoV-2 and the other receptor being TMPRSS2 which acts as a coreceptor thereby regulating the infectivity level in living organisms. According to recent studies, genetic changes and vulnerability were found to play a crucial role in viral infections. 18 With the SARS-CoV-2 being an RNA virus, it is of no surprise regarding its capability to mutate and to evolve with greater virulence and to reform itself with hindrance towards the immune system.

(p0.1) With the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, we have seen the emergence of various variants with different mutability capacity. The origin of VOCs like Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta, and now Omicron along with various VOIs and VUMs showcases the virus' reinfection, increased resistance to the immune system and to vaccines. 19  The mutational changes are seen in the Spike protein, RBD region, receptor-binding motif (RBM), and in the areas of S1 and S2.

(p0.2) This dynamic change may have the ability to alter the interaction of host receptor ACE2 with RBD or the host's immune system and Omicron variant is shown to possess a stronger and higher Coulomb attraction force between ACE2, and Spike protein and it is shown to have increased electric charge in nucleocapsid protein thereby terming the Omicron as "Electric Virus." 22 It was also indicated that Omicron had a close phylogenetic relation with the Alpha variant proving that Omicron was already in existence before its mass spreading. 23 As of 2022 Omicron is the prevalent strain globally and in particular, its subvariant BA.2 is a slowly increasing its dominance worldwide and it is dubbed as "Stealth Omicron" as this variant lacks deletion of 69-70 position in its Spike region that is a characteristic feature of variant alpha and BA.1, currently BA. 2   The mutations are known to interfere with protein-protein interaction complex thereby changing the dynamics of the virus. The mutational structure of Omicron has been of a significant concern due to its mutation in the Spike protein. The deletion of genomic positions H69 and H70 (also found in Alpha and Eta) facilitates the Sassay of Taqpath polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests to provide negative results thereby providing the virus with proxy prevalence also known as S-gene target failure (SGFT). There are three amino acids "EPE" that are observed in position 214. This hotspot is also known as insertion hotspot and is known to induce structural dynamic changes to the Spike protein. 34,35 Omicron is said to possess increased transmissibility due to the mutation of H655Y, N679K, and P681H in the S1-S2 area thereby increasing spike cleavage. Due to the double mutation of Q498R and N501Y, it has led to an increase in the binding capability of ACE2.
