# Towards More Precise Automatic Analysis: A Comprehensive Survey of Deep Learning-based Multi-organ Segmentation

CorpusID: 257255572 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/564ec33ed2cbfae044e8c770f73e0044d305107f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/564ec33ed2cbfae044e8c770f73e0044d305107f)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s13) VI. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE TRENDS
(p13.0) In this paper, a systematic review of deep learning methods for multi-organ segmentation is presented from the perspectives of both full annotation and imperfect annotation. The main innovations of the full annotation method focus on the design of network architectures, the combination of network dimensions, the innovation of network modules and the proposal of new loss functions. In terms of the network architecture design, with the development of the transformer [75] architectures, better utilization of these advanced architectures for multi-organ segmentation is a promising direction, as well as the automatic search for the optimal architecture for each organ through neural network architecture search (NAS) [191]. In the network dimension, optimally combining 2D and 3D architectures is a worthwhile research direction. In terms of network module, more dedicated modules need to design to improve the segmentation accuracy according to the multi-organ segmentation task. In terms of the loss functions, targeting the class imbalance, geometric prior or introducing adversarial learning loss will have great potential for designing more comprehensive and diverse loss functions.

(p13.1) Full annotation methods rely on fully annotated and highquality datasets. Many imperfect annotation-based methods have been proposed for medical image segmentation in the last two years, including the aforementioned multi-organ segmentation based on weak annotation-based methods and semi annotation-based methods. However, compared to full annotation-based methods, the imperfect annotation-based methods have been less studied. It is a future research focus if imperfect annotation-based methods can be used more adequately to achieve the performance close to that of the full annotation-based methods.

(p13.2) Deep learning has already played a significant role in multiorgan segmentation task, but many challenges remain to be explored in the future, which are summarized in follows:
