# Journal of Technology Management and Business Social Well-Being Elements Through the Lens of Low-Income Group among Malays in Malaysia After 14th General Election: A Systematic Literature Review Centre for General Studies, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia and Principal Researcher for Sustainable Community, Culture & Economy Development (SUCCEED), MALAYSIA *Corresponding Author

CorpusID: 255257114 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1b14b1fa8cea95800c3d905286b81c5875e79ef5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1b14b1fa8cea95800c3d905286b81c5875e79ef5)

Fields: Sociology

## (s12) Various government agencies and corporate sectors have implemented strategic
(p12.0) plans and policies targeting the B40 groups through its Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) program. However, relatively little empirical data exists in assessing their effectiveness. 3. Physical health, mental health, health behaviour, literacy and financing, and nutrition are involved among B40. 4. The low-income group has been identified as vulnerable to mental health problems, as shown by workplace bullying and psychological distress among employees from this group. 5. They are also more likely to be absent from work due to lower income, divorce or separation, chronic diseases such as kidney disease, diabetes, and migraine. Mahdzan et al. (2021) B40 voted least with the statements:

(p12.1) 1. Satisfied with personal finances.

(p12.2) 2. Never worry about meeting monthly living expenses. 3. Never wait eagerly for the next payday. Thangiah et al. (2020) 1. M40 and T20 income groups had a better quality of life in all domains (physical, psychological, social, and environmental) compared to the B40 community. 2. B40 with a majority of Malays experience a much slower income growth in rural areas because of: a) under-investment in infrastructure and facilities b) limited job opportunities c) high dependency on declining agricultural 3. The lack of income also inhibited people from procuring health-related equipment, products, and services. 4. B40 group often experienced stress and anxiety problems when their income status was compared to those at higher rungs of the ladder, thus resulting in low scores in the psychological domain. 5. B40 had a low-quality housing area. Sharifa et al. (2019) 
