# An overview on nanoparticle-based strategies to fight viral infections with a focus on COVID-19 Open Access Journal of Nanobiotechnology

CorpusID: 252760292 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f89aa1e6e2c02d8f9352989269888fd11a3d00f3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f89aa1e6e2c02d8f9352989269888fd11a3d00f3)

Fields: Materials Science, Environmental Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s20) Other types of nanovaccines
(p20.0) To advance the creation of viral vaccines through mRNA and pDNA, a professional medicine company created a novel silica-based new technology called, Nuvec ® designed for the transfer of vaccines and drugs. These new silica-NPs carrying nucleic acids have asymmetrical surfaces functionalized by polyethyleneimines (PEIs). This surface encapsulates nuclear acids (including mRNA/pDNA), as they cross into cells, and preserves them from nucleus enzymes. The critical benefit of Nuvec ® is that it does not destroy the cell membrane when it attains the cells, contrasted to LNP; and not neither does it generate each inflammatory response at the administration location with no extreme systemic adverse events [140]. Peptide vaccines are known for their less immunogenicity, which could be dominated via combining immunostimulatory adjuvants and NPs, including PLGA or chitosan. The CD4 + and CD8 + T cell epitopes can as well be fused with adjuvant proteins such as TLR ligands which can be entrapped or presented on the surface of NPs such as PLGA to induce continued T-cell reactions and enhance long-range preservation. Smaller PLGA NPs (350 nm) allow improved internalization via DCs and cause a continued cellular immune reaction in mice. PLGA-NP encapsulated peptide antigens are being preserved against enzymatic destruction in vivo until they are absorbed via APCs and caused stimulation of strong B-and T-lymphocyte reactions [141]. In other investigations, SARS-CoV-2 vaccine developers, including GlaxoSmithKline, which owns the ASs and other adjuvant techniques, are employed in numerous companies to implant their adjuvant methods by COVID-19 virus-protein-based vaccines. The capability of approved adjuvants, including AS01 and AS03, to increase adaptive immune response has been related to their capacity to increase STAT1/IRF1 IFN signaling [124]. NVX-CoV2373 is a recombinant (rSARS-CoV-2) NP vaccine combined with trimeric full-length COVID-19 S proteins and Matrix-M1 adjuvant. Adjuvant led to increased immune reactions, was antigen dosage-sparing, and stimulated a Th1 response. The Matrix-M1 adjuvant elicited helper T lymphocytes reactions biased toward a Th1 phenotype. Matrix-M1, a saponin-based adjuvant, was created via Novavax. Both vaccine and adjuvant were maintained at 2-8 °C [142]. 
## (s22) Nanoparticles as antiviral agents against SARS-CoV-2 Infection
(p22.0) In the absence of carrying additional medicine payloads, NPs can use specific mechanisms for direct viral inhibiting. One of these mechanisms is the degradation of viral protein structure. Biocompatible NPs can demonstrate a wide range of antiviral actions. The action of specific NPs, such as AgNPs and AuNPs, can chip in the generally antiviral function [152]. Quantum dots (QD), a kind of crystalline NPs, have great nano-based detecting, and they, can be utilized as antiviral remedies. Various metallic combinations (Pb, Cu, Ga, Zn, Hg) based on QD displayed target particular activities versus viral infection [153]. Moreover, QDs can be employed as ideal options versus pathogenic human CoVs diseases; For example, the antiviral actions of 7 diverse carbon QDs (CQDs) for remedying HCoV-229E infections were assessed [154,155]. Moreover, the available documentation shows that NPs, including graphene, nanodiamonds, carbon nanotubes, and polystyrene particles, possess an inherent capability to trigger the immune system, related to their functionalization. For example, graphene oxide functionalized with amino groups (GO-NH2) stimulates the triggering of STAT1/IRF1 IFN signaling in monocytes and T lymphocytes, leading to the generation of T cell chemoattractant, and macrophage 1/Th1 polarization of the immune reaction, with slight toxicity. Significantly, hypericin graphene is on the list of computationally recognized potential therapy versus SARS-CoV-2. Besides, graphene is a potent immunomodulator, and GO-AgNPs increase the generation of natural antiviral protections (IFN-α and ISGs) [156]. Octadecylamine-functionalized and dexamethasoneincorporated nanodiamonds increase anti-inflammatory and pro-regenerative performance in human macrophages in vitro. A less amount of this NP also decreased macrophage penetration and expression of proinflammatory intermediary's inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and TNF-alpha in mice. Generally, outcomes showed that nanodiamond particles could be beneficial as an intrinsically immunomodulatory system [124]. The usage of nitric oxide NPs (NONPs) can also be an option in the therapy of SARS-CoV-2 disease. An investigation by SARS-CoV-1 detected that NO suppresses viral reproduction via the cytotoxic response from intermediate factors, including peroxynitrite. Since COVID-19 infects endothelial cells, which are an origin of NO, carrying NO from NPs may be an alternative for NO substitution, also a reaction to the viral targeting endothelial cells. Furthermore, suppressing viral prevalence, NO can inhibit the beginning of inflammatory activities based on hypoxia-reoxygenation /ischemia-reperfusion, regulator the cytokine cascade, let the elimination of cell fragments, restrict lipid peroxidation and cell injury, decrease damaging vascular penetrability, and preserve sufficient blood circulation [149]. Carbon nanotubes (CNT) belong to the fullerene family (sized 10-100 nm). Investigators developed a new method against COVID-19 by acidizing, and RALyase modified CNTs in combination with photodynamic thermal efficacy [157]. In another investigation, researchers hypothesized that carbon dots (CDs) derived from Allium sativum (AS-CDs) may have the capability to downregulate the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and return the immunological abnormalities to normal in SARS-CoV-2 infection. CDs have now been investigated in the nanobiomedicine field as a hopeful theranostic candidates for bioimaging and medication/ gene transfer. The antifibrotic and antioxidant properties of AS are explained with accuracy, as confirmed in numerous investigations. It is found that the most active constituent of AS, allicin has an extremely strong antioxidant and reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging efficacy [158].
