# DYADIC MODELS FOR FLUID EQUATIONS: A SURVEY

CorpusID: 252408511 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c91c0f3f5e4f9b1d85a1cbbba30d5179dbf6d3e3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c91c0f3f5e4f9b1d85a1cbbba30d5179dbf6d3e3)

Fields: Mathematics

## (s19) Additive noise on low modes.
(p19.0) We consider the following model with additive noise,

(p19.1) where W is a Brownian motion and constant σ denotes the intensity of the noise. Note that the stochastic forcing only acts on a large scale. Denote

(p19.2) by the stochastic basis. We first recall the existence and uniqueness results for (4.1) established by Friedlander, Glatt-Holtz and Vicol [43]. (ii) If the components of the initial data a 0 are positive, then for any martingale solution (a, S) we have a j (t) > 0 for all j ≥ 0 and t ≥ 0. Moreover, there is a realization (u, S) such that

(p19.3) (iii) Let ν > 0 and θ ≥ 1. There exists a stationary martingale solution (ā ν , S) satisfying (4.2). (iv) Let θ ∈ [1, 2] and fix a stochastic basis S. There exists a unique pathwise solution a = a(t, a 0 , W ) of (4.1) satisfying (4.2) with an equality. Moreover, a(t, a 0 , W ) depends continuously on a 0 ∈ l 2 and W ∈ C([0, T ]).

(p19.4) Hence the uniqueness result in Theorem 4.1 (iv) is consistent with the uniqueness result in the deterministic case, see Theorem 3.18.

(p19.5) Moreover the authors gave a rigorous proof for some of Kolmogorov's laws including the zeroth law -anomalous dissipation and the dissipation anomaly, through analysis of the statistically stationary solutions.  for an absolute constant C > 0. (ii) Such solutionā from (i) may be obtained as an inviscid limit, i.e. there exists Borel probability measures {µ ν k } and µ 0 on l 2 such that

(p19.6) with µ ν k (·) = P(ā ν k ∈ ·). (iii) The inviscid stationary solutionsā has a constant mean energy flux

(p19.7) We consider the following model with additive noise,

(p19.8) where W is a Brownian motion and constant σ denotes the intensity of the noise. Note that the stochastic forcing only acts on a large scale. Denote

(p19.9) by the stochastic basis. We first recall the existence and uniqueness results for (4.1) established by Friedlander, Glatt-Holtz and Vicol [43]. (ii) If the components of the initial data a 0 are positive, then for any martingale solution (a, S) we have a j (t) > 0 for all j ≥ 0 and t ≥ 0. Moreover, there is a realization (u, S) such that

(p19.10) (iii) Let ν > 0 and θ ≥ 1. There exists a stationary martingale solution (ā ν , S) satisfying (4.2). (iv) Let θ ∈ [1, 2] and fix a stochastic basis S. There exists a unique pathwise solution a = a(t, a 0 , W ) of (4.1) satisfying (4.2) with an equality. Moreover, a(t, a 0 , W ) depends continuously on a 0 ∈ l 2 and W ∈ C([0, T ]).

(p19.11) Hence the uniqueness result in Theorem 4.1 (iv) is consistent with the uniqueness result in the deterministic case, see Theorem 3.18.

(p19.12) Moreover the authors gave a rigorous proof for some of Kolmogorov's laws including the zeroth law -anomalous dissipation and the dissipation anomaly, through analysis of the statistically stationary solutions.  for an absolute constant C > 0. (ii) Such solutionā from (i) may be obtained as an inviscid limit, i.e. there exists Borel probability measures {µ ν k } and µ 0 on l 2 such that

(p19.13) with µ ν k (·) = P(ā ν k ∈ ·). (iii) The inviscid stationary solutionsā has a constant mean energy flux
## (s22) Multiplicative noise.
(p22.0) Stochastic dyadic models with multiplicative noise have also been investigated. In particular, Barbato, Flandoli and Morandin [3] considered the inviscid model with multiplicative stochastic forcing in Stratonovich form

(p22.1) The authors showed anomalous dissipation in the following sense.

(p22.2) Theorem 4.7. Let a(t) be the unique solution of (4.8) with initial data a 0 ∈ l 2 which satisfies E(t) < ∞ for all t > 0. Then we have P(E(t) = E(0)) < 1, ∀ t > 0.

(p22.3) Moreover, for any ε > 0 there exists t such that P(E(t) < ε) > 0.

(p22.4) Despite the formal conservation of the energy for system (4.8), such anomalous dissipation arises from the forward energy cascade mechanism, just like the deterministic dyadic Euler model. Consequently, the authors further proved that global regular solutions can not exist by employing the stochastic tool of birth and death process. Later on, Barbato and Morandin [6] extended the work of [3] to more general dyadic models forced by multiplicative noise, including the inviscid GOY and Sabra models.

(p22.5) For the same inviscid model (4.8) with multiplicative noise, the authors showed weak uniqueness in the class of exponentially integrable solutions in [4]. Namely, Theorem 4.8. Consider (4.8) with initial data a 0 ∈ l 2 . A weak solution (Ω, F t , P, W, a) of (4.8) is said to be exponentially integrable on

(p22.6) There is weak uniqueness in the class of exponentially integrable solutions for (4.8).

(p22.7) Weak uniqueness is in the sense of uniqueness of the law of the process. Recall that in the deterministic case, there are non-unique weak solutions for the dyadic Euler model. Nevertheless, strong (path-wise) uniqueness for (4.8) remains an open question. As indicated by the authors, their approach of showing uniqueness builds on the Girsanov transformation which turns a nonlinear system to a linear system. This approach naturally leads to weak uniqueness.

(p22.8) Stochastic dyadic models with multiplicative noise have also been investigated. In particular, Barbato, Flandoli and Morandin [3] considered the inviscid model with multiplicative stochastic forcing in Stratonovich form

(p22.9) The authors showed anomalous dissipation in the following sense.

(p22.10) Theorem 4.7. Let a(t) be the unique solution of (4.8) with initial data a 0 ∈ l 2 which satisfies E(t) < ∞ for all t > 0. Then we have P(E(t) = E(0)) < 1, ∀ t > 0.

(p22.11) Moreover, for any ε > 0 there exists t such that P(E(t) < ε) > 0.

(p22.12) Despite the formal conservation of the energy for system (4.8), such anomalous dissipation arises from the forward energy cascade mechanism, just like the deterministic dyadic Euler model. Consequently, the authors further proved that global regular solutions can not exist by employing the stochastic tool of birth and death process. Later on, Barbato and Morandin [6] extended the work of [3] to more general dyadic models forced by multiplicative noise, including the inviscid GOY and Sabra models.

(p22.13) For the same inviscid model (4.8) with multiplicative noise, the authors showed weak uniqueness in the class of exponentially integrable solutions in [4]. Namely, Theorem 4.8. Consider (4.8) with initial data a 0 ∈ l 2 . A weak solution (Ω, F t , P, W, a) of (4.8) is said to be exponentially integrable on

(p22.14) There is weak uniqueness in the class of exponentially integrable solutions for (4.8).

(p22.15) Weak uniqueness is in the sense of uniqueness of the law of the process. Recall that in the deterministic case, there are non-unique weak solutions for the dyadic Euler model. Nevertheless, strong (path-wise) uniqueness for (4.8) remains an open question. As indicated by the authors, their approach of showing uniqueness builds on the Girsanov transformation which turns a nonlinear system to a linear system. This approach naturally leads to weak uniqueness.
## (s23) Dyadic models for magnetohydrodynamics
(p23.0) The PDEs for the incompressible magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) u t + (u · ∇)u − (B · ∇)B + ∇P = ν∆u, B t + (u · ∇)B − (B · ∇)u = µ∆B, ∇ · u = 0, ∇ · B = 0 (5.1) describe electrically conducting fluids in geophysics and astrophysics. In system (5.1), u, B and p are the unknowns, denoting respectively the velocity field, magnetic field and scalar pressure function. The constants ν and µ represent the kinetic viscosity and magnetic diffusivity respectively. Despite many similar features with the NSE, the MHD system (5.1) is more challenging due to the intricate interactions of the velocity field and magnetic field. The open questions for the pure fluid equations discussed in Subsection 1.3 remain open for the MHD system. Inspired by the fruitful results for the dyadic models for the NSE and Euler equation, it is possible to advance the understanding of the MHD by studying reduced models. In particular, a class of dyadic models were introduced by Dai in [30] including both of the Desnyansky-Novikov and Obukhov types of nonlinear structures. Particular case of these models are consistent with some dyadic models suggested by physicists, for instance, see the work [82] of Plunian, Stepanov and Frick. We point out that the majority of the work from the physics community concerns numerical study of these dyadic models.

(p23.1) We recall two particular models from [30] which contain Desnyansky-Novikov nonlinear terms and exhibit different energy cascade mechanisms, d dt a j + νλ 2 j a j + λ θ j a j a j+1 − λ θ j−1 a 2

(p23.2) for j ≥ 0 with a −1 = b −1 = 0 and external forcing f = (f 0 , f 1 , f 2 , ...), and d dt a j + νλ 2 j a j + λ θ j a j a j+1 − λ θ j−1 a 2

(p23.3) Here a j (t) = u(t) L 2 and b j (t) = B(t) L 2 , and θ = 5−d 2 (under the assumption that the intermittency dimension of the velocity field and magnetic field is the same). Denote the total energy by

(p23.4) and cross helicity
## (s57) Additive noise on low modes.
(p57.0) We consider the following model with additive noise,

(p57.1) where W is a Brownian motion and constant σ denotes the intensity of the noise. Note that the stochastic forcing only acts on a large scale. Denote

(p57.2) by the stochastic basis. We first recall the existence and uniqueness results for (4.1) established by Friedlander, Glatt-Holtz and Vicol [43]. (ii) If the components of the initial data a 0 are positive, then for any martingale solution (a, S) we have a j (t) > 0 for all j ≥ 0 and t ≥ 0. Moreover, there is a realization (u, S) such that

(p57.3) (iii) Let ν > 0 and θ ≥ 1. There exists a stationary martingale solution (ā ν , S) satisfying (4.2). (iv) Let θ ∈ [1, 2] and fix a stochastic basis S. There exists a unique pathwise solution a = a(t, a 0 , W ) of (4.1) satisfying (4.2) with an equality. Moreover, a(t, a 0 , W ) depends continuously on a 0 ∈ l 2 and W ∈ C([0, T ]).

(p57.4) Hence the uniqueness result in Theorem 4.1 (iv) is consistent with the uniqueness result in the deterministic case, see Theorem 3.18.

(p57.5) Moreover the authors gave a rigorous proof for some of Kolmogorov's laws including the zeroth law -anomalous dissipation and the dissipation anomaly, through analysis of the statistically stationary solutions.  for an absolute constant C > 0. (ii) Such solutionā from (i) may be obtained as an inviscid limit, i.e. there exists Borel probability measures {µ ν k } and µ 0 on l 2 such that

(p57.6) with µ ν k (·) = P(ā ν k ∈ ·). (iii) The inviscid stationary solutionsā has a constant mean energy flux

(p57.7) We consider the following model with additive noise,

(p57.8) where W is a Brownian motion and constant σ denotes the intensity of the noise. Note that the stochastic forcing only acts on a large scale. Denote

(p57.9) by the stochastic basis. We first recall the existence and uniqueness results for (4.1) established by Friedlander, Glatt-Holtz and Vicol [43]. (ii) If the components of the initial data a 0 are positive, then for any martingale solution (a, S) we have a j (t) > 0 for all j ≥ 0 and t ≥ 0. Moreover, there is a realization (u, S) such that

(p57.10) (iii) Let ν > 0 and θ ≥ 1. There exists a stationary martingale solution (ā ν , S) satisfying (4.2). (iv) Let θ ∈ [1, 2] and fix a stochastic basis S. There exists a unique pathwise solution a = a(t, a 0 , W ) of (4.1) satisfying (4.2) with an equality. Moreover, a(t, a 0 , W ) depends continuously on a 0 ∈ l 2 and W ∈ C([0, T ]).

(p57.11) Hence the uniqueness result in Theorem 4.1 (iv) is consistent with the uniqueness result in the deterministic case, see Theorem 3.18.

(p57.12) Moreover the authors gave a rigorous proof for some of Kolmogorov's laws including the zeroth law -anomalous dissipation and the dissipation anomaly, through analysis of the statistically stationary solutions.  for an absolute constant C > 0. (ii) Such solutionā from (i) may be obtained as an inviscid limit, i.e. there exists Borel probability measures {µ ν k } and µ 0 on l 2 such that

(p57.13) with µ ν k (·) = P(ā ν k ∈ ·). (iii) The inviscid stationary solutionsā has a constant mean energy flux
## (s60) Multiplicative noise.
(p60.0) Stochastic dyadic models with multiplicative noise have also been investigated. In particular, Barbato, Flandoli and Morandin [3] considered the inviscid model with multiplicative stochastic forcing in Stratonovich form

(p60.1) The authors showed anomalous dissipation in the following sense.

(p60.2) Theorem 4.7. Let a(t) be the unique solution of (4.8) with initial data a 0 ∈ l 2 which satisfies E(t) < ∞ for all t > 0. Then we have P(E(t) = E(0)) < 1, ∀ t > 0.

(p60.3) Moreover, for any ε > 0 there exists t such that P(E(t) < ε) > 0.

(p60.4) Despite the formal conservation of the energy for system (4.8), such anomalous dissipation arises from the forward energy cascade mechanism, just like the deterministic dyadic Euler model. Consequently, the authors further proved that global regular solutions can not exist by employing the stochastic tool of birth and death process. Later on, Barbato and Morandin [6] extended the work of [3] to more general dyadic models forced by multiplicative noise, including the inviscid GOY and Sabra models.

(p60.5) For the same inviscid model (4.8) with multiplicative noise, the authors showed weak uniqueness in the class of exponentially integrable solutions in [4]. Namely, Theorem 4.8. Consider (4.8) with initial data a 0 ∈ l 2 . A weak solution (Ω, F t , P, W, a) of (4.8) is said to be exponentially integrable on

(p60.6) There is weak uniqueness in the class of exponentially integrable solutions for (4.8).

(p60.7) Weak uniqueness is in the sense of uniqueness of the law of the process. Recall that in the deterministic case, there are non-unique weak solutions for the dyadic Euler model. Nevertheless, strong (path-wise) uniqueness for (4.8) remains an open question. As indicated by the authors, their approach of showing uniqueness builds on the Girsanov transformation which turns a nonlinear system to a linear system. This approach naturally leads to weak uniqueness.

(p60.8) Stochastic dyadic models with multiplicative noise have also been investigated. In particular, Barbato, Flandoli and Morandin [3] considered the inviscid model with multiplicative stochastic forcing in Stratonovich form

(p60.9) The authors showed anomalous dissipation in the following sense.

(p60.10) Theorem 4.7. Let a(t) be the unique solution of (4.8) with initial data a 0 ∈ l 2 which satisfies E(t) < ∞ for all t > 0. Then we have P(E(t) = E(0)) < 1, ∀ t > 0.

(p60.11) Moreover, for any ε > 0 there exists t such that P(E(t) < ε) > 0.

(p60.12) Despite the formal conservation of the energy for system (4.8), such anomalous dissipation arises from the forward energy cascade mechanism, just like the deterministic dyadic Euler model. Consequently, the authors further proved that global regular solutions can not exist by employing the stochastic tool of birth and death process. Later on, Barbato and Morandin [6] extended the work of [3] to more general dyadic models forced by multiplicative noise, including the inviscid GOY and Sabra models.

(p60.13) For the same inviscid model (4.8) with multiplicative noise, the authors showed weak uniqueness in the class of exponentially integrable solutions in [4]. Namely, Theorem 4.8. Consider (4.8) with initial data a 0 ∈ l 2 . A weak solution (Ω, F t , P, W, a) of (4.8) is said to be exponentially integrable on

(p60.14) There is weak uniqueness in the class of exponentially integrable solutions for (4.8).

(p60.15) Weak uniqueness is in the sense of uniqueness of the law of the process. Recall that in the deterministic case, there are non-unique weak solutions for the dyadic Euler model. Nevertheless, strong (path-wise) uniqueness for (4.8) remains an open question. As indicated by the authors, their approach of showing uniqueness builds on the Girsanov transformation which turns a nonlinear system to a linear system. This approach naturally leads to weak uniqueness.
## (s61) Dyadic models for magnetohydrodynamics
(p61.0) The PDEs for the incompressible magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) u t + (u · ∇)u − (B · ∇)B + ∇P = ν∆u, B t + (u · ∇)B − (B · ∇)u = µ∆B, ∇ · u = 0, ∇ · B = 0 (5.1) describe electrically conducting fluids in geophysics and astrophysics. In system (5.1), u, B and p are the unknowns, denoting respectively the velocity field, magnetic field and scalar pressure function. The constants ν and µ represent the kinetic viscosity and magnetic diffusivity respectively. Despite many similar features with the NSE, the MHD system (5.1) is more challenging due to the intricate interactions of the velocity field and magnetic field. The open questions for the pure fluid equations discussed in Subsection 1.3 remain open for the MHD system. Inspired by the fruitful results for the dyadic models for the NSE and Euler equation, it is possible to advance the understanding of the MHD by studying reduced models. In particular, a class of dyadic models were introduced by Dai in [30] including both of the Desnyansky-Novikov and Obukhov types of nonlinear structures. Particular case of these models are consistent with some dyadic models suggested by physicists, for instance, see the work [82] of Plunian, Stepanov and Frick. We point out that the majority of the work from the physics community concerns numerical study of these dyadic models.

(p61.1) We recall two particular models from [30] which contain Desnyansky-Novikov nonlinear terms and exhibit different energy cascade mechanisms, d dt a j + νλ 2 j a j + λ θ j a j a j+1 − λ θ j−1 a 2

(p61.2) for j ≥ 0 with a −1 = b −1 = 0 and external forcing f = (f 0 , f 1 , f 2 , ...), and d dt a j + νλ 2 j a j + λ θ j a j a j+1 − λ θ j−1 a 2

(p61.3) Here a j (t) = u(t) L 2 and b j (t) = B(t) L 2 , and θ = 5−d 2 (under the assumption that the intermittency dimension of the velocity field and magnetic field is the same). Denote the total energy by

(p61.4) and cross helicity
