# Liver transplantation as a treatment for Wilson's disease with neurological presentation: a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 256286472 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/42e098a736189c8a539e963cecbbb0d0a707dcae](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/42e098a736189c8a539e963cecbbb0d0a707dcae)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Search strategy and eligibility criteria
(p2.0) This systematic review was performed in concordance with international accepted criteria of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) statement [74].

(p2.1) We searched the PubMed database (up to 6 April 2021) for original studies (prospective and retrospective), as well as case and series reports analyzing the efficacy of LT as a treatment option for WD patients with neurological phenotypic manifestation. Search terms included ("Wilson's disease" and "liver transplantation" and "neurological symptoms"), ("Wilson's disease" and "liver transplantation" and "neurology"), and ("Liver transplantation and neurological Wilson's disease"). Studies eligible for further analysis were: (1) conducted with humans; (2) original studies (prospective or retrospective); (3) case and series reports of the patients with neurological manifestation of WD who have had LT; and (4) in English language. Review articles and studies describing the neurological outcome of LT in patients with other etiologies of liver failure were excluded. The reference lists of extracted publications were also searched.
## (s13) Search strategy and eligibility criteria
(p13.0) This systematic review was performed in concordance with international accepted criteria of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) statement [74].

(p13.1) We searched the PubMed database (up to 6 April 2021) for original studies (prospective and retrospective), as well as case and series reports analyzing the efficacy of LT as a treatment option for WD patients with neurological phenotypic manifestation. Search terms included ("Wilson's disease" and "liver transplantation" and "neurological symptoms"), ("Wilson's disease" and "liver transplantation" and "neurology"), and ("Liver transplantation and neurological Wilson's disease"). Studies eligible for further analysis were: (1) conducted with humans; (2) original studies (prospective or retrospective); (3) case and series reports of the patients with neurological manifestation of WD who have had LT; and (4) in English language. Review articles and studies describing the neurological outcome of LT in patients with other etiologies of liver failure were excluded. The reference lists of extracted publications were also searched.
