# The Link between Different Types of Prebiotics in Infant Formula and Infection Rates: A Review

CorpusID: 258227879 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4eff27713006af4b4881c02d0be017867876661](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4eff27713006af4b4881c02d0be017867876661)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Human Milk Oligosaccharides
(p4.0) We retained six publications on human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) ( Table 3) [28,[34][35][36][37][38] involving a total of 1571 infants, conducted in America, Europe, and Asia. Five studies included only healthy term infants, and one study examined the effects of HMOs on infants with cow's milk allergy (CMA). HMOs were added in a range of 0.25 g/L to 5.8 g/L, using 2 -FL, LNnT, 3 -FL, LNT, 3 -SL, and 6 -SL.

(p4.1) The first study was published in 2015 by Marriage et al. In this study, four groups were compared: (i) formula supplemented with 2.2 g/L GOSs and 0.2 g/L 2 -FL; (ii) 1.4 g/L GOSs and 1 g/L 2 -FL; (iii) in the control group, infant formula with 2.4 g/L GOSs; and (iv) a breastfed reference group. After an intervention and observation period of four months, there were more infections in the second intervention group (38/109) and in the control group (28/109) compared to the first intervention group (11/104) (p < 0.05) [34]. These results were not compared to the breastfeeding group. It should be noted that the control group received a prebiotic as well, and that the total dosage of prebiotic was 2.4 g/L in each group. Considering this study setup and its results, which are difficult to interpret, this study was not considered in our conclusions.

(p4.2) In the study by Puccio et al., formula was supplemented with 2 -FL and LNnT for six months [28]. After an observation period of 12 months, fewer infections (p = 0.051) and a decreased use of antibiotics (p < 0.05) were reported. Furthermore, there was less bronchitis (p < 0.01) and a lower incidence of RTIs (p < 0.05).

(p4.3) Storm and co-workers added a small amount of 2 -FL (0.25 g/L) to partially hydrolysed formula containing B. lactis over a period of six weeks. The control formula contained B. lactis as well. In the adverse events, they observed a reduction in the incidence of infections, which was low in both groups (9/38 vs. 3/40; p = 0.05) [35]. Due to the small sample of participants (78 infants), short period of intervention, and low infection rate, this study was not included in our conclusions.

(p4.4) In two RCTs, published by Parschat and Lasekan, a mix of five HMOs (5.75 g/L) was added to infant formula over the course of four months. Both investigations reported no decrease in infection rates. In the study of Parschat et al., the infection rate was 32/113 vs. 28/112 (p = 0.54) [36]. In the study of Lasekan et al., the antipyretic use was comparable (4/128 and 4/126), as was the antibiotic use (4/128 vs. 4/126) [38]. However, the study of Lasekan was conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic, where the infection rates in infants were generally low (7.6% of included patients), which is likely to have had an impact on these observations. When added to extensively hydrolysed formula in a study population of 190 infants, 2 -FL and LNnT were associated with a reduction in the frequency of a range of infections [37]. In the subgroups, there was a risk reduction of 34% for lower RTIs (13/94 vs. 20/96; p = 0.25). There was no difference in the incidence of URTIs (p = 0.77); however, the frequency of URTIs per year was lower (p = 0.003). Further analyses showed a reduction in otitis media (p = 0.17; relative risk reduction 70%) and fewer gastrointestinal infections (p = 0.021). There were no reductions in antipyretic (p = 0.6) or antibiotic use (p = 0.8).
