# Impact of climate change-induced natural disasters on intangible cultural heritage related to food: a review

CorpusID: 257163313 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/665577e101b1f363fe5638b40bbc84a75d4cb91b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/665577e101b1f363fe5638b40bbc84a75d4cb91b)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s10) Elements or dimensions of food that make food qualify as an intangible cultural heritage
(p10.0) Based on a traditional literature review (Table 2), we grouped the identified ICH elements of food into six domains which are (i) food traditions and customs, (ii) food production, processing, and storage, (iii) dietary culture, (iv) eating and social practices, (v) culinary, and (vi) geographical indicators ( Table 2). These proposed domains were created based on the similarity of the characteristics of the ICH elements identified in the literature.

(p10.1) Food traditions and customs domain consists of traditional cultures, rituals, festivals as well as taboos centered around food from its production, processing up  to consumption [50]. Community identity relates to the cooking skills, knowledge, and techniques which are unique to a community, thereby giving it a sense of identity. The geographical indicator domain is related to or concerns foods or dishes that are identified by their locations or are specific to a certain location. The eating and social practices domain relates to the art of sharing food, thereby creating bonds within the family as well as the community. Food production, processing, and storage domain brings out the different traditional food acquiring, processing, and storage methods that communities have used. It also looks at the cultures and ceremonies done during these stages. Lastly, culinary entails the recipes and cuisines which are specific to communities. These proposed domains are explained in further detail below and graphically presented in Fig. 1.

(p10.2) Based on a traditional literature review (Table 2), we grouped the identified ICH elements of food into six domains which are (i) food traditions and customs, (ii) food production, processing, and storage, (iii) dietary culture, (iv) eating and social practices, (v) culinary, and (vi) geographical indicators ( Table 2). These proposed domains were created based on the similarity of the characteristics of the ICH elements identified in the literature.

(p10.3) Food traditions and customs domain consists of traditional cultures, rituals, festivals as well as taboos centered around food from its production, processing up  to consumption [50]. Community identity relates to the cooking skills, knowledge, and techniques which are unique to a community, thereby giving it a sense of identity. The geographical indicator domain is related to or concerns foods or dishes that are identified by their locations or are specific to a certain location. The eating and social practices domain relates to the art of sharing food, thereby creating bonds within the family as well as the community. Food production, processing, and storage domain brings out the different traditional food acquiring, processing, and storage methods that communities have used. It also looks at the cultures and ceremonies done during these stages. Lastly, culinary entails the recipes and cuisines which are specific to communities. These proposed domains are explained in further detail below and graphically presented in Fig. 1.
## (s13) Effects of climate-induced natural disasters on ICH in relation to food
(p13.0) The ICH domains of food identified and categorized in 'Food as an intangible cultural heritage' section (Table 1 and Fig. 1) are under threat from climate-induced natural disasters, such as floods, cyclones, hurricanes, droughts, and earthquakes, whose frequency and occurrence have been increasing over the past decade. A single incidence of a climate-induced disaster might impact on more than one ICH domain of food. Disasters such as cyclones, hurricanes, and floods can lead to the erosion of the nutrient-rich topsoil leaving behind soil that is infertile. Erosion of the topsoil can be a drive to the extinction of some of the traditional food crops (dietary culture) that are particular to some specific locations (GIs) and consumed by specific cultural groups as well as being used in some traditional ritual processes (food traditions and customs) which are ICH domains of food. For example, hurricane Allen hit St. Lucia in the Caribbean and destroyed almost ninety percentage of the island's banana crops which by that time comprised of almost eighty-five percent of the country's agricultural export [66]. Floods can submerge land used for agriculture, pastures, and livestock, which could in turn reduce crop yields and animal production. More so, some indigenous food crops might become extinct affecting the dietary culture of the local community. The disasters also destroy the storage infrastructure as well as the socioeconomic activities (food production, processing, and storage) which are linked to the agriculture sector, and this could greatly affect food production and eventually decreases food availability, accessibility, utilization and stability in the region [68].
## (s28) Elements or dimensions of food that make food qualify as an intangible cultural heritage
(p28.0) Based on a traditional literature review (Table 2), we grouped the identified ICH elements of food into six domains which are (i) food traditions and customs, (ii) food production, processing, and storage, (iii) dietary culture, (iv) eating and social practices, (v) culinary, and (vi) geographical indicators ( Table 2). These proposed domains were created based on the similarity of the characteristics of the ICH elements identified in the literature.

(p28.1) Food traditions and customs domain consists of traditional cultures, rituals, festivals as well as taboos centered around food from its production, processing up  to consumption [50]. Community identity relates to the cooking skills, knowledge, and techniques which are unique to a community, thereby giving it a sense of identity. The geographical indicator domain is related to or concerns foods or dishes that are identified by their locations or are specific to a certain location. The eating and social practices domain relates to the art of sharing food, thereby creating bonds within the family as well as the community. Food production, processing, and storage domain brings out the different traditional food acquiring, processing, and storage methods that communities have used. It also looks at the cultures and ceremonies done during these stages. Lastly, culinary entails the recipes and cuisines which are specific to communities. These proposed domains are explained in further detail below and graphically presented in Fig. 1.

(p28.2) Based on a traditional literature review (Table 2), we grouped the identified ICH elements of food into six domains which are (i) food traditions and customs, (ii) food production, processing, and storage, (iii) dietary culture, (iv) eating and social practices, (v) culinary, and (vi) geographical indicators ( Table 2). These proposed domains were created based on the similarity of the characteristics of the ICH elements identified in the literature.

(p28.3) Food traditions and customs domain consists of traditional cultures, rituals, festivals as well as taboos centered around food from its production, processing up  to consumption [50]. Community identity relates to the cooking skills, knowledge, and techniques which are unique to a community, thereby giving it a sense of identity. The geographical indicator domain is related to or concerns foods or dishes that are identified by their locations or are specific to a certain location. The eating and social practices domain relates to the art of sharing food, thereby creating bonds within the family as well as the community. Food production, processing, and storage domain brings out the different traditional food acquiring, processing, and storage methods that communities have used. It also looks at the cultures and ceremonies done during these stages. Lastly, culinary entails the recipes and cuisines which are specific to communities. These proposed domains are explained in further detail below and graphically presented in Fig. 1.
## (s31) Effects of climate-induced natural disasters on ICH in relation to food
(p31.0) The ICH domains of food identified and categorized in 'Food as an intangible cultural heritage' section (Table 1 and Fig. 1) are under threat from climate-induced natural disasters, such as floods, cyclones, hurricanes, droughts, and earthquakes, whose frequency and occurrence have been increasing over the past decade. A single incidence of a climate-induced disaster might impact on more than one ICH domain of food. Disasters such as cyclones, hurricanes, and floods can lead to the erosion of the nutrient-rich topsoil leaving behind soil that is infertile. Erosion of the topsoil can be a drive to the extinction of some of the traditional food crops (dietary culture) that are particular to some specific locations (GIs) and consumed by specific cultural groups as well as being used in some traditional ritual processes (food traditions and customs) which are ICH domains of food. For example, hurricane Allen hit St. Lucia in the Caribbean and destroyed almost ninety percentage of the island's banana crops which by that time comprised of almost eighty-five percent of the country's agricultural export [66]. Floods can submerge land used for agriculture, pastures, and livestock, which could in turn reduce crop yields and animal production. More so, some indigenous food crops might become extinct affecting the dietary culture of the local community. The disasters also destroy the storage infrastructure as well as the socioeconomic activities (food production, processing, and storage) which are linked to the agriculture sector, and this could greatly affect food production and eventually decreases food availability, accessibility, utilization and stability in the region [68].
