# A Survey on Federated Learning for the Healthcare Metaverse: Concepts, Applications, Challenges, and Future Directions

CorpusID: 257913812 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39d3ac2b003398e4c2876cb311fd98a9ce56f21f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39d3ac2b003398e4c2876cb311fd98a9ce56f21f)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s3) B. FL in Conventional Healthcare
(p3.0) As computer software and hardware technologies advance quickly, more and more healthcare data are becoming available from patients, healthcare organizations, the pharmaceutical industry, and insurance companies, among other sources. Data science technologies now have an improbable chance to get insights from data and raise the standard of healthcare services because of this access [29]. However, the acquisition of enormous, diversified, centrally stored healthcare datasets is almost impossible due to strict privacy laws and data ownership considerations. On the other hand, the AI model demands an increasing amount of healthcare data in order to provide better decisions. FL offers promising solutions to this issue, and the advantages of adapting FL over conventional methods are discussed below.

(p3.1) • Privacy: FL offers training without compromising privacy of healthcare data. FL has enormous potential for connecting disparate healthcare data sources while protecting privacy. FL uses a central server to train a common global model while preserving all the sensitive data at the local institutions where it belongs [30]. Thus, FL enables healthcare organisations to create reliable and trustworthy models by participating in collaborative training without disclosing data to third parties. As a result, it provides new opportunities for industry and research and enhances health care all around the world. FL can have positive impact on almost all stakeholders and the entire treatment cycle, better diagnostic tools for clinicians, including improved medical image analysis, collaborative and accelerated drug discovery, true precision medicine by assisting in the identification of similar patients, and which reduces cost and time-to-market for pharmaceutical companies [31].
## (s5) C. The Healthcare Metaverse Platform
(p5.0) Metaverse has been built to intently provide permanent, decentralized, collaborative, and interoperable opportunities and business models that will allow companies to extend their digital operations [10]. A general Metaverse platform for healthcare and medical can have seven layers, including infrastructure, human interface, decentralization, spatial computing, economy, discovery, and experience as from the bottom to the top layers as shown in Fig. 2, as from the bottom to the top, but not being strict and may be changed upon many metrics, such as applications, services provided, scalability, and requirement.

(p5.1) Infrastructure: At the bottom, the infrastructure layer pertains to all technological infrastructure things that are required to create a fully immersive, functional, and interoperable Metaverse [36]. Networking and wireless communication with 5G, 6G, and WiFi, cloud storage architecture, VR systems, microelectromechanical systems, and graphics processing units are some major technology clusters to build a healthcare Metaverse, which allows to seamlessly connect decentralized healthcare and medical centers. So far the Metaverse stands on the foundation of powerful computers, integrated medical circuits, communication components, healthcare and medical equipments, and mixed reality devices.

(p5.2) Human interface: The human interface layer mentions about the hardware or the devices that enable users (doctors, clinicians, and patients) to experience the true immersive experience in the virtual world [37]. This layer involves wearable devices such as VR mobiles, VR headsets, gloves with haptic, smart glasses, gesture, voice, miniaturized biosensors, smart contact lenses and human brain-computer interface systems. With the haptic technology, users can operate electronics gadgets in mid-air (e.g., picking up a 3D lung object to zoom in and rotate for diagnosis) without touching screen or buttonaided control.

(p5.3) Decentralization: In the domain of healthcare, the Metaverse should be decentralized, open, and diffused, that means, it is governed by a single entity and belongs to no one but serving everyone at the same time. Decentralization encompasses the blockchain, self-sovereign digital identity mechanisms, smart contracts, open-source platforms to enable and facilitate the increasing growth of distributed computing and healthcare microservices in a scalable environment, serving many crowded patient and medical expert communities [38], [39]. A host of decentralized healthcare Metaverse projects can use the blockchain technology to provide patient-owned private data (e.g., sensory data, medical image, and electronics health records) and shareable clinic experiences (e.g., diagnosis and treatment approaches) in a transparent and traceable manner to perform transactions and interactions.

(p5.4) Spatial computing: as standing for a real/virtual combination, spatial computing dims the borderline between the actual and ideal worlds. In the healthcare domain, spatial computing is all material, libraries, and AI tools to create 3D immersive experience for real-world healthcare and wellness applications as well as medical services [9]. For instance, medical students have opportunity to practice and test their ability in realistic environments without risk over a virtual surgical training applications built in the Metaverse. Some 3D design engines like Unity and Unreal support for 3D modeling and rendering with GPUs for displaying geometry and animation. Spatial computing also helps to integrate diversified healthcare and medical data from different devices and sources for between visualization and analysis using VR devices.

(p5.5) Economy: This layer is responsiable for economic establishment and development in the Metaverse, in which patients, doctors, healthcare institutions, and medical clusters can manage their business in many unique kinds. Patients can allow the service providers to use their private data for research activities and other non-commercial purposes, meanwhile, the providers will reward their contribution by virtual goods, assets, and incentives. There are some economic actitivies provided by healthcare and medical institutions, such as managing a virtual market of digital contents (e.g., medical training, remotely collaborative diagnosis, and treatment plan) and trading health things and medical equipment (e.g., first aid kit, thermometer, and wheelchair), wherein retail shops should be placed in the virtual world [40]. Indeed, it has enormous potential for economic expansion by generating a virtual space for not only patients and doctors but also content creators and designer to connect and communicate in the Metaverse.

(p5.6) Discovery: Discovery can be understood as an advertising ecosystem which includes store placements, rating systems, and recommendation systems from users and service providers. This layer conveys the experiential learning that can be achieved as the results of pull and push information constantly. Particularly in the Metaverse for healthcare and medical domains, pull represents an inbound system where patients proactively look for useful information and experiences (e.g., disease symptoms and treatment plans shared by other patients), whereas push in more outbound and incorporates notice procedures about what experiences awaiting patients in the Metaverse [41]. Some major modules are usually deployed in the Metaverse to make profit, including inbound with search engine, community-driven content, application stores, and real-time presence, and outbound with display advertising, notifications, emails and other social media.

(p5.7) Experience: This layer contains what the most individuals and business are focusing on. Users, including patients and clinicians, has various interactive activities, with virtual objects and each other, in digitally-driven setting via digital content such as disease symptom declaration, health and medical checking, remotely collaborative diagnosis, medial training and education. As known that the Metaverse is more than a simple 3D representation of reality, it was introduced as the ultimate virtualization of physical space and product to engender a seamlessly virtual-realistic ecosystem with built-in services and applications. For example, an interactive virtual reality surgery platform can help doctors to find an anatomy of interest and utilize meaningful information, from learned AI model, to enhance the quality of medical images in the real time.
## (s18) D. Infectious diseases/ Pandemic
(p18.0) The COVID-19 pandemic has set up a perfect stage for the Metaverse technology to take off. The pandemic has affected the economic and social stability of the nations to a great extent. Longer periods of isolation has even created a society with social anxiety [70]. However, the pandemic has made huge technological advancements in education, healthcare, and entertainment. The wide adoption of online classes, virtual meetings, telemedicine and OTT movie release are all a result of the pandemic [71]. Pandemic surveillance is an important aspect that helps to understand the pattern of the spread of the disease so that appropriate measures can be adopted to alleviate the spread [72]. The transparency and efficiency of the surveillance can be enhanced by building a platform that can integrate data from multiple domains such as transportation, retail and telecommunications. However, such an integration would be difficult to be accomplished in a real world even with the advanced technologies due to the risk of the spread of disease.
## (s19) E. Drug Discovery
(p19.0) Drug discovery is the technique through which potential novel therapeutic entities are identified, using an amalgamation of experimental, computational, clinical and translational models. Machine learning models play a major role here in improving the decision making for applications such as hit discoveries, target identification, hit to lead and lead optimization [75]. Computational growth algorithms are also used in De novo drug design (DNDD) to understand and design new chemical entities that fits in the defined constraint sets [76]. Enhanced experimental results can be obtained if researchers can collaborate in building the required models. However, conducting experiments for discovering new drugs is critical and requires a lot of human effort and expenses.
