# A Review of the Risk Factors for Iron Deficiency Anaemia among Adolescents in Developing Countries

CorpusID: 255592218 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/20c758c848422046b5dbb79149344581b7c52dd0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/20c758c848422046b5dbb79149344581b7c52dd0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s19) Rural Areas.
(p19.0) Two studies reported on rural areas and anaemia [36,38]. Te studies showed that adolescents living in rural areas had an increased risk of anaemia. Regasa and Haidar found that the odds were statistically signifcant.

(p19.1) Two studies reported on rural areas and anaemia [36,38]. Te studies showed that adolescents living in rural areas had an increased risk of anaemia. Regasa and Haidar found that the odds were statistically signifcant.
## (s20) Family Size.
(p20.0) Two studies assessed the relationship between family size and anaemia [36,42]. Te studies indicated that large family size increased the odds of anaemia. Ramzi et al. [42] showed signifcant association, while Shaka and Wondimagegne [36] indicated otherwise.

(p20.1) Two studies assessed the relationship between family size and anaemia [36,42]. Te studies indicated that large family size increased the odds of anaemia. Ramzi et al. [42] showed signifcant association, while Shaka and Wondimagegne [36] indicated otherwise.
## (s55) Rural Areas.
(p55.0) Two studies reported on rural areas and anaemia [36,38]. Te studies showed that adolescents living in rural areas had an increased risk of anaemia. Regasa and Haidar found that the odds were statistically signifcant.

(p55.1) Two studies reported on rural areas and anaemia [36,38]. Te studies showed that adolescents living in rural areas had an increased risk of anaemia. Regasa and Haidar found that the odds were statistically signifcant.
## (s56) Family Size.
(p56.0) Two studies assessed the relationship between family size and anaemia [36,42]. Te studies indicated that large family size increased the odds of anaemia. Ramzi et al. [42] showed signifcant association, while Shaka and Wondimagegne [36] indicated otherwise.

(p56.1) Two studies assessed the relationship between family size and anaemia [36,42]. Te studies indicated that large family size increased the odds of anaemia. Ramzi et al. [42] showed signifcant association, while Shaka and Wondimagegne [36] indicated otherwise.
