# Klinische Studien zu COVID-19 -die ersten zwei Jahre in Deutschland und darüber hinaus nutzten die Plattform COVID-evidence.org einschließlich der Registereinträge von ClinicalTrials.gov und der WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform sowie Publikationen der Living Overview of Evidence Plattform für COVID-19 (L-OVE)

CorpusID: 252546188 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/025345539f2b776685c76c8b8d3e6fca464fdbb0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/025345539f2b776685c76c8b8d3e6fca464fdbb0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) The early days
(p2.0) It did not take long until the first RCTs for COVID-19 have been planned and registered. There were 11 RCTs registered (all Chinese) in the first 30 days after the World Health Organization (WHO) China Country Office was notified of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause on December 31, 2019. Five hundred and sixteen RCTs were planned or registered in the first 100 days, until April 9, 2020 [5]. They aimed to include over 350,000 participants worldwide. The early RCTs were predominantly small (median sample size 144; interquartile range [IQR] 70-334) and had a remarkable focus on some highly dominating treatments combined with a very wide spectrum of intervention types.

(p2.1) Almost all trials explored treatments (89%; 457 of 516), and most where pharmaceutical (91%; 468 of 516). The two most frequently investigated pharmacological classes were antivirals (e.g., lopinavir/ritonavir) and antimalarials (e.g., hydroxychloroquine).
## (s3) After one year
(p3.0) Throughout the first year of the pandemic, the number of trials steadily increased [6]. After the initial dominance of trials conducted in Asia (mostly China), the number of trials registered in the rest of the world increased rapidly as the pandemic spread through March 2020. There were 2,814 registered randomized trials worldwide as of February 16, 2021. Most were still small with only 18% planning to recruit >500 participants and only 3% planning to recruit >5000 participants. A small proportion of 6% of trials linked to registry entries provided published results, allowing to inform decisions promptly. While this is indeed a small proportion -it does represent a remarkable absolute number of 171 trials with results published as of February 16, 2021 [6].
## (s9) Positive examples
(p9.0) However, there are some positive examples of randomized assessments of NPIs that are highlighted here to illustrate the range of creative possibilities and what could have been done.

(p9.1) One example is a pragmatic megatrial that was set-up in the US including more than 35 million people. Prior to Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays, Facebook users were randomly assigned to receive either ads containing a short video on the importance of ''staying safe" by considering not traveling, social distancing, and using a mask when appropriate or no facebook ads. Confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infections were analysed on the zip-code level up to two weeks after the holidays. The results favor the Facebook ads indicating these measures to be an effective pubic health strategy to prevent individuals from SARS-CoV-2 infections [32].
## (s21) The early days
(p21.0) It did not take long until the first RCTs for COVID-19 have been planned and registered. There were 11 RCTs registered (all Chinese) in the first 30 days after the World Health Organization (WHO) China Country Office was notified of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause on December 31, 2019. Five hundred and sixteen RCTs were planned or registered in the first 100 days, until April 9, 2020 [5]. They aimed to include over 350,000 participants worldwide. The early RCTs were predominantly small (median sample size 144; interquartile range [IQR] 70-334) and had a remarkable focus on some highly dominating treatments combined with a very wide spectrum of intervention types.

(p21.1) Almost all trials explored treatments (89%; 457 of 516), and most where pharmaceutical (91%; 468 of 516). The two most frequently investigated pharmacological classes were antivirals (e.g., lopinavir/ritonavir) and antimalarials (e.g., hydroxychloroquine).
## (s22) After one year
(p22.0) Throughout the first year of the pandemic, the number of trials steadily increased [6]. After the initial dominance of trials conducted in Asia (mostly China), the number of trials registered in the rest of the world increased rapidly as the pandemic spread through March 2020. There were 2,814 registered randomized trials worldwide as of February 16, 2021. Most were still small with only 18% planning to recruit >500 participants and only 3% planning to recruit >5000 participants. A small proportion of 6% of trials linked to registry entries provided published results, allowing to inform decisions promptly. While this is indeed a small proportion -it does represent a remarkable absolute number of 171 trials with results published as of February 16, 2021 [6].
## (s28) Positive examples
(p28.0) However, there are some positive examples of randomized assessments of NPIs that are highlighted here to illustrate the range of creative possibilities and what could have been done.

(p28.1) One example is a pragmatic megatrial that was set-up in the US including more than 35 million people. Prior to Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays, Facebook users were randomly assigned to receive either ads containing a short video on the importance of ''staying safe" by considering not traveling, social distancing, and using a mask when appropriate or no facebook ads. Confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infections were analysed on the zip-code level up to two weeks after the holidays. The results favor the Facebook ads indicating these measures to be an effective pubic health strategy to prevent individuals from SARS-CoV-2 infections [32].
## (s40) The early days
(p40.0) It did not take long until the first RCTs for COVID-19 have been planned and registered. There were 11 RCTs registered (all Chinese) in the first 30 days after the World Health Organization (WHO) China Country Office was notified of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause on December 31, 2019. Five hundred and sixteen RCTs were planned or registered in the first 100 days, until April 9, 2020 [5]. They aimed to include over 350,000 participants worldwide. The early RCTs were predominantly small (median sample size 144; interquartile range [IQR] 70-334) and had a remarkable focus on some highly dominating treatments combined with a very wide spectrum of intervention types.

(p40.1) Almost all trials explored treatments (89%; 457 of 516), and most where pharmaceutical (91%; 468 of 516). The two most frequently investigated pharmacological classes were antivirals (e.g., lopinavir/ritonavir) and antimalarials (e.g., hydroxychloroquine).
## (s41) After one year
(p41.0) Throughout the first year of the pandemic, the number of trials steadily increased [6]. After the initial dominance of trials conducted in Asia (mostly China), the number of trials registered in the rest of the world increased rapidly as the pandemic spread through March 2020. There were 2,814 registered randomized trials worldwide as of February 16, 2021. Most were still small with only 18% planning to recruit >500 participants and only 3% planning to recruit >5000 participants. A small proportion of 6% of trials linked to registry entries provided published results, allowing to inform decisions promptly. While this is indeed a small proportion -it does represent a remarkable absolute number of 171 trials with results published as of February 16, 2021 [6].
## (s47) Positive examples
(p47.0) However, there are some positive examples of randomized assessments of NPIs that are highlighted here to illustrate the range of creative possibilities and what could have been done.

(p47.1) One example is a pragmatic megatrial that was set-up in the US including more than 35 million people. Prior to Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays, Facebook users were randomly assigned to receive either ads containing a short video on the importance of ''staying safe" by considering not traveling, social distancing, and using a mask when appropriate or no facebook ads. Confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infections were analysed on the zip-code level up to two weeks after the holidays. The results favor the Facebook ads indicating these measures to be an effective pubic health strategy to prevent individuals from SARS-CoV-2 infections [32].
## (s59) The early days
(p59.0) It did not take long until the first RCTs for COVID-19 have been planned and registered. There were 11 RCTs registered (all Chinese) in the first 30 days after the World Health Organization (WHO) China Country Office was notified of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause on December 31, 2019. Five hundred and sixteen RCTs were planned or registered in the first 100 days, until April 9, 2020 [5]. They aimed to include over 350,000 participants worldwide. The early RCTs were predominantly small (median sample size 144; interquartile range [IQR] 70-334) and had a remarkable focus on some highly dominating treatments combined with a very wide spectrum of intervention types.

(p59.1) Almost all trials explored treatments (89%; 457 of 516), and most where pharmaceutical (91%; 468 of 516). The two most frequently investigated pharmacological classes were antivirals (e.g., lopinavir/ritonavir) and antimalarials (e.g., hydroxychloroquine).
## (s60) After one year
(p60.0) Throughout the first year of the pandemic, the number of trials steadily increased [6]. After the initial dominance of trials conducted in Asia (mostly China), the number of trials registered in the rest of the world increased rapidly as the pandemic spread through March 2020. There were 2,814 registered randomized trials worldwide as of February 16, 2021. Most were still small with only 18% planning to recruit >500 participants and only 3% planning to recruit >5000 participants. A small proportion of 6% of trials linked to registry entries provided published results, allowing to inform decisions promptly. While this is indeed a small proportion -it does represent a remarkable absolute number of 171 trials with results published as of February 16, 2021 [6].
## (s66) Positive examples
(p66.0) However, there are some positive examples of randomized assessments of NPIs that are highlighted here to illustrate the range of creative possibilities and what could have been done.

(p66.1) One example is a pragmatic megatrial that was set-up in the US including more than 35 million people. Prior to Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays, Facebook users were randomly assigned to receive either ads containing a short video on the importance of ''staying safe" by considering not traveling, social distancing, and using a mask when appropriate or no facebook ads. Confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infections were analysed on the zip-code level up to two weeks after the holidays. The results favor the Facebook ads indicating these measures to be an effective pubic health strategy to prevent individuals from SARS-CoV-2 infections [32].
## (s78) The early days
(p78.0) It did not take long until the first RCTs for COVID-19 have been planned and registered. There were 11 RCTs registered (all Chinese) in the first 30 days after the World Health Organization (WHO) China Country Office was notified of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause on December 31, 2019. Five hundred and sixteen RCTs were planned or registered in the first 100 days, until April 9, 2020 [5]. They aimed to include over 350,000 participants worldwide. The early RCTs were predominantly small (median sample size 144; interquartile range [IQR] 70-334) and had a remarkable focus on some highly dominating treatments combined with a very wide spectrum of intervention types.

(p78.1) Almost all trials explored treatments (89%; 457 of 516), and most where pharmaceutical (91%; 468 of 516). The two most frequently investigated pharmacological classes were antivirals (e.g., lopinavir/ritonavir) and antimalarials (e.g., hydroxychloroquine).
## (s79) After one year
(p79.0) Throughout the first year of the pandemic, the number of trials steadily increased [6]. After the initial dominance of trials conducted in Asia (mostly China), the number of trials registered in the rest of the world increased rapidly as the pandemic spread through March 2020. There were 2,814 registered randomized trials worldwide as of February 16, 2021. Most were still small with only 18% planning to recruit >500 participants and only 3% planning to recruit >5000 participants. A small proportion of 6% of trials linked to registry entries provided published results, allowing to inform decisions promptly. While this is indeed a small proportion -it does represent a remarkable absolute number of 171 trials with results published as of February 16, 2021 [6].
## (s85) Positive examples
(p85.0) However, there are some positive examples of randomized assessments of NPIs that are highlighted here to illustrate the range of creative possibilities and what could have been done.

(p85.1) One example is a pragmatic megatrial that was set-up in the US including more than 35 million people. Prior to Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays, Facebook users were randomly assigned to receive either ads containing a short video on the importance of ''staying safe" by considering not traveling, social distancing, and using a mask when appropriate or no facebook ads. Confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infections were analysed on the zip-code level up to two weeks after the holidays. The results favor the Facebook ads indicating these measures to be an effective pubic health strategy to prevent individuals from SARS-CoV-2 infections [32].
