# Overview of the Role of Spatial Factors in Indoor SARS-CoV-2

CorpusID: 252143778 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1c0a5402491b7f50b2b63f0e01ca24e7637b3997](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1c0a5402491b7f50b2b63f0e01ca24e7637b3997)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s8) Exposure and Infection
(p8.0) There are generally four ways of virus exposure as follows: (1) respiratory fluid exchange between facial membrane, (2) RDs deposition by direct splash on exposed facial membrane, (3) touching facial membrane with hands contaminated with RDs or virusbearing surfaces, and (4) inhalation of fine RDs and droplet nuclei.

(p8.1) The virus can cause infections in different organs of the body, but the relationship between the location of virus deposition and the mechanism of infection remains unclear. In the first three exposures, the viral particles can trigger an infection once they meet the facial membrane. For the fourth, inhaled particles can deposit on the surface of the respiratory tract and cause infection. The nose is reportedly more sensitive to SARS-CoV-2 than the mouth and eyes [54]. Larger particles >10 µm generally settle in the nasopharynx and particles smaller than 5µm can be directly inhaled into the alveoli [55]. The infective dose, i.e., the number of particles that lead to an infection, is highly dependent on virus biological data, which is generally difficult to obtain early in an epidemic. Karimzadeh et al. [56] estimated that the minimum infective dose of COVID-19 in humans is higher than 100 particles. Additional studies are needed to complement epidemiological data that provide insights into the dose-response relationship between received doses and disease outcomes for different exposures.
## (s19) . (S O -E A -V S ) Opening Design Determines Airflow Field Due to Natural Ventilation
(p19.0) Spatial openings generally refer to windows and doors, both of which are related to indoor-airflow organization caused by natural ventilation. The position of the window openings in the horizontal and vertical directions is the main factor affecting the airflow pattern, which is usually studied through field measurements and numerical simulations. Zhou et al. [91] investigated the influence of the position of the window opening on the effective ventilation of the room and found that ventilation rates reached the minimum when the window opening was located at the centre of the windward face. Vertically, the further the window is from the centre of the windward side, the greater the ventilation [91].
