# Perspectives in the Application of High, Medium, and Low Molecular Weight Oat β-D-Glucans in Dietary Nutrition and Food Technology-A Short Overview

CorpusID: 257450006 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b3e475eb1c5c2a105a2696a8a49f20c32961e47a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b3e475eb1c5c2a105a2696a8a49f20c32961e47a)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s6) Influence on Gastrointestinal Diseases and Inflammation
(p6.0) Many studies in the last few decades searched for the possible nutraceutical applications of LMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans, most notably as co-treatments for gastrointestinal diseases such as Crohn's disease, colitis, enteritis, and gastritis, associated with chronic inflammation.

(p6.1) Zyła et al. [108] modeled Crohn's disease in rats, i.e., 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenosulfonic acid (TNBSA)-induced colitis, and found that the LMW fraction (M w < 100 kDa) of oat β-D-glucans was more beneficial for animal weight gain and recovery because the macromolecules of this fraction are more accessible to the immune cells, inducing immunomodulation. Their effectiveness in stimulating Dectin-1 receptors expressed on the surface of dendritic cells and antigen-presenting cells is higher due to an increased proportion of 1,3-linkages. By contrast, in the same study, HMW β-D-glucan was more effective in reducing the inflammatory infiltration of mucosal and submucosal lymphocytes because of the ability of this fraction to form a protective layer on the mucosal surface against the irritating agent. When added to food, both LMW and HMW fractions of oat β-D-glucan significantly increased the percent of B cells compared to control animals with untreated colitis. The same authors [109] performed a similar experiment on Sprague Dawley rats with TNBSA-induced colitis. The experimental and control animals obtained a diet containing 1% LMW or HMW oat β-D-glucan; the control group's diet was free of this polysaccharide. In animals fed with LMW β-D-glucans, the gene expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, TNF-α) reduced, and their concentration in the colon was lower compared to control. The authors pointed out that this suppression activity could have a positive therapeutic effect in patients with Crohn's disease who also have mutations in the gene NOD2/CARD15 complex, an intracellular receptor that activates pro-inflammatory cytokine synthesis. When this gene is mutated, the reduction of inflammation cannot be regulated by anti-inflammatory cytokines, thus leading to persistent inflammation in the gut. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucan improved the overall recovery of tissue at the histological level. According to the authors, a diet containing oat β-D-glucan is neutral for the normal intestine.

(p6.2) Kopiasz et al. [110] studied the effect of supplementation with food containing 1% (w/w) of either HMW or LMW oat β-D-glucan on hematological and biochemical parameters in mice with early stages of TNBSA-induced colitis. Eighteen groups of animals obtained different diets. The experimental group with colitis was fed with TNBSA and its subgroups contained animals fed additionally with HMW, LMW, or without oat β-Dglucans for 3, 7, and 21 days. Similar subgroups were in the healthy control group, but 0.9% NaCl was given instead of TNBSA. The authors mentioned that during the first five days of observation, the control group consumed significantly more food than the group induced to colitis. During the same period, the mice with colitis fed with LMW β-D-glucan consumed more food than the colitis mice without β-D-glucan in their diet. The analysis of alanine aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.2), aspartate aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.1), and alkaline phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.1) activities showed no significant difference in all groups, thus reporting the low hepatotoxicity of 1% β-D-glucans in food. Mice in both control and experimental groups that consumed β-D-glucans showed a higher percentage of T cells in the lymphocyte population, most evident after three days of supplemented diet intake, especially in the colitis group. After three days of feeding, control mice fed with LMW β-D-glucans showed the highest percentage of B cells. Platelet count was higher in the untreated colitis group, which did not obtain β-D-glucans, but did not differ among the groups at feeding days 7 and 21. Compared to the control, the percentage of NK cells was significantly higher in mice with colitis receiving β-D-glucans in the diet, regardless of their molecular weight. In the control group, an increase in NK cells was induced only by the HMW β-D-glucan. These authors [111] carried out a similar experiment with TNBSA on rats and measured the expression levels of protein-1 light chain 3, mammalian isoform B (LC3B), and Caspase-3 (the autophagy markers) and TLR and Dectin-1 receptors in colonocytes. Their results showed that colitis decreased the expression of TLR 4 and Dectin-1, but supplementation with β-D-glucans increased the expression of Dectin-1 and TLR 5. The intake of HMW and LMW oat β-D-glucans positively influenced the state of rats with colitis. The consumption of feed with HMW and LMW β-D-glucans by colitis mice committed to a higher expression of microtubule-associated LC3B, compared to other diets and after 21 days of the experiment this was on a similar level to the control group with a usual diet without β-D-glucans. Noteworthily, LC3B is a protein that plays one of the central roles in autophagy, and thus oat β-D-glucans can enhance this process in patients with Crohn's disease. Both fractions of β-D-glucans significantly reduced the expression of Caspase-3 in the experimental group compared to colitis mice without β-D-glucans in the diet and therefore protected the intestinal barrier via reducing the extent of apoptosis. Kopiasz et al. [112] showed that dietary oat β-D-glucans, especially those of HMW, can improve colitis by modulating the expression of chemokines, their receptors, and some Crohn's disease-associated proteins.
## (s28) Influence on Gastrointestinal Diseases and Inflammation
(p28.0) Many studies in the last few decades searched for the possible nutraceutical applications of LMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans, most notably as co-treatments for gastrointestinal diseases such as Crohn's disease, colitis, enteritis, and gastritis, associated with chronic inflammation.

(p28.1) Zyła et al. [108] modeled Crohn's disease in rats, i.e., 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenosulfonic acid (TNBSA)-induced colitis, and found that the LMW fraction (M w < 100 kDa) of oat β-D-glucans was more beneficial for animal weight gain and recovery because the macromolecules of this fraction are more accessible to the immune cells, inducing immunomodulation. Their effectiveness in stimulating Dectin-1 receptors expressed on the surface of dendritic cells and antigen-presenting cells is higher due to an increased proportion of 1,3-linkages. By contrast, in the same study, HMW β-D-glucan was more effective in reducing the inflammatory infiltration of mucosal and submucosal lymphocytes because of the ability of this fraction to form a protective layer on the mucosal surface against the irritating agent. When added to food, both LMW and HMW fractions of oat β-D-glucan significantly increased the percent of B cells compared to control animals with untreated colitis. The same authors [109] performed a similar experiment on Sprague Dawley rats with TNBSA-induced colitis. The experimental and control animals obtained a diet containing 1% LMW or HMW oat β-D-glucan; the control group's diet was free of this polysaccharide. In animals fed with LMW β-D-glucans, the gene expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, TNF-α) reduced, and their concentration in the colon was lower compared to control. The authors pointed out that this suppression activity could have a positive therapeutic effect in patients with Crohn's disease who also have mutations in the gene NOD2/CARD15 complex, an intracellular receptor that activates pro-inflammatory cytokine synthesis. When this gene is mutated, the reduction of inflammation cannot be regulated by anti-inflammatory cytokines, thus leading to persistent inflammation in the gut. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucan improved the overall recovery of tissue at the histological level. According to the authors, a diet containing oat β-D-glucan is neutral for the normal intestine.

(p28.2) Kopiasz et al. [110] studied the effect of supplementation with food containing 1% (w/w) of either HMW or LMW oat β-D-glucan on hematological and biochemical parameters in mice with early stages of TNBSA-induced colitis. Eighteen groups of animals obtained different diets. The experimental group with colitis was fed with TNBSA and its subgroups contained animals fed additionally with HMW, LMW, or without oat β-Dglucans for 3, 7, and 21 days. Similar subgroups were in the healthy control group, but 0.9% NaCl was given instead of TNBSA. The authors mentioned that during the first five days of observation, the control group consumed significantly more food than the group induced to colitis. During the same period, the mice with colitis fed with LMW β-D-glucan consumed more food than the colitis mice without β-D-glucan in their diet. The analysis of alanine aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.2), aspartate aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.1), and alkaline phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.1) activities showed no significant difference in all groups, thus reporting the low hepatotoxicity of 1% β-D-glucans in food. Mice in both control and experimental groups that consumed β-D-glucans showed a higher percentage of T cells in the lymphocyte population, most evident after three days of supplemented diet intake, especially in the colitis group. After three days of feeding, control mice fed with LMW β-D-glucans showed the highest percentage of B cells. Platelet count was higher in the untreated colitis group, which did not obtain β-D-glucans, but did not differ among the groups at feeding days 7 and 21. Compared to the control, the percentage of NK cells was significantly higher in mice with colitis receiving β-D-glucans in the diet, regardless of their molecular weight. In the control group, an increase in NK cells was induced only by the HMW β-D-glucan. These authors [111] carried out a similar experiment with TNBSA on rats and measured the expression levels of protein-1 light chain 3, mammalian isoform B (LC3B), and Caspase-3 (the autophagy markers) and TLR and Dectin-1 receptors in colonocytes. Their results showed that colitis decreased the expression of TLR 4 and Dectin-1, but supplementation with β-D-glucans increased the expression of Dectin-1 and TLR 5. The intake of HMW and LMW oat β-D-glucans positively influenced the state of rats with colitis. The consumption of feed with HMW and LMW β-D-glucans by colitis mice committed to a higher expression of microtubule-associated LC3B, compared to other diets and after 21 days of the experiment this was on a similar level to the control group with a usual diet without β-D-glucans. Noteworthily, LC3B is a protein that plays one of the central roles in autophagy, and thus oat β-D-glucans can enhance this process in patients with Crohn's disease. Both fractions of β-D-glucans significantly reduced the expression of Caspase-3 in the experimental group compared to colitis mice without β-D-glucans in the diet and therefore protected the intestinal barrier via reducing the extent of apoptosis. Kopiasz et al. [112] showed that dietary oat β-D-glucans, especially those of HMW, can improve colitis by modulating the expression of chemokines, their receptors, and some Crohn's disease-associated proteins.
