# molecules Biomaterials Based on Chitosan and Its Derivatives and Their Potential in Tissue Engineering and Other Biomedical Applications-A Review

CorpusID: 255246438 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72fcca29261923aac74454e865e0e05eab047b88](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72fcca29261923aac74454e865e0e05eab047b88)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering, Medicine

## (s3) Chitosan and Its Derivatives in Medicine
(p3.0) Due to its properties, chitosan and its derivatives can be used in the production of dressing materials, in the manufacture of drugs as a controlled-release active substance carrier, or in tissue engineering involving soft tissues, nerves, cartilage, bones, or arteries. Studies on the use of chitosan are summarized in Table 1 and studies on its derivatives are in Table 2.    Good drug delivery, non-cytotoxic to the cornea, good degradability [103] The team of Fangsong Zhang et al. [30] used two chemical agents, glutaraldehyde, genipin, and a physical agent, ultraviolet light, to crosslink nerve extracellular matrix/chitosan scaffolds. Scaffolds cross-linked with genipin were characterized by higher porosity and regular structure in contrast to scaffolds cross-linked with glutaraldehyde and UV. The degree of crosslinking for genipin-crosslinked and glutaraldehyde-crosslinked scaffolds were similar to each other. Genipin-crosslinked scaffolds had the lowest degree of cytotoxicity and the highest histocompatibility, with good mechanical properties.

(p3.1) Another team, Jie Xu et al. [31], prepared a scaffold based on decellularized extracellular matrix, gelatin, and chitosan cross-linked EDC/NHS. The resulting scaffolds were characterized by a high modulus of elasticity and biodegradability. The obtained scaffolds are not cytotoxic and provided a good substrate for cell proliferation. The scaffolds were also characterized by antibacterial properties (E. Coli, S. Aureus). The scaffolds obtained could be used in skin tissue engineering.

(p3.2) A scaffold for use in muscle tissue engineering is a project by the team of Weiguang Zhao et al. [32]. They used genipin as a crosslinking agent and electrospun cellulose acetate nanofibers that were incorporated into a chitosan/fibroin silk cryogel scaffold. The resulting scaffolds were characterized by larger pores and roughness than the cryogel scaffold itself. They are also a good substrate for smooth muscle cell proliferation, which showed a higher potential for the expression of genes related to muscle contraction. They also exhibit good mechanical properties.

(p3.3) Scaffold for use in cartilage tissue engineering is a study by Christian E. G. Garcia et al. [33]. The properties of chitosan in two forms were compared: thin film and electrospinning scaffold chitosan/poly (ethylene oxide) (PEO). PEO of two different molecular weights was used and different weight ratios of Cs/PEO were applied. Some of the materials obtained were neutralized in order to compare the effect of neutralization on the properties of the scaffolds. The scaffolds after neutralization were characterized by better adhesion of chondrocyte cells and better proliferation; the worst properties were characterized by the chitosan film.

(p3.4) Nihui Zhang and her team [65] used genipin solutions with different concentrations (2.5%, 5%, 10%, and 15%) to produce carboxymethyl chitosan hydrogels. Analysis of HSFs cell proliferation and adhesion showed that the best cell adhesion and proliferation were obtained for the hydrogel with the highest amount of genipin, and the worst for the hydrogel with the lowest proportion of genipin. The best properties for promoting wound healing and reducing the appearance of scars in vivo tests were obtained for the hydrogel carboxymethyl chitosan/genipin 5% (v/v). This was confirmed by an in vivo test using female rats. With the additional contribution of aloe vera gel, wound healing results improved even further. In conclusion, genipin-crosslinked chitosan hydrogels are promising candidates for use as a dressing to accelerate wound healing.

(p3.5) Yalei Liu et al. [66] used polyvinyl alcohol, carboxymethyl chitosan, silver nanoparticles, and borax as a crosslinking agent to produce a hydrogel. The resulting hydrogel, due to its dual crosslinking (hydrogen bonds and borate ester bonds), has self-healing properties and is characterized by good mechanical properties. It also exhibits antibacterial properties, as confirmed by a test with E.coli and S. aureus bacteria. A cytotoxicity test was also performed using L929 cells, which showed that the resulting scaffolds were non-toxic.

(p3.6) Guozhu Chang et al. [67] produced a carboxymethyl chitosan/carboxymethyl cellulose hydrogel using heparin and glutaraldehyde as a crosslinking agent. This allowed the fabrication of a self-healing hydrogel. It is biocompatible with cells and its ability to release drugs has also been studied. An in vivo study was also performed on rats with diabetes, where its effect on accelerating open wound healing was confirmed. It can be concluded that the resulting hydrogel has the potential to be used as a material to accelerate diabetic wound healing.

(p3.7) To form antimicrobial scaffolds, A. Mishra's team [68] used carboxymethyl chitosan, zinc, and genipin. Carboxymethyl chitosan/genipin/Zn scaffolds were obtained. Wet compression analysis showed that the carboxymethyl chitosan/genipin/Zn scaffold was more robust than the non-cross-linked scaffold. Degradation testing was carried out under enzymatic and non-enzymatic conditions. The resulting scaffold also showed good stability. An adhesion and proliferation test was performed using dental pulp stem cells; in addition, a biocompatibility test against red blood cells was performed, which confirmed its good biological properties. An antibacterial test was also performed (Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 25619, S. aureus ATCC 9144, S. aureus ATCC 25923, and Staphylococcus epidermidis ATCC 155). No biofilm formed on the surface of the scaffold carboxymethyl chitosan/genipin/Zn. In conclusion, scaffold carboxymethyl chitosan/genipin/Zn can find application in dental tissue engineering due to its antibacterial properties.

(p3.8) Summarizing the data overview on the use of chitosan and its derivatives in tissue engineering (Figure 3a,b), it can be written that the most research on chitosan-based materials concerned bone tissue engineering and the least concerned dental tissue engineering. For materials based on chitosan derivatives, the greatest interest in use was in skin tissue engineering and the least in tissue engineering applications.

(p3.9) Summarizing the data overview on the use of chitosan and its derivatives in tissue engineering (Figure 3a,b), it can be written that the most research on chitosan-based materials concerned bone tissue engineering and the least concerned dental tissue engineering. For materials based on chitosan derivatives, the greatest interest in use was in skin tissue engineering and the least in tissue engineering applications.

(p3.10) (a) (b) 
