# Exposure to Agrochemicals and Cardiovascular Disease: A Review

CorpusID: 260555102 - [None](None)

Fields: 

## (s4) Results
(p4.0) In study by Weichenthal et al. [4] statistical analysis hazard ratios (HR) and their 96% Confidence interval (CI) were estimated using Cox proportional hazard model. Three separate models (minimal, moderate and fully adjusted) were used to evaluate the relationship between ambient PM 2.5 and non-accidental and cardiovascular mortality. Potential confounding factors included in the abovementioned models were added at different models. Simple models were examined without any confounding factors first-minimal model. This was followed by moderately models including potential important behavioural/personal factors, and finally adjusted models included socioeconomic and educational background. Sensitivity analyses resulted in stronger relationship between ambient PM 2.5 concentration and cardiovascular mortality among men. There were significant positive association between PM 2.5 and cardiovascular mortality in all three models for men as compared with women (Adjusted model-HR = 1.66; 95% CI: 1.04, 3.36; minimal model-HR = 1.32; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.76 and moderately model-HR = 1.41; 95% CI: 1.00, 2.02) ( Table 2).

(p4.1) Each agrochemical concentration was log-transformed to improve the level of normality in a study conducted in United State. The adjusted concentration was used to calculate the association. For each agrochemical both lipid standardized and wet-weight concentration age, sex, race, education, family income, smoking, alcohol use, diabetes, serum cotinine and BMI were adjusted as potential confounders. Additional, logistic regression analyses were conducted to estimate the odd ratio of the agrochemicals in peripheral arterial disease (PAD) against subjects without PAD. Subjects with obesity added as confounder of PAD had significant increased mean lipids standardization value of p,p'-DDE (OR = 1.47; 95% CI: 1.08, 1.99) ( Table 2). Most wet-weight concentration of agrochemicals also showed significant association that were similar to those of the lipid standardized concentration.  

(p4.2) In study by Weichenthal et al. [4] statistical analysis hazard ratios (HR) and their 96% Confidence interval (CI) were estimated using Cox proportional hazard model. Three separate models (minimal, moderate and fully adjusted) were used to evaluate the relationship between ambient PM 2.5 and non-accidental and cardiovascular mortality. Potential confounding factors included in the abovementioned models were added at different models. Simple models were examined without any confounding factors first-minimal model. This was followed by moderately models including potential important behavioural/personal factors, and finally adjusted models included socioeconomic and educational background. Sensitivity analyses resulted in stronger relationship between ambient PM 2.5 concentration and cardiovascular mortality among men. There were significant positive association between PM 2.5 and cardiovascular mortality in all three models for men as compared with women (Adjusted model-HR = 1.66; 95% CI: 1.04, 3.36; minimal model-HR = 1.32; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.76 and moderately model-HR = 1.41; 95% CI: 1.00, 2.02) ( Table 2).

(p4.3) Each agrochemical concentration was log-transformed to improve the level of normality in a study conducted in United State. The adjusted concentration was used to calculate the association. For each agrochemical both lipid standardized and wet-weight concentration age, sex, race, education, family income, smoking, alcohol use, diabetes, serum cotinine and BMI were adjusted as potential confounders. Additional, logistic regression analyses were conducted to estimate the odd ratio of the agrochemicals in peripheral arterial disease (PAD) against subjects without PAD. Subjects with obesity added as confounder of PAD had significant increased mean lipids standardization value of p,p'-DDE (OR = 1.47; 95% CI: 1.08, 1.99) ( Table 2). Most wet-weight concentration of agrochemicals also showed significant association that were similar to those of the lipid standardized concentration.  
## (s6) Epidemiological Studies
(p6.0) A study that was conducted in Naivash which is situated 80 km North West of the Kenyan rift valley showed that most of the farmworker complain of health issues related to agrochemical. Most farms were green house, floriculture and horticulture with an extensive usage of wide variety of agrochemicals throughout the year to control the development of plants and weeds [6]. The large proportions of farmworkers were predominant spraying agrochemicals most of the time. Also, farmworkers that perform removal of weeds, planting and harvesting reported the highest proportion of symptoms potentially related to pesticide exposure over a period of time. The total number of 247 (34.5%) farmworkers showed cardiovascular symptoms (palpitation, chest pain and leg swelling) [6] (Table 2). There was an indication that a higher proportion of flower farm labours that continuously using the agrochemicals exhibited high incident of cardiovascular disease during their lifetime. These findings had been linked with handling and usage of agrochemical over time.
## (s19) Results
(p19.0) In study by Weichenthal et al. [4] statistical analysis hazard ratios (HR) and their 96% Confidence interval (CI) were estimated using Cox proportional hazard model. Three separate models (minimal, moderate and fully adjusted) were used to evaluate the relationship between ambient PM 2.5 and non-accidental and cardiovascular mortality. Potential confounding factors included in the abovementioned models were added at different models. Simple models were examined without any confounding factors first-minimal model. This was followed by moderately models including potential important behavioural/personal factors, and finally adjusted models included socioeconomic and educational background. Sensitivity analyses resulted in stronger relationship between ambient PM 2.5 concentration and cardiovascular mortality among men. There were significant positive association between PM 2.5 and cardiovascular mortality in all three models for men as compared with women (Adjusted model-HR = 1.66; 95% CI: 1.04, 3.36; minimal model-HR = 1.32; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.76 and moderately model-HR = 1.41; 95% CI: 1.00, 2.02) ( Table 2).

(p19.1) Each agrochemical concentration was log-transformed to improve the level of normality in a study conducted in United State. The adjusted concentration was used to calculate the association. For each agrochemical both lipid standardized and wet-weight concentration age, sex, race, education, family income, smoking, alcohol use, diabetes, serum cotinine and BMI were adjusted as potential confounders. Additional, logistic regression analyses were conducted to estimate the odd ratio of the agrochemicals in peripheral arterial disease (PAD) against subjects without PAD. Subjects with obesity added as confounder of PAD had significant increased mean lipids standardization value of p,p'-DDE (OR = 1.47; 95% CI: 1.08, 1.99) ( Table 2). Most wet-weight concentration of agrochemicals also showed significant association that were similar to those of the lipid standardized concentration.  

(p19.2) In study by Weichenthal et al. [4] statistical analysis hazard ratios (HR) and their 96% Confidence interval (CI) were estimated using Cox proportional hazard model. Three separate models (minimal, moderate and fully adjusted) were used to evaluate the relationship between ambient PM 2.5 and non-accidental and cardiovascular mortality. Potential confounding factors included in the abovementioned models were added at different models. Simple models were examined without any confounding factors first-minimal model. This was followed by moderately models including potential important behavioural/personal factors, and finally adjusted models included socioeconomic and educational background. Sensitivity analyses resulted in stronger relationship between ambient PM 2.5 concentration and cardiovascular mortality among men. There were significant positive association between PM 2.5 and cardiovascular mortality in all three models for men as compared with women (Adjusted model-HR = 1.66; 95% CI: 1.04, 3.36; minimal model-HR = 1.32; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.76 and moderately model-HR = 1.41; 95% CI: 1.00, 2.02) ( Table 2).

(p19.3) Each agrochemical concentration was log-transformed to improve the level of normality in a study conducted in United State. The adjusted concentration was used to calculate the association. For each agrochemical both lipid standardized and wet-weight concentration age, sex, race, education, family income, smoking, alcohol use, diabetes, serum cotinine and BMI were adjusted as potential confounders. Additional, logistic regression analyses were conducted to estimate the odd ratio of the agrochemicals in peripheral arterial disease (PAD) against subjects without PAD. Subjects with obesity added as confounder of PAD had significant increased mean lipids standardization value of p,p'-DDE (OR = 1.47; 95% CI: 1.08, 1.99) ( Table 2). Most wet-weight concentration of agrochemicals also showed significant association that were similar to those of the lipid standardized concentration.  
## (s21) Epidemiological Studies
(p21.0) A study that was conducted in Naivash which is situated 80 km North West of the Kenyan rift valley showed that most of the farmworker complain of health issues related to agrochemical. Most farms were green house, floriculture and horticulture with an extensive usage of wide variety of agrochemicals throughout the year to control the development of plants and weeds [6]. The large proportions of farmworkers were predominant spraying agrochemicals most of the time. Also, farmworkers that perform removal of weeds, planting and harvesting reported the highest proportion of symptoms potentially related to pesticide exposure over a period of time. The total number of 247 (34.5%) farmworkers showed cardiovascular symptoms (palpitation, chest pain and leg swelling) [6] (Table 2). There was an indication that a higher proportion of flower farm labours that continuously using the agrochemicals exhibited high incident of cardiovascular disease during their lifetime. These findings had been linked with handling and usage of agrochemical over time.
