# OVERVIEW ON THE THEORY OF DOUBLE FLAG VARIETIES FOR SYMMETRIC PAIRS

CorpusID: 263310810 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/85a9d149a5f1360e4d706fc433eb245242b59c29](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/85a9d149a5f1360e4d706fc433eb245242b59c29)

Fields: Mathematics

## (s4) Finiteness criterions
(p4.0) We will apply the theory explained in § 2.2 to the double flag varieties of symmetric pairs. For this purpose, it is important to know if there are finitely many orbits on a double flag variety. Thus we say, a double flag variety X = K/Q × G/P is of finite type if there are only finitely many K-orbits on X. Although the classification of the double flag varieties of finite type is still largely open, there are several different classifications of such varieties.

(p4.1) Roughly speaking, there are three major methods to classify the K-orbits on X. Let us explain them briefly.

(p4.2) (1) Since X/K ≃ P \G/Q, the double coset decomposition by (P, Q) will give the classification. This is the strategy used in [HNOO13], but explicit decomposition is often very subtle. In [HNOO13], the decomposition is reduced to that of unipotent subgroups, and by linearization, it further reduced to the multiplicity free representations if one of P or Q is a Borel subgroup.
## (s8) Orbits in triple flag varieties. Let us briefly introduce the classification after
(p8.0) Magyar-Weyman-Zelevinsky [MWZ99,MWZ00] in the case of type A.

(p8.1) Let a = (a 1 , . . . , a ℓa ) be a composition of n. We allow zero for several components. For this a, we define a flag variety

(p8.2) is a composition of n. Define a multiple flag variety X = Fℓ a 1 × Fℓ a 2 × · · · × Fℓ a N = N j=1 Fℓ a j . For X , consider a star shaped quiver Q. The underlying graph of Q is a tree, which has N-branches of length ℓ 1 , ℓ 2 , . . . , ℓ N with a unique root. The orientation is given from the end vertex of each branch toward the root vertex. We give an example of 3-branched quiver below. Here, each branch represents flags associated to the compositions a, b, c, of length p, q and r respectively.

(p8.3) We can associate a point in X

(p8.4) Fℓ a j = X with a representation of Q. Namely, in the j-th branch of Q, we associate the flag

(p8.5) k+1 is the inclusion map. In this way points in X are embedded into the representation space Rep Q of the quiver. To make use of this scheme ultimately, we consider a full subcategory of Rep Q consisting of those objects corresponding to N-tuples of flags of length ℓ 1 , ℓ 2 , . . . , ℓ N . Let M F (a 1 , . . . , a N ) be the set of objects in Rep Q which are isomorphic to representations corresponding to the multiple flags in X = N j=1 Fℓ a j . Then sum up all of these to get a full subcategory

(p8.6) where the union is taken over tuples of compositions of n (of nonnegative integers including zero) with prescribed lengths, and n moves over all nonnegative integers. This subcategory is clearly additive and closed under the decomposition. To state it more precisely, let π ∈ M F and decompose it into indecomposable representations in Rep Q:

(p8.7) Because the category Rep Q is equivalent to a category of modules of the path algebra of Q, the Krull-Schmidt theorem applies. Thus a decomposition is always possible and it is indeed unique. It is easy to see the direct summands π k 's are belonging to M F again. So the decomposition is indeed in the category M F . By Kac's theorem, the dimension vector d k = dim π k is a positive root of the Kac-Moody algebra g(A). Moreover if d k is real, i.e. (d k |d k ) = 1, then π k is the unique indecomposable object (up to isomorphism) with the dimension vector d k . If d k is imaginary, i.e., (d k |d k ) ≤ 0, there are infinitely many non-isomorphic classes of indecomposable objects with dimension vector d k .

(p8.8) Let X = Fℓ a 1 × Fℓ a 2 × · · · × Fℓ a N be a multiple flag variety. We identify a multiple flag x ∈ X with a representation π ∈ Rep Q. Then d = dim π does not depend on the choice of x ∈ X . The decomposition of π into indecomposables π = k π k induces a decomposition of d = k dim π k .

(p8.9) Let Λ = Λ ℓ 1 ,ℓ 2 ,...,ℓ N = {dim σ | σ ∈ M F }. Then the above considerations read as

(p8.10) Theorem 7.4. Let d be the dimension vector of any π ∈ M F corresponding to an Ntuple of flags x ∈ X = N j=1 Fℓ a j . It is independent of the choice of x, but only depending on (a j ) N j=1 .

(p8.11) (1) The multiple flag variety X is of finite type if and only if the following condition (FT) holds.

(p8.12) (2) If it is of finite type, N must be less than or equal to 3 (at most a triple flag variety). Moreover, GL(V )-orbits in X are in bijection with decomposition d = k d k where d k ∈ Λ and (d k |d k ) = 1.
## (s11) Orbits in the double flag variety of type AIII
(p11.0) In this section, we show a concrete example of classification of orbits in a double flag variety by using quiver representations. Thus we focus on the category of quiver representations J (a, b, c) and the double flag variety X((a ′ , b ′ ); c) of type AIII (cf. [FN20,FN23]). We summarize the notation which will be used below:

(p11.1) • n = p + q, r ≤ n are positive integers, and we set a = (1 p , q), b = (1 q , p), c = (r, n − r);

(p11.2) bases (e 1 , . . . , e n ) = (e + 1 , . . . , e + p , e − 1 , . . . , e − q );

(p11.3) are subgroups of upper-triangular matrices corresponding to a ′ = (1 p ) and b ′ = (1 q ) respectively;

(p11.4) 9.1. Category of joint representations. We consider the quiver Q = T 2,p+1,q+1 indicated below, which is also denoted as S(p + 1, q + 1) in [MWZ99].

(p11.5) We denote by J the full subcategory of quiver representations Rep Q consisting of the following representations

(p11.6) where all maps are injective and Im α ⊕ Im β = D. Then J (a, b, c) is the subset of such representations satisfying dim C = r, dim D n = n, dim L i = i, dim M j = j for all i, j, so that the points in the double flag variety X = X((a ′ , b ′ ); c) correspond to the objects in J (a, b, c), for which D = V , L p = V + , and M q = V − hold.

(p11.7) In order to classify the K-orbits of X by applying Lemma 8.1, we describe the category J in more detail. From [Hom21], we can describe the indecomposable objects which arise in the decomposition of elements in J . For i ∈ {1, . . . , p}, we define  Figure 1 on page 35. For each one we include (in parentheses) a graphical representation, which will be explained in § 9.2 below.

(p11.8) Recall that if F , G are objects in J , we have denoted by Hom(F , G) the complex vector space of morphisms of quiver representations, and set F , G = dim Hom(F , G).

(p11.9) Lemma 9.1. Let F ∈ J (a, b, c) be a quiver representation corresponding to the point

(p11.10) . For all (i, j) ∈ {1, . . . , p} × {1, . . . , q}, we have
