# Predicting risk and outcomes for frail older adults: an umbrella review of frailty screening tools Methodological quality

CorpusID: 32235281 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f666b049c235639cb6c44cad030820cc4a0a58e9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f666b049c235639cb6c44cad030820cc4a0a58e9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s15) Methodological quality
(p15.0) Two independent reviewers assessed methodological quality of 10 reviews. The authors of eight of them were contacted to obtain more details in relation to missing or unclear data. Three authors replied. The answer obtained from one of the authors did not satisfy the mandatory criteria for inclusion in this umbrella review. Besides this review, four other reviews were excluded. Appendix II lists the reviews that were excluded based on critical appraisal and the reasons for the exclusion. There was general agreement among the reviewers to include the five reviews. All included reviews stated clearly and explicitly the review question (Q1), performed the search process in adequate sources of studies (Q4), used appropriate criteria for appraising studies (Q5), delivered recommendations for policy and/or practice that were supported by the reported data (Q10) and indicated appropriate specific directives for new research (Q11). In one review, 37 the inclusion criteria were not sufficiently detailed to decide whether they were appropriate or not for the review question, being evaluated as unclear (Q2). One unclear answer was also obtained in relation to the question addressing the issue of appropriateness of search strategy (Q3). 36 One review 36 provided insufficient information in relation to the critical appraisal process, and unclear whether this process was conducted by two or more independent reviewers or not (Q6). The lack of sufficient information was also observed with respect to the data extraction process in three reviews 36,37,39 that did not specify their method for minimizing errors in data extraction (Q7). One review 36 provided unclear information on the reasons why the method to combine the studies was chosen (Q8). None of the included reviews evaluated likelihood of publication bias (Q9). Table 1 shows the results of the methodological quality assessment of included reviews.
## (s36) SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
(p36.0) years for chair stands. Predictive ability of 3608 turn, bending over, foot taps and hand signature was analyzed at 12 months after evaluation. 39 Regarding muscle strength or hand grip strength, the reported findings were inconsistent. 39 Three studies with follow-up periods of three, four and eight years concluded that grip strength was not a significant predictor of disability in activities of daily living. In seven studies with follow-up periods from three to nine years, grip strength was found to be associated with higher risk of developing disability in activities of daily living. Exhaustion was analyzed in a single study, with follow-up of eight years, which was the only frailty indicator that was shown not to be a significant predictor of disability in activities on daily living. 39 Findings related to predictive ability of frailty indicators are summarized in Table 11.
