# A Survey on Graph Drawing Beyond Planarity

CorpusID: 4947258 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2900ef06167eb5684020db9ccfcb9fe42a07a919](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2900ef06167eb5684020db9ccfcb9fe42a07a919)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s9) Relationships Between Graph Families
(p9.0) Some families of beyond-planar graphs have similar edge densities or exhibit similar structural and topological properties. In these cases it is natural to ask whether they have some inclusion relationships. In what follows, we survey the main results concerning this research direction.

(p9.1) RAC graphs and 1-planar graphs. One of the most studied problems on the subject is the relationship between RAC graphs and 1-planar graphs. Recall that straight-line RAC drawings have at most 4n − 10 edges, while topological (resp. geometric) 1-planar graphs have at most 4n − 8 edges (resp. 4n − 9). This immediately implies that optimal 1-planar graphs are not straight-line RAC. Eades and Liotta proved in fact that these two families are in general incomparable, and provide a series of interesting results about their relationships [119]. They exhibit an infinite subfamily of straight-line RAC graphs with n ≥ 85 vertices that are not 1-planar (see, e.g., Fig. 6(a)), and they show that there exist infinitely many 1planar graphs with 4n − 10 edges that are not straight-line RAC (see, e.g., Fig. 6(b)). On the positive side, every optimal straight-line RAC graph is 1-planar (see, e.g., Fig. 4(d)).

(p9.2) Brandenburg et al. study the RAC drawability of the 1-planar graphs with independent pairs of crossing edges (the IC-planar graphs) [60]. They show that every IC-planar graph has a straight-line RAC drawing, while this is not true for the larger class of the NIC-planar graphs [30].

(p9.3) The incomparability of straight-line RAC graphs and 1-planar graphs, together with the fact that ICplanar graphs always admit a straight-line RAC drawing (which is also 1-planar), suggest two interesting questions: (i) What is the complexity of deciding whether a graph admits a drawing that is both 1-planar and straight-line RAC? (ii) Does every 1-planar graph admit a 1-planar drawing that is also RAC if we allow at most one bend per edge? These questions have been recently answered [40]: Question (i) is NP-hard, as already mentioned in Section 5 (see Table 3), while Question (ii) has a positive answer. Figure 6(c) shows a 1-planar RAC drawing with at most one bend per edge of the graph in Fig. 6(b). Additional inclusion relationships between 1-planar and straight-line RAC drawings have been studied for constrained drawings and they are summarized in Section 9.

(p9.4) k-planar graphs and k-quasi planar graphs. Note that the tight bounds on the edge density of 3-planar and 3-quasi planar graphs imply the existence of 3-quasi planar graphs that are not 3-planar. On the other hand, for k ≥ 1, every k-planar graph is clearly (k + 2)-quasi planar. These two observations have motivated a recent work on the relationship between k-planar graphs and k-quasi planar graphs [14]. This work proves that, for k ≥ 3, every k-planar graph is (k + 1)-quasi planar. The proof is based on a rerouting argument that starts from a k-planar drawing and resolves all possible bundles of k + 1 pairwise crossing edges. The drawing produced by this technique is (k + 1)-quasi planar, but it may not be k-planar anymore. This result has been later extended to the case k = 2 [138]. Thus, every k-planar graph is (k + 1)-quasi planar, for k ≥ 2.

(p9.5) k-planar graphs and fan-planar graphs. Since optimal fan-planar graphs have the same density as optimal 2-planar graphs (optimal n-vertex graphs have 5n − 10 edges for these two families), Binucci et al. study the relationship between fan-planar and k-planar graphs [48]. They prove that these two families are incomparable. On the one hand, they show that for any k ≥ 2 there exists a fan-planar graph that is not k-planar; the proof uses a complete 3-partite graph K 1,3,h , where the index h depends on k; this graph is clearly fan-planar but any of its drawings contains too many crossings to be k-planar. On the other hand, they exhibit 2-planar graphs that are not fan-planar.

(p9.6) k-gap planar graphs, k-planar graphs, k-quasi planar graphs. Bae et al. studied the relationship between k-gap planar graphs and both k-planar and k-quasi planar graphs [31]. By using Hall's theorem, they prove that for every k ≥ 1 all 2k-planar graphs are k-gap planar. On the other hand, for every fixed k ≥ 1, there exists a 1-gap planar graph that is not k-planar. Similarly, by using a counting argument on the number of crossings, they prove that all k-gap planar graphs are 2k + 2-quasi planar, while for all k ≥ 1 they exhibit a quasi planar graph that is not k-gap planar.

(p9.7) Planarly-connected graphs, 1-planar graphs, fan-planar graphs. Ackerman motivates the study of planarly-connected graphs with the fact that both maximally dense 1-planar graphs and maximally dense fan-planar graphs are planarly-connected [7]. For 1-planar graphs, the high-level idea is to consider a drawing with the minimum number of crossings of a maximally dense graph; in such a drawing, for every pair of crossing edges there is a crossing-free edge that connects their endpoints, as otherwise one could contradict either the fact that the drawing is crossing minimal or the fact that the graph is maximally dense. The idea for fan-planar graphs is similar.

(p9.8) The intersection relationships between the different families of beyond-planar graph families are summarized in Table 5. Each family in a row (resp. column) is represented by a thin (resp. thick) circle. Each cell reports the relationship between the corresponding row and column using the common Venn diagram notation. Note that, some relationships immediately derive from the definitions. For example, a fan-planar drawing is always k-quasi planar (for each k ≥ 3), because three mutually crossing edges imply that two independent edges are crossed by a third one.
