# Acute care and emergency general surgery in patients with chronic liver disease: how can we optimize perioperative care? A review of the literature

CorpusID: 51704154 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b95065baddb53592d5701d8d45180c17076bce21](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b95065baddb53592d5701d8d45180c17076bce21)

Fields: Medicine

## (s9) Imaging exams
(p9.0) Morphologic findings of early cirrhosis include hepatomegaly, as well as widening of the porta hepatis, umbilical fissure, and pericholecystic space. As cirrhosis advances, hepatomegaly evolves into the typical nodular shrunken liver with atrophy of segment 4 and the right lobe, as well as hypertrophy of segments 2 and 3 and the caudate lobe. Bright and coarse nodular texture with surface nodularity (most commonly noticed on the undersurface of the liver) can be demonstrated on bedside ultrasonography [25]. Dysplastic and regenerative nodules are difficult to appreciate on CT due to their small size and isointensity. However, the identification of nodules, particularly if they are hyper-enhancing, on the arterial phase, should raise suspicion for an incidental hepatocellular carcinoma [26].

(p9.1) Vascular manifestations of cirrhosis include signs of hepatic perfusion abnormalities and portal hypertension. Progressive hepatic fibrosis increases resistance to both arterial and venous inflow. While the portal venous system may decompress through portosystemic collaterals, there is no equivalent alternative for hepatic arterial inflow. Intra-hepatic vascular communications thus develop in the hepatic sinusoids, vasa vasorum of portal vein, and peribiliary capillaries to shunt arterial blood into the portal venous system [27]. These changes present on cross-sectional imaging as heterogeneous delayed enhancement of hepatic parenchyma, sometimes mixed with geographic areas of arterialization. Evidence of overt portal hypertension can also be found on imaging (esophageal, gastric, and umbilical varices, prominent left gastric vein and tributaries, splenomegaly, and ascites).
