# membranes Pd-Based Membranes: Overview and Perspectives

CorpusID: 73447516 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f3a157258112d63b66a1de8fe7e3899a850bbcea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f3a157258112d63b66a1de8fe7e3899a850bbcea)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Environmental Science, Engineering, Chemistry

## (s3) Material Investigations
(p3.0) For metal membranes to be massively integrated into industrial processes to separate hydrogen from gas mixture, it is crucial to assess their performance and stability under actual operating conditions. In particular, as these types of membranes are thought to operate at relatively high temperatures (300-600 • C) and high pressure (2-50 bar and even more), while also in transient conditions in which they can be subjected to rapid changes, it is essential to understand the behavior of the materials they are made of under such conditions.

(p3.1) In this Special Issue, three papers regarding novel and non-conventional studies of materials are offered. In particular, Vicinanza et al. [7] studied the heat treatment of Pd-based membranes, separating the single contributions of both membrane surfaces (i.e., on the feed and permeate side). In their work, they consider three different membrane thicknesses, from whose analysis the effects of adsorption and desorption are disentangled, quantifying the surface phenomena influence, and also in terms of the apparent Arrhenius parameters for permeation before and after the heat treatment [7].

(p3.2) Complementary to the work of Vicinanza et al. [7], Løvvik et al. [8] carried out an interesting and specific work on the influence of grain boundary segregation of bulk in Pd-Ag-Cu membranes, an area to which the literature has generally paid relatively poor attention. Specifically, this study is based on first-principles electronic structure calculations performed on realistic atomic-scale models of binary Pd-Cu and ternary Pd-Cu-Ag alloys. In this way, a systematic approach to designing metal alloys is introduced, which opens up the possibility of more precisely predicting the behaviour of metal lattices a priori, thus reducing the number of experimental tests required and the costs related to the development of new membrane alloy materials.
