# Clinicopathological characteristics in the differential diagnosis of hepatoid adenocarcinoma: A literature review

CorpusID: 9531109 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73f4b190e6f4ac4ea72ad605a2fe5ed68a2bd4e0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73f4b190e6f4ac4ea72ad605a2fe5ed68a2bd4e0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) 323
(p5.0) January 21, 2013|Volume 19|Issue 3| WJG|www.wjgnet.com Table 1  ditions including HAC, so AFP is not suggested for diagnosis of HCC nowadays [18] . Diagnosis of HCC should be based on dynamic image studies (such as computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging) and/or liver tumor biopsy, and the typical dynamic image of HCC shows intense arterial uptake followed by "washout" of contrast in the venous and/or delayed phases [18] . Even in liver tumors with elevated AFP, secondary malignancies still should be considered especially when the presentations of imaging studies are atypical, and liver tumor biopsy is recommended for differential diagnosis. In addition, risk factors such as liver cirrhosis, chronic hepatitis B or chronic hepatitis C infection can usually be found among patients with HCC, but those risk factors may not be observed among patients with HAC. Once AFPproducing metastatic liver tumors are found, an intensive search for primary tumor origin should be initiated.

(p5.1) HAC is a very aggressive neoplasm with metastasis in a high proportion of patients at the time of diagnosis. Lymph nodes and the liver are the most common sites of metastasis. Once metastatic HAC is suspected, panendoscopy should be arranged because the stomach is the most common origin of HAC. HCC with metastasis to the stomach has been reported [11] , and a clinical challenge of differentiating primary tumor origin arises when liver and gastric tumors are found simultaneously. Pathology markers, especially IHC stains, may provide clues to make a correct diagnosis. In addition, finding the tumor origin may be challenging when no tumor can be detected in the liver and/or stomach, so other organs positive for both CK18 and CK19 stains (100%), and only a small proportion of HAC patients showed positive stains for CK20 (25%) and CK7 (15.4%). High proportions of HAC tumors were positive for pancytokeratin (AE1/AE3) stain (92.3%) and α1-antitrypsin (α1-AT) stain (91%), and 62.5% of HAC patients were positive for CD10 antigen. In addition, positive glypican 3 (GPC-3) staining ( Figure 2C) was found in all HAC patients (100%).
