# Potential Use of Phenolic Acids as Anti-Candida Agents: A Review

CorpusID: 10001304 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f51a7836ec6f455ca5d3a7fcc5f245c8514ddb81](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f51a7836ec6f455ca5d3a7fcc5f245c8514ddb81)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 34

(p0.0) Candida species are a major group of fungal pathogens in humans, particularly among immunocompromised and hospitalized patients (Cuellar-Cruz et al., 2012). Candida albicans inhabits various body surfaces like oral cavity, gastrointestinal tract, vagina, and skin of the healthy individuals as a commensal organism (Kleinegger et al., 1996;Huffnagle and Noverr, 2013). Hostrelated factors can predispose the transformation of harmless Candida into an opportunistic pathogen, causing infection or candidiasis in superficial mucous surfaces which can progress into invasive mycoses (Nett and Andes, 2006). Foregoing factors include, but not limited to immuno-suppression, prolonged treatment with wide-spectrum antibiotics and chronic diseases (Kullberg and Arendrup, 2015;Polke et al., 2015). The epidemiology of invasive candidiasis varies geographically (Morgan, 2005;Pfaller et al., 2011). It significantly increases the period of hospitalization, economic burden and mortality, especially in ICU patients or those under chemotherapy or with a history of abdominal surgery (Falagas et al., 2006;Berdal et al., 2014;Drgona et al., 2014).

(p0.1) Only few classes of antifungals such as polyenes, azoles, echinocandins, allylamines, and flucytosine are available for the treatment of Candida infections (Sanglard et al., 2009). However, there are various undesirable properties, most importantly the dose-related toxicity in aforementioned antifungals (Chandrasekar, 2011). Ideally, an antifungal should have null or reduced toxicity toward human cells (Wong et al., 2014). For instance, amphotericin B is a polyene available for systemic administration, but its use has been limited due to its systemic side effects such as nephrotoxicity (Odds et al., 2003). Azole antifungals have some side effects associated with gastrointestinal, hepatic, and endocrinologic disorders and interfere with oxidative drug metabolism in the liver (Joly et al., 1992).

(p0.2) In addition, rising drug resistance is an inevitable problem. In particular, Candida glabrata and Candida krusei show intrinsic resistance to fluconazole, the drug of choice for AIDS patients (Kanafani and Perfect, 2008;Siikala et al., 2010;Rautemaa and Ramage, 2011). Drug resistance has already been reported for recently introduced echinocandin antifungal agents (Hakki et al., 2006;Ben-Ami et al., 2011;Clancy and Nguyen, 2011;Seneviratne et al., 2011). Moreover, biofilm mode of Candida is known to be highly resistant to antifungal agents (Chandra et al., 2005;Niimi et al., 2010). Therefore, it is necessary to discover new antifungal agents or safer alternatives to improve the efficacy of treatment against Candida infections. In this regard, antifungal agents based on natural resources, such as phenolic compounds may be an alternative strategy to negate the rising antifungal drug resistance (Negri et al., 2014). This review attempts to critically analyze the possible use of phenolic acids as a therapeutic strategy against Candida infections.

(p0.3) Phenolic compounds are widely found in plant foods (fruits, cereal grains, legumes, and vegetables) and beverages (tea, coffee, fruits juices, and cocoa). The most common phenolic compounds are phenolic acids (cinnamic and benzoic acids), flavonoids, proanthocyanidins, coumarins, stilbenes, lignans, and lignins (Figure 1; Cowan, 1999;Chirinos et al., 2009;Khoddami et al., 2013). The anti-Candida properties of phenolic compounds that have been widely reported in the literature include inactivation of enzyme production (Evensen and Braun, 2009) and anti-biofilm effect (Evensen and Braun, 2009;Shahzad et al., 2014).

(p0.4) Phenolic acids are derivatives of hydrocinnamic, hydrobenzoic, phenylacetic, and phenylpropionic acids (Figures 1 and 2; Pereira et al., 2009;Cueva et al., 2010). Phenolic acids commonly exist as esters, glycosides or amides in nature, but not in their free form. The determining factor for characterization of phenolic acids is the number and the location of hydroxyl groups on the aromatic ring. Some natural sources are rich in phenolic acids and shown to possess a promising action against Candida (Table 1). In this review, we discuss the anti-candidal activity of the phenolic acid compounds, possible mechanism of actions and future directions.
## (s3) Mechanisms of Action and Biological Pathways
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) Phenolic acids such as ferulic and gallic acids are known to affect the cell membrane of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria leading to a change in cell surface hydrophobicity and charge, ultimately causing leakage of cytoplasmic content (Borges et al., 2013). A similar effect has been suggested for the caffeic acid derivative on Candida cytoplasmatic membrane (Sung and Lee, 2010). Furthermore, a possible effect on the C. albicans cell wall has been shown for caffeic acid derivatives which may interfere with 1,3-β-glucan synthase (Ma et al., 2010). It is noteworthy that polyene antifungals also cause pouring of cellular contents through direct binding to ergosterol, distorting the membrane function. Also, azole antifungal agents inhibit biosynthesis of ergosterol (Vanden Bossche et al., 2004). No study on the effect of phenolic acid on the ergosterol composition or biosynthesis could be detected.
## (s4) on the
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) Another aspect to be considered is that previous studies reported that some Candida species were able to metabolize phenolic acids (Middelhoven et al., 1992;Middelhoven, 1993). C. parapsilosis was able to grow in the presence of some phenolic acids after 3 days of cultivation. On the other hand, C. tropicalis was unable to grow in the presence of phenolic acids even after 14 days of cultivation (Middelhoven, 1993). These evidences should be better investigated in the future. Further studies are warranted to obtain a deeper understanding of the mechanism of action and others biological pathways of phenolic acids on Candida cells.
## (s6) Safety of the Phenolic Acids In vitro and In vivo
Number of References: 15

(p6.0) An 'ideal' antifungal agent for Candida infections should not have side effects or toxicity (Chapman et al., 2008;Wong et al., 2014). However, in reality, all the antifungals currently in use have some side effects on gastrointestinal tract, liver and kidney (Wingard et al., 1999;Bates et al., 2001). Therefore, practically one would expect to have some dose-related side effects from any new antifungal agent. It is imperative to understand this limitation in order to appreciate promising qualities of the drug under investigation. DNA-damaging effect of phenolic acids has been observed in p53R cell lines treated with gallic acid (Hossain et al., 2014). Moreover, in vivo hepatotoxicity was observed in rats when given a diet supplemented with more than 200 mg/kg/day of gallic acid (Galati et al., 2006). In addition, hematological disorders, as well as liver and kidney weight increase were observed in rats fed with 0.6-5% of gallic acid daily for 13 weeks (Niho et al., 2001).

(p6.1) A potential carcinogenicity was observed on the fore-stomach of rats when fed with a powdered diet containing 0.4% of caffeic acid for up to 28 weeks (Hirose et al., 1998). The clastogenic power of caffeic and cinnamic acids have been described in vitro (Maistro et al., 2011). Subcronic administration of protocatechuic acid (0.1% in drinking water) for 60 days has shown a possible liver and kidney toxicity in mice (Nakamura et al., 2001). Sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate have been used in the treatment of acute hyperammonaemia and are derived from benzoic acid and phenylacetic acid respectively. Inappropriate doses of both substances may cause plasma acidosis, hypotension, cerebral edema and other neurotoxical effects, sometimes even death of patients (Kaufman, 1989;Praphanphoj et al., 2000). Phenylacetic acid can also affect the osteoblastic functions in vitro and increase cell proliferation in the alveolar region (Kaufmann et al., 2005;Yano et al., 2007). Sodium and potassium benzoates could be clastogenic, mutagenic and cytotoxic to human lymphocytes in vitro (Zengin et al., 2011). Therefore, is imperative to examine the dose-related toxicity of phenolic acids in a series of comprehensive in vitro, in vivo and clinical studies before administration as an antifungal agent.
