# THE PROCESS AND PATHOGEN BEHAVIOUR IN COMPOSTING: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 11972968 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d27b35a26bce9a69f937654241ed0e72b09cb41](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d27b35a26bce9a69f937654241ed0e72b09cb41)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Biology

## (s5) Structure
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Rapid composting is dependent on condition and structure of the starting material. Size reduction in composting is necessary to increase the surface area of the material. The smaller the particle, the greater the ratio of the surface area to mass (de Bertoldi et al., 1983). This explained that the smaller particle size makes a better of biological degradation. The preparation of organic fractions for composting, of which there are two, mechanical or biological-mechanical, is an important start to the composting process. .After this process, the biodegradable organic fraction has been drastically conditioned and disintegrated, making it more easily separated by mechanical means from the inert material (de Bertoldi et al., 1983).
## (s9) Pathogen control and inactivation
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) Salmonella spp. and E. coli are well known as pathogen indicators, in standard quality of composting. The role of both Salmonella sp. and E. coli in defining the ecological quality composts products was establish in the European Commission Decisions. The limits for their densities (<10 3 MPN g -1 and Absence in 50 g, respectively) is fixed in order to assign a seal quality in Commission Decision 2001/688/EC;Commission Decision 2005/384/EC (Briancesco, 2008). Meanwhile, the UK composting standard (BSI, 2005) requires composts that are sold to be free of Salmonella spp. and to contain fewer than 1000 colony forming units of E. coli per gram of material. Summarized by Böhm et al., (2007) the selected species to be an indicator organisms should fulfil several requirement: a. present with high probability in the raw material involved b. the transmission via products must be a factor in epidemiology c. if a biotechnology process is used the indicator should not be involved in the process itself d. the indicator should not be an organisms that is generally present in soil and soil-related material e. the method for isolation and identification must be simple definitive and reliable if applied to a substrate with a complex microbiological matrix such as compost sludge or related materials.
## (s10) Regrowth of pathogen in compost
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) The enteric pathogen is known to be able to grow after having diminished below the detectable limits and representing a health hazard for certain uses of compost. Regrowth of pathogens in compost depends upon a number of factors such as moisture content bio-available nutrients, temperature and indigenous micro organisms (Sidhu et al., 2001). The most critical factor to prevent regrowth of pathogen is stability. The compost materials appear to be stable when it is too dry to support high rates of microbiology activity. Re-wetting of these compost material will lead an ideal environment being provided for pathogens to repopulate (Wilkinson, 2008).
