# A review of total energy-momenta in GR with a positive cosmological constant *

CorpusID: 119533555 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de7d069f62daa26ef249fe4032dddbaf2170f416](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de7d069f62daa26ef249fe4032dddbaf2170f416)

Fields: Physics

## (s15) A spinorial expression of Kastor and Traschen
Number of References: 7

(p15.0) Using the original Dirac spinor form of the Nester-Witten form [26,25], the Witten-type energy positivity proof of [30], originally given for Λ < 0, has been successfully adapted to the Λ > 0 case and yielded a positivity argument by Kastor and Traschen in [49] (see also [57]). Here, the energy-momentum tensor of the matter fields is assumed to satisfy the dominant energy condition, and, as the boundary condition for the (modified) Witten equation, the Dirac spinor constituents Ψ of the conformal Killing vectors of the background de Sitter spacetime are used.

(p15.1) A generalization C a of the conserved currentK b t ba of subsection 3.1, built from t ab , the 'perturbation' γ ab and an arbitrary vector field ξ a , is also given in [49]: this C a is ∇ a -divergence free, and if ξ a is chosen to be a Killing vector of the de Sitter background, then it reduces toK a t ab . Then, it is shown that the flux integral of C b on Σ with the conformal Killing vector ξ a determined by the Dirac spinor Ψ coincides with the spinorial construction above. Therefore, the present spinorial expression of these authors is a nontrivial generalization of the original construction in [35].
## (s16) Asymptotically-Schwarzschild/Kerr-de Sitter data: work of Chruściel and collaborators
Number of References: 5

(p16.0) Chruściel with a range of collaborators has been investigating definitions of mass in a variety of space-times with Λ positive, negative or zero for many years. The investigations are typically motivated by adherence to a Hamiltonian approach to space-times, following the monograph [59], analysing Cauchy data to arrive at definitions of mass and momentum. In this subsection we review their work on asymptotically-Schwarzschild-de Sitter data and asymptotically-Kerr-de Sitter data. These are discussed in [60] and [61] respectively and these in turn rely on families of initial data for the Einstein equations shown to exist in [62] and [63] respectively. The Schwarzschild-de Sitter metric, sometimes called the Kottler solution, can be defined in space-time dimension n + 1 as
## (s19) Three Suggestions of Penrose
Number of References: 5

(p19.0) In [46] Penrose considered the problem of defining a cosmological total mass in the presence of a positive cosmological constant. He was motivated, at least in part, by his Conformal Cyclic Cosmology (or CCC) rather than by a consideration of isolated systems, which was the motivation of Ashtekar and colleagues considered above. Thus Penrose sought a definition at I + of one aeon which was suitable for carrying through to the next aeon. Interestingly, Penrose considered but rejected the idea of working in a Poincaré patch and using the Killing vector of the steady-state universe to define energy (section 3 of [46]) because galaxies beyond the cosmological event horizon, where this Killing vector is space-like, would be represented as having super-luminal velocities. This could be a problem in a cosmological setting but one that Ashtekar et. al. avoid by considering only isolated bodies.

(p19.1) Penrose makes three concrete suggestions: (1) To seek an expression motivated by the conserved currents that one constructs from a trace-free energy-momentum tensor and a conformal Killing vector of de Sitter space. In CCC one expects matter to become massless near I + , so that T ab will become trace-free, and in de Sitter space there do exist time-like conformal Killing vectors. This suggestion is not worked out in detail but the insight also underlay the earlier work of [49], [55] and [57].
