# Robotic quantification of upper extremity loss of independent joint control or flexion synergy in individuals with hemiparetic stroke: a review of paradigms addressing the effects of shoulder abduction loading

CorpusID: 12028298 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4392e70b86a67a6ec3bafd61f19b5a3013c194b4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4392e70b86a67a6ec3bafd61f19b5a3013c194b4)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s1) Context
Number of References: 8

(p1.0) Residual motor system impairments limit the activities conducted in daily life and restrict participation in life roles in individuals with moderate to severe chronic stroke. Two primary motor system impairments characterizing classic hemiparesis are muscle weakness and abnormal stereotypical movements/synergies. Contemporary clinical tools attempt to evaluate these motor impairments however are limited by subjective/nominal scoring descriptors and/or observational methods and are confounded by the interdependency of these phenomena. For example, following stroke there is a relative weakness on the paretic side in that the production of joint torque at a single joint is less that on the nonparetic side. However, when the individual is required to first produce shoulder abduction torque, abnormal co-activation with elbow flexors occurs with greater abduction torque production [2], resulting in a task dependent weakness of elbow extension [3,4]. This abnormal co-activation of shoulder abductors with distal limb flexors [2] was described observationally as stereotypical movements and labeled flexion synergy [5,6] in the mid 20th century. Early quantitative dynamic movement studies of hemiparetic reaching demonstrated the same phenomena showing that outward reaching magnitude is dramatically reduced when required to support the arm against gravity as compared to when supported on a frictionless table [7] and is not predicted by muscle weakness [8]. These studies demonstrated that two fundamental motor system impairments could be independently and quantitatively evaluated but required more sophisticated equipment than available in clinical practice. The application of robotics, as presented in this manuscript, offers a means to account for the presence of weakness/paresis and systematically quantify the impact of flexion synergy on reaching function through kinetic/kinematic measurement.
## (s2) Definition of loss of independent joint control
Number of References: 10

(p2.0) Individuals with moderate to severe hemiparetic stroke exhibit compromised upper extremity function due in part to a loss of independent joint control. Neuromechanistically, this phenomena is thought to be due to an increased reliance on contralesional corticoreticulospinal motor pathways (see [9] for review). Early quantitative movement analysis studies described the phenomena as disturbed limb dynamics [10] and disrupted interjoint coordination [11] that was observed during reaching movements. Of specific relevance to the evaluation with rehabilitation robotics is that the abnormal co-activation of distal limb flexors with proximal shoulder abductors is task-dependent [3,12,13] and dynamic [7,14,15], meaning that the more one attempts to drive the limb, the greater the activation of the flexion pattern and the lessor the ability to move outside of this pattern such as during a reach against gravity. A device with the capability of progressively manipulating proximal joint requirements is needed to fully describe the effects of loss of independent joint control on reaching and hand function in hemiparesis [14].
## (s3) Conventional assessment
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) Conventional standardized clinical measures such as the Fugl-Meyer Motor Assessment [16] and Chedoke-McMaster Stroke Assessment [17] attempt to quantify movement impairments resultant from abnormal flexion synergy through observational analysis. Furthermore, observational analysis is then scored via nominal or ordinal scales. These evaluation tools have adequate psychometric properties, granted the clinician is properly trained in administration. However, they lack quantitative control and measurement with ratio-level data that arguably offers more meaningful and higher resolution information. Robotic methods of movement analysis can provide the much-need higher resolution measurements of the impact of loss of independent joint control on reaching performance [14] and hand function. Such methods offer both the researcher and clinician more powerful information for investigating and diagnosing movement problems, their underlying mechanisms, and response to intervention. The following section discusses a series of robotic methods for measuring the effect of loss of independent joint control on reaching and hand function.
