# Epidemiology and Management of Hypertension in the Hispanic Population A Review of the Available Literature

CorpusID: 12366298 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66a5c93b707cb25addc6a69af4947adc08a54945](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66a5c93b707cb25addc6a69af4947adc08a54945)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Benefits of Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitor Therapy
Number of References: 8

(p6.0) RAAS inhibitors may be more beneficial than other classes of antihypertensive therapy in reducing complications related to obesity, diabetes, and metabolic syndrome, which as discussed previously are significant concerns for many Hispanic patients. [60] Over-activation of the RAAS results in increased vasoconstriction, increased sodium reabsorption, and increased aldosterone secretion, all of which elevate BP. In addition, increased RAAS activity can contribute to the pathophysiology of diabetes and metabolic syndrome. Increased aldosterone production has been shown to impair insulin signaling and increase insulin resistance, and angiotensin II-mediated oxidative stress can damage pancreatic islet cells. [60,61] Excess food intake has also been linked to increased angiotensin II formation in adipocytes, and body mass index is positively correlated with plasma aldosterone and plasma renin activity levels, suggesting a pathophysiologic association between RAAS activation and obesity. [60] Therefore, in addition to lowering BP, antihypertensive therapy with RAAS inhibitors may also improve glucose metabolism and delay or prevent the onset of diabetes. [60,61] RAAS inhibitors have also been shown to reduce tissue injury and microvascular damage in patients with hypertension and hyperglycemia. [62] For these reasons, RAAS inhibitors are an appropriate component of first-line therapy in hypertensive patients at risk for obesity, diabetes, and or metabolic syndrome. [60] 
## (s8) Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers (ARBs)
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Several studies were identified that reported the efficacy of ARB monotherapy or combination therapy in Hispanic patients. These studies indicate that substantial proportions of Hispanic patients treated with ARBs as part of their treatment regimen can achieve BP goals. The largest, TRINITY (NCT00654745; complete results posted on ClinicalTrials.gov), [64] included a prespecified subgroup analysis of 369 Hispanic Latino and 2122 non-Hispanic non-Latino hypertensive patients that has Reprinted from Cooper-DeHoff et al. [29] , with permission from Elsevier. MI = myocardial infarction.
