# Perfect graphs: a survey

CorpusID: 13143367 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/407e12ce49a1fe176cf610eef9469fe68f3a953e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/407e12ce49a1fe176cf610eef9469fe68f3a953e)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s11) Further reading
Number of References: 6

(p11.0) In [20], the global strategy of the proof is well explained at the beginning. More about the strategy is to be found in [92] and [19]. How structural methods can be used generally for classes closed under taking induced subgraphs is discussed in Chudnovsky and Seymour [23] and in Vušković [97]. To make a start on Question 6.2, the first step is the detection in polynomial time of the structures that are used in the proof (line graphs of a bipartite subdivision of K 4 , even prism and odd prism). Apart from wheels (that are NP-complete to detect as mentioned at the end of Section 5), they all can be detected in polynomial time in Berge graph, see Maffray and Trotignon [74].
## (s16) Further reading
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) About technicalities, the best reading is of course Chudnovsky, Robertson, Seymour and Thomas [20]. The paper is very well organized: the first four sections are devoted to technical lemmas that are used extensively in the sequel. But as a result of this wise organization, it is very hard to extract a meaningful part: it is difficult to feel how useful the technical lemmas are without knowing the sequel, and the sequel is difficult to understand without mastering the technicalities of the lemmas. A reader seeking the easiest parts from [20] should try 15.1, Section 15 or Section 16. Section 10 is devoted to the even prism and is a self-contained chunk that has fewer technicalities than the rest of the paper (but still relies a lot on technical lemmas of the previous sections).
## (s17) Recognizing perfect graphs
Number of References: 2

(p17.0) From here on, we investigate works on perfect graphs that were done after the proof of the SPGT. Soon after the proof of the SPGT, another open question was solved. Chudnovsky, Cornuéjols, Liu, Seymour and Vušković [17] found a polynomial time algorithm that decides whether an input graph is Berge. Observe that this algorithm is independent from the SPGT. It takes any graph G as an input and outputs in time O(n 9 ) an odd hole-orantihole of G (if any). We give here a brief outline (that is a copy from the introduction of [17]). In what follows, G is the input graph of the algorithm.
## (s25) Theorem 11.2 (Maffray and Trotignon 2005) Every Artemis graph is perfectly contractile.
Number of References: 2

(p25.0) This theorem can be transformed into a colouring algorithm [65] that generalizes several well known algorithms for colouring classes of perfect graphs, such as Meyniel graphs and weakly chordal graphs. It yields a combinatorial polynomial time colouring algorithm for perfectly orderable graphs (none was known before). The proof of the next theorem from [24] uses some technics of the proof of Theorem 11.3, is very readable, and as we will see saves about 50 pages in the proof of the SPGT. An odd wheel (C, T ) in a graph G consists of a hole C of length at least six, and a nonempty anticonnected subset T ⊆ V (G) \ V (C), such that at least three vertices of C are T -complete, and there is a path P of C with odd length at least 3, such that its ends are not T -complete and all its internal vertices are T -complete. A long prism is a prism such that at least one the paths has length at least 2. Let us say that G is impoverished if G is Berge, and G and G both contain no odd wheel, long prism or double diamond. A dominant pair in G is a pair (x, y) of nonadjacent vertices such that every other vertex of G is adjacent to at least one of x, y.
