# Cost of dengue outbreaks: literature review and country case studies

CorpusID: 1343358 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/816853e15cca088d7ed5cd9e194dca66716f18e7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/816853e15cca088d7ed5cd9e194dca66716f18e7)

Fields: Environmental Science, Economics, Medicine

## (s10) Publications on cost of interventions (group B)
Number of References: 8

(p10.0) We identified 4 studies calculating the cost of interventions: one in Vietnam on community-based strategies against the vector Aedes aegypti [23], one in Venezuela and Thailand on the cost of routine aedes aegypti control and insecticide-treated curtain implementation [24], one in Australia on costs of cutting mosquito surveillance budgets [25] and one in Brazil on the direct costs of dengue prevention and control programs [26].

(p10.1) For Australia, Vazquez-Prokopec et al. [25] showed the effect of delayed response to dengue outbreaks of 4 to 6 weeks, which would result in 86 times (or 13 million US $ in 2003) and 346 times (or 382 million US$ in 2009) higher dengue illness costs versus a scenario with active surveillance and response within 2 weeks. Their calculations suggest the value of an active and fast dengue surveillance and response system. The calculations of Baly et al. [12] of the costs of control programs in one state in Venezuela (0.38 million US$) and in one province in Thailand (0.08 million US$) and of Kay et al. [23] for Vietnam also suggest the low cost of dengue control measures compared to the cost of uncontrolled dengue outbreaks. Taliberti et al. [26] estimate the cost of dengue prevention and control in Sao Paolo in 2005 to be 12.5 million US$ (or 1.14 US$ per capita).
## (s11) Publication on cost-effectiveness of interventions (group C)
Number of References: 9

(p11.0) Three publications out of the 9 in group C investigated the cost-effectiveness of a dengue vaccine. Carrasco et al. [27] investigated the cost-effectiveness of future vaccination programs in Singapore, whereas Lee et al. [28] assessed the economic value of a dengue vaccine in Thailand, and finally Shepard et al. [29] evaluated the cost-effectiveness of a paediatric dengue vaccine.

(p11.1) Six publications assessed the cost-effectiveness of interventions aimed at improving dengue vector control. Alphey et al. [30] assessed the cost-effectiveness of genetics-based sterile insect methods for vector control. Suaya et al. [31] investigated the cost-effectiveness  of larviciding campaigns in Cambodia. Baly et al. [24] compared vertical versus community-based approaches in Cuba. McConnell et al. [32] focused on control programs in Puerto Rico, whereas Orellano et al. [33] analysed the cost-benefit of control programs versus no control in Argentina. Luz et al. [34] developed an economic model to assess dengue vector control strategies. The modelling methods used for assessing the economic value of vaccine intervention and the costeffectiveness of vector control programs might lead to future research on the cost-effectiveness of national surveillance systems.
## (s15) Dominican Republic
Number of References: 5

(p15.0) In the Dominican Republic 12,171 dengue patients were reported during the outbreak in 2011, of which 292 were outpatients, 11,864 were general-ward patients and 15 were intensive-care patients. In the general ward 68% of patients were adults, and 32% were children (<15 years). The exchange rate used for the analysis was 39.03 DOP/ US$ on June 17th, 2012. For the Dominican Republic, hospital records of 5 outpatients, 9 adult general-ward patients, 28 child general-ward patients, and 15 ICU patients were analysed in terms of resource identification, quantification and valuation. The average direct cost per case without personal costs amounted to 117 US$ in 2012. Shepard et al. (2011) [3] obtain a ratio of indirect to direct cost of 96% for the Dominican Republic. The corresponding indirect cost estimation based on our direct cost estimate is 112 US$. Shepard et al. (2011) [3] obtained a weighted average estimation of total costs of 430 US$ per dengue case based on their economic model. The cost we obtained for government spending on vector control was a total of 9,165 US$ per year on average over the years 2009 to 2012. Cost for collecting, storing, analysing and communicating surveillance data amounted to 2,550 US$. Our total cost estimate was around 2.8 million US$ (Figure 4). The comparability of the reviewed studies was restricted due to variations in the perspective taken to collect costs, the definition and reporting of costs, and the inclusion or  exclusion of certain cost items within a micro-costing approach. Finally, precise details on the year of cost accounting (year of prices), the exchange rate used and the transformations conducted to calculate costs (discounting, inflation adjustment) were missing. The Asian countries had been neglected in terms of methodologically comparable cost of illness studies as produced by Shepard et al. [3] for the Americas. Sensitivity analyses would increase the validity of produced cost figures.
