# Molecular Sciences An Overview of Hardware for Protein Crystallization in a Magnetic Field

CorpusID: 13455823 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e95353d3a3e25e81f342a47ae010f35ed93891bc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e95353d3a3e25e81f342a47ae010f35ed93891bc)

Fields: Materials Science, Physics, Medicine, Engineering

## (s3) Permanent Magnets
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) A permanent magnet, as a hard magnetic body, is not easy to magnetize or demagnetize, and thus can maintain long-term magnetic stability. Permanent magnets can be classified into groups including NdFeB permanent magnets, ferrite permanent magnets, and rubber permanent magnets. The merits of permanent magnets are their low cost and stability for long-term experiments. However, the magnetic field strength is usually weak, and it is difficult to adjust the magnitude and direction of the magnetic field. Experimental setup utilized to observe the orientation of crystal boards: (a) horizontal magnetic field generated by an electromagnet; and (b) vertical magnetic field generated by a permanent magnet [15]. Reproduced from reference [15] with permission from the Japan Society of Applied Physics.
## (s5) Resistive Magnets
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) A representative resistive magnet is the water-cooled resistive magnet [8]. The maximum current of this magnet is up to 40 kA at a working voltage of 500 V. This magnet has a bore 32 mm in diameter, and its magnetic field intensity is as great as 33 T for an extended period. A strong advantage of this magnet is its low cost (water-cooled) and extremely high magnetic field intensity. Heijna et al. [17] studied the growth of diamagnetic lysozyme crystals by tuning the gravity strength from 0.15 to 1 g using this magnet. They reported that convection could be damped, stopped and reversed during this process. Furthermore, a hybrid magnet system with a 45 T magnetic field strength (with a 32 mm bore) was constructed by the High Field Magnet Laboratory [9].
## (s8) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Magnets
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) instruments, commonly used for disease surveillance, have recently attracted substantial attention as the source of a static magnetic field for protein crystallization. Moreno et al. [45] grew highly perfect single-protein crystals (thaumatin, lysozyme and ferritin) in the presence of gels and magnetic fields (Oxford and Varian magnets with current frequencies of 500 and 300 MHz, respectively). During the experiments, capillaries were filled with protein solutions, and all the capillaries were placed in an NMR tube with silica hydrogel. In addition, Moreno et al. [46] obtained high-quality lysozyme crystals, in terms of mosaicity and diffraction resolution, under the same magnetic fields. They showed that the crystal quality was value and mosaicity of the crystals grown with this magnet were significantly improved compared with controls. In 2013, Cao and her co-workers [36] compared the quality of protein crystals grown in three container-less environments (agarose gel, silicone oil and diamagnetic levitation) and concluded that the diamagnetic levitation technique had the greatest benefits for obtaining high-quality protein crystals.  
## (s9) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Magnets
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) instruments, commonly used for disease surveillance, have recently attracted substantial attention as the source of a static magnetic field for protein crystallization. Moreno et al. [45] grew highly perfect single-protein crystals (thaumatin, lysozyme and ferritin) in the presence of gels and magnetic fields (Oxford and Varian magnets with current frequencies of 500 and 300 MHz, respectively). During the experiments, capillaries were filled with protein solutions, and all the capillaries were placed in an NMR tube with silica hydrogel. In addition, Moreno et al. [46] obtained high-quality lysozyme crystals, in terms of mosaicity and diffraction resolution, under the same magnetic fields. They showed that the crystal quality was 
## (s10) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Magnets
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) instruments, commonly used for disease surveillance, have recently attracted substantial attention as the source of a static magnetic field for protein crystallization. Moreno et al. [45] grew highly perfect single-protein crystals (thaumatin, lysozyme and ferritin) in the presence of gels and magnetic fields (Oxford and Varian magnets with current frequencies of 500 and 300 MHz, respectively). During the experiments, capillaries were filled with protein solutions, and all the capillaries were placed in an NMR tube with silica hydrogel. In addition, Moreno et al. [46] obtained high-quality lysozyme crystals, in terms of mosaicity and diffraction resolution, under the same magnetic fields. They showed that the crystal quality was remarkably improved due to the suppression of convective transport and the control of nucleation kinetics in the magnetic field.

(p10.1) Another NMR instrument (Bruker AM-300) was applied to study the effects of a magnetic field on lysozyme crystals in a typical NMR cell [47]. The magnetic field intensity could be as great as 7 T with 99.9% homogeneity. The number of oriented lysozyme crystals decreased as the agarose increased when the crystals were grown in agarose. The number of larger crystals increased when grown in agarose under a homogeneous magnetic field. Subsequently, Surade et al. [48] used an 11.75 T magnet (Bruker NMR 500 MHz) to obtain high-quality crystals of four proteins (lysozyme, thaumatin, ferritin, and INHA-NAD) inside capillary pipettes at a high gel concentration. The transport control induced by gel-growth and kinetic surface control from the magnetic field may contribute to the cooperation observed for this phenomenon.
## (s13) Protein Crystallization Apparatus inside the Magnetic Field
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) The development of experimental devices used for protein crystallization inside a magnetic field has been rapid. A simple glass vessel was initially used as the crystallization apparatus. Figure 5 shows a simple experimental device using permanent magnets [7]. The crystallization cell was installed between two small permanent magnets, and the magnets were installed on the microscope by the pole piece to allow the detection of the crystal growth process. This setup allowed observations of the occurrence and growth of crystals by continuous monitoring and recording, but the observation was discontinuous rather than real-time. remarkably improved due to the suppression of convective transport and the control of nucleation kinetics in the magnetic field. Another NMR instrument (Bruker AM-300) was applied to study the effects of a magnetic field on lysozyme crystals in a typical NMR cell [47]. The magnetic field intensity could be as great as 7 T with 99.9% homogeneity. The number of oriented lysozyme crystals decreased as the agarose increased when the crystals were grown in agarose. The number of larger crystals increased when grown in agarose under a homogeneous magnetic field. Subsequently, Surade et al. [48] used an 11.75 T magnet (Bruker NMR 500 MHz) to obtain high-quality crystals of four proteins (lysozyme, thaumatin, ferritin, and INHA-NAD) inside capillary pipettes at a high gel concentration. The transport control induced by gel-growth and kinetic surface control from the magnetic field may contribute to the cooperation observed for this phenomenon.
## (s16) Protein Crystallization Apparatus Inside the Magnetic Field
Number of References: 20

(p16.0) The development of experimental devices used for protein crystallization inside a magnetic field has been rapid. A simple glass vessel was initially used as the crystallization apparatus. Figure  5 shows a simple experimental device using permanent magnets [7]. The crystallization cell was installed between two small permanent magnets, and the magnets were installed on the microscope by the pole piece to allow the detection of the crystal growth process. This setup allowed observations of the occurrence and growth of crystals by continuous monitoring and recording, but the observation was discontinuous rather than real-time.   This simple glass vessel evolved into an integrative device equipped with a real-time observation apparatus [49], a temperature control system [44], and an auxiliary instrument. Sazaki et al. and Yanagiya et al. [49,50] designed a real-time observation device for use in a strong magnetic field by conveniently adjusting the sample location, as shown in Figure 6. White light was used to illuminate the protein crystallization drops through an optical fiber. The location of the drops could be adjusted by sliding the stages in the X, Y and Z directions. Long-working-distance lenses, a CCD camera, and a videotape recorder were used to capture high-resolution crystal images. The crystallization temperature was controlled by a Peltier element and circulating water. The elements of the experimental device were all made of paramagnetic and diamagnetic materials. The microscope system was installed in the superconducting magnet [22]. A similar in situ observation apparatus was created using two completely identical pieces of equipment positioned symmetrically to record the growth process of protein crystals [51]. The equipment consisted of a light, four mirrors, a zoom lens (Pentax, Tokyo, Japan), and a CCD camera (XC-77, Sony, Tokyo, Japan). The control of crystallization temperatures was recorded at three different positions near the samples by T-type thermocouples. High-quality lysozyme crystals were obtained in a complete levitating state in the device. The advantage of the former apparatus was that the sample position could be adjusted continuously, while the advantage of the latter was the simultaneous observation of a sample in two locations. This simple glass vessel evolved into an integrative device equipped with a real-time observation apparatus [49], a temperature control system [44], and an auxiliary instrument. Sazaki et al. and Yanagiya et al. [49,50] designed a real-time observation device for use in a strong magnetic field by conveniently adjusting the sample location, as shown in Figure 6. White light was used to illuminate the protein crystallization drops through an optical fiber. The location of the drops could be adjusted by sliding the stages in the X, Y and Z directions. Long-working-distance lenses, a CCD camera, and a videotape recorder were used to capture high-resolution crystal images. The crystallization temperature was controlled by a Peltier element and circulating water. The elements of the experimental device were all made of paramagnetic and diamagnetic materials. The microscope system was installed in the superconducting magnet [22]. A similar in situ observation apparatus was created using two completely identical pieces of equipment positioned symmetrically to record the growth process of protein crystals [51]. The equipment consisted of a light, four mirrors, a zoom lens (Pentax, Tokyo, Japan), and a CCD camera (XC-77, Sony, Tokyo, Japan). The control of crystallization temperatures was recorded at three different positions near the samples by T-type thermocouples. High-quality lysozyme crystals were obtained in a complete levitating state in the device. The advantage of the former apparatus was that the sample position could be adjusted continuously, while the advantage of the latter was the simultaneous observation of a sample in two locations. Poodt et al. [52] designed a long working schlieren microscope in a 20 T resistive magnet (at Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands), as shown in Figure 7. The coolant was projected on a 1 mm slit, and the slit was placed in the focal plane of an achromatic lens. Using two mirrors, the beams were guided through a glass cuvette with the sample. Finally, the images were recorded by a projective zoom lens and CCD camera system. Using this microscope, the features of protein crystal growth in a gradient magnetic field were studied to compare how the same process occurred in microgravity. The authors showed that gradient magnetic fields can simulate microgravity crystal growth in space.

(p16.1) Another real-time visualization installation for crystal growth in a superconducting magnet was constructed by Okada et al. [53]. The setup consisted of a temperature control system, crystallization cells and an observation system. The crystallization cells were positioned in a plate around a periscope to effectively save space. It is worth noting that the cell plate contained buffer solutions to control the evaporation rates of the crystallization solutions. All of the crystallization cells were composed of optical transparent plastic for optical observation, and they were stacked vertically in the magnetic cavity. Using the observation system (including a periscope, CCD camera and PC), crystals in the cells outside of a magnetic field could be observed. The crystallization temperature was maintained at 4-20 °C by flowing dry, warm air from the bottom. During the experiments, the location of the periscope could be conveniently moved by motors to observe crystal growth. Poodt et al. [52] designed a long working schlieren microscope in a 20 T resistive magnet (at Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands), as shown in Figure 7. The coolant was projected on a 1 mm slit, and the slit was placed in the focal plane of an achromatic lens. Using two mirrors, the beams were guided through a glass cuvette with the sample. Finally, the images were recorded by a projective zoom lens and CCD camera system. Using this microscope, the features of protein crystal growth in a gradient magnetic field were studied to compare how the same process occurred in microgravity. The authors showed that gradient magnetic fields can simulate microgravity crystal growth in space.

(p16.2) Another real-time visualization installation for crystal growth in a superconducting magnet was constructed by Okada et al. [53]. The setup consisted of a temperature control system, crystallization cells and an observation system. The crystallization cells were positioned in a plate around a periscope to effectively save space. It is worth noting that the cell plate contained buffer solutions to control the evaporation rates of the crystallization solutions. All of the crystallization cells were composed of optical transparent plastic for optical observation, and they were stacked vertically in the magnetic cavity. Using the observation system (including a periscope, CCD camera and PC), crystals in the cells outside of a magnetic field could be observed. The crystallization temperature was maintained at 4-20 • C by flowing dry, warm air from the bottom. During the experiments, the location of the periscope could be conveniently moved by motors to observe crystal growth. Lu et al. [44] designed a container-less device for the levitation of crystallization droplets inside of a superconducting magnet (JMTA-16T 50 MF), as shown in Figure 8. The levitation apparatus was composed of a temperature control unit, a levitation unit, and a real-time observation unit [44]. The temperature control unit included a water bath, a temperature sensor, a water jacket, a computer and a temperature control program. A micro-CCD camera was used to observe the levitation process. This easy and simple levitation setup could accurately control the temperature and sample volume. The levitation processes were as follows: first, tightly screwing the screw caused the droplet to grow gradually along with the injection from the syringe; and finally, the droplet would fully levitate in the chamber when the magnetization force was larger than the gravitational force. The crystal growth process of the levitated droplet was observed using this setup, and the lysozyme crystals were obtained in levitation droplets. Shared instruments using the same superconducting magnet (JMTA-16 T 50 MF) were designed by Wang et al. [54]. These instruments included an operating platform, temperature controller, sample holders, and observation system. An outstanding advantage of this apparatus was that it could simulate different gravity levels by orienting the sample at different positions in the magnet. This setup provided a simple, quick and accurate experimental environment in which to conduct research or practical applications, in areas such as life sciences or materials sciences, in a superconducting magnet.
