# Photosensitive drugs: a review on their photoprotection by liposomes and cyclodextrins

CorpusID: 13531224 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4c9377498e917356cd039f21c0d0fc719fc51a9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4c9377498e917356cd039f21c0d0fc719fc51a9)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s4) Liposomes as drug stabilizers
Number of References: 11

(p4.0) The characteristic function of liposomes to include substances of different nature has led many researchers to study their application as degradation-preventing systems. (Crosasso et al., 2000;Pietzyk & Henschke, 2000;Fatouros & Antimisiaris, 2002). Some reviews summarize the contributions of many authors on the use of liposomes for the light protection of drugs and cosmetics during the last decades of the twentieth century (Bisby et al., 2000;Brisaert et al., 2001;Ragno et al., 1993Ragno et al., , 1995Ragno et al., , 2006aRagno et al., , 2006b). Subsequently, many other interesting studies and reviews in this field have been published, which we are looking at in this review to report the main ones.

(p4.1) Incorporation into liposomal systems has been deeply investigated for drugs belonging to the class of 1,4-dihydropyridines, known to be photosensitive and leading in most cases to the corresponding pyridine derivatives, devoid of any therapeutic activity (Ioele et al., 2009). In particular, inclusion of amlodipine showed a high protection degree with a rate of degradation comparable to that of solid pharmaceutical formulations. The experiments were monitored by UV spectrophotometry. Liposome and CD complexes showed a degradation of 10%, respectively, at 220 and 480 min, compared with a value of only 10 min for the ethanol solution. Amlodipine pure powder and commercial tablets showed a 10% degradation after 325 and 110 min. (Ragno et al., 2003a).
## (s6) Cyclodextrins as drugs stabilizers
Number of References: 4

(p6.0) The potential of CD in improving the stability of drugs has been widely investigated in pharmaceutical technology. A number of molecules entrapped in CD matrices have shown an improved stability under various stressing conditions of light, heating, oxidation agents, moisture. Many citations regarding the ability of these matrices to protect the drugs from light are also provided. Some reviews published some years ago provide very detailed information on the use of CD in drug delivery and especially for topical formulations. Many references regarding the ability of these matrices to protect the drugs from light are also provided. (Cal & Centkowska, 2008;Challa et al., 2005). Usually, the drug/CD ratio is 1:1 and the complex stability is generally higher at low temperature (Loftsson et al., 2001;Valle, 2004).
