# A review on hepatitis D: From virology to new therapies

CorpusID: 131951802 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0606ef90d7b1589ba043e0714a0c85b002b413c2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0606ef90d7b1589ba043e0714a0c85b002b413c2)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s3) Classification
Number of References: 13

(p3.0) HDV is the smallest known virus infecting mammals, for which humans are the only natural reservoir. Other susceptible mammalian hosts have been identified as well as used for research purposes; these include chimpanzees, tree shrews (both with HBV as a helper virus) and woodchucks (in the presence of the woodchuck hepatitis virus, WHV). Although HBV orthologues have been found in a variety of non-human mammals and have been shown to have potential cross-species infectivity [27], no HDV orthologue had been described until the very recent identification of HDV-like agents in birds and snakes [28,29].

(p3.1) Due to its distinct characteristics, HDV has been postulated to originate from plant viroids or cellular circular RNAs and is currently the sole member of the Deltavirus genus [30][31][32].

(p3.2) There are eight HDV genotypes, highly heterogeneous, with up to $40% of sequence divergence [33]. Genotype 1 is present worldwide and is the predominant virus in Europe and North America. Genotype 3 is identified in South America, while genotypes 2 and 4 are common in East Asia and genotypes 5-8 are mainly found in Africa (refer to [34] for a review of genotype distribution). Although good quality studies are limited, different genotypes seem to be associated with distinct liver disease severity. In comparison with genotype 1, genotypes 2 and 4 seem to cause milder liver disease. Genotype 2 in particular, has been associated to a lower incidence of cirrhosis, HCC and decreased mortality than genotype 1 in a prospective study conducted in Asia [35]. Genotype 3, on the other hand, is associated with a more severe course of acute infections and a higher risk of acute liver failure [36].

(p3.3) A co-evolution of HBV and HDV genotypes can be suggested by the frequency of specific genotype pairs, the most commonly reported being the combination of HDV genotype 3 with HBV genotype F [37]. However, these associations have been argued to merely result from geographic distribution, given these are not strict combinations [36] and HDV virion assembly has been shown to be possible with several HBV genotypes [38].
## (s6) Viral entry
Number of References: 15

(p6.0) HDV is considered to target primarily hepatocytes. Although the possibility of extra-hepatic replication in a natural infection has been hypothesised for HBV, namely in lymphocytes [51,52], no such evidence exists for HDV [53]. However, HDV replication can take place in a wide range of mammalian cells, if the genome is experimentally delivered, suggesting that its hepatotropism depends exclusively on the presence of the receptor [54].

(p6.1) HDV is considered to enter hepatocytes through the same mechanisms as HBV, given that both viruses share a similar envelope [2]. Infectivity of both viruses depends on the presence of L-HBsAg, in particular on the 75 amino acids located at its HBV icosahedral capsid is formed by multimerisation of its core protein (HBcAg) and contains one copy of the viral partially double-stranded DNA genome (or relaxed circular DNA, rcDNA) and the viral polymerase. HDV virions contain one copy of the viral circular, single-stranded RNA genome (that has 70% of sequence complementarity, allowing its folding into a rod-like structure), associated with both forms of its only protein (large and small delta antigen or S-and L-HDAg), forming the viral ribonucleoprotein (RNP). HDV life cycle. HDV entry (step 1) is mediated by a first attachment step, resulting from viral interaction with HSPGs, and later specific interaction of L-HBsAg with the viral receptor, NTCP. This step is inhibited by Myrcludex B. The viral RNP is then transported to the nucleus (step 2) where it releases the viral genome that serves as template to transcription of HDV mRNA (step 3), from which HDAg is translated (step 4). Replication of viral RNA (step 5) is mediated by cellular DNA-dependent RNA polymerases in the presence of S-HDAg, through a rolling-circle mechanism, with formation of multimeric and antigenomic RNA intermediates. During replication, antigenomic RNA can be edited by ADAR1 (step 6), leading to the expression of L-HDAg molecules (as detailed in Fig. 3). Farnesylation of L-HDAg (step 7), a step inhibited by lonafarnib, is necessary for regulation of replication and viral assembly. The newly formed HDV RNPs are assembled in the nucleus (step 8), exported and then enveloped by HBV surface glycoproteins (step 9) through the interaction of farnesylated L-HDAg with HBsAg. HDV virions are thought to be secreted through the Golgi (step 10) in parallel with HBV SVPs. Although the precise mechanism of action of REP 2139 is not fully characterized, it has been shown not to interfere with viral entry of HBV or HDV but appears to affect HDV secretion by inhibiting secretion of HBsAg and also potentially by interacting with HDAg. The exact mechanism of action of interferons (both alpha and lambda) is not represented, as it is still not fully known (although it is believed to involve an inhibition of viral RNA replication). ADAR1, adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 1; AG, antigenome; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; G, genome; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HDV, hepatitis B virus; HSPGs, heparan sulfate proteoglycans; NTCP, sodium taurocholate coreceptor peptide; RNP, ribonucleoprotein; SVPs, subviral particles. N-terminal (in the PreS1 domain), where an essential myristoylation site is located [40], as well as specific amino acid residues of S-HBsAg. However, M-HBsAg does not seem necessary [55,56].

(p6.2) A first, non-specific step consists in the viral attachment to the heparin sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) exposed on the outer face of the host cell membrane [57][58][59]. One particular HSPG, glypican-5, has been identified as an entry factor that only partially justifies HDV and HBV dependence on HSPGs, as its abrogation was not sufficient to completely prevent infection [60].

(p6.3) Attachment, although necessary, is not sufficient to allow viral entry and further interaction of the virus with its specific receptor is needed. For the first three decades following the identification of both HBV and HDV, this receptor was unknown. In 2012, the human sodium taurocholate cotransporting peptide (hNTCP, encoded by SLC10A1) was convincingly shown to be a functional receptor to both HBV and HDV in hepatocytes [61]. This molecule is located at the basolateral membrane of hepatocytes and is involved in the uptake of bile acids. The interaction of the bile acid binding domain of NTCP with the myristoylated N-terminal sequence of the PreS1 region of L-HBsAg was shown to be both necessary and sufficient for HBV and HDV infection [61,62]. The post-entry steps involved in the release of the HDV RNP in the cytoplasm and its transport into the nucleus, where transcription and replication subsequently occur, are not fully characterised.
## (s7) Replication
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) HDV replication occurs in the nucleus and is completely independent of HBV. Since HDV does not possess its own RNAdependent RNA polymerase or use the polymerase of its helper virus, the host cell DNA-dependent RNA polymerases likely mediate its replication. Several lines of evidence support the involvement of RNA polymerase II, but a debate is still ongoing concerning the role of the other cell RNA polymerases in HDV replication [54,63]. Both RNA polymerases I and III have been shown to bind HDV RNA. While RNA polymerase I seems implicated in the antigenomic transcription, no precise function has been reported so far for RNA polymerase III [64].
## (s8) RNA editing and L-HDAg synthesis
Number of References: 5

(p8.0) A single open reading frame in the HDV antigenome directs the synthesis of both isoforms of HDAg (S-HDAg and L-HDAg). These two isoforms differ by an additional C-terminal stretch of 19 amino acids in L-HDAg. As described before, the replication of HDV RNA requires S-HDAg, whereas L-HDAg is essential for virion assembly. The C-terminal domain of L-HDAg enables the interaction with HBsAg [74]. The relative ratio between these two HDAg isoforms regulates the equilibrium between replication and virion assembly. The editing of the antigenomic RNA by adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 1 (ADAR1) drives the transition from S-HDAg mRNA to L-HDAg mRNA transcription [75]. This cellular enzyme has two isoforms: the small, which is expressed constitutively and the large, whose expression is stimulated by type I IFN. Contradictory results still exist regarding the role of each ADAR-1 isoform in the HDV life cycle [76,77]. ADAR1 acts on a particular site of the HDV antigenome, called the amber/W site. This site is a UAG amber stop codon, leading to translation termination and consequent S-HDAg production. ADAR1 deaminates an adenosine (UAG ? UIG) and the resulting inosine is recognised as a guanosine in the next replication cycle, leading to a ACC triplet on the genome (instead of the original AUC). Transcription of this triplet generates a tryptophan-encoding UGG codon in the mRNA that no longer works as a stop codon. Consequently, translation proceeds for an additional 19 amino acids, resulting in L-HDAg synthesis [75], as depicted in Fig. 3.
## (s9) Post-translational modifications of HDAg proteins
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) Both HDAg proteins undergo post-translational modifications critical for their respective functions. Phosphorylation of two serine residues of S-HDAg allows interactions with the cellular RNA polymerase II, enabling the replication of HDV RNA [78,79]. A farnesylation signal (C 211 XXQ box) in the additional 19 amino acids of L-HDAg enables a farnesyl lipid group to be added covalently to the cysteine at position 211 by a cellular farnesyltransferase. This farnesylated form of L-HDAg inhibits the replication of HDV RNA and is essential for virion assembly [74]. Indeed, agents that inhibit the addition of the farnesyl lipid group to the C-terminus of L-HDAg prevent its interaction with HBsAg, consequently inhibiting HDV virion secretion both in vitro and in vivo [80,81] and constitute a novel therapeutic approach for HDV infection (see Drugs in Clinical Development below).
## (s10) Assembly and release
Number of References: 5

(p10.0) As mentioned previously, although HDV can replicate and synthesise new RNPs independently of HBV, its release from hepatocytes depends on the presence of HBsAg in the same cell. HDV assembly depends on the specific interaction between the farnesylated N-terminus of L-HDAg and the S region of HBsAg [82], and it has been shown that, unlike HBV, HDV RNP can efficiently be assembled with the small form of HBsAg (S-HBsAg) [83]. However, the large form of HBsAg (L-HBsAg) is needed to form infectious virions (as mentioned earlier, it mediates the interaction between the virus and its hepatocyte receptor, NTCP). The relevance of the non-infectious, S-HBsAg enveloped, HDV particles in a natural infection is still to be demonstrated.

(p10.1) In the context of a HBV infection, the three forms of HBsAg, which are produced in much higher amounts than required for HBV virion production, can self-assemble and be secreted as ''empty" subviral particles (SVPs). These non-infectious SVPs (constituted of an envelope devoid of HBV capsid or nucleic acids) are secreted in large excess relative to the infectious virions and are thought to play a role in HBV escape to the immune response. HBV SVPs are secreted through the Golgi, while infectious virions follow the multivesicular body pathway [84]. Given that the composition of the HDV envelope is close to that of SVPs and that titers of circulating HDV virions are higher than those of HBV virions, approaching those of HBV SVPs [2,85], it is likely that HDV uses the SVP secretion pathway for its assembly and release.
## (s12) Clinical presentation and natural history of the disease
Number of References: 15

(p12.0) Two modalities of HDV infection exist: simultaneous coinfection with HBV and HDV superinfection of a person chronically carrying HBV. Coinfection translates into acute hepatitis, during which aminotransferase levels can follow a typical biphasic course, corresponding to an initial HBV spread followed by HDV propagation. As for HBV monoinfection, in most immunocompetent adult patients (90-95%), it progresses to resolution of both HBV and HDV infections. The risk of acute liver failure is however much higher than that during acute HBV monoinfection [111,112]. Acute HDV superinfection of a patient chronically infected with HBV is associated with an episode of acute hepatitis that can be mistaken for a HBV flare. In this setting, the risk of acute liver failure is particularly high [111]. More than 90% of HBV carriers superinfected with HDV progress to chronic dual infection [111,112].

(p12.1) CHD is considered the most severe form of chronic viral hepatitis, with a faster progression towards cirrhosis and a higher risk of decompensation and mortality [113]. Indeed, 10-15% of chronically infected patients might develop cirrhosis within 5 years from infection and up to 80% after 30 years [114].

(p12.2) The association between HDV and HCC is still debated. On the one hand, decompensation of chronic liver disease, and not HCC, has been shown to be the most common complication of CHD [115,116]. On the other hand, despite the long-standing belief that HDV-infected patients do not present an increased risk of HCC, several cohort studies have recently found that this risk may indeed be as much as nine times higher than in HBV monoinfected patients [20,113,117,118]. Furthermore, persisting HDV replication was shown to be a risk factor for liver disease progression and HCC [119]. Other factors of disease progression are male sex, cirrhosis at presentation and lack of antiviral therapy [116].
## (s17) Nucleoside/nucleotide analogues
Number of References: 8

(p17.0) Nucleoside/nucleotide analogues (NUCs) act on the HBV reverse transcriptase, and efficiently inhibit HBV replication, with little effect on HBsAg expression. Although in theory inhibiting the helper virus is expected to affect HDV life cycle, in reality, NUCs are not effective against HDV. Molecules tested in HDV infection include famciclovir [141], ribavirin (in combination with pegylated IFN-alpha [142]), lamivudine [143] and entecavir [144], but none demonstrated effectiveness.

(p17.1) A clinical trial tested adefovir as monotherapy or in combination with pegylated IFN-alpha, but none of these treatments showed a better efficacy than pegylated IFN-alpha alone, and adefovir treatment alone had no effect on HDV viremia [133]. The same result was later observed with tenofovir [136]. However, a prospective South American study reported encouraging results with the combination of entecavir and pegylated IFN-alpha for 48 weeks in patients infected with HDV genotype 3, as 21 of the 22 patients included had an undetectable HDV RNA level at the end of treatment and at the six months follow-up, and 20 of 22 had undetectable level of HBV DNA at the six months follow-up, suggesting that genotype 3 might react differently to these molecules, potentially being easier to treat [145]. Finally, a study conducted with HIV co-infected patients treated with tenofovir for 58 weeks showed a good response with no detectable levels of HBV DNA in all patients and with no detectable levels of HDV RNA in 53% of them. Furthermore, an improvement in liver fibrosis severity was observed in 60% of patients who achieved undetectable HDV RNA levels [146]. Although this improvement may be a mere consequence of the immune reconstitution resulting from antiretroviral treatment, a benefit of prolonged therapy with NUCs in CHD cannot be excluded.
## (s21) Lonafarnib
Number of References: 5

(p21.0) As mentioned before, farnesylation of L-HDAg is an important post-translational modification, as it enables the interaction of HDV RNP with the HBV envelope. Lonafarnib is a farnesyltransferase inhibitor preventing the farnesylation of L-HDAg and consequently its interaction with HBsAg ( Fig. 2) and has been shown to abrogate the secretion of HDV viral particles both in vitro and in vivo [80,81]. A 2015 phase IIa clinical study showed that HDV RNA levels were significantly reduced in patients treated with lonafarnib for 28 days, in comparison to placebo (0.73 log10 IU/ml and 1.54 log10 IU/ml in the 100 mg and 200 mg group, respectively) and these reductions were proportional to the circulating drug levels [152]. However, lonafarnib has significant adverse effects, such as nausea, diarrhoea, abdominal bloating and weight loss.

(p21.1) A more recent study combined a low dosage of lonafarnib with ritonavir, a cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitor [153]. Ritonavir allows the administration of smaller doses of lonafarnib to achieve sufficient serum levels, leading to a better tolerability than the equivalent dose without ritonavir. Four weeks of treatment with lonafarnib 100 mg thrice daily led to a 1.2 log decrease in HDV RNA, whereas a 2.4 log decline was observed with a treatment of 100 mg of lonafarnib twice daily combined with ritonavir. Moreover, lonafarnib added to pegylated IFN-alpha showed a decrease of 1.8 log of HDV RNA after four weeks. However, after 8 weeks of treatment with either lonafarnib + ritonavir or lonafarnib + pegylated IFN-alpha, almost all patients returned to the pretreatment HDV RNA levels within 4-24 weeks post-treatment [153]. A new phase III study has recently been announced.
## (s22) REP 2139
Number of References: 5

(p22.0) Nucleic acid polymers (NAPs) are amphipathic molecules with a broad antiviral spectrum. Although their precise mechanisms of action are still debated, their anti-HBV action seems to result from an inhibition HBsAg release from hepatocytes [161]. As for HDV, an additional interaction with HDAg has been described and may account for the observed antiviral effect (current evidence on the mechanisms of action of NAPs has been recently reviewed in [162]). Furthermore, the drastic reduction of circulating HBAg levels shown in patients is thought to promote a normalisation of the humoral immune response [157].

(p22.1) A recent uncontrolled trial included 12 patients that were treated with REP 2139-Ca in combination with pegylated IFN-alpha (patients received REP 2139-Ca only for 15 weeks, followed by a combination of REP 2139-Ca and pegylated IFN-alpha for 15 weeks and finally pegylated IFN-alpha only for 33 weeks) [157]. At the end of combination therapy (week 30), 10/12 patients had undetectable HDV RNA and 9/12 patients had HBsAg declines > 2log10 from baseline, 6 of whom had HBsAg seroconversion. At the end of treatment 9 patients remained HDV RNA negative with 6 still having HBsAg seroconversion. Eighteen months after removal of treatment, HDV RNA was still negative in 7 patients and HBs seroconversion was still present in 4 patients [158].
## (s23) Vaccination/ prevention
Number of References: 2

(p23.0) HBV vaccination protects effectively against both HBV and HDV infection. Vaccination campaigns have indeed reduced the reservoir of HBV patients that can be potentially infected by HDV. A study published in 2007 [163] showed a clear correlation between the introduction of vaccination for HBV and the decrease in HDV incidence particularly among those 15-24 years old, probably also because of reduced iatrogenic transmission. Countries with high HDV endemicity, such as Brazil and Mongolia, have adopted universal HBV vaccination programmes, with an expected impact on the absolute number of new infections. No perspectives for a vaccination strategy to prevent HDV infection in HBV-infected patients currently exist, as results in animal models have been discouraging [164].
