# Periodontically Accelerated Osteogenic Orthodontics-A Review

CorpusID: 138198847 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ee4195f32d8f3e99539147d1373b81ac922203be](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ee4195f32d8f3e99539147d1373b81ac922203be)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Role of Orthodontist
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) Orthodontic treatment after surgery. The orthodontic force should be applied immediately after the surgery, as it was found to be the best time to initiate the movement [4]. But some prefer to start the tooth movement two weeks after the surgery. The orthodontist adjusts the appliances once in every two weeks. Depending upon the individual cases, the orthodontic correction will be over in four to ten months [1,5]. These procedures were found to reduce the treatment time required for the correction of Crowding and they accelerate canine retraction after premolar extraction. Molar intrusions and open bite corrections can also be carried out at a faster pace with this technique.
## (s7) Modifications
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) It is not always necessary to carry out the periodontal surgical procedure for the full mouth. The surgical procedure can be confined to the site where it is needed as determined by the orthodontist [6,7]. Also the surgical procedure can be split into two procedures and can be carried out in two separate appointments to reduce the complication of necrosis [8]. It can be used to expedite the rate of movement of individual teeth or dental segments. 7. There is an increase in alveolar bone volume after orthodontic treatment; the amount of bone formation around the tooth in its new position is moreindicates a gain in additional strength in long term when compared to traditional techniques. This also gives a better facial profile in some cases.
