# A Survey of Suicidality and Views on Suicide in an Indian Sample of Adults

CorpusID: 147650492 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1037fdfaf51687449b60a615c47287b85717630](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1037fdfaf51687449b60a615c47287b85717630)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine, Psychology

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 18

(p0.0) Suicide is a major social and public health issue in India. There is a consistent increase in suicidal deaths in India; from 1975 to 2005 the suicide rate increased by 43%. [1] It has been estimated that in India at age 15 an individual has a cumulative risk of about 1.3% of dying by suicide before the age of 80 years; men have a higher risk (1.7%) compared to women (1.0%), which is especially high in South India (3.5% in men and 1.8% in women). [2] It is well-known that suicides are under-reported and attempted suicides occur many times more than suicides in communities. [3,4] It is common to observe the suicidal cognitions and behaviors in psychiatric patients; however, the majority of suicide happen outside the clinical population. Compared to the magnitude of the problem, knowledgebase is rather scarce about the prevalence of suicidal cognitions

(p0.1) This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 License, which allows others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non-commercially, as long as the author is credited and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms. (0.4-4.2%) by a factor of 10-14 across sites. [9] There are a few specific Indian studies regarding suicidality conducted in various populations. A study involving 4711 subjects (aged 30+ years) in rural Central India close to the tribal belt reported suicide attempt by 4.2% and suicidal thoughts during the last 6 months by 5.1%. [10] In the Idu Mishmi, tribal population in North East India suicide attempt (14.2%) was higher than urban population in general (0.4-4.2%) and females were at higher risk. [11] In a study of medical students in Madras, 16.8% reported previous suicidal ideation and 5.9% reported suicide attempts. [12] A survey of 1817 undergraduate college students aged 18-24 years in Ahmedabad, found the prevalence of lifetime suicide ideation and suicide attempts as 11.7% and 4.0% respectively. [13] In a school based study of 1205 adolescents between 12 and 19 years of age in Delhi, reported lifetime and last year prevalence rates of suicidal ideation were 21.7% and 11.7%; and those of suicide attempt were 8% and 3.5% respectively; which were considerable. [14] Another study with 1087 adolescents aged 16-18 years in Bangalore found that 25.4% reported suicidal ideation in the past 3 months; lifetime suicide attempt was reported by 12.9%, which was 6% in the past 3 months. [15] In a study of 296 women from various backgrounds, suicidal idea and/or death wish was reported by 10% during the premenstrual period. [16] In clinical population, suicide attempt rates are obviously higher. In a study in India, it was 34% for schizophrenia and 44% for major depressive disorder. [17] In a study of patients with obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), 46.1% had current and 62.3% had lifetime suicidal ideation. [18] Another study with OCD patients, the worst ever and current rates of suicidal ideation were 59% and 28% respectively with a history of suicide attempt in 27% of the subjects. [19] There are few studies in specific vulnerable population. In 326 sex workers in Goa, 19% reported attempted suicide in the past 3 months. [20] In a study following natural disaster 1-year prevalence rates of death wishes (66.4%), suicidal ideas (38.0%), plans (18.3%), and attempts (12.6%) were considerable. [21] Objective In the above context, it was intended to study the awareness and attitude of people toward suicide, and to find out the prevalence of suicidality. The association of suicidality with awareness, attitude, stress, and sociodemographic and clinical profiles was also studied.
