# Adaptive radiation therapy for bladder cancer: a review of adaptive techniques used in clinical practice

CorpusID: 14382855 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fc10e40a854cc0f0c736ee8ed0c8892e4b901861](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fc10e40a854cc0f0c736ee8ed0c8892e4b901861)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s3) Offline ART
Number of References: 12

(p3.0) Composite ART techniquecompared to conventional RT Two studies 14,15 applied the offline/composite method for ART. This involved use of the CBCT images acquired in the first week of treatment to create a new adaptive CTV (Fig. 3) and a target volume more representative of the patients' organ size, shape and position during the treatment period. Pos et al., 15 showed that composite ART technique for bladder cancer in 21 patients reduced PTV volume by 40% compared to conventional non-adaptive RT, while maintaining adequate target volume coverage. Foroudi et al., 14 showed that two of five patients benefited from a composite ART technique with CTV coverage, improving from a minimum of 60.1-94.7% in one patient and 96.3-98.1% in the second patient. Although the results of this study using such a small sample size were not able to provide statistical significance, they do demonstrate the potential benefit of using ART. The composite technique also showed a higher conformity index compared to conventional in 95% isodose distribution around the CTV. 15 Furthermore, the composite ART technique resulted in lower rectal D50 (dose received by 50% of the rectum volume) compared to the conventional plan. 14 Another study that looked at composite ART technique was by Webster et al. 16 who created two composite plans by applying 5-and 10-mm isotropic margins (composite 1 and composite 2, respectively). The study showed that composite 1 compromised target coverage compared to convention RT. Composite 2 did not show any significant advantage in target coverage compared to conventional RT. However, both composite techniques had healthy tissue sparing benefits by reducing the irradiated volume. Therefore, the conclusion can be made that composite ART technique is superior to conventional RT in increasing the therapeutic ratio. It is also evident that a CTV-PTV margin of >5 mm is required for composite techniques to be beneficial compared to conventional RT. However, the optimal CTV-PTV margin for composite techniques was not investigated in this study and should be considered for inclusion in future studies. Furthermore, there was a reduced number of CBCT scans used to create ART plans in the Webster et al. 16   It is not clear whether an additional two CBCT images would have made a difference in target coverage in the study by Webster et al. 16 but further research is required to determine the optimal number of images required to create ART plans. One contributing factor to these non-statistically significant results may have been the small sample size (five) in the Foroudi et al. 14 study, however, as mentioned previously, they did show a significant reduction in healthy tissue irradiated. 14 Webster et al. 16 used a different methodology to create their composite ART plans. Using the first three CBCT images, rather than the first five CBCT images, they concluded that conventional RT was superior to composite ART in target volume coverage. However, the reduced number of CBCT images may have resulted in composite ART plans that did not represent the full range of bladder volume variation throughout a treatment course.
