# Multi-criteria decision making approaches for green supply chains: a review more multi-criteria models for real-life GSCs, especially with inclusion of uncer- tainty in parameters that are associated with GSCs

CorpusID: 157976762 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e390b556106da981d2e16487f44542f4077513c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e390b556106da981d2e16487f44542f4077513c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Economics, Business, Computer Science

## (s1) Conceptual framework
Number of References: 11

(p1.0) We started this research by identifying recent and relevant literature reviews on the topic of green supply chain management, which refers to integrating environmental thinking in SCM (Srivastava 2007). This resulted in 10 review articles which were used as a basis for the development of the conceptual framework for this study. First of all, Dekker et al. (2012) discussed issues related to green logistics, and revealed Operations Research contributions to supply chains with environmental considerations. Seuring (2012) and Brandenburg et al. (2014) focused on forward supply chains and reviewed modelling approaches used for SCs with sustainability considerations. Seuring and Müller (2008) reviewed literature on forward sustainable supply chain management. Srivastava (2007) presented a state of the art literature review on green supply chain management with a focus on reverse logistics, whereas Carter and Rogers (2008) and Ashby et al. (2012) reviewed and discussed literature on supply chain management within the context of sustainability. Three review articles focused on perishable products. Perishability is an important source of inefficiency because it contributes to production of waste. Food production chains are characteristic example of supply chains where perishability and changing product quality is evident. Akkerman et al. (2010) reviewed quantitative approaches used for distribution management of food products and focus on quality, safety and sustainability; Shukla and Jharkharia (2013) reviewed literature in agri-fresh produce SCs and discussed operational issues causing postharvest wastage; and Soysal et al. (2012) reviewed quantitative models used for sustainable food logistics management.
## (s2) Eco-efficiency indicators in supply chains
Number of References: 9

(p2.0) During the production of final products from raw materials, and the delivery of products to final customers, supply chains inevitably harm the environment (Tang and Zhou 2012). In Supply Chain Management with environmental concerns, the main business objectives are cost reduction, responsiveness improvement, and avoidance of permanent environmental damage (Soysal et al. 2012). In order to quantify the economic and environmental impact of supply chain activities and to improve environmental and economic performance, a set of indicators for ecoefficiency must be selected and considered to support decision making at SC level. Apart from commonly used indicators for economic performance of supply chains, such as total costs or profit, the analysis of the 10 review papers shows that important indicators to account for eco-efficiency are greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, energy consumption and water consumption (Dekker et al. 2012;Seuring 2012;Soysal et al. 2012).

(p2.1) Each supply chain is unique in its characteristics. Products are characterised by quality, fluctuations in demand and prices, seasonality, and perishability (Akkerman et al. 2010;Quariguasi Frota Neto et al. 2009;van der Vorst et al. 2009). These factors are associated with uncertainty. For instance, in Food Supply Chains (FSCs) these various sources of uncertainty lead to production of substantial amount of losses (Shukla and Jharkharia 2013). Perishability and continuous quality change of products over time is not exclusively associated with food products, but holds for other products as well, e.g. other fast moving consumer goods. Quality change over time is also associated with uncertainty because the change in quality is usually not precisely known as it depends on environmental conditions. We conclude that product quality, uncertainty, and perishability should be taken into account when designing eco-efficient GSCs.
## (s11) Discussion and conclusions
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) As observed by Dekker et al. (2012), environmental performance can often be improved substantially at a marginal expense of economic performance, and MCDM approaches can be very useful within this context. To the best of our knowledge, no reviews have specifically focused on MCDM approaches in GSCs and related production, distribution, and inventory problems. The aim of this paper was to review studies and to identify research opportunities in this field. While MCDM approaches are important to identify solutions balancing environmental and economic concerns, there are other approaches that can be used to take environmental issues into account, e.g. financial evaluation of environmental criteria, for instance carbon tax as presented in Chaabane et al. (2008), or using economic objective and environmental constraints (or vice versa). In this manuscript, however, we focused on papers that as a starting point apply MCDM approaches to balance (conflicting) criteria of economic and environmental performance.
