# A Survey on Service Composition Middleware in Pervasive Environments

CorpusID: 15264530 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d96105828f2994fd7d02a9a6cc807e508663e621](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d96105828f2994fd7d02a9a6cc807e508663e621)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s1) SCM: Service Composition Middleware Model
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) Based on several studies [22][24] that resolve the service composition process problem into several fundamental problems, we define a service composition middleware as a framework providing tools and techniques for composing services. We define a service composition middleware model, SCM model, as an abstract layer, general enough to describe all existing service composition middleware. The SCM model is at a highlevel of abstraction, without considering a particular service technology, language, platform or algorithm used in the composition process. The aim of this definition is to give the basis to discuss similarities and differences, advantages and disadvantages of all available service composition middleware and to highlight the nowadays existing lacks concerning the service composition problem in pervasive environments. As depicted Figure 1, the SCM interacts with the application layer by receiving functionality requests from users or applications [5] [7]. SCM needs to respond to the functionality requests by providing services that fulfill the demand. These services can be atomic or composite. The Service Repository represents all the distributed service repository where services are registered. The SCM interacts with the Service Repository to choose services to compose.
## (s4) SeSCo: Seamless Service Composition
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) SeSCo [10] presents a service composition mechanism for pervasive computing. It employs the service-oriented middleware platform called Pervasive Information Communities Organization (PICO) to model and represent resources as services. The proposed service composition mechanism models services as directed attributed graphs, maintains a repository of service graphs, and dynamically combines multiple basic services into complex services (Builder). The proposed service composition mechanism constructs possible service compositions based on their semantic and syntactic descriptions (Generator). SeSCo [10] proposes a hierarchical service overlay mechanism based on a LATCH protocol (Evaluator). The hierarchical scheme of aggregation exploits the presence of heterogeneity through service cooperation. Devices with higher resources assist those with restricted resources in accomplishing service-related tasks such as discovery, composition, and execution.
## (s5) Broker Approach for Service Composition
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Broker [6] presents a distributed architecture and associated protocols for service composition in mobile environments that take into consideration mobility, dynamic changing service topology, and device resources. The composition protocols are based on distributed brokerage mechanisms (Evaluator) and utilize a distributed service discovery process over adhoc network connectivity. The proposed architecture is based on a composition manager, a device that manages the discovery, integration (Generator), and execution of a composite request (Builder). Two broker selectionbased protocols -dynamic one and distributed one -are proposed in order to distribute the composition requests IJCSI IJCSI 6 to the composition managers available in the environment. These protocols depend on device-specific potential value, taking into account services available on the devices, computation and energy resources and the service topology of the surrounding vicinity.
## (s9) WebDG: Semantic Web Services Composition
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) WebDG [12] proposes an ontology-based framework for the automatic composition of web services. [12] presents an algorithm to generate composite services from high level declarative descriptions. The algorithm uses composability rules, in order to compare the syntactic and semantic features of web services to determine whether two services are composable.  7 WebDG architecture is depicted under SCM model in Figure 7. The service composition approach is depicted under four phases of request specification (Translator), service description matchmaking (Generator), composition plan selection (Evaluator) and composite service generation (Builder). A prototype implementation WebDG is provided and tested on a E-government Web service applications. The WebDG evaluation aims to test the possibility of generating plans for a large number of service interfaces, the effectiveness and speed of the matchmaking algorithm, and the role of the selection phase (QoC parameters) in reducing the number of generated plans. The result show that most of the time is spent on checking message composability. On the other hand, a relatively low value of composition completeness generates more plans, each plan containing a small number of composable operations. In contrast, a high value of this ratio generates a smaller number of plans, each plan having more composable operations.
