# Drug Design, Development and Therapy Dovepress Video abstract 8-Hydroxyquinolines: a review of their metal chelating properties and medicinal applications

CorpusID: 15623903 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/742bd066de60aff6eae35d512b026de4b798b957](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/742bd066de60aff6eae35d512b026de4b798b957)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry

## (s2) 1162
Number of References: 47

(p2.0) Prachayasittikul et al which are described as follows. First, compounds should have low to moderate metal affinity, allowing them to bind metal ions in higher concentration areas and release them in lower concentration areas. 80 Second, a suitable logarithmic measure of acid dissociation constant value (pKa) is necessary for compounds to be protonated upon entering cell compartments, which induces the release of metal ions from the complex. 80 If the extracellular pH is higher than the pKa of the ionophore, the compound will form a complex with the metal ion. Once the metal complex passes into the cell, where the pH is lower than the pKa, the metal ions will be released. 80 Both properties have been noted for CQ thereby allowing it to act as an ionophore with the capability to transport Cu and Zn ions into cells. 25,26,86 As a Cu ionophore, CQ has been reported to be able to deliver metal ions into cells, where it exerts its activity. 79 CQ has been found to interact with Cu ions in tumor cells to form active Cu complexes which target the proteasome. 87 Either Cu 1+ or Cu 2+ interact with electron donors, such as thiol and amino groups that are located outside the active site of proteasome 88-90 thereby causing its conformational changes. These effects finally lead to proteasome inhibition 79,87 and apoptosis of tumor cells. 87 Some organic Cu complexes including CQ-Cu complexes have been reported to exhibit potent proteasome inhibitory effects on tumor cells but not on normal cells. 81,91 Moreover, in vivo study of the effect on prostate cancer cells and xenografts by CQ was reported. 79 The results showed that CQ alone can form an active metal complex with Cu of tumor cells, leading to androgen receptor repression, angiogenesis reduction, and apoptosis induction. Particularly, androgen receptor overexpression was found in all stages of prostate cancer, 92,93 indicating that CQ may serve as an excellent antiandrogen receptor agent for prostate cancer treatment and prevention. 79 Besides acting as the Cu ionophore, CQ also provides anticancer activity as the Zn ionophore. 84 The CQ-Zn complex is a known proteasome inhibitor; however, its growth inhibitory effect is weaker than that exerted by the CQ-Cu complex. 84 In addition, CQ relays Zn ions to lysosomes 85 and inhibits nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) activity 84,94 thereby leading to lysosomal disruption and cell apoptosis. 84,95 The ionophore property of CQ was confirmed by adding metal ions, such as Cu and Zn, which can potentiate its cytotoxic activity instead of reversing the effects, as can be expected in the case of metal chelators. 80 This indicated that CQ can transport metal ions into cells and exhibits cytotoxic activity. 80 Furthermore, the anticancer activity of 8HQ derivatives on human cancer cells indicated that the effect is enhanced by Cu ions, a redox-reactive metal ion, as it leads to an elevation of ROS. However, such effects were not observed for Zn ions, which are non-redox reactive metal ions. 96 It has been further demonstrated that nitro containing 8HQ derivatives such as nitroxoline (8-hydroxy-5-nitroquinoline; NQ) ( Figure 8) exerted more potent anticancer activity, with a IC 50 of 5-10-fold less than that of CQ (halogenated 8HQ derivative), and may be less neurotoxic. 96 Unlike CQ, the antitumor effect of NQ is mainly exhibited via an increasing level of ROS in cells. The nitro moiety of NQ is a nitrogen radical source that initiates redox reactions, that consequently alters intracellular signaling thereby leading to antiangiogenesis and inhibition of tumor cell growth. These effects are enhanced by Cu but not Zn ions. This hypothesis was supported by studies that demonstrated that NQ acted as an antiangiogenic agent both in vitro and in vivo. 84 It is notable that Cu ions enhanced the cytotoxic activity found in NQ. 96 While Zn ions are known to enhance cytotoxic activity, the activity is found only in association with compounds containing an iodine moiety on the C-7 position of quinoline rings, such as CQ. 96 However, the mechanism by which Zn enhances the cytotoxic activity has not been fully elucidated. 96 The neurotoxicity of CQ has been reported to be involved with the Zn transporting activity. 86,97 CQ that contains iodine at the C-7 position is capable of acting as a Zn ionophore, while NQ does not. 96 Such an observation explains why NQ is less neurotoxic than CQ. Moreover, neurological diseases have not been reported in patients treated with NQ, 98 suggesting that NQ is a novel compound with less neurotoxicity and should be further developed as an anticancer drug.

(p2.1) Recently, glucoconjugates of 8HQ derivatives ( Figure 9) were developed as anticancer prodrugs in order to improve the selectivity and to avoid chelation of systemic metal ions. 99 It was reported that glucose avidity, increased glycolysis rate, and overexpression of glucose transporters were found in cancer cells. 100 The study indicated that glucoconjugates could enhance drug delivery owing to the presence of the glucose moiety in drug molecules. The molecular structures of conjugated glucose can mask the chelating properties of compounds until they reach their target sites. Moreover, the presence of glucose in the drug structure promotes a more selective action by exploiting glucose transporters, which were found to be overexpressed in cancer cells. 99 Therefore, glucoconjugated drugs are more selective to cancer cells and can cause less systemic side effects. 99 After glucoconjugates are trapped in target cells, glucose moieties are hydrolyzed by specific β-glucosidases, which allows the compounds was supported by the finding that the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) value was not changed by the addition of metal ions such as Fe, Cu, Mn, Zn, or Ni. 109 Therefore, it was suggested that 8HQ interacts with several molecular targets to evade TB resistance. 109 Most of the clinically used antituberculosis drugs are known to be more active against replicating TB and are able to kill both types of TB. The more potent actions were exhibited against the nonreplicating type as was observed in 8HQ, which has not been reported in the literature. 109 Thus, 8HQ could be a promising compound for the improvement of TB treatment. 109 The antitubercular activity of CQ-metal complexes were also reported. 113 In particular, a series of mixed ligand metal complexes using CQ and 1,10-phenanthroline as ligands to coordinate with transition metal ions were synthesized and tested for antitubercular and antifungal activities. 113 It was found that the Mn(II) complex was active against TB (MTCC200) with comparable MIC to the standard drug rifampicin with MIC values of 45 µg/mL and 40 µg/mL, respectively, 113 whereas the Co(II) complex showed more potent activity with MIC 6.4-fold less than that of rifampicin. 113 This study showed that free ligands and metal complexes exerted higher antitubercular activity than that of metal salts. 113 inhibitory effect on Escherichia coli A previous study reported the antimicrobial effects of 8HQ and its derivatives including 2-hydroxyquinoline (2HQ), 4-hydroxyquinoline (4HQ), and 6-hydroxyquinoline (6HQ) as well as 2-methyl-8HQ against human intestinal bacteria (Bifidobacterium longum, Clostridium difficile, Clostridium perfringens, E. coli, Lactobacillus acidophilus, and Lactobacillus casei). 103 The results from the paper disc agar diffusion method demonstrated that only 8HQ could exhibit anti-intestinal bacterial activity. Strong inhibition was also observed for E. coli and C. difficile at a concentration of 0.5 mg/disc and for C. perfringens at a concentration of 0.1 mg/disc. The SAR study indicated that different positions of the hydroxyl group but not the methyl group on the quinoline ring gave rise to growth inhibitory activity against intestinal bacteria. Particularly, compounds with an OH group at the C-8 position displayed effective E. coli, C. difficile, and C. perfringens inhibitions. 103 On the other hand, 2HQ, 4HQ, and 6HQ showed no growth inhibition against all of the tested intestinal bacteria.
## (s4) Antibacterial activity Antitubercular activity
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) Nonreplicating Mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB) or latent TB is more tolerant to most antituberculosis drugs than the replicating type of TB and requires a more prolonged treatment. 109 In fact, more than 200 8HQ-like compounds were identified to have an inhibitory effect against replicating TB. 112 Results showed that 8HQ itself exerted the most potent activity among other compounds in its class. 113 8HQ can kill both replicating and nonreplicating TB in vitro, with a more potent effect noted for the nonreplicating type. 109 Moreover, toxicity toward mammalian cells was not observed within the tested range of concentrations (0.1-10 µM), suggesting its safety in humans. 109 Insight into its mechanism of action was not fully elucidated; however, the bidentate chelating property of 8HQ was probably not the primary mechanism. This Drug Design, Development and Therapy 2013:7 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
## (s7) 1164
Number of References: 27

(p7.0) Prachayasittikul et al inhibit the growth of S. aureus including methicillinresistant S. aureus (MRSA), methicillin-susceptible S. aureus, and vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus and displayed median MIC of 0.25%, which is equal to an active ingredient concentration of 12.5 µg/mL at optimum pH of 9.2. 1 Lowering of the pH value caused a reduction in its efficacy: pH 7.5 yielded 4-fold reduction, and pH 5.5 resulted in 8-fold reduction. 1 Interestingly, MRSA and vancomycinintermediate S. aureus were equally susceptible to AQ + as was observed for methicillin-susceptible S. aureus. It was suggested that the susceptibility to AQ + was not influenced by antibiotic resistance determinants of the microbe. 1 Data from electron microscopy indicated that AQ + actively disrupts bacterial cell walls thereby leading to cell lysis. 1 A timekilling study showed that AQ + killed 99.9% of all bacterial cells from tested isolates within 6 hours. The time-killing curve of AQ + was similar to that of gentamicin. Moreover, at higher concentration of AQ + , a more rapid killing effect was observed. 1 MRSA is carried in the anterior nares, and it should be noted that mupirocin-containing nasal ointment is currently being used to prevent transmission; however, antibiotic resistance had been reported to increase. 113 Owing to the lipophilicity of 8HQ and its potency against various S. aureus strains as well as its rapid killing nature, it has been suggested that this compound could be used as topical hand cleansing agent to prevent MRSA transmission. 1 The efficacy of 8HQ in inhibiting S. aureus is dependent on its chelating ability and is enhanced in the presence of Cu. In addition, 8HQ derivatives were found to inhibit S. aureus strains. 102 Quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSAR) study performed on 24 substituted 8HQ derivatives showed that ten three-dimensional descriptors such as molecular refraction (MR), partition coefficient (logP), total energy (E), standard Gibbs free energy (G), lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), total molecular energy (TotE), Wien index (WInd), Balaban index (BInd), and octanol-water ClogP were significant for the development of highly predictive (R 2 = 0.988) model. 102 Moreover, potent activity was found in ester derivatives rather than styryl derivatives. 102 Antidental plaque activity Antidental plaque activity of 8HQ derivatives has been reported. 110,111 Dental plaque is a combination of oral microorganisms colonized on oral surfaces in which a microbial consortium or oral biofilm is formed. 115 Mutans streptococci and Porphyromonas gingivalis are the most important among such oral microorganisms since they are pathogens of dental caries and periodontal diseases, respectively. 115 At equilibrium, oral biofilms are beneficial for the prevention of exogenous and potentially pathogenic species colonization. However, unfavorable disruption of dynamic balance between host and microbial community at local sites eventually leads to an overgrowth of virulent or pathogenic species causing diseases. 116 Mutans streptococci comprises two species, Streptococcus mutans and S. sobrinus, in which S. mutans is highly prevalent in dental plaque and is considered as an etiological pathogen for dental caries. 117 An in vitro study of antidental plaque activity of three 8HQ derivatives, namely 8HQ sulfate, 5-chloro-7-iodo-8HQ (or CQ), and 5,7-dichloro-8HQ, against S. mutans, Streptococcus sanguis, Actinomyces viscosus, and Actinomyces naeslundii was reported. The result showed that all 8HQ derivatives differentially inhibited each of the tested organisms. 111 These compounds were prepared in percentage concentrations in polyethylene glycol owing to their sparingly water-soluble nature. 111 CQ and 5,7-dichloro-8HQ exerted a bactericidal effect at 0.05% concentration on S. mutans (cariogenic) and A. viscosus (periodontogenic), whereas 8HQ sulfate showed a bacteriostatic effect against both pathogens at a higher (0.3%) concentration. 111 It was demonstrated that halogenated 8HQs were more potent dental plaque inhibitors. 110,111 The low water solubility is a limitation in using these bioactive compounds via an aqueous vehicle such as mouth rinse. 111 However, such compounds could be used via a polyethylene glycol vehicle as an ointment or additive ingredient in dentifrice to control dental diseases. 111 It is widely known that the antibacterial activity of 8HQ is closely related with its chelating ability, therefore, Fe or Cu chelation is required for the activity. 110 Previous SAR studies indicated that substitution near the nitrogen atom or the phenolic group could alter the chelating ability, which led to a reduction of the antimicrobial activity. 118,119 This study demonstrated that the hydrophobic logP parameter alone is not adequate for accurate computational prediction. Thus, electronic parameters such as pKa and steric parameters including MW and molecular refractivity are required for antidental plaque prediction. 110 The QSAR study showed that two main factors are involved in antidental plaque activity of 8HQ against S. mutans. 110 The results revealed that compounds with increased lipophilicity and electron-withdrawing substituents at the 5-position led to improvements in the activity, whereas bulky substituent groups afforded a decrease in the activity. 110 According to these findings, the most potent S. mutans inhibitor should contain small C-5 substituents with lipophilicity and electron-withdrawing properties. Notably, CQ contains a 5-chloro group with lipophilicity and an electron-withdrawing nature, making this compound a good S. mutans inhibitor. 110 Antimicrobial activity of metal complexes and novel compounds
## (s8) Metal-8HQ complexes
Number of References: 12

(p8.0) The antimicrobial activity of divalent metal-8HQ complexes and their mechanisms of action have been proposed. 120 It was assumed that 8HQ uses its high lipophilicity to penetrate bacterial cell membranes in order to reach its target site of action, which could possibly be a metal-binding site of bacterial enzymes. The metal-8HQ complex will dissociate into a 1:1 ratio of 8HQ-metal charged complex and 8HQ free ligand. 120 The charged 8HQ metal complex can bind and block the metal-binding sites on bacterial enzymes, which gives rise to the antimicrobial effect. 119 Therefore, the lipophilicity, as indicated by the logP, is considered to be an important factor for antimicrobial activity of the investigated compounds. 120 In addition, the dissociated free ligand of 8HQ possesses high chelating ability that could bind metallic prosthetic groups of microbial enzymes thereby leading to the inhibition of enzymatic activity. 5,120 Recently, 8HQ-uracil metal complexes bearing antimicrobial activity (Figure 7) have been reported. 121 The complexes exhibited growth inhibition against many strains of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria including resistant pathogens, such as S. aureus, Enterococcus faecalis, and Candida albicans. 121 Previously, 4-benzenesulfonamide (HQMABS), shown in Figure 10, is a hybrid of 8HQ and sulfanilamide and was reported to be a ligand for metal complexes. 5 This study showed that HQMABS exhibited more potent antimicrobial activity with higher sensitivity against Gram-positive bacteria as compared to their individual parent compounds (ie, 8HQ and sulfanilamide). 5 This demonstrates that there is a synergistic effect of 8HQ and sulfanilamide that facilitates the penetration of HQMABS into the site of action in bacterial cells. 5 Therefore, HQMABS exhibited antimicrobial effects through a similar mechanism to that of 8HQ, as a membrane active agent via metal ion chelation. 122 On the other hand, all metal complexes of HQMABS displayed weak to moderate activity as compared to their respective free ligand, HQMABS. Moreover, the antimicrobial activity of these compounds is dependent on the nature of the ligands, concentration and lipophilicity of the compound, nature of metal ions, geometry of the complex, and coordinate sites. 5
## (s9) 8HQ-based quaternary cationic surfactant
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) Quaternary cationic surfactants ( Figure 11) were synthesized from the reaction of 8HQ and long chain alkyl halides. 104 The study showed that cationic amphiphilic structures of quaternary salts allowed the compounds to interact with the bacterial lipid bilayer membrane. 122 The effect may alter the membrane itself or cause toxicity to the membrane thereby leading to bacterial cell death. 123 The activity of these 8-hydroxyquinolium derivatives is dependent on both the polar heads (ie, size and electronic charge distribution) and the hydrocarbon chain length. 104 It was found that the activity increased from C-12 to C-14 carbon atoms and decreased in the case of C-16. 104 This suggested that cationic and long chain hydrocarbons of an appropriate length facilitate bacterial killing via membrane attack.
## (s12) Linkages of antiparasitic and anticancer activities
Number of References: 10

(p12.0) Metabolic pathways in intracellular parasites (ie, T. gondii and P. falciparum) and in cancer cells are more sensitive to oxidative stress than normal cells and are dependent upon glycolysis in order to produce energy. In addition, some anticancer drugs were found to have antimalarial activity. [138][139][140] Results from computational screening of quinoline-based antitumor compounds showed that nitrogen substitution at the C-5 position of the quinoline ring is required for antiprotozoal activity. Apparently, 5-nitroso-8HQ (NSC3852) (Figure 15) exerted the most potent predicted activity and is therefore relevant to the experimentally observed activity against T. gondii, with a half maximal effective concentration of 78.6 nM. But, its activity against P. falciparum was found to be eight times less active than that for T. gondii. 105 So far, NSC3852 was reported to exert anticancer activity as elicited through the production of superoxide anion and nitric oxide (NO) against breast cancer cells. 141 In contrast, antiprotozoal activity of NSC3852 was attributed to different mechanisms. 105 Particularly, it was hypothesized that NSC3852 increased the intracellular oxidative stress via indirect mechanisms. This involves arylation of protein sulfhydryls and the depletion of intracellular glutathione, 142 which resulted in the metabolism of NSC3852 to non-redox cycling naphthoquinone and NO release from the nitroso group of the compound. 105 Interestingly, antiparasitic and anticancer activities of 8HQ derivatives are potentiated upon complexation with metal ions such as Cu and Zn. 84 A series of antimony-8HQ complexes were synthesized and found to exhibit more potent antitrypanosomal and cytotoxic activities when compared to Sb salt (SbCl 3 ) and their free ligands, which are 8HQ, 5-chloro-8HQ, and 5-chloro-7-iodo-8HQ (or CQ). 143 
## (s13) Antioxidant activity
Number of References: 8

(p13.0) Oxidative damage is frequently found in many diseases such as aging, atherosclerosis, cancer, diabetes, 144 and neurodegenerative diseases. 7 Free radicals are continuously produced in cells through a wide range of biological processes. 144 For example, the changing oxidation stage of Cu, which is a cofactor of SOD, results in the generation of ROS. 145 Therefore, antioxidant defenses, such as those afforded by tocopherol, ascorbic acid, SOD enzyme, and catalases, are necessary in the maintenance of homeostasis. 146 Many phenolic compounds, derived from either natural sources or synthetic methods, have been reported as potent antioxidants. [147][148][149] An effective antioxidant activity of phenolic compounds is dependent on the stability of the phenoxyl radical formed in the reaction 150 
## (s16) Pb transportation across erythrocyte membranes
Number of References: 21

(p16.0) Long-term exposure to Pb from the environment causes lead poisoning. Pb accumulation is found in bone tissue 165 and is also distributed to other organs. 166 Moreover, Pb accumulation in bone tissue is correlated with an increased risk of cardiovascular mortality, 167 cognitive changes, and neurodegenerative diseases. 168,169 The majority of Pb in whole blood is not found in the plasma but is sequestered in erythrocytes, which take up Pb via anion exchangers. 83 The accumulation of Pb in erythrocytes affects erythrocyte enzymes, especially ∆-ALA dehydratase 170 and 5-nucleotidase. 171 Such accumulation also accelerates the vascular clearance of red blood cells 172 and thrombin generation, 173 which may lead to an increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease. 174 Most of the chelators that are employed for chelation therapy are not capable of passing across the erythrocyte membrane. Thus, the effective reduction of the total body Pb level is not achieved and gives only a short period of therapeutic benefit. 83,175 Therefore, a combination of Pb ionophore and Pb chelating agent was recommended as a new strategy for lowering total body Pb accumulation. 176 ∆-ALA dehydratase is well recognized as a Zncontaining erythrocyte enzyme. 83 Pb is believed to displace Zn from the enzyme, thereby leading to enzyme inactivation. However, the addition of Zn has been reported to restore ∆-ALA dehydratase activity in vivo. 177,178 Since Pb ions enter erythrocytes through anion channels, if they were not trapped in extracellular areas they could reenter cells. 83 Thus, the increase of intracellular Zn may reverse Pb binding and facilitate the release of Pb from the enzyme. This potentiates intracellular Pb ions to exit from erythrocytes into the extracellular space, where they are effectively eliminated by Pb chelators. 83 CQ is a hydrophobic halogenated 8HQ derivative known to act as a Zn ionophore. It is capable of transporting Zn across the cellular membrane. 80 An in vitro study demonstrated that CQ acting as a Zn ionophore could facilitate Pb escape from erythrocytes into the extracellular space. An increased intracellular Zn level thereby allows more effective chelation. 83 This suggested that 8HQ derivatives and other classes of Zn ionophore could be further developed as a combined agent, acting as Pb chelators by lowering the total body Pb accumulation. 83 
## (s17) Building block for artificial carbohydrate receptors
Number of References: 8

(p17.0) Artificial carbohydrate receptors exploiting carbohydratebased molecular recognition processes via noncovalent interactions of sugar binding [179][180][181] have been developed (Figure 16) for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. 182 Binding preference in carbohydrate recognition is an important factor for effective systemic outcome. 183 An in vitro study demonstrated that 8HQ-based receptors elicited higher affinity to β-galactoside as compared to that of quinoline-based receptors. 183 Moreover, the addition of more 8HQ moieties into the receptor can potentiate higher affinity. 183 It was suggested that the quinoline hydroxyl group plays an important role in complex formation and molecular recognition of carbohydrates. Therefore, 8HQ-based compounds could potentially be used as a building block for artificial carbohydrate receptors. 183 
## (s18) Potential antidiabetic activity
Number of References: 21

(p18.0) Insulin/insulin-like growth factor-1 signaling pathway (IIS) is an evolutionarily conserved pathway, which regulates lifespan and longevity in various species from nonvertebrates to humans. 184 In nonhuman organisms, decreased IIS has been found to be associated with extended lifespan and protection against oxidative stress damage. 185,186 In addition, experiments on mouse models also demonstrated a significant role of down-regulated IIS in the maintenance of metabolic homeostasis and oxidative defense. 184 In humans, individuals with decreased IIS as found in those with Laron syndrome were shown to exhibit a lower rate in the development of diseases of civilization including acne, cancer, and diabetes mellitus (DM). 184 Forkhead box proteins (FOXO) are crucial regulators against oxidative stress conditions. Activation of FOXO in the nucleus results in an expression of many downstream effectors including antioxidant enzyme genes such as superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) and catalase. At the promoter level, FOXO1 induces the expression of the Hmox1 gene (heme oxygenase-1) thereby leading to the reduction of mitochondrial respiration and ROS formation. 185 Moreover, in pancreatic β-cell, FOXO1 functions to inhibit β-cell proliferation and prevent β-cell apoptosis 187 as shown in Figure 17. Therefore, the level of nuclear FOXO is important for oxidative stress resistance and cytoprotection of cells. 187,188 Overstimulated IIS is closely associated with the pathogenesis of DM. Overconsumption of hyperglycemic diet can cause high blood glucose levels, which induces glucose/FOXO1-mediated β-cell proliferation in order to produce insulin for controlling blood glucose. 188 This long-term phenomenon generates insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia, which are the hallmarks of DM type 2. 188 IIS is found to regulate nuclear distribution of FOXO proteins. 185 The induction of IIS, caused by hyperglycemic diet, induces Zn-dependent phosphorylation of nuclear  185 Reduction of nuclear FOXO1 levels as a result of phosphorylation leads to three events. First, an impairment of oxidative stress resistance of β-cells as caused by downregulation of MnSOD and catalase gene expressions. 184 Second, an increased proliferation and apoptosis of β-cells. Third, the inhibition of FOXO1 serves as key regulators for the inhibition of hepatic gluconeogenesis. Therefore, FOXO1 inhibition suppresses hepatic enzymes necessary for glucose production, such as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and glucose-6-phosphatase, at the transcriptional level. 189 Obviously the first two events promote β-cell apoptosis thereby leading to impaired insulin synthesis and altered blood glucose level, while the last event facilitates the lowering of blood glucose as shown in Figure 18.

(p18.1) 8HQ has been reported as a diabetogenic agent owing to its ability to harm β-cells. 190 As a Zn ionophore, 8HQ carries Zn into cells in the form of lipophilic, uncharged complexes and releases Zn inside the cells to promote Zn-dependent FOXO1 phosphorylation thereby leading to oxidative damage and apoptosis of β-cell. 190 In addition, acidic proton (H + ) released from the -OH group of 8HQ causes damage to β-cells. 190 The SAR study of 8HQ and its derivatives indicated that their binding affinity to Zn 2+ , charge of complex, and acidity are determinant factors for diabetogenicity of the investigated compounds. 190 As mentioned, FOXO1 phosphorylation is Zn-dependent, therefore, compounds that possess affinity to bind and form uncharged complexes with Zn are also capable of penetrating into cells thereby leading to the induction of FOXO1 phosphorylation and the triggering of its exclusion from the nucleus. 190 Reduced nuclear FOXO1 levels ultimately lead to β-cell destruction and apoptosis. 190 A series of 8HQ and derivatives containing OH groups at different positions on the quinoline ring (ie, 2HQ and 4HQ) as well as ionizable functional groups (ie, CO 2 Table 1 Brief review of 8-hydroxyquinoline (8HQ) and its derivatives 8HQ is a lipophilic compound with diverse bioactivities which are exerted via its chelating ability. ionophore is a subset of metal-binding compounds which are capable of transferring multiple metal ions across biological membranes, either in or out of cells. Antineurodegenerative activity • 8HQ derivatives are small lipophilic compounds that are capable of entering the blood-brain barrier into the target site in the brain.
## (s22) •
Number of References: 17

(p22.0) A compound is considered diabetogenic if it has the ability to harm β-cells, including decreasing antioxidant defenses and activating β-cell proliferation leading to β-cell apoptosis. • 8HQ has been reported as a diabetogenic agent due to its ability to induce Zn-dependent FOXO1 phosphorylation via action of the Zn ionophore as well as its acidity caused by release of H + from OH groups. These phenomena lead to β-cell apoptosis, which affects insulin production and control of blood glucose. SO 3 H) and polar amino groups were investigated in vitro. 190 The results showed that 8HQ and 8-hydroxyquinaldine ( Figure 19A) displayed diabetogenic effects and strongly induced FOXO1 phosphorylation in the presence of Zn 2+ . However, all 8HQ derivatives with substituents at C-2 (CO 2 H) and C-5 (SO 3 H) ( Figure 19B) positions showed no diabetogenicity, and no induction of FOXO1 phosphorylation. This could be attributed to anionic charge groups (CO 2 and SO 3 -) that inhibited their penetration into the cell and specific compartments. Furthermore, 2HQ and 4HQ ( Figure 19C) displayed no diabetogenic effects and no induction of FOXO1 phosphorylation. This suggested that the OH group in the C-8 position on the quinoline ring was crucial for the observed diabetogenic effect. Interestingly, CQ ( Figure 19D), a derivative of 8HQ-bearing substitutions with hydrophobic groups at C-5 (chlorine) and C-7 (iodine) positions induced FOXO1 phosphorylation without diabetogenic effects. The phosphorylation of FOXO1 arises from its CQ property as the transporter and the insulin receptor, which consequently causes lower blood glucose levels 34 as shown in Figure 20.

(p22.1) In addition, both compounds exhibit protective effects against oxidative damage to β-cells. 152 A study on pancreatic β-cell lines indicated that cytoprotective effects of HLA-20 and M30 arise from combined actions 152 in which they act as Fe chelators. M30 and HLA-20 directly decrease ROS formation by inhibiting the Fenton reaction as well as indirectly increasing catalase activity, 152 possibly by maintaining nuclear FOXO1 levels. 184 Furthermore, both compounds promote antiapoptotic effects against H 2 O 2 stress-induced mitochondrial dysfunction. 152 Mitochondria are known to play important roles on cell cycle regulation, 152 and their dysfunction is a critical event leading to cell apoptosis. 152 M30 and HLA-20 exert antiapoptotic effects by maintenance of a mitochondrial factor called ∆ψM, which is necessary for mitochondria survival. 152 Due to IIS and the FOXO1 phosphorylation inductive ability and significant cytoprotective effects, 8HQ and its derivatives could be a promising class of compound that merits further development for the treatment of DM. 152,190 Conclusion Metal imbalance plays a crucial role in the etiology of many diseases that affect quality of life. The objectives of treatment Zn ionophore. It was suggested that increased hydrophobicity alone is unlikely to account for the nondiabetogenicity of CQ; however, other factors such as electronic and steric effects may be involved in the lack of diabetogenic effects.

(p22.2) According to IIS regulatory roles on glucose homeostasis, an ideal antidiabetic agent should be capable of inducing FOXO1 phosphorylation as well as minimizing oxidative damage to β-cells. Recent studies suggested that the scope of drug design may focus on small Zn-binding FOXO1 regulators targeting lipophilic compounds that do not release H + after Zn-binding. 191 Therefore, CQ is a potential candidate for DM treatment. 190 Antidiabetic activity of other 8HQ derivatives, such as M30 and HLA-20, have been reported to function through different mechanisms. 34,152 The liver is the center of Fe homeostasis, and hepatic enzymes are found to be key regulators of hepatic gluconeogenesis. 34 Glucose metabolism is directly controlled by hepatic factors that in turn are regulated by Fe levels, as is the case for the glucose transporter and the insulin receptor. 34 As Fe chelators, M30 and HLA-20 generate low levels of Fe, thereby mimicking hypoxic conditions. 34 Such conditions increase the expression of regulated hypoxia inducible factor. The activation of hypoxia inducible factor leads to the expression of downstream effector genes including the glucose Alters glucose metabolism via expression of hepatic factors Zn chelator Antineurodegenerative Allows degradation of misfolded proteins Reduces neurotoxicity caused by metal-protein interaction Cu ionophore Antineurodegenerative Restores brain metal homeostasis by redistribution of intracellular Cu ions and delivery of Cu ions to the brain areas where they are depleted Activates protective signaling cascades Anticancer inhibits apoptosis via proteasome inhibition Zn ionophore Antineurodegenerative Restores brain metal homeostasis by redistribution of intracellular Zn ions and delivery of Zn ions to brain areas where they are depleted Anticancer induces apoptosis via lysosomal disruption and NF-κB inactivation Antidiabetic increases insulin production and inhibits hepatic enzymes required for gluconeogenesis via induction of Zn-dependent FOXO1 phosphorylation Pb poisoning treatment improves effect of Pb chelators by promoting Pb escape from red blood cells into extracellular space are not only aimed at restoring metal balance but also at minimizing cellular damage. 8HQ and its derivatives possess diverse pharmacological and biological activities, which are a result of their chelating ability (Table 1). Interestingly, such bioactivities originate from multiple mechanisms ( Table 2). These mechanisms of actions function in restoring metal homeostasis as well as promoting protective effects. Therefore, 8HQ and its derivatives are considered as promising candidates that should be further developed as therapeutics for many diseases.
