# Glycopeptide Resistance in Gram-Positive Cocci: A Review

CorpusID: 15734319 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d578af0cc189461ff7a94b2e7f0ad0a0bcfd4beb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d578af0cc189461ff7a94b2e7f0ad0a0bcfd4beb)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Molecular Basis of Vancomycin Resistance in Entero-
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) cocci. The basic mechanism of vancomycin resistance in enterococci is the formation of peptidoglycan receptors with reduced glycopeptide affinity. This results in decreased binding of vancomycin and decreased inhibition of cell wall synthesis. Peptidoglycan precursors with decreased binding to vancomycin are responsible for this. Instead of the normally occurring peptidoglycan precursor D-alanine-Dalanine, precursors like D-ala-D-lactate or D-ala-D-serine are found on the cell wall of vancomycin-resistant strains of enterococci. D-ala-D-lactate has been found to have an affinity 1000 times less than D-ala-D-ala for vancomycin whereas D-ala-D-serine has an affinity about 6 times less than the normal cell wall precursors. It has been shown that the substitution of the terminal D-alanine of the cell wall with D-lactate results in repulsive forces in the binding pocket of the vancomycin molecule leading to a 1000fold decrease in affinity to the antibiotic [12]. D-ala-Dserine substitution leads to a 6-fold decrease in affinity to vancomycin because of the hydroxymethyl group of serine which is bulkier than the methyl group of alanine [13].
## (s7) Antimicrobial Agents Effective against VRE and Emerging
Number of References: 9

(p7.0) Resistance. Linezolid is a member of a class of synthetic antimicrobials, the oxazolidinones. Although it is more expensive than vancomycin, linezolid has the advantage of not requiring testing for adequate serum drug concentrations or dose adjustment in renal or hepatic failure. It is therefore a valuable drug in the hands of clinicians and can be used in situations where vancomycin use is either contraindicated or ineffective. Linezolid was licensed for clinical use in the United States in 2000. It was approved for use in United Kingdom a year later. The first isolates of Enterococcus resistant to Linezolid were reported from the United Kingdom in 2002 [35]. Two of the isolates were E. faecium; one was E. faecalis. All the isolates were from patients who had been previously treated with Linezolid. Pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) analysis of the isolates indicated that resistance developed in previously susceptible strains via point mutations in the 23SrRNA [35]. Linezolidresistant and vancomycin-resistant enterococci have also been isolated from patients without any prior therapy with Linezolid [36].

(p7.1) Kainer et al. performed a case-control study during a hospital outbreak of linezolid-resistant enterococci (LRE) and tried to find out putative risk factors for acquiring this infection [37]. Important risk factors which came up in the study were culture positive for MRSA, increased hospitalization duration before index culture and duration of preceding linezolid therapy [37].

(p7.2) Quinupristin-Dalfopristin (Q/D) is a semisynthetic antimicrobial which is administered parenterally. It belongs to a group of agents called Streptogramins. This drug has a broad spectrum of in vitro activity against gram-positive bacteria like MRSA, coagulase-negative Staphylococci, and MDR strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae [38]. It has also been found to be very effective against vancomycin strains of E. faecium [39], although against E. faecalis, it has been found to be bacteriostatic rather than bacteriocidal [40]. In a study by Winston et al., quinupristin-dalfopristin has been found to be effective in 86% of the cases of VRE in which it was used [38]. This is a well-tolerated drug apart from arthralgias or myalgias seen in higher doses in some patients.
## (s9) Vancomycin Intermediate S. aureus (VISA).
Number of References: 7

(p9.0) Increasing prevalence of MRSA infections has led to the extensive use of vancomycin for treating these conditions. Infact, vancomycin is the treatment of choice for MRSA infections. However, the overuse of this antibiotic has led to the emergence of S. aureus strains with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin. Hiramatsu et al. from Japan were the first to report a clinical strain of methicillin-resistant S. aureus with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin. This strain, named Mu50, was isolated from pus from the sternal incision site of a 4-monthold male infant with pulmonary atresia [2]. Such strains have now been reported from many other countries. Tiwari and Sen were the first to report strains of S. aureus with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin (VISA) from the Indian subcontinent. Strains of S. aureus in the intermediate range of vancomycin susceptibility have also been reported from the southern part of India [47].

(p9.1) The concentration of vancomycin required to inhibit most strains of S. aureus ranges from 0.5 to 2 μg/ml. According to the current guidelines given by the Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI), S. aureus isolates with vancomycin MICs between 4 and 8 μg/ml are classified as vancomycin intermediate and those with MIC ≥16 μg/ml as vancomycin resistant. These MIC cut-offs are different from those for coagulase negative staphylococci and enterococci where isolates with vancomycin MIC ≥32 μg/ml are classified as vancomycin resistant [20]. Apart from vancomycin intermediate S. aureus (VISA) and vancomycin-resistant S. aureus (VRSA), there is one more entity, heterogenous VISA (hVISA), which is a source of some confusion. Like VISA, heterogenous VISA was first reported from Japan, from the sputum of a 64-year-old man suffering from MRSA pneumonia who had been on vancomycin therapy. The strain named Mu3 when grown on drug-free medium produced subpopulations with varying degrees of vancomycin resistance [48]. hVISA has a vancomycin MIC ≤2 μg/ml by routine testing methods but has a population of cells with reduced vancomycin susceptibility (in the vancomycin intermediate range) [49].

(p9.2) Unlike VRSA isolates, strains of VISA or hVISA do not possess vancomycin resistant genes like vanA, vanB, or vanC. Although no mechanism has yet been conclusively established for VISA or hVISA, many mechanisms have been proposed like defects in DNA mismatch repair [50]. The acquisition of VISA phenotype is probably a multiple step event and is due to changes in the process of peptidoglycan synthesis. VISA strains have been found to synthesise excess amounts of D-alanine-D-alanine. The extra layers of cell wall precursors prevent vancomycin molecules from reaching their target sites [48].
## (s14) Vancomycin Resistance in Coagulase-Negative Staphylococci
Number of References: 9

(p14.0) Coagulase-negative staphylococci are increasingly becoming important causes of nosocomial infections. Although these are perhaps the commonest isolates from clinical samples in any diagnostic bacteriology laboratory, it is in many cases difficult to assign clinical significance to them as they are also normal commensals found on the skin surface and elsewhere. In 1987 the first clinically significant isolate of a coagulase-negative staphylococci showing resistance to vancomycin was described by Schwalbe et al. [63]. Since then, there have been many reports of clinically relevant isolates of coagulase negative staphylococci showing resistance to glycopeptides. Among the various species of coagulasenegative staphylococci (CoNS), Staphylococcus haemolyticus is the most common species associated with glycopeptide resistance [64]. Other species which have been associated with vancomycin resistance include S. epidermidis, Staphylococcus warneri, and Staphylococcus hominis [65]. In some studies, S. epidermidis has been found to be the commonest CoNS species associated with glycopeptide resistance [66,67]. The prevalence of glycopeptide resistance among clinical isolates of CoNS has shown an upward trend in many studies worldwide [68].

(p14.1) Although the exact mechanism of glycopeptide resistance in coagulase-negative staphylococci has not yet been elucidated, glycopeptide-resistant strains of S. epidermidis and S. haemolyticus have been shown to differ considerably from glycopeptide-susceptible strains with respect to various parameters like cell wall composition and synthesis, binding to glycopeptides and even ultrastructural morphology [69]. Glycopeptide-resistant CoNS strains have been demonstrated to sequester glycopeptides like vancomycin and teicoplanin more efficiently than their glycopeptide sensitive counterparts at sites unassociated with the D-alanyl-Dalanine target [70]. Teicoplanin has been found to bind more avidly than vancomycin at these sites. Interestingly, there have been reports of strains of CoNS, especially S. haemolyticus which are resistant to teicoplanin, but vancomycin susceptible [71].
## (s16) Vancomycin Tolerance in Streptococcus pneumoniae
Number of References: 5

(p16.0) Although vancomycin resistance is not known in Streptococcus pneumoniae, the phenomenon of vancomycin tolerance has been observed in a few strains. Though this phenomenon has also been described in some strains of S. aureus, it is with regards to S. pneumoniae that it is considered most alarming. Vancomycin tolerance has been defined as a minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) 32-fold higher than the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) [75,76]. Another definition used by workers in the field considers pneumococcal strains showing more than 1% survival after four hours of growth in the presence of vancomycin concentration more than 10 times the minimum inhibitory concentration as showing tolerance [77]. Vancomycin tolerance in S. pneumoniae has been linked to treatment failure in many cases. Vancomycin tolerant S. pneumoniae has been found to be difficult to eradicate in animal models of meningitis and clinical instances of treatment failure with vancomycin in cases of meningitis have also been reported [78]. Vancomycin tolerance in case of S. pneumoniae is important not only because it can lead to treatment failure but also because tolerance is considered a precursor phenotype to resistance [79]. The first strain of vancomycin tolerant S. pneumoniae to be isolated from the CSF of a patient with meningitis was named the Tupelo strain after the local hospital where the patient was admitted.
