# A Short Survey on Data Clustering Algorithms

CorpusID: 15553087 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5615769ad70a42ab8ee1c05fda2021c05a84e375](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5615769ad70a42ab8ee1c05fda2021c05a84e375)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s3) B. Hierarchical Clustering
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) Clusters are formed by following either a bottom-up approach or a top-down approach. For example, single-linkage clustering [10] is a classic bottom-up approach in which data points are gradually agglomerated together to form clusters. In each step, all pair-wise distances are computed to identify the minimum. The parties involved in the minimal pair-wise distance are linked together. Such a step is repeated until all data points are linked together. A hierarchical tree is constructed to connect all data points at the end. A tree depth level can be chosen to cut the tree, forming clusters. To model data dynamically, a special hierarchical clustering method called Chameleon has been proposed [11]. It makes use of the inter-connectivity and closeness concept to merge and divide clusters. If the inter-connectivity and closeness between two clusters are higher than those within the clusters, then the two clusters are merged.
## (s9) H. Herd Clustering
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) To tackle the clustering problem, a novel clustering method, Herd Clustering (HC), has been proposed by Wong et al. [24]. It novelties lie in two aspects: (1) HC is inspired from the nature, herd behavior, which is a commonly seen phenomenon in the real world including human mobility patterns [25]. Thus it is very intuitive and easy to be understood for its good performance. (2) HC also demonstrates that cluster analysis can be done in a non-traditional way by making data alive.
## (s12) A. Clustering on Data Stream
Number of References: 5

(p12.0) The previous clustering methods assume data are static during clustering. Nonetheless, modern data are not static necessarily. In fact, data can be transmitted in streaming form; for instance, real-time financial stock market data, video surveillance data, and social media data. Modern data keeps itself changing and evolving during the course of clustering. For analysis of such data, the ability to process the data in a timely manner with little memory is crucial. In light of that, different data stream clustering methods are proposed. Fo instance, Guha et al. have proposed one of the firstknown method, STREAM, to solve the k-median problem on streaming data with constant-factor approximation [45]. An incremental clustering method (COBWEB) has also been proposed to maintain a hierarchical clustering tree on streaming data by Fisher [46]. Zhang et al. have proposed an efficient data clustering method for large datasets [47]. Thanks to its linear complexity and single-pass nature, it can also be applied to cluster data streams with a tree data structure, CF Tree [47]. On the other hand, an incremental clustering method (C2ICM) has been proposed to data stream clustering problems. In particular, a lower bound for its clustering performance has also been provided [48].
