# Multiple Mitochondrial Dysfunctions Syndrome 4 Due to ISCA2 Gene Defects: A Review

CorpusID: 156055306 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9f4bde03402587abfa728887aeec8fb8ffd9657](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9f4bde03402587abfa728887aeec8fb8ffd9657)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) History
Number of References: 5

(p0.0) Multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome 4 was first described by Al-Hassnan et al in 2015 reporting 6 patients from 5 unrelated consanguineous families. In 2015, Alazami et al also described a single patient from a large cohort of consanguineous families in which 33 recessive novel genes were identified, not previously associated with any diseases. Subsequently, in 2017, Alfadhel et al reported 10 new patients with similar phenotypes. Other researchers have described 3 more patients with overlapping phenotypes. 7,8,[10][11][12] Pathophysiology
## (s2) Biochemical Abnormalities
Number of References: 6

(p2.0) Elevated lactate is a vital marker in the diagnosis of individuals with a suspected mitochondrial disease. To our knowledge, cerebrospinal fluid glycine was tested in only 3 of the 20 patients and was observed to be increased in all 3 (100%) patients. Plasma glycine was tested in 13 of 20 patients and was observed to be increased in 3 (23%) patients. 8,10,11 Therefore, both (glycine elevation on cerebrospinal fluid and plasma glycine) could be tested in other patients as potential biomarkers.

(p2.1) Other biochemical investigations, such as tests for ammonia, acylcarnitine profile and screening urine for organic acids, were unremarkable. Respiratory chain enzymology was checked in 2 (10%) patients and both showed complex II and IV deficiency. Muscle biopsies were done in a few patients, and revealed mild histopathological abnormalities, including myofiber size variation and atrophic changes. The mitochondria were observed to be shortened, and the outlines were stretched out and angulated. There was severe mitochondrial depletion in the fibroblasts of the patients. 7 However, myopathic features such as fiber hypertrophy or degeneration were absent, and there were no ragged red fibers. 7,11 Genetics The ISCA2 gene is located at chromosome 14q24.3. The ISCA2 gene has 4 exons, 154 amino acids, and a molecular mass of 16 476 Da. It encodes an A-type iron-sulfur cluster protein in mitochondria. This protein is essential in the maturation of mitochondrial iron-sulfur proteins. Two transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene. Two mutations have been detected in 18 different families: one is a homozygous missense mutation (c.229G>A; p.Gly77Ser) which is a founder mutation in Saudi families, and a compound heterozygous mutation [(c.295delT; p.Phe99Leufs*18); (c.334A>G; p.Ser112Gly)] in 1 Italian family. An autosomal recessive inheritance pattern is suggested by the consanguinity reported in most cases. Therefore, the recurrence risk is 25% (n ¼ 5) in each pregnancy. There is no clear genotype-phenotype correlation.
