# materials A Review of PMMA Bone Cement and Intra-Cardiac Embolism

CorpusID: 1622261 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b2d2f9ca6fa49de902aef9d56bf275e578ea603](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b2d2f9ca6fa49de902aef9d56bf275e578ea603)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 15

(p0.0) Approximately 700,000 people suffer from vertebral compression fractures in the United States, costing over $1 billion for treatment and management [1]. Reinforcement of vertebral compression fractures with polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) bone cement through percutaneous vertebroplasty (PVP) was first introduced by Galibert et al. in 1987 [1,2]. PVP was reportedly not conducted in the United States until 1994 [3]. It involves injecting PMMA bone cement into the compressed vertebral body to steady the fracture mechanically [4]. The bone cement popularly used is primarily a two component system composed of a powder PMMA copolymer and a liquid methylmethacrylate (MMA) monomer. This is used because it is a bismethacrylate, thus improving network formation and stability of the cement. The development of this arena has led to many challenges related to the material properties of PMMA. One other procedure that involves the use of PMMA bone cement is kyphoplasty, which involves filling of the collapsed or injured vertebra [5,6]. However, the PVP technique is much more prone to adverse cement leaks than kyphoplasty, because the PMMA is injected in a liquid state in the case of PVP and the cement would flow through the bone path of least resistance [3]. The popularity of the procedure is increasing and it is being used more frequently [7].

(p0.1) PMMA is an inert material which is not reabsorbed in the human body. The polymer achieves 90% of its ultimate strength within one hour of injection [8]. Although alternative materials are available and continue to be created, PMMA remains the material of choice due to its mechanical properties and lower rate of professed complications. An overarching problem associated with PMMA is cement leakage, which may result in both local and global complications [9]. Cement leakage is reported to be as high as 72.5% in metastases and 65% in osteoporotic fractures [10]. Cement leakage may cause local complications (cord compression or nerve root compression) or systemic complications such as pulmonary embolism, cerebral embolism, cardiac embolism, cardiac perforation, renal artery embolism, and acute respiratory distress syndrome [11]. There is also some unknown long-term result in the osteoporotic spine. The damage is more prominent in vital organs such as the lungs and the heart. Even retrograde intra-venous PMMA in femoral nutritional vessels, but without serious side effects from the heart systems, has been documented [12]. In addition, absorption of the PMMA monomer can induce hypotension by virtue of its cardiotoxic and arrythmogenic properties [13].
## (s2) Factors Affecting Cement Leakage
Number of References: 7

(p2.0) Several factors related to cement leakage include: bone permeability, marrow viscosity, bone porosity, size of the injection cavity, diameter of the leakage path, bone pore size, and cement viscosity [15]. Among these factors, the cement viscosity is the only parameter not determined by the bone structure, indicating that the bone cement leakage can be controlled by adjusting the cement viscosity. Therefore, PMMA with low and medium viscosity has been identified as an important risk factor for the development of cement leakage along with bone porosity. High-viscosity PMMA, on the other hand, effectively stabilizes vertebral compression fractures, while minimizing the risk of cement leakage and associated complications in vitro [14,15]. Subsequently, decompressed PVP may result in reduced cement leakage [16]. Nieuwenhuijse et al. performed a detailed analysis of potential risk factors for the occurrence of cement leakage, and fracture severity and PMMA bone cement viscosity were identified as two strong independent predictors in general [17]. Lador et al. studied leakage patterns that understood the points and patterns of cement extravasation in 23 human vertebrae. This study showed that the most common type of leakage, classified as severe, occured through small breaches in the cortex due to anterior blood vessels. Severe leakage occurred in 83% of the samples, and suggested monitoring procedures during injection to avoid complications and to minimize possible life-threatening risks to the patients [18]. The leakage to the nearby vasculature may reach distant locations of the body, such as the heart, and result in cardiac embolism [19].
## (s8) Calcium Phosphate and Hydroxyapatite
Number of References: 5

(p8.0) Over time, many varieties of injectable materials have been proposed for use in order to reduce cement leakages [54]. Calcium phosphate (CP) cement has been used as a clinical substitute to PMMA. rhBMP-2/CP, an osteoinductive and biodegradable material, is another candidate that may also be an alternative to PMMA, in order to achieve biostabilization in a vertebroplasty [55]. It has been demonstrated in animal experiments that fragmentation of calcium phosphate cement yields more emboli, especially microemboli, resulting in more severe cardiovascular deterioration when compared to PMMA; this was confirmed by CT scanning of postmortem lungs [56]. Even though CP is biocompatible, a major drawback is that it rapidly decays when in contact with blood or physiological fluids. The compressive strength is very similar to PMMA and its isothermic properties during the setting phase prevents heat related tissue damage [57]. Additionally, it is known that the severity of pulmonary hypertension after embolism is related to the size and number of emboli [58].
## (s10) Orthocomp™ and Hydroxyapatite
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) Orthocomp™ is composite material with a matrix of Bis-phenol glycidyl dimethacrylate (BisGMA), Bis-phenol ethoxy dimethacrylate (BisEMA), and triethyleneglycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA) [4]. It is biocompatible, has a lower setting exotherm, and good material properties. In a study comparing compressive moduli, Orthocomp™ exhibited a modulus almost twice that of the PMMA cements. In fact, Jasper et al. suggested that a higher modulus may translate to better mechanical stabilization, resulting in a lower use of Orthocomp™ compared to PMMA cement [55]. Similarly, for compressive yield strength and ultimate compressive strength, PMMA cements ranged from 50 ± 73 MPa and from 53 ± 80 MPa, respectively, but Orthocomp™ exhibited strength values 2-3 times those values [64].
## (s11) Injection Device and Viscometer
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Various optimization tools have also been utilized. The impact of the injection device and viscometer in controlling cement leakage has been suggested. Gisep's study showed a strong correlation of the PMMA viscosity during setting to the injection forces through vertebroplasty injection devices [67,68]. There was a significant difference in injection forces between the in vitro injections in room temperature or in a simulated body temperature setting. The viscometer may potentially have a role in enhancing the safety of percutaneous vertebroplasty procedures. Transpedical body augmentors have been used to try and prevent body recollapse, as well as PMMA in the short term, which when used with bone grafts theoretically allows for potential fracture healing in the long term.
## (s13) Case Report
Number of References: 4

(p13.0) PMMA cement cardiac embolism is a potentially serious complication following vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty. The frequency of pulmonary cement emboli following percutaneous vertebroplasty varies from 4.6% to 26.9% [72][73][74][75]. The risk of ICE remains unknown. ICE may be an isolated finding or it can co-present with pulmonary emboli. Common chief complaints are chest pain, dyspnea, and syncope. Presentation may be acute, sub-acute, or chronic. Cardiac perforation, acute valvular damage, and paradoxical cerebral embolism are the most dreadful complications. Surgery is the most common management approach. Percutaneous methods involving snaring and the insertion of an inferior vena cava filter have been successful. Conservative medical therapy has also been attempted. We present a case of left ventricular PMMA cement emboli via a secundum ASD causing acute torrential mitral regurgitation (MR). Our anecdotal case illustrates the need for close monitoring of patients undergoing percutaneous vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty. We also emphasize the importance of the treatment of any intra-cardiac cement emboli (ICE) because of its capability of causing serious complications.
## (s14) Conclusions
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) In this paper, we have reviewed the aspects of PMMA material properties that are relevant to orthopedic and cardiovascular applications. It is important to note that cement leakage is asymptomatic in most situations. PMMA viscosity regulated by density and particle size is one of the important determinants in the formation of the cardiac emboli that may have life threatening implications. Additionally, avoiding excessive PMMA injection and excessive pressure during injection may play a role in prevention [11]. Recently, the role of injectable hydrogels has been explored in vertebroplasty [77]. Future work should attempt to understand its favorable impact on the reduction of cardiac as well as non-cardiac embolism.
