# A Review on Recent Contribution of Meshfree Methods to Structure and Fracture Mechanics Applications

CorpusID: 16230919 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d710c7c1667f253b38494c3448a5ff222c6b22e9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d710c7c1667f253b38494c3448a5ff222c6b22e9)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s4) Imposing Essential Boundary
Number of References: 7

(p4.0) Conditions. Because MLS shape functions used in EFG and MLPG do not satisfy Kronecker delta criterion, process of imposition of EBCs gets complicated than FEM. Number of techniques were developed for enforcing EBCs in the problem like Lagrange multiplier, penalty method, orthogonal transformation techniques, coupling with FEM, Nitsche's method, singular weighing functions, boundary collocation, and D' Alembert's Principle. Out of these techniques, penalty method can be easily implemented and do not increase much computational effort. Detailed description of these techniques can be referred from references [5,[14][15][16][17][18][19].
## (s13) Composite Solids.
Number of References: 4

(p13.0) Functionally graded materials (FGM) possesses continuously varying microstructure and material properties in a predetermined way and they are used in structures subjected to nonuniform service conditions. Rao and Rahman proposed EFG approach for calculating stress intensity factors (SIF) for stationary crack in twodimensional functionally graded materials of arbitrary geometry. In proposed method, the interaction integral method was extended for FGM and material properties were taken as smooth functions of spatial coordinates and two newly developed interaction integrals were introduced for analysis of basic modes and mixed mode fracture problems [87]. While twodimensional stress analysis problems of anisotropic and linear elastic/viscoelastic solids with continuously varying material properties were addressed by Sladek et al., using MLPG with unit step function as test function in local weak form which leads to local boundary integral equations (LBIEs). MLS was adopted for approximating physical quantities in LBIEs and for time-dependent problems, Laplace transformation was utilized [88]. Delamination and matrix cracking are routine damage mechanisms observed during analysis of laminated structures. Guiamatsia et al. proposed EFG for the first time to simulate delamination (interlaminar) and intralaminar matrix microcracking in composite laminates. Modeling was done at mesolevel, where each ply represented individually and background integration cells were arranged per layer in a way that they are not traversed by material interfaces. Virtual crack closure technique (VCCT) was used for crack advancement in the present technique [89]. Orthotropic composites possess high specific strength and stiffness characteristics because of their constituents and extensively applied in various engineering applications. Ghorashi et al. presented a new approach for modeling discrete cracks in two-dimensional orthotropic media by EFG method. In proposed approach, recently developed orthotropic enrichment functions were used which were used earlier in the extended finite element method along with a subtriangle technique for enhancing the Gauss quadrature accuracy near the crack [90].
