# BMC Genomics Genome-wide survey of putative Serine/Threonine protein kinases in cyanobacteria

CorpusID: 16037674 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad934e28d16d5367f7441fba6cb7b3cb41f9e84d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad934e28d16d5367f7441fba6cb7b3cb41f9e84d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s2) Identification of STK proteins
Number of References: 4

(p2.0) The 21 cyanobacterial genomes fully available from IMG database (Version 2.0, as of Jan 2007) were considered in our analysis (Fig. 1, Table 1). Synechococcus elongatus PCC6301 and Synechococcus elongatus PCC7942 are virtually identical except for a chromosomal inversion, but both were included in our analysis. Using BlastP and TBlastN programs to look for proteins similar to proven cyanobacterial STKs, we obtained 303 protein sequences from the 21 cyanobacterial genomes, 284 of which were originally annotated as protein kinase or Serine/Threonine Protein Kinase. The remaining 19 proteins were accepted as STKs in this study after sequence alignment and SMART analysis [27]. Seventeen out of these were originally annotated not by their STK domains but by other additional domains, such as ATPase and WD40 repeats, and the last two were annotated as hypothetical proteins [16]. 17 proteins, all originally annotated as STKs, from the 303 proteins identified by sequence similarity lack all or part of at least one important catalytic domains [13], and these were excluded from further consideration. Some slightly truncated proteins, such as CwatDRAFT_6607 and CwatDRAFT_1979, lacking structural motifs I, II or XI but possessing all catalytic motifs were retained. Nine proteins (including four STKs in marine unicellular Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus, 6803_slr1443, CwatDRAFT_090 1, Tery_0088, Tery_4781 and Ava_3867) exhibit some deviations from the canonical motifs (Fig. 2) that were deemed tolerable. In all 286 putative STK sequences were considered in this study ( Table 1).
