# Fundamental Lifetime Mechanisms in Routing Protocols for Wireless Sensor Networks: A Survey and Open Issues

CorpusID: 16023210 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5592d0183ee067e1cba4b42696530141900e0332](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5592d0183ee067e1cba4b42696530141900e0332)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 3

(p0.0) Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are composed of a lot of small, low cost sensor nodes that work together to measure various parameters of the environment and send the data to a unique or several sinks where they will be processed [1]. WSNs have a wide range of uses in military, medical, metropolitan and industrial venues. They are employed in many applications such as security surveillance, battlefield and habitat monitoring, intrusion detection, and target tracking purposes. Although reducing the size of sensors could make them cheaper, this also requires that all hardware equipment, specially the batteries, be extremely small. Since the sensor nodes should be functional for a long period of time and battery replacement in harsh environments like battlefields is usually impossible, nodes may lose their energy very fast, thus becoming nonfunctional in a short time. This situation can negatively affect the whole network connectivity, fault tolerance and lifetime. Therefore, optimization for energy consumption is an important issue, especially to prolong network lifetime in WSNs [2]. To address this problem, a variety of approaches are implemented in the area of routing strategies, which play a key role in network functionality and performance [3].
## (s1) Related Work
Number of References: 7

(p1.0) The growing interest in wireless sensor networks on the one hand, and the continual emergence of new architectural techniques in the other hand have inspired some previous efforts for surveying the characteristics, applications and communication protocols for such a technical area [21,22]. In this subsection we point out the features that distinguish our paper and highlight the differences in scope.

(p1.1) The authors in [23] presented full categories of routing protocols for WSNs, as did the authors in [21,24]. However, none of them include the recent energy-efficient mechanisms (such as mobile sink, multi-sink, etc.) which could be combined with routing algorithms to increase the network lifetime. Moreover, all of the mentioned approaches only consider the routing algorithms in WSNs from the network structure and the protocol operation point of view. In our paper, we classify not only the routing schemes based on protocol operation, but also from the viewpoint of energy-efficiency.

(p1.2) A taxonomy of different energy-saving strategies applicable in wireless sensor networks is developed in [1] and [25]. According to these surveys, the energy-aware routing protocols in sensor networks are classified by considering several factors such as data cycling, mobility, topology control and data-driven techniques. However, the authors do not focus sufficiently on the network layer and these papers do not include bio-inspired and multi-sink mechanisms for routing protocols. Our survey can serve those who seek deeper insight into energy-efficient routing issues and schemes in wireless sensor networks.
## (s6) Lifetime Improvement Mechanisms in Routing
Number of References: 7

(p6.0) In the next subsections, the main categories of energy-aware mechanisms applied to routing protocols in WSNs will be discussed in detail. Figure 2 shows the taxonomy of the methods covered in this paper. In this figure, the numbers represent the corresponding references. However, some protocols [5,7,8,10,16] fall in more than one category. Lifetime improvement mechanisms in routing protocols for WSNs are basically divided into two main categories: simultaneous schemes and cross-layer schemes. Simultaneous schemes [21] usually refer to the mechanisms which could be combined with routing algorithms in order to achieve a specific goal like energy-efficiency. In WSNs, these mechanisms are classified based on the protocol operation. However, cross-layer schemes [1] investigate different layers simultaneously to make the protocol more energy-efficient. In the following, we discuss the various classes under these two categories.
## (s13) Multi-Path Mechanism
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) Depending on the methods used for finding the path, routing protocols in WSNs can be classified into three groups as follows: proactive (table-driven), reactive (on-demand) and hybrid. According to the on-demand method, the route should be built only when a node decides to send data to a destination, in contrast with the table driven technique in which all of the nodes must exchange route messages periodically to maintain a permanent route table all over the network. Therefore, only the active path, in which a link failure has taken place, should be updated. A hybrid routing protocol is a combination of the both mechanisms [40]. The most popular multi-path routing protocols in wireless sensor and ad hoc networks are based on traditional on-demand single-path routing schemes such as ad hoc On-demand Distance Vector (AODV) and Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) [16].
## (s18) Micro Sensor Multi-Path Routing Protocol (MSMRP)
Number of References: 3

(p18.0) The test-bed experiments [42] show that the MSMRP algorithm could successfully build the routes crossing around the unavailable areas. However, there is no comparison with other similar protocols to justify the proposed method. Another drawback of the MSMRP protocol is that in comparison with its predecessor MSRP, it has more routing control packets such as RREQ, RREP, RERR, advertisement message of neighbor node table, HELLO message and delete message of neighbor node. These control packets impose a high overhead to the sensor nodes that cause unnecessary energy consumption across the network. [43] is another energy-efficient approach that uses a probabilistic manner to find multiple paths between the source and the sink. In order to prolong network lifetime, it uses the available paths alternatively to distribute the energy consumption all over the network. In contrast with the original Rumor Routing [31], EBMRR considers residual energy and power usage level at the neighboring nodes. Two kinds of query messages called Forward Agent (FA) and Backward Agent (BA) are employed in this protocol. FA which is sent by source node is responsible to search for multiple paths. BA carries the information of paths and updates the routing table of relay nodes as it moves on reverse path.
## (s21) Adaptive Transmission Power Control (ATPC)
Number of References: 6

(p21.0) Although ATPC could predict the proper transmission power level accurately and reach an acceptable link quality over time, it still suffers from the initialization phase overhead. One of the other drawbacks of ATPC is that the performance of the algorithm may negatively affected by conflicting interferences and transmissions [18]. Furthermore, this protocol has the execution cost for calculating the RSSI/LQI parameters. The simulation [18] shows that ATPC conserves significantly more transmission power than other solutions. This algorithm only uses 53.6% of the transmission energy in comparison with the maximum transmission power scheme.

(p21.1) Kim et al. [19] followed a similar concept as in previous algorithm but they tried to omit the initialization phase in order to reduce the overhead. This new algorithm, which could be applied in Directed Diffusion routing protocols, is named On-Demand Transmission Power Control (ODTPC). It has two steps as follows: in the first step, a node which has data to be sent, searches in its neighbor table to find the best transmission power level. The data packet should be sent with the maximum transmission power level if there is no optimal transmission power level to the receiver. After that, the RSSI parameter related to the data packet is measured by receiver. Then the successful communication margin achieved upon the measured RSSI is returned to the sender by an ACK packet with the approximate transmission power level. Now, the sender can calculate the estimated transmission power level based on the RSSI and the margin field. In the second step, the sender gradually proceeds to adjust the transmission power level by increasing or decreasing it based on the lower and upper threshold of RSSI value over time. With the help of an analytical model, the RSSI threshold is calculated approximately. Equation (9) presents this value where: f = 30 bytes (the length of packet) and P N = −110 dBm (the average noise floor). These parameters are achieved from experiments. (9) Since the real-data and ACK packets have been exchanged with a beaconing mechanism, this algorithm has no throughput overhead. The experiments [19] in a real test-bed environment show that ODTPC consumes less than 53.48% of the energy consumption for the initialization phase in comparison with the maximum transmission power scheme. It also improves the transmission energy consumption on the entire network by rates of 50% and 120% in comparison with the ATPC and maximum transmission power schemes, respectively. Just like the ATPC protocol, this algorithm has an execution cost for calculating the RSSI parameters.
## (s23) Protocol Comparison
Number of References: 33

(p23.0) A common objective of all mechanisms surveyed in this paper is to prolong the network lifetime. In all approaches, it is assumed that sinks have unlimited energy resources while sensor nodes are energy constrained. Multiple and mobile sink strategies, multi-path strategy, power control schemes and bio-inspired mechanisms are examples of methods that can be employed in routing algorithms to increase network lifetime. The multi-sink and mobile sink mechanisms as discussed in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 respectively are compared in Table 1 based on the following criteria:  Multi-sink: As mentioned before, the network lifetime could be improved by preventing network partitioning caused by fast energy depletion around the sink. Increasing the number of sinks is one of the methods to distribute the traffic load through the sensor field and balance energy consumption around the sinks. The algorithms presented in [5][6][7], are samples of multi-sink mechanisms for lifetime enhancement. Although some other protocols [8][9][10] are originally designed for mobile sink strategy, they can also support multi-sink mechanisms as well as previous approaches. Therefore, the researchers can use these two techniques simultaneously to get better results.  Mobile sink: It is another solution for "sink neighborhood problem" caused by network partitioning around the sink. A mobile sink can replace its neighbors with low residual energy by relocating to fresh part of the network periodically. Some of the protocols [8][9][10][11] in Table 1 use this mechanism to prolong the network lifetime.  Multi-path: Since employing a single path for data transmission between a source and the sink can decrease the energy level of sensor nodes on the path quickly and cause network partitioning along the route, making use of the multi-path mechanism results in traffic load and energy balancing over the sensor field. In MSDD [5] and MSLBR [7], for instance, each source node can implement multiple paths towards the multiple sinks to increase reliability and fault tolerance as far as possible. It is worth mentioning that there is no protocol listed in Table 1 using mobile sink and multi-path mechanisms simultaneously.  Power control: according to this mechanism, each sensor node tries to compute the energy needed to send a packet to the next hop in multi-hop routing protocols. In this way, the node is capable to adjust the transmission power level based on the distance to the next hop and avoid using maximum power level. As a result, the network lifetime will be improved by saving nodes' energy individually on the path. Only one protocol [11] in this table can employ a power control scheme.  Sensor mobility: As mentioned before, the ability to change the position of sensor nodes helps to maintain connectivity by avoiding network partitioning and sink neighborhood problems. In Table 1, none of the protocols use this method.  Sink movement pattern: There are three methods used by the sink node to identify the next position during the movement. In stochastic mobility pattern [8,10], a random path is followed by the sink node while the path is predefined in a fixed [9] strategy. In controlled mobility pattern [10,11], the sink is able to define the next position autonomously based on variations of the energy factors in the sensor field. The algorithm proposed in [11] uses a fixed sink mobility method for the first round. However, it switches to controlled sink mobility in subsequent rounds.  Location awareness: Location information is a powerful tool to find the best next hop in routing mechanisms. It can also be used for determining the next location of mobile nodes in the network. This information can be acquired from GPS directly or calculated on other localization methods. None of the multi-sink approaches in Table 1 are location aware. Although the sink node in all mobile sink mechanisms knows its position, there is only one [9] algorithm in which all nodes are location aware.  Number of sinks: The network lifetime can be improved by increasing the number of sinks up to a specific point. When the number of sinks exceeds that point, the network lifetime is constant. The reason behind this phenomenon is that each sink becomes at most 1-hop away from a sensor node. All multi-sink approaches in Table 1 support more than one sink through the network while in some mobile sink algorithms [8][9][10], one or more sinks can be deployed in sensor field.  Network structure: Routing algorithms in WSNs are usually classified into three group as follows: Flat (data-centric), hierarchical and geographic (location-based). Most of the protocols in Table 1 are flat-based and only one protocol [11] use hierarchical structure accompany with mobile sink mechanism to prolong network lifetime.  Data aggregation: This technique can enhance the network lifetime by reducing the number of data packets transmitted in the network. Data aggregation mostly is employed in hierarchical protocols [11] where the cluster heads proceed to gather data from cluster members before they act to send them to the sink node.  Application Type: This factor shows that which kind of mechanisms will be employed to send data to the sink. In time-driven method, the data are sent to the sink continuously by all or special groups of sensor nodes that caused fast energy depletion through the network.

(p23.1) In event-driven strategy [6], on the other hand, only the data about an interested event will be forwarded to the sink while in the query-based method [5], the data should be transmitted according to the sink's request. Most of the algorithms [8][9][10] that support sink mobility are used for time-driven applications.  Sink speed: In mobile WSNs, the sink speed is an important factor. A sink can move from one place to another by using a constant speed [8]. Some approaches [9] use a move/stop mechanism in which, the sink node moves to a new place and stops in that position for a specific period of time in order to collect data from k-hop neighbors and after that moves to another place, and so on. Sometimes the sink speed is adaptive [11] based on the number of congested areas that should be visited for data gathering.
