# personalized Medicine in screening for Malignant Disease: A Review of Methods and Applications

CorpusID: 16331789 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ad7082be9b16e5fadfe918b3760e5a17c6a1e76](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ad7082be9b16e5fadfe918b3760e5a17c6a1e76)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Breath test
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) Peng et al introduced a completely new method of early detection: they carried out analyses of the expired breath of various subjects. 50 Among them were both healthy subjects and patients with lung, colorectal, breast, or prostate carcinoma. However, only tumor patients who had received no oncological therapy (chemotherapy, radiation therapy, etc) were included. The discoveries which the group made in the analysis of volatile organic compounds (VOC) have the potential to fundamentally revolutionize the screening programme. Peng et al found out that cancerous breath differs from healthy breath in its VOCs. 50 Thus it is possible, in their opinion, to screen the population for the abovementioned cancers by means of a simple breath test. The analysis of the VOCs was carried out by of a gold nanoparticle sensor array (GNP sensor). It was possible not only to differentiate between cancerous and healthy breath, but at the same time specific clusters of VOCs. By means of these clusters, it is possible to determine the type of cancer from which the patient is suffering. However, the VOC clusters overlap between healthy subjects and patients with a stage 1 tumor, especially stage 1 prostate cancer. The reliability of the breath test in the early stage of a malignant disease must therefore be regarded as limited. 50 Further series of tests will show whether this method produces sufficient evidence to allow it to be adopted for clinical use. An early detection method could thus be provided that is cost-effective, noninvasive, and easy to carry out thereby making it possible to carry out effective mass screening. 50 By means of mobile units, it would also be possible to reach the population outside peak population centers and thus reach all levels of the population.
