# polymers Recent Trends of Foaming in Polymer Processing: A Review

CorpusID: 174808689 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0721fce96b4ba44b0a66e38c80d09b7926490a73](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0721fce96b4ba44b0a66e38c80d09b7926490a73)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s4) Cell Growth
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) After the formation of cells, the pressure of the gas inside the cell is inversely proportional to the radius of the cell. Thus, the smaller the cell, the greater the pressure inside the cell. When two cells of different sizes are close to each other, the gas will spread from small cell to a large cell, and the two cells merge together. As a result of nucleation, the number of cells increases, and the diameter of the cell hole expands. Thus, the cell can grow [62,63].
## (s6) Foaming Methods
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Foaming methods have various classification methods. In this review, foaming methods are categorized as mechanical foaming, physical foaming, and chemical foaming. Figure 2 shows a schematic diagram of mechanical foaming. Air is added in polymer resins by mechanical stirring, and then, the resin is foamed. After the formation of cells, the pressure of the gas inside the cell is inversely proportional to the radius of the cell. Thus, the smaller the cell, the greater the pressure inside the cell. When two cells of different sizes are close to each other, the gas will spread from small cell to a large cell, and the two cells merge together. As a result of nucleation, the number of cells increases, and the diameter of the cell hole expands. Thus, the cell can grow [62,63].
## (s23) Thermoplastics
Number of References: 16

(p23.0) At a certain temperature, thermoplastics can melt or soften into any shape, and the shape does not change after cooling. The thermoplastics for polymer foams include PE, PP, PS, PVC, and poly (methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) [79][80][81][82][83][84][85][86][87][88][89].

(p23.1) Wu et al. [79] used low-density PE as a raw material to study cell growth in low-density PE foaming processes. Wang et al. [81] prepared microcellular-insert injection-molded PP composite foams. Tang et al. [84] analyzed the mechanical performance of PS foam. Senol et al. [87] prepared closed-cell PVC foams through 3D DIC technique. Notario et al. [89] studied the dielectric behavior of porous PMMA.
## (s24) Rubbers
Number of References: 11

(p24.0) Rubbers, as the raw materials for polymer foams, include natural rubber, silicone rubber, ethylene-propylene diene monomer (EPDM) rubber, and styrene butadiene rubber [90][91][92][93][94][95][96].

(p24.1) Huang et al. [90] investigated the effects of bottom ventilation on the fire behavior of natural rubber latex foam. Bai et al. [92] prepared microcellular silicone rubber/nanographite foam with enhanced mechanical performance. Liu et al. [94] fabricated superhydrophobic and superoleophilic-modified EPDM foam rubber by a facile approach for oil/water separation. Ji et al. [96] prepared styrene butadiene rubber/ethylene vinyl acetate composite foams with skeleton support structure based on an alternately cross-linking process.
## (s32) Current Problems
Number of References: 15

(p32.0) (1) With the growing use of petroleum-based polymer foams, the global accumulation of plastic waste has increased continuously every year. For example, packing foams prepared from petroleumbased polymers are used to protect equipment or items from damage during transportation. However, after the foams were used, they were discarded, becoming white trash. In addition, buried polymer foams reside underground for hundreds of years without decay, causing serious pollution to the environment [101][102][103][104][105][106].

(p32.1) (2) Most polymer foams are highly flammable and exhibit poor flame retardation. For example, PS foams, as the most commonly used form of commercial thermal and acoustic insulation have been widely used in building thermal insulation. However, they often produced heavy smoke and release toxic gases during burning, which seriously threatens the lives of humans and limits their further application [107][108][109][110].

(p32.2) (3) Most rigid polymer foams such as rigid PU, PVC, epoxy, and phenolic foams, are brittle and have poor fracture resistance [111][112][113][114]. For example, packaging foams of electrical appliances were broken during transportation. In severe cases, electrical appliances are also damaged.  Wu et al. [55] presented a new core-back chemical foam injection molding method that has a unique secondary filling stage right after the core-back operation. The mechanical testing results showed that the new technology can produce plastic foam with simultaneously enhanced tensile strength, elastic modulus, and notch impact strength. This technology can also improve the surface appearance of the foamed sample.
## (s34) Current Problems
Number of References: 14

(p34.0) (1) With the growing use of petroleum-based polymer foams, the global accumulation of plastic waste has increased continuously every year. For example, packing foams prepared from petroleum-based polymers are used to protect equipment or items from damage during transportation. However, after the foams were used, they were discarded, becoming white trash. In addition, buried polymer foams reside underground for hundreds of years without decay, causing serious pollution to the environment [101][102][103][104][105][106].

(p34.1) (2) Most polymer foams are highly flammable and exhibit poor flame retardation. For example, PS foams, as the most commonly used form of commercial thermal and acoustic insulation have been widely used in building thermal insulation. However, they often produced heavy smoke and release toxic gases during burning, which seriously threatens the lives of humans and limits their further application [107][108][109][110].

(p34.2) (3) Most rigid polymer foams such as rigid PU, PVC, epoxy, and phenolic foams, are brittle and have poor fracture resistance [111][112][113][114]. For example, packaging foams of electrical appliances were broken during transportation. In severe cases, electrical appliances are also damaged.
## (s39) Flame Retardancy
Number of References: 24

(p39.0) The flame retardancy of polymer foams can be improved by using the following two methods. One method is adding flame retardants into the foaming formula using physical blending [129][130][131][132][133][134]. Sun et al. [27] studied the effects of ARHC on the flame retardancy of isocyanate-based PI foams. Their results indicated that the flame retardancy of PI foams was significantly increased by the addition of ARHC. Li et al. [19] studied the fire properties of larch tannin-based rigid phenolic foams reinforced with cork powder. Experimental results indicated that the reinforced phenolic foams showed a maximum LOI of 47.8%. Liu et al. [61] investigated the flame retardance of urea-formaldehyde/aramid fiber composite foams. The UL-94 test results showed that the foams were classified with V-0 rating with the addition of aramid fiber.

(p39.1) Wang et al. [129] prepared core-shell expandable graphite (EG) @ aluminum hydroxide (ATH) as a flame-retardant to enhance the flame-retardant performance of rigid PU foams. Their results indicated that the LOI of PU foams increased from 21.5% to 29.6% with the addition of 11.5 wt% EG@ATH. Liu et al. [130] synthesized a magnesium amino-tris-(methylenephosphonate)-reduced graphene oxide (Mg-rGO) hybrid to prepare a flame-retardant and toughened phenolic foam. Experimental results indicated that the LOI of the foam with 4 phr Mg-rGO increased to 41.5% compared with 38% for the untreated foam, as shown in Table 4. The peak heat release rate and total heat release of the foam decreased by 28.7% and 18.4%, respectively. Vadas et al. [132] studied flame retardancy of microcellular PLA foams prepared by supercritical CO 2 -assisted extrusion. Their results indicated that the PLA foams showed excellent flame retardancy, a UL-94 V-0 rate and an LOI value of 31.5%, with the addition of 19.5% intumescent flame retardant. Another method is adding reactive flame retardants into the foaming formula [133][134][135][136][137][138][139][140]. Jin et al. [96] studied the flame retardance of PU/MF interpenetrating polymer network foams. Their results indicated that the linear burn rates of the foams decreased significantly from 236 to 126 mm/s with increasing MF content, as shown in Figure 10. Wang et al. [135] synthesized a reactive flame-retardant triol (TDHTPP), based on a triazine and phosphate structure, to improve the flame-retardance of rigid PU foams. Experimental results indicated that the TDHTPP-incorporated PU foams showed higher compressive strength and lower thermal conductivity than those of the neat rigid PU foams. The PU foams displayed a UL-94 V-0 rating with the addition of 5 wt % TDHTPP. Rao et al. [136] studied the flame-retardant and smoke-suppressant capabilities of flexible PU foams based on reactive phosphorus-containing polyol (PDEO) and expandable graphite (EG). The LOI value of the PU foam with 10 wt% EG and 5 wt% PDEO was 24.5%, which was much higher than those of PU/PDEO and PU/EG. Chen et al. [137] prepared epoxy-resin-modified polyisocyanurate (EP-PIR) foams by the reaction of polymethylene polyphenylene isocyanate (PAPI) and diglycidyl ether of bisphenol-A (DGEBA). The UL94 test results revealed that the foams with a (PAPI)/(DGEBA) ratio above 2.5 could reach V-0 classification. The LOI values of the foams increased linearly from 24.5% to 30.0% with an increase in the (PAPI)/(DGEBA) ratio. 
