# Local and Regional Anesthesia Intravenous regional anesthesia: a review of common local anesthetic options and the use of opioids and muscle relaxants as adjuncts

CorpusID: 1759016 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1fed9ac4458e48dbaee04c1c80a5ba6e1f610e81](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1fed9ac4458e48dbaee04c1c80a5ba6e1f610e81)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Part one: local anesthetics for IvRA
Number of References: 60

(p6.0) Nine studies involving 516 patients compared the efficacy of lidocaine, ropivacaine, and prilocaine as local anesthetic agents for IVRA (Table 2). 8,15,[26][27][28][29][30][31][32] One study evaluated three different LA drugs, 32 with the remaining studies evaluating two LA agents in comparison to one another. Three of the studies reported sample size estimations and power analysis. 15,26,30 Allocation concealment was adequate in two studies 30,32 and unclear in the others (Table 1).

(p6.1) Nine studies involving 516 patients compared the efficacy of lidocaine, ropivacaine, and prilocaine as local anesthetic agents for IVRA (Table 2). 8,15,[26][27][28][29][30][31][32] One study evaluated three different LA drugs, 32 with the remaining studies evaluating two LA agents in comparison to one another. Three of the studies reported sample size estimations and power analysis. 15,26,30 Allocation concealment was adequate in two studies 30,32 and unclear in the others (Table 1).
## (s7) Local anesthetic
Number of References: 36

(p7.0) Lidocaine and ropivacaine were the most common LA agents evaluated. Out of nine studies, five compared lidocaine to ropivacaine, 8,26,27,29,31 three compared lidocaine to prilocaine, 28,30,32 and one compared ropivacaine and prilocaine. 15 

(p7.1) Lidocaine and ropivacaine were the most common LA agents evaluated. Out of nine studies, five compared lidocaine to ropivacaine, 8,26,27,29,31 three compared lidocaine to prilocaine, 28,30,32 and one compared ropivacaine and prilocaine. 15 
## (s8) Sensory anesthesia
Number of References: 28

(p8.0) Overall, there were no significant differences in the onset of sensory block between lidocaine, prilocaine, and ropivacaine. 8,[26][27][28][29]31,32 One study 15 compared 0.5% prilocaine with 0.2% ropivacaine and found that more patients had pin-prick analgesia in one of the four peripheral nerve distributions (radial nerve) 10 minutes after injection in the prilocaine group compared to the ropivacaine group (90% vs 60%). The clinical significance of this is doubtful. 

(p8.1) Overall, there were no significant differences in the onset of sensory block between lidocaine, prilocaine, and ropivacaine. 8,[26][27][28][29]31,32 One study 15 compared 0.5% prilocaine with 0.2% ropivacaine and found that more patients had pin-prick analgesia in one of the four peripheral nerve distributions (radial nerve) 10 minutes after injection in the prilocaine group compared to the ropivacaine group (90% vs 60%). The clinical significance of this is doubtful. 
## (s10) Dovepress
Number of References: 28

(p10.0) Five studies evaluated offset of sensory block with the use of ropivacaine compared to lidocaine and prilocaine. All five studies found recovery to be prolonged when ropivacaine was used. 8,15,26,27,29 Hartmannsgruber et al 8 found that sensory recovery was prolonged by up to 30 minutes in those who received 0.2% ropivacaine compared to 0.5% lidocaine (but only in the area of the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve). Likewise, Chan et al 29 found that sensory recovery in the high-dose ropivacaine group (1.8 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) was significantly longer than the low-dose ropivacaine (1.2 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) or lidocaine group (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ). Atanassoff et al 27 found a prolonged sensory recovery by approximately 19 minutes, on average, with the use of 0.2% ropivacaine compared to lidocaine. Asik et al 26 demonstrated sensory recovery to be significantly prolonged in both 0.2% and 0.25% ropivacaine groups compared to 0.5% lidocaine (20.5 ± 4.6 minutes and 23.5 ± 4.8 minutes compared to 3.5 ± 1 minute). Only one study compared ropivacaine with prilocaine. In this study, 0.2% ropivacaine was compared with 0.5% prilocaine, and a prolonged recovery was found with the ropivacaine -but only in the area innervated by the median nerve. 15 One study investigated sensory recovery times between lidocaine and prilocaine and did not find a difference. 28   

(p10.1) Five studies evaluated offset of sensory block with the use of ropivacaine compared to lidocaine and prilocaine. All five studies found recovery to be prolonged when ropivacaine was used. 8,15,26,27,29 Hartmannsgruber et al 8 found that sensory recovery was prolonged by up to 30 minutes in those who received 0.2% ropivacaine compared to 0.5% lidocaine (but only in the area of the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve). Likewise, Chan et al 29 found that sensory recovery in the high-dose ropivacaine group (1.8 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) was significantly longer than the low-dose ropivacaine (1.2 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) or lidocaine group (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ). Atanassoff et al 27 found a prolonged sensory recovery by approximately 19 minutes, on average, with the use of 0.2% ropivacaine compared to lidocaine. Asik et al 26 demonstrated sensory recovery to be significantly prolonged in both 0.2% and 0.25% ropivacaine groups compared to 0.5% lidocaine (20.5 ± 4.6 minutes and 23.5 ± 4.8 minutes compared to 3.5 ± 1 minute). Only one study compared ropivacaine with prilocaine. In this study, 0.2% ropivacaine was compared with 0.5% prilocaine, and a prolonged recovery was found with the ropivacaine -but only in the area innervated by the median nerve. 15 One study investigated sensory recovery times between lidocaine and prilocaine and did not find a difference. 28   
## (s12) Motor block
Number of References: 28

(p12.0) The onset of motor block revealed no significant difference between agents. 8,15,26,29,31,32 When assessing motor block recovery, ropivacaine use was found to cause a delayed recovery in all studies. 8 

(p12.1) The onset of motor block revealed no significant difference between agents. 8,15,26,29,31,32 When assessing motor block recovery, ropivacaine use was found to cause a delayed recovery in all studies. 8 
## (s13) Tourniquet tolerance and intraoperative analgesia
Number of References: 20

(p13.0) Similar tourniquet tolerance times were found in four of five studies that compared lidocaine and ropivacaine. 8,27,29,31 Only Asik et al 26 demonstrated contrary findings, in which 0.25% ropivacaine resulted in improved distal tourniquet tolerance compared to the 0.2% ropivacaine or 0.5% lidocaine group (15.3 ± 2.3 minutes vs 9.1 ± 2.6 minutes and 9.0 ± 2.1 minutes). Tourniquet tolerance for prilocaine was not compared with the other agents, but intraoperative analgesia was assessed in two studies. Niemi et al 15 found intraoperative fentanyl requirements to be similar between those receiving 0.5% prilocaine and 0.2% ropivacaine. Davidson et al 30 used an objective scoring system for intraoperative pain, with results suggesting improved pain relief with 0.5% lidocaine compared to 0.5% prilocaine.

(p13.1) Similar tourniquet tolerance times were found in four of five studies that compared lidocaine and ropivacaine. 8,27,29,31 Only Asik et al 26 demonstrated contrary findings, in which 0.25% ropivacaine resulted in improved distal tourniquet tolerance compared to the 0.2% ropivacaine or 0.5% lidocaine group (15.3 ± 2.3 minutes vs 9.1 ± 2.6 minutes and 9.0 ± 2.1 minutes). Tourniquet tolerance for prilocaine was not compared with the other agents, but intraoperative analgesia was assessed in two studies. Niemi et al 15 found intraoperative fentanyl requirements to be similar between those receiving 0.5% prilocaine and 0.2% ropivacaine. Davidson et al 30 used an objective scoring system for intraoperative pain, with results suggesting improved pain relief with 0.5% lidocaine compared to 0.5% prilocaine.
## (s14) Postoperative analgesia
Number of References: 4

(p14.0) Three out of four studies found significant postoperative benefits with ropivacaine compared to lidocaine. 26 lower verbal numerical pain scores and longer TTFA in the 0.25% and 0.20% ropivacaine subjects compared to 0.5% lidocaine (29.8 ± 4.9 minutes, 27.5 ± 7.3 minutes vs 11.3 ± 3.9 minutes). Furthermore, the number of patients taking more than two tablets of tramadol within the first 24 hours was lowest in the high-dose ropivacaine group compared to 0.2% ropivacaine and 0.5% lidocaine groups (three vs 18 and 16 patients, respectively). One study examined the use of 0.5% prilocaine and 0.2% ropivacaine. Although the time for the request of f irst analgesic agents was three times longer in the ropivacaine group (82 minutes vs 25 minutes), this did not achieve statistical significance. 15

(p14.1) Three out of four studies found significant postoperative benefits with ropivacaine compared to lidocaine. 26 lower verbal numerical pain scores and longer TTFA in the 0.25% and 0.20% ropivacaine subjects compared to 0.5% lidocaine (29.8 ± 4.9 minutes, 27.5 ± 7.3 minutes vs 11.3 ± 3.9 minutes). Furthermore, the number of patients taking more than two tablets of tramadol within the first 24 hours was lowest in the high-dose ropivacaine group compared to 0.2% ropivacaine and 0.5% lidocaine groups (three vs 18 and 16 patients, respectively). One study examined the use of 0.5% prilocaine and 0.2% ropivacaine. Although the time for the request of f irst analgesic agents was three times longer in the ropivacaine group (82 minutes vs 25 minutes), this did not achieve statistical significance. 15
## (s15) Side effects
Number of References: 18

(p15.0) No significant side effects were reported in any study. Several studies demonstrated minor side effects without accompanying statistical analysis. 8,15,[26][27][28][29] The volunteer patient studies 8,29 both demonstrated an increased incidence of temporary dizziness, tinnitus, and light-headedness in the lidocaine groups; however, these patients were not administered any sedation prior to, or during, the procedure. Asik et al 26 identified an increased incidence of light-headedness, tinnitus, and metallic taste in patients receiving lidocaine. Niemi et al 15 identified one patient with postoperative dizziness and blurry vision after receiving 0.5% prilocaine.
## (s17) Opioids
Number of References: 70

(p17.0) Sixteen studies involving 761 patients investigated the use of opioids as IVRA adjuncts, either as a sole agent [34][35][36][37]39,40,42,43,[45][46][47][48] or in combination with a muscle relaxant 33,38,41,44 (Table 3). The opioids investigated were morphine 34,37 (two studies), fentanyl 33,35,38,41,44,47,48 (seven studies), meperidine 36 (one study), sufentanil 40,42 (two studies), and tramadol 39,42,43,45,46 (five studies).

(p17.1) One of the above studies involved both a sufentanil and tramadol group compared to control. 42 Morphine Two studies involving a total of 57 subjects investigated morphine as a sole adjunct. 34,37 The doses studied were 1 mg and 6 mg.
## (s18) Fentanyl
Number of References: 44

(p18.0) Seven studies involving a total of 345 subjects investigated fentanyl as an IVRA adjunct. 33,35,38,41,44,47,48 Four studies evaluated it as a sole adjunct, 33,35,47,48 and four studies looked at fentanyl in combination with a muscle relaxant 33,38,41,44 (one study investigated it as both a sole adjunct and in combination with a muscle relaxant). The dose range was 50-200 µg.

(p18.1) Studies evaluating fentanyl as a sole adjunct did not identify any benefits in terms of onset or recovery of sensory or motor block. One study investigated tourniquet pain, identifying no improvement compared to control. 35 Postoperative analgesia was not assessed in any study. Two studies reported a significantly increased incidence of nausea post-tourniquet deflation in the fentanyl-treated groups. 35,47 Three studies investigated fentanyl plus pancuronium, 33,38,44 and one study investigated fentanyl plus mivacurium. 41 All four studies used a dilute solution of LA (0.25% lidocaine) with the addition of these adjuncts. Sztark et al 38  One study found no difference in onset of sensory block. 41 Abdulla and Fadhil 33 did not assess onset time specifically, but noted that the combination of fentanyl (50 µg) and pancuronium (0.5 mg) added to dilute LA provided good or excellent intraoperative analgesia in 100% of cases. Onset of motor block was assessed in two studies 38      Notes: *The first number shown is the total number of study subjects, second number is the number of groups. Abbreviations: IvRA, intravenous regional anesthesia; LA, local anesthetic; NS, normal saline; N/A, not analyzed or not available; x-over, cross-over study design; vAS, visual analog scale (1 = no pain, 10 = worst imaginable pain); vNS, verbal numerical pain score; VPRS, verbal pain rating score; AC, analgesic consumption; TTFA, time to first analgesia; IA, intraoperative analgesia; TP, tourniquet pain.
## (s20) Sufentanil
Number of References: 12

(p20.0) Two studies involving 125 subjects investigated the use of sufentanil as a sole adjunct in IVRA. 40,42 Sufentanil was one of several agents investigated in each of these studies; the other agents are discussed elsewhere. For each study the dose was 25 µg.

(p20.1) Sensory onset was found to be faster in each study. Hoffman et al 40 

(p20.2) Two studies involving 125 subjects investigated the use of sufentanil as a sole adjunct in IVRA. 40,42 Sufentanil was one of several agents investigated in each of these studies; the other agents are discussed elsewhere. For each study the dose was 25 µg.

(p20.3) Sensory onset was found to be faster in each study. Hoffman et al 40 
## (s21) Tramadol
Number of References: 64

(p21.0) Five studies involving a total of 264 subjects looked at the use of tramadol as a sole adjunct for IVRA. 39,42,43,45,46 In one study, tramadol was analyzed in comparison to a number of single adjuncts. 42 The dose range was 50-100 mg.

(p21.1) Three out of four studies demonstrated a faster onset of sensory block with the addition of tramadol to LA. 39,42,45 Siddiqui et al 45 investigated two doses of tramadol, and found a faster onset of sensory block with both 50 mg and 100 mg doses added to 0.5% lidocaine (5.2 ± 1.2 minutes and 4.9 ± 1.2 minutes vs 7.6 ± 1.4 minutes). Alayurt et al 42 found a faster onset of sensory block by approximately 2 minutes if tramadol (100 mg) was added to 0.5% lidocaine. Acalovschi et al 39 demonstrated a faster onset of sensory block (pin-prick, touch, and temperature) with 100 mg tramadol added to 0.5% l idocaine. However, this study found only touch sensation to be slower to recover; the remaining studies did not find a difference in sensory recovery. 42 No study demonstrated a significant difference in onset or recovery of motor block.

(p21.2) Tourniquet pain was decreased by the addition of tramadol in three of four studies that investigated this outcome. 42,45,46 Tan et al 46 found that a 50 mg dose decreased tourniquet pain at 30 minutes (not at 10 minutes or 20 minutes) and after changeover to the distal tourniquet. Alayurt et al 42 found that 100 mg tramadol added to LA decreased intraoperative fentanyl requirements (44 ± 54 µg vs 56 ± 54 µg), and decreased tourniquet pain at 20 minutes and 40 minutes compared to control. Siddiqui et al 45 found no difference in intraoperative analgesia with 50 mg tramadol, but identified a decrease in intraoperative fentanyl requirements (32.8 ± 35.2 µg vs 63.3 ± 39.5 µg) and tourniquet pain with the 100 mg dose. One study did not find any improvement in tourniquet pain. 43 Siddiqui et al 45  In summary, morphine, meperidine, and fentanyl (as a sole adjunct) do not demonstrate clinically significant benefits as adjuncts or their side effects preclude their clinical use. The combination of fentanyl with a muscle relaxant can achieve an equivalent quality of IVRA with a 50% reduction in LA dose, but at the expense of a potentially slower sensory block. Sufentanil provides a faster onset of sensory block, but does not demonstrate postdeflation analgesia. Tramadol provides a faster onset of sensory block and improved tourniquet tolerance, but lacks consistent postdeflation analgesia and poses an increased risk of minor side effects.

(p21.3) Five studies involving a total of 264 subjects looked at the use of tramadol as a sole adjunct for IVRA. 39,42,43,45,46 In one study, tramadol was analyzed in comparison to a number of single adjuncts. 42 The dose range was 50-100 mg.

(p21.4) Three out of four studies demonstrated a faster onset of sensory block with the addition of tramadol to LA. 39,42,45 Siddiqui et al 45 investigated two doses of tramadol, and found a faster onset of sensory block with both 50 mg and 100 mg doses added to 0.5% lidocaine (5.2 ± 1.2 minutes and 4.9 ± 1.2 minutes vs 7.6 ± 1.4 minutes). Alayurt et al 42 found a faster onset of sensory block by approximately 2 minutes if tramadol (100 mg) was added to 0.5% lidocaine. Acalovschi et al 39 demonstrated a faster onset of sensory block (pin-prick, touch, and temperature) with 100 mg tramadol added to 0.5% l idocaine. However, this study found only touch sensation to be slower to recover; the remaining studies did not find a difference in sensory recovery. 42 No study demonstrated a significant difference in onset or recovery of motor block.

(p21.5) Tourniquet pain was decreased by the addition of tramadol in three of four studies that investigated this outcome. 42,45,46 Tan et al 46 found that a 50 mg dose decreased tourniquet pain at 30 minutes (not at 10 minutes or 20 minutes) and after changeover to the distal tourniquet. Alayurt et al 42 found that 100 mg tramadol added to LA decreased intraoperative fentanyl requirements (44 ± 54 µg vs 56 ± 54 µg), and decreased tourniquet pain at 20 minutes and 40 minutes compared to control. Siddiqui et al 45 found no difference in intraoperative analgesia with 50 mg tramadol, but identified a decrease in intraoperative fentanyl requirements (32.8 ± 35.2 µg vs 63.3 ± 39.5 µg) and tourniquet pain with the 100 mg dose. One study did not find any improvement in tourniquet pain. 43 Siddiqui et al 45  In summary, morphine, meperidine, and fentanyl (as a sole adjunct) do not demonstrate clinically significant benefits as adjuncts or their side effects preclude their clinical use. The combination of fentanyl with a muscle relaxant can achieve an equivalent quality of IVRA with a 50% reduction in LA dose, but at the expense of a potentially slower sensory block. Sufentanil provides a faster onset of sensory block, but does not demonstrate postdeflation analgesia. Tramadol provides a faster onset of sensory block and improved tourniquet tolerance, but lacks consistent postdeflation analgesia and poses an increased risk of minor side effects.
## (s22) Muscle relaxants
Number of References: 84

(p22.0) Ten studies involving 494 patients investigated muscle relaxants, either in combination with fentanyl, 33,38,41,44 or as sole adjuncts 6,33,[49][50][51][52][53] (Table 4). The muscle relaxants investigated were pancuronium, 33,38,44 atracurium, 49,51,52 mivacurium, 41,50,53 and cisatracurium. 6 

(p22.1) Ten studies involving 494 patients investigated muscle relaxants, either in combination with fentanyl, 33,38,41,44 or as sole adjuncts 6,33,[49][50][51][52][53] (Table 4). The muscle relaxants investigated were pancuronium, 33,38,44 atracurium, 49,51,52 mivacurium, 41,50,53 and cisatracurium. 6 
## (s23) Sensory anesthesia
Number of References: 40

(p23.0) Two out of six studies evaluating muscle relaxants as sole adjuncts reported a faster onset of sensory block with the addition of muscle relaxant to LA. Esamaoglu et al 6 found sensory blockade to be on average 1.8 minutes faster with the addition of cisatracurium (0.01 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) to plain lidocaine (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ). Mizrak et al 50 found similar results to the previous studies, demonstrating a faster onset of sensory block by adding mivacurium (0.6 mg) to plain lidocaine (3.1 ± 0.5 minutes vs 2.2 ± 0.8 minutes). No study identified a difference in sensory recovery compared to control. 6,50 Motor block Two studies evaluating muscle relaxants as sole adjuncts to LA found a faster onset of motor block. 6,50 With the addition of mivacurium (0.6 mg) to lidocaine (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ), Mizrak et al 50 found a faster onset of motor block by approximately 2 minutes. Esmaoglu et al 6 found that the addition of cisatracurium (0.01 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) to plain lidocaine (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) resulted in a faster onset of motor block by approximately 7 minutes. Three studies did not report a faster onset of block, yet described a significantly greater degree of muscle relaxation with the addition of 0.5 mg pancuronium 33 or 2 mg atracurium 33,49,52 to IVRA. Five out submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com

(p23.1) Two out of six studies evaluating muscle relaxants as sole adjuncts reported a faster onset of sensory block with the addition of muscle relaxant to LA. Esamaoglu et al 6 found sensory blockade to be on average 1.8 minutes faster with the addition of cisatracurium (0.01 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) to plain lidocaine (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ). Mizrak et al 50 found similar results to the previous studies, demonstrating a faster onset of sensory block by adding mivacurium (0.6 mg) to plain lidocaine (3.1 ± 0.5 minutes vs 2.2 ± 0.8 minutes). No study identified a difference in sensory recovery compared to control. 6,50 Motor block Two studies evaluating muscle relaxants as sole adjuncts to LA found a faster onset of motor block. 6,50 With the addition of mivacurium (0.6 mg) to lidocaine (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ), Mizrak et al 50 found a faster onset of motor block by approximately 2 minutes. Esmaoglu et al 6 found that the addition of cisatracurium (0.01 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) to plain lidocaine (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) resulted in a faster onset of motor block by approximately 7 minutes. Three studies did not report a faster onset of block, yet described a significantly greater degree of muscle relaxation with the addition of 0.5 mg pancuronium 33 or 2 mg atracurium 33,49,52 to IVRA. Five out submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
## (s25) Dovepress
Number of References: 32

(p25.0) of six studies evaluating the recovery of motor block found it to be significantly prolonged in patients receiving muscle relaxant. 6,49,50,52,53 Tourniquet tolerance and intraoperative analgesia Two studies investigating tourniquet pain found no improvement with the addition of muscle relaxant to LA. 50,51 Elhakim and Sadek 49 described significantly improved intraoperative VAS scores unrelated to the tourniquet site. Likewise, Esmaoglu et al 6 described an improved quality of analgesia requiring less intraoperative supplemental opioids.

(p25.1) of six studies evaluating the recovery of motor block found it to be significantly prolonged in patients receiving muscle relaxant. 6,49,50,52,53 Tourniquet tolerance and intraoperative analgesia Two studies investigating tourniquet pain found no improvement with the addition of muscle relaxant to LA. 50,51 Elhakim and Sadek 49 described significantly improved intraoperative VAS scores unrelated to the tourniquet site. Likewise, Esmaoglu et al 6 described an improved quality of analgesia requiring less intraoperative supplemental opioids.
## (s26) Postoperative analgesia
Number of References: 4

(p26.0) Elhakim and Sadek 49 measured postoperative pain and described a reduction at 5 minutes and 15 minutes with the addition of 2 mg atracurium to LA. Esmaoglu et al 6  Mizrak et al 50 did not find a significant difference in pain scores, but reported a small but significant decrease in the amount of fentanyl consumption within a 24-hour period with the addition of 0.6 mg mivacurium to LA (10 ± 20.3 µg vs 25 ± 34.1 µg). Prasad and Anjan 51 did not discover any improvement in postoperative analgesia with the use of muscle relaxants.

(p26.1) Elhakim and Sadek 49 measured postoperative pain and described a reduction at 5 minutes and 15 minutes with the addition of 2 mg atracurium to LA. Esmaoglu et al 6  Mizrak et al 50 did not find a significant difference in pain scores, but reported a small but significant decrease in the amount of fentanyl consumption within a 24-hour period with the addition of 0.6 mg mivacurium to LA (10 ± 20.3 µg vs 25 ± 34.1 µg). Prasad and Anjan 51 did not discover any improvement in postoperative analgesia with the use of muscle relaxants.
## (s27) Side effects
Number of References: 4

(p27.0) Nine out of ten studies did not find any significant side effects. 6 In summary, muscle relaxants provide an improved quality of motor block, but at the expense of a delay in motor recovery. There are no postdeflation benefits with the use of these adjuncts.

(p27.1) Nine out of ten studies did not find any significant side effects. 6 In summary, muscle relaxants provide an improved quality of motor block, but at the expense of a delay in motor recovery. There are no postdeflation benefits with the use of these adjuncts.
## (s29) Local anesthetic
Number of References: 16

(p29.0) With regards to LA, the intraoperative outcomes (onset of sensory and motor block, tourniquet pain) appear to be equivalent with all three agents. When assessing postoperative outcomes the differences between these agents become more evident. One of the major concerns with IVRA is limited postoperative pain relief following tourniquet deflation, and evidence from this review suggests that ropivacaine has the most to offer for improving postoperative analgesia. The prolonged residual anesthesia of ropivacaine may be due to the slow release of the drug from tissue binding sites with subsequent slow increase in plasma concentrations. 54 This benefit was most evident when ropivacaine was compared to lidocaine. One study comparing it to prilocaine did not demonstrate an improvement, and further studies are needed to investigate this comparison. The improvement in postoperative analgesia must be weighed against a prolonged recovery for return of motor function in comparison to other LA agents. Furthermore, although no significant side effects were reported in these studies, LA toxicity remains a concern. Prilocaine has fallen out of favor in the past because of concerns regarding risk of methemoglobinemia, but evidence has shown that this is very unlikely to occur at doses appropriate for IVRA. 55 Data records from 1963-1989 indicated that prilocaine was not responsible for any deaths from all modes of use, not just IVRA. 55 Ropivacaine is devoid of the potential toxic dextrorotatory version of racemic LA anesthetic mixtures, but in high doses may still cause CNS and cardiac toxicity. 26 When considering its use, an unanswered question remains regarding its potency ratio compared to other LA agents.

(p29.1) With regards to LA, the intraoperative outcomes (onset of sensory and motor block, tourniquet pain) appear to be equivalent with all three agents. When assessing postoperative outcomes the differences between these agents become more evident. One of the major concerns with IVRA is limited postoperative pain relief following tourniquet deflation, and evidence from this review suggests that ropivacaine has the most to offer for improving postoperative analgesia. The prolonged residual anesthesia of ropivacaine may be due to the slow release of the drug from tissue binding sites with subsequent slow increase in plasma concentrations. 54 This benefit was most evident when ropivacaine was compared to lidocaine. One study comparing it to prilocaine did not demonstrate an improvement, and further studies are needed to investigate this comparison. The improvement in postoperative analgesia must be weighed against a prolonged recovery for return of motor function in comparison to other LA agents. Furthermore, although no significant side effects were reported in these studies, LA toxicity remains a concern. Prilocaine has fallen out of favor in the past because of concerns regarding risk of methemoglobinemia, but evidence has shown that this is very unlikely to occur at doses appropriate for IVRA. 55 Data records from 1963-1989 indicated that prilocaine was not responsible for any deaths from all modes of use, not just IVRA. 55 Ropivacaine is devoid of the potential toxic dextrorotatory version of racemic LA anesthetic mixtures, but in high doses may still cause CNS and cardiac toxicity. 26 When considering its use, an unanswered question remains regarding its potency ratio compared to other LA agents.
## (s30) Opioids
Number of References: 8

(p30.0) Using basic concepts of peripheral opioid activity, anesthesiologists have attempted to capitalize on the presence of peripheral opioid receptors to improve the quality of intraoperative and/or postoperative regional anesthesia. 56 The scientific basis for this theory was based on the presence of opioid receptors and their endogenous ligands in the peripheral nervous system, and their effect on modulation of inflammatory pain. 57 However, recent systematic reviews have concluded that, in fact, opioids lack significant effect in this setting. 56 As outlined by Choyce and Peng 17 in a systemic review on IVRA adjuncts in 2002, results of early studies evaluating morphine, fentanyl, meperidine, sufentanil, and tramadol as adjuncts were disappointing. Since this time, however, new studies have continued to assess the benefits of several opioids, with a submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress Dovepress focus on sufentanil and tramadol, as well as the combination of opioids with muscle relaxants in an attempt to decrease the required dose of LA. Evidence from this review indicated that morphine did not demonstrate a clinically significant benefit as an adjunct. Fentanyl (as a sole adjunct) failed to demonstrate any benefits, and had an increased risk of minor side effects. Meperidine demonstrated positive findings, but an increased incidence of light-headedness and nausea was a significant disadvantage.
## (s32) Implications for further research
Number of References: 4

(p32.0) Further research is needed to investigate the safety of LA options for IVRA. There is currently no recommended dose for ropivacaine in IVRA, and comparison trials should be completed with full knowledge of the relative LA potencies. 26 More clinical studies are required to examine the safety of the use of ropivacaine. Furthermore, one of the major limitations of IVRA continues to be the lack of postoperative analgesia following tourniquet deflation. Trials to date have failed to identify an adjunct that provides consistent postoperative analgesia without an increase in minor side effects. Future studies should focus their investigations on novel adjuncts that can provide effective postdeflation analgesia.

(p32.1) Further research is needed to investigate the safety of LA options for IVRA. There is currently no recommended dose for ropivacaine in IVRA, and comparison trials should be completed with full knowledge of the relative LA potencies. 26 More clinical studies are required to examine the safety of the use of ropivacaine. Furthermore, one of the major limitations of IVRA continues to be the lack of postoperative analgesia following tourniquet deflation. Trials to date have failed to identify an adjunct that provides consistent postoperative analgesia without an increase in minor side effects. Future studies should focus their investigations on novel adjuncts that can provide effective postdeflation analgesia.
## (s48) Part one: local anesthetics for IvRA
Number of References: 60

(p48.0) Nine studies involving 516 patients compared the efficacy of lidocaine, ropivacaine, and prilocaine as local anesthetic agents for IVRA (Table 2). 8,15,[26][27][28][29][30][31][32] One study evaluated three different LA drugs, 32 with the remaining studies evaluating two LA agents in comparison to one another. Three of the studies reported sample size estimations and power analysis. 15,26,30 Allocation concealment was adequate in two studies 30,32 and unclear in the others (Table 1).

(p48.1) Nine studies involving 516 patients compared the efficacy of lidocaine, ropivacaine, and prilocaine as local anesthetic agents for IVRA (Table 2). 8,15,[26][27][28][29][30][31][32] One study evaluated three different LA drugs, 32 with the remaining studies evaluating two LA agents in comparison to one another. Three of the studies reported sample size estimations and power analysis. 15,26,30 Allocation concealment was adequate in two studies 30,32 and unclear in the others (Table 1).
## (s49) Local anesthetic
Number of References: 36

(p49.0) Lidocaine and ropivacaine were the most common LA agents evaluated. Out of nine studies, five compared lidocaine to ropivacaine, 8,26,27,29,31 three compared lidocaine to prilocaine, 28,30,32 and one compared ropivacaine and prilocaine. 15 

(p49.1) Lidocaine and ropivacaine were the most common LA agents evaluated. Out of nine studies, five compared lidocaine to ropivacaine, 8,26,27,29,31 three compared lidocaine to prilocaine, 28,30,32 and one compared ropivacaine and prilocaine. 15 
## (s50) Sensory anesthesia
Number of References: 28

(p50.0) Overall, there were no significant differences in the onset of sensory block between lidocaine, prilocaine, and ropivacaine. 8,[26][27][28][29]31,32 One study 15 compared 0.5% prilocaine with 0.2% ropivacaine and found that more patients had pin-prick analgesia in one of the four peripheral nerve distributions (radial nerve) 10 minutes after injection in the prilocaine group compared to the ropivacaine group (90% vs 60%). The clinical significance of this is doubtful. 

(p50.1) Overall, there were no significant differences in the onset of sensory block between lidocaine, prilocaine, and ropivacaine. 8,[26][27][28][29]31,32 One study 15 compared 0.5% prilocaine with 0.2% ropivacaine and found that more patients had pin-prick analgesia in one of the four peripheral nerve distributions (radial nerve) 10 minutes after injection in the prilocaine group compared to the ropivacaine group (90% vs 60%). The clinical significance of this is doubtful. 
## (s52) Dovepress
Number of References: 28

(p52.0) Five studies evaluated offset of sensory block with the use of ropivacaine compared to lidocaine and prilocaine. All five studies found recovery to be prolonged when ropivacaine was used. 8,15,26,27,29 Hartmannsgruber et al 8 found that sensory recovery was prolonged by up to 30 minutes in those who received 0.2% ropivacaine compared to 0.5% lidocaine (but only in the area of the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve). Likewise, Chan et al 29 found that sensory recovery in the high-dose ropivacaine group (1.8 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) was significantly longer than the low-dose ropivacaine (1.2 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) or lidocaine group (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ). Atanassoff et al 27 found a prolonged sensory recovery by approximately 19 minutes, on average, with the use of 0.2% ropivacaine compared to lidocaine. Asik et al 26 demonstrated sensory recovery to be significantly prolonged in both 0.2% and 0.25% ropivacaine groups compared to 0.5% lidocaine (20.5 ± 4.6 minutes and 23.5 ± 4.8 minutes compared to 3.5 ± 1 minute). Only one study compared ropivacaine with prilocaine. In this study, 0.2% ropivacaine was compared with 0.5% prilocaine, and a prolonged recovery was found with the ropivacaine -but only in the area innervated by the median nerve. 15 One study investigated sensory recovery times between lidocaine and prilocaine and did not find a difference. 28   

(p52.1) Five studies evaluated offset of sensory block with the use of ropivacaine compared to lidocaine and prilocaine. All five studies found recovery to be prolonged when ropivacaine was used. 8,15,26,27,29 Hartmannsgruber et al 8 found that sensory recovery was prolonged by up to 30 minutes in those who received 0.2% ropivacaine compared to 0.5% lidocaine (but only in the area of the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve). Likewise, Chan et al 29 found that sensory recovery in the high-dose ropivacaine group (1.8 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) was significantly longer than the low-dose ropivacaine (1.2 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) or lidocaine group (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ). Atanassoff et al 27 found a prolonged sensory recovery by approximately 19 minutes, on average, with the use of 0.2% ropivacaine compared to lidocaine. Asik et al 26 demonstrated sensory recovery to be significantly prolonged in both 0.2% and 0.25% ropivacaine groups compared to 0.5% lidocaine (20.5 ± 4.6 minutes and 23.5 ± 4.8 minutes compared to 3.5 ± 1 minute). Only one study compared ropivacaine with prilocaine. In this study, 0.2% ropivacaine was compared with 0.5% prilocaine, and a prolonged recovery was found with the ropivacaine -but only in the area innervated by the median nerve. 15 One study investigated sensory recovery times between lidocaine and prilocaine and did not find a difference. 28   
## (s54) Motor block
Number of References: 28

(p54.0) The onset of motor block revealed no significant difference between agents. 8,15,26,29,31,32 When assessing motor block recovery, ropivacaine use was found to cause a delayed recovery in all studies. 8 

(p54.1) The onset of motor block revealed no significant difference between agents. 8,15,26,29,31,32 When assessing motor block recovery, ropivacaine use was found to cause a delayed recovery in all studies. 8 
## (s55) Tourniquet tolerance and intraoperative analgesia
Number of References: 20

(p55.0) Similar tourniquet tolerance times were found in four of five studies that compared lidocaine and ropivacaine. 8,27,29,31 Only Asik et al 26 demonstrated contrary findings, in which 0.25% ropivacaine resulted in improved distal tourniquet tolerance compared to the 0.2% ropivacaine or 0.5% lidocaine group (15.3 ± 2.3 minutes vs 9.1 ± 2.6 minutes and 9.0 ± 2.1 minutes). Tourniquet tolerance for prilocaine was not compared with the other agents, but intraoperative analgesia was assessed in two studies. Niemi et al 15 found intraoperative fentanyl requirements to be similar between those receiving 0.5% prilocaine and 0.2% ropivacaine. Davidson et al 30 used an objective scoring system for intraoperative pain, with results suggesting improved pain relief with 0.5% lidocaine compared to 0.5% prilocaine.

(p55.1) Similar tourniquet tolerance times were found in four of five studies that compared lidocaine and ropivacaine. 8,27,29,31 Only Asik et al 26 demonstrated contrary findings, in which 0.25% ropivacaine resulted in improved distal tourniquet tolerance compared to the 0.2% ropivacaine or 0.5% lidocaine group (15.3 ± 2.3 minutes vs 9.1 ± 2.6 minutes and 9.0 ± 2.1 minutes). Tourniquet tolerance for prilocaine was not compared with the other agents, but intraoperative analgesia was assessed in two studies. Niemi et al 15 found intraoperative fentanyl requirements to be similar between those receiving 0.5% prilocaine and 0.2% ropivacaine. Davidson et al 30 used an objective scoring system for intraoperative pain, with results suggesting improved pain relief with 0.5% lidocaine compared to 0.5% prilocaine.
## (s56) Postoperative analgesia
Number of References: 4

(p56.0) Three out of four studies found significant postoperative benefits with ropivacaine compared to lidocaine. 26 lower verbal numerical pain scores and longer TTFA in the 0.25% and 0.20% ropivacaine subjects compared to 0.5% lidocaine (29.8 ± 4.9 minutes, 27.5 ± 7.3 minutes vs 11.3 ± 3.9 minutes). Furthermore, the number of patients taking more than two tablets of tramadol within the first 24 hours was lowest in the high-dose ropivacaine group compared to 0.2% ropivacaine and 0.5% lidocaine groups (three vs 18 and 16 patients, respectively). One study examined the use of 0.5% prilocaine and 0.2% ropivacaine. Although the time for the request of f irst analgesic agents was three times longer in the ropivacaine group (82 minutes vs 25 minutes), this did not achieve statistical significance. 15

(p56.1) Three out of four studies found significant postoperative benefits with ropivacaine compared to lidocaine. 26 lower verbal numerical pain scores and longer TTFA in the 0.25% and 0.20% ropivacaine subjects compared to 0.5% lidocaine (29.8 ± 4.9 minutes, 27.5 ± 7.3 minutes vs 11.3 ± 3.9 minutes). Furthermore, the number of patients taking more than two tablets of tramadol within the first 24 hours was lowest in the high-dose ropivacaine group compared to 0.2% ropivacaine and 0.5% lidocaine groups (three vs 18 and 16 patients, respectively). One study examined the use of 0.5% prilocaine and 0.2% ropivacaine. Although the time for the request of f irst analgesic agents was three times longer in the ropivacaine group (82 minutes vs 25 minutes), this did not achieve statistical significance. 15
## (s57) Side effects
Number of References: 18

(p57.0) No significant side effects were reported in any study. Several studies demonstrated minor side effects without accompanying statistical analysis. 8,15,[26][27][28][29] The volunteer patient studies 8,29 both demonstrated an increased incidence of temporary dizziness, tinnitus, and light-headedness in the lidocaine groups; however, these patients were not administered any sedation prior to, or during, the procedure. Asik et al 26 identified an increased incidence of light-headedness, tinnitus, and metallic taste in patients receiving lidocaine. Niemi et al 15 identified one patient with postoperative dizziness and blurry vision after receiving 0.5% prilocaine.
## (s59) Opioids
Number of References: 70

(p59.0) Sixteen studies involving 761 patients investigated the use of opioids as IVRA adjuncts, either as a sole agent [34][35][36][37]39,40,42,43,[45][46][47][48] or in combination with a muscle relaxant 33,38,41,44 (Table 3). The opioids investigated were morphine 34,37 (two studies), fentanyl 33,35,38,41,44,47,48 (seven studies), meperidine 36 (one study), sufentanil 40,42 (two studies), and tramadol 39,42,43,45,46 (five studies).

(p59.1) One of the above studies involved both a sufentanil and tramadol group compared to control. 42 Morphine Two studies involving a total of 57 subjects investigated morphine as a sole adjunct. 34,37 The doses studied were 1 mg and 6 mg.
## (s60) Fentanyl
Number of References: 44

(p60.0) Seven studies involving a total of 345 subjects investigated fentanyl as an IVRA adjunct. 33,35,38,41,44,47,48 Four studies evaluated it as a sole adjunct, 33,35,47,48 and four studies looked at fentanyl in combination with a muscle relaxant 33,38,41,44 (one study investigated it as both a sole adjunct and in combination with a muscle relaxant). The dose range was 50-200 µg.

(p60.1) Studies evaluating fentanyl as a sole adjunct did not identify any benefits in terms of onset or recovery of sensory or motor block. One study investigated tourniquet pain, identifying no improvement compared to control. 35 Postoperative analgesia was not assessed in any study. Two studies reported a significantly increased incidence of nausea post-tourniquet deflation in the fentanyl-treated groups. 35,47 Three studies investigated fentanyl plus pancuronium, 33,38,44 and one study investigated fentanyl plus mivacurium. 41 All four studies used a dilute solution of LA (0.25% lidocaine) with the addition of these adjuncts. Sztark et al 38  One study found no difference in onset of sensory block. 41 Abdulla and Fadhil 33 did not assess onset time specifically, but noted that the combination of fentanyl (50 µg) and pancuronium (0.5 mg) added to dilute LA provided good or excellent intraoperative analgesia in 100% of cases. Onset of motor block was assessed in two studies 38      Notes: *The first number shown is the total number of study subjects, second number is the number of groups. Abbreviations: IvRA, intravenous regional anesthesia; LA, local anesthetic; NS, normal saline; N/A, not analyzed or not available; x-over, cross-over study design; vAS, visual analog scale (1 = no pain, 10 = worst imaginable pain); vNS, verbal numerical pain score; VPRS, verbal pain rating score; AC, analgesic consumption; TTFA, time to first analgesia; IA, intraoperative analgesia; TP, tourniquet pain.
## (s62) Sufentanil
Number of References: 12

(p62.0) Two studies involving 125 subjects investigated the use of sufentanil as a sole adjunct in IVRA. 40,42 Sufentanil was one of several agents investigated in each of these studies; the other agents are discussed elsewhere. For each study the dose was 25 µg.

(p62.1) Sensory onset was found to be faster in each study. Hoffman et al 40 

(p62.2) Two studies involving 125 subjects investigated the use of sufentanil as a sole adjunct in IVRA. 40,42 Sufentanil was one of several agents investigated in each of these studies; the other agents are discussed elsewhere. For each study the dose was 25 µg.

(p62.3) Sensory onset was found to be faster in each study. Hoffman et al 40 
## (s63) Tramadol
Number of References: 64

(p63.0) Five studies involving a total of 264 subjects looked at the use of tramadol as a sole adjunct for IVRA. 39,42,43,45,46 In one study, tramadol was analyzed in comparison to a number of single adjuncts. 42 The dose range was 50-100 mg.

(p63.1) Three out of four studies demonstrated a faster onset of sensory block with the addition of tramadol to LA. 39,42,45 Siddiqui et al 45 investigated two doses of tramadol, and found a faster onset of sensory block with both 50 mg and 100 mg doses added to 0.5% lidocaine (5.2 ± 1.2 minutes and 4.9 ± 1.2 minutes vs 7.6 ± 1.4 minutes). Alayurt et al 42 found a faster onset of sensory block by approximately 2 minutes if tramadol (100 mg) was added to 0.5% lidocaine. Acalovschi et al 39 demonstrated a faster onset of sensory block (pin-prick, touch, and temperature) with 100 mg tramadol added to 0.5% l idocaine. However, this study found only touch sensation to be slower to recover; the remaining studies did not find a difference in sensory recovery. 42 No study demonstrated a significant difference in onset or recovery of motor block.

(p63.2) Tourniquet pain was decreased by the addition of tramadol in three of four studies that investigated this outcome. 42,45,46 Tan et al 46 found that a 50 mg dose decreased tourniquet pain at 30 minutes (not at 10 minutes or 20 minutes) and after changeover to the distal tourniquet. Alayurt et al 42 found that 100 mg tramadol added to LA decreased intraoperative fentanyl requirements (44 ± 54 µg vs 56 ± 54 µg), and decreased tourniquet pain at 20 minutes and 40 minutes compared to control. Siddiqui et al 45 found no difference in intraoperative analgesia with 50 mg tramadol, but identified a decrease in intraoperative fentanyl requirements (32.8 ± 35.2 µg vs 63.3 ± 39.5 µg) and tourniquet pain with the 100 mg dose. One study did not find any improvement in tourniquet pain. 43 Siddiqui et al 45  In summary, morphine, meperidine, and fentanyl (as a sole adjunct) do not demonstrate clinically significant benefits as adjuncts or their side effects preclude their clinical use. The combination of fentanyl with a muscle relaxant can achieve an equivalent quality of IVRA with a 50% reduction in LA dose, but at the expense of a potentially slower sensory block. Sufentanil provides a faster onset of sensory block, but does not demonstrate postdeflation analgesia. Tramadol provides a faster onset of sensory block and improved tourniquet tolerance, but lacks consistent postdeflation analgesia and poses an increased risk of minor side effects.

(p63.3) Five studies involving a total of 264 subjects looked at the use of tramadol as a sole adjunct for IVRA. 39,42,43,45,46 In one study, tramadol was analyzed in comparison to a number of single adjuncts. 42 The dose range was 50-100 mg.

(p63.4) Three out of four studies demonstrated a faster onset of sensory block with the addition of tramadol to LA. 39,42,45 Siddiqui et al 45 investigated two doses of tramadol, and found a faster onset of sensory block with both 50 mg and 100 mg doses added to 0.5% lidocaine (5.2 ± 1.2 minutes and 4.9 ± 1.2 minutes vs 7.6 ± 1.4 minutes). Alayurt et al 42 found a faster onset of sensory block by approximately 2 minutes if tramadol (100 mg) was added to 0.5% lidocaine. Acalovschi et al 39 demonstrated a faster onset of sensory block (pin-prick, touch, and temperature) with 100 mg tramadol added to 0.5% l idocaine. However, this study found only touch sensation to be slower to recover; the remaining studies did not find a difference in sensory recovery. 42 No study demonstrated a significant difference in onset or recovery of motor block.

(p63.5) Tourniquet pain was decreased by the addition of tramadol in three of four studies that investigated this outcome. 42,45,46 Tan et al 46 found that a 50 mg dose decreased tourniquet pain at 30 minutes (not at 10 minutes or 20 minutes) and after changeover to the distal tourniquet. Alayurt et al 42 found that 100 mg tramadol added to LA decreased intraoperative fentanyl requirements (44 ± 54 µg vs 56 ± 54 µg), and decreased tourniquet pain at 20 minutes and 40 minutes compared to control. Siddiqui et al 45 found no difference in intraoperative analgesia with 50 mg tramadol, but identified a decrease in intraoperative fentanyl requirements (32.8 ± 35.2 µg vs 63.3 ± 39.5 µg) and tourniquet pain with the 100 mg dose. One study did not find any improvement in tourniquet pain. 43 Siddiqui et al 45  In summary, morphine, meperidine, and fentanyl (as a sole adjunct) do not demonstrate clinically significant benefits as adjuncts or their side effects preclude their clinical use. The combination of fentanyl with a muscle relaxant can achieve an equivalent quality of IVRA with a 50% reduction in LA dose, but at the expense of a potentially slower sensory block. Sufentanil provides a faster onset of sensory block, but does not demonstrate postdeflation analgesia. Tramadol provides a faster onset of sensory block and improved tourniquet tolerance, but lacks consistent postdeflation analgesia and poses an increased risk of minor side effects.
## (s64) Muscle relaxants
Number of References: 84

(p64.0) Ten studies involving 494 patients investigated muscle relaxants, either in combination with fentanyl, 33,38,41,44 or as sole adjuncts 6,33,[49][50][51][52][53] (Table 4). The muscle relaxants investigated were pancuronium, 33,38,44 atracurium, 49,51,52 mivacurium, 41,50,53 and cisatracurium. 6 

(p64.1) Ten studies involving 494 patients investigated muscle relaxants, either in combination with fentanyl, 33,38,41,44 or as sole adjuncts 6,33,[49][50][51][52][53] (Table 4). The muscle relaxants investigated were pancuronium, 33,38,44 atracurium, 49,51,52 mivacurium, 41,50,53 and cisatracurium. 6 
## (s65) Sensory anesthesia
Number of References: 40

(p65.0) Two out of six studies evaluating muscle relaxants as sole adjuncts reported a faster onset of sensory block with the addition of muscle relaxant to LA. Esamaoglu et al 6 found sensory blockade to be on average 1.8 minutes faster with the addition of cisatracurium (0.01 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) to plain lidocaine (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ). Mizrak et al 50 found similar results to the previous studies, demonstrating a faster onset of sensory block by adding mivacurium (0.6 mg) to plain lidocaine (3.1 ± 0.5 minutes vs 2.2 ± 0.8 minutes). No study identified a difference in sensory recovery compared to control. 6,50 Motor block Two studies evaluating muscle relaxants as sole adjuncts to LA found a faster onset of motor block. 6,50 With the addition of mivacurium (0.6 mg) to lidocaine (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ), Mizrak et al 50 found a faster onset of motor block by approximately 2 minutes. Esmaoglu et al 6 found that the addition of cisatracurium (0.01 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) to plain lidocaine (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) resulted in a faster onset of motor block by approximately 7 minutes. Three studies did not report a faster onset of block, yet described a significantly greater degree of muscle relaxation with the addition of 0.5 mg pancuronium 33 or 2 mg atracurium 33,49,52 to IVRA. Five out submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com

(p65.1) Two out of six studies evaluating muscle relaxants as sole adjuncts reported a faster onset of sensory block with the addition of muscle relaxant to LA. Esamaoglu et al 6 found sensory blockade to be on average 1.8 minutes faster with the addition of cisatracurium (0.01 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) to plain lidocaine (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ). Mizrak et al 50 found similar results to the previous studies, demonstrating a faster onset of sensory block by adding mivacurium (0.6 mg) to plain lidocaine (3.1 ± 0.5 minutes vs 2.2 ± 0.8 minutes). No study identified a difference in sensory recovery compared to control. 6,50 Motor block Two studies evaluating muscle relaxants as sole adjuncts to LA found a faster onset of motor block. 6,50 With the addition of mivacurium (0.6 mg) to lidocaine (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ), Mizrak et al 50 found a faster onset of motor block by approximately 2 minutes. Esmaoglu et al 6 found that the addition of cisatracurium (0.01 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) to plain lidocaine (3 mg ⋅ kg −1 ) resulted in a faster onset of motor block by approximately 7 minutes. Three studies did not report a faster onset of block, yet described a significantly greater degree of muscle relaxation with the addition of 0.5 mg pancuronium 33 or 2 mg atracurium 33,49,52 to IVRA. Five out submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
## (s67) Dovepress
Number of References: 32

(p67.0) of six studies evaluating the recovery of motor block found it to be significantly prolonged in patients receiving muscle relaxant. 6,49,50,52,53 Tourniquet tolerance and intraoperative analgesia Two studies investigating tourniquet pain found no improvement with the addition of muscle relaxant to LA. 50,51 Elhakim and Sadek 49 described significantly improved intraoperative VAS scores unrelated to the tourniquet site. Likewise, Esmaoglu et al 6 described an improved quality of analgesia requiring less intraoperative supplemental opioids.

(p67.1) of six studies evaluating the recovery of motor block found it to be significantly prolonged in patients receiving muscle relaxant. 6,49,50,52,53 Tourniquet tolerance and intraoperative analgesia Two studies investigating tourniquet pain found no improvement with the addition of muscle relaxant to LA. 50,51 Elhakim and Sadek 49 described significantly improved intraoperative VAS scores unrelated to the tourniquet site. Likewise, Esmaoglu et al 6 described an improved quality of analgesia requiring less intraoperative supplemental opioids.
## (s68) Postoperative analgesia
Number of References: 4

(p68.0) Elhakim and Sadek 49 measured postoperative pain and described a reduction at 5 minutes and 15 minutes with the addition of 2 mg atracurium to LA. Esmaoglu et al 6  Mizrak et al 50 did not find a significant difference in pain scores, but reported a small but significant decrease in the amount of fentanyl consumption within a 24-hour period with the addition of 0.6 mg mivacurium to LA (10 ± 20.3 µg vs 25 ± 34.1 µg). Prasad and Anjan 51 did not discover any improvement in postoperative analgesia with the use of muscle relaxants.

(p68.1) Elhakim and Sadek 49 measured postoperative pain and described a reduction at 5 minutes and 15 minutes with the addition of 2 mg atracurium to LA. Esmaoglu et al 6  Mizrak et al 50 did not find a significant difference in pain scores, but reported a small but significant decrease in the amount of fentanyl consumption within a 24-hour period with the addition of 0.6 mg mivacurium to LA (10 ± 20.3 µg vs 25 ± 34.1 µg). Prasad and Anjan 51 did not discover any improvement in postoperative analgesia with the use of muscle relaxants.
## (s69) Side effects
Number of References: 4

(p69.0) Nine out of ten studies did not find any significant side effects. 6 In summary, muscle relaxants provide an improved quality of motor block, but at the expense of a delay in motor recovery. There are no postdeflation benefits with the use of these adjuncts.

(p69.1) Nine out of ten studies did not find any significant side effects. 6 In summary, muscle relaxants provide an improved quality of motor block, but at the expense of a delay in motor recovery. There are no postdeflation benefits with the use of these adjuncts.
## (s71) Local anesthetic
Number of References: 16

(p71.0) With regards to LA, the intraoperative outcomes (onset of sensory and motor block, tourniquet pain) appear to be equivalent with all three agents. When assessing postoperative outcomes the differences between these agents become more evident. One of the major concerns with IVRA is limited postoperative pain relief following tourniquet deflation, and evidence from this review suggests that ropivacaine has the most to offer for improving postoperative analgesia. The prolonged residual anesthesia of ropivacaine may be due to the slow release of the drug from tissue binding sites with subsequent slow increase in plasma concentrations. 54 This benefit was most evident when ropivacaine was compared to lidocaine. One study comparing it to prilocaine did not demonstrate an improvement, and further studies are needed to investigate this comparison. The improvement in postoperative analgesia must be weighed against a prolonged recovery for return of motor function in comparison to other LA agents. Furthermore, although no significant side effects were reported in these studies, LA toxicity remains a concern. Prilocaine has fallen out of favor in the past because of concerns regarding risk of methemoglobinemia, but evidence has shown that this is very unlikely to occur at doses appropriate for IVRA. 55 Data records from 1963-1989 indicated that prilocaine was not responsible for any deaths from all modes of use, not just IVRA. 55 Ropivacaine is devoid of the potential toxic dextrorotatory version of racemic LA anesthetic mixtures, but in high doses may still cause CNS and cardiac toxicity. 26 When considering its use, an unanswered question remains regarding its potency ratio compared to other LA agents.

(p71.1) With regards to LA, the intraoperative outcomes (onset of sensory and motor block, tourniquet pain) appear to be equivalent with all three agents. When assessing postoperative outcomes the differences between these agents become more evident. One of the major concerns with IVRA is limited postoperative pain relief following tourniquet deflation, and evidence from this review suggests that ropivacaine has the most to offer for improving postoperative analgesia. The prolonged residual anesthesia of ropivacaine may be due to the slow release of the drug from tissue binding sites with subsequent slow increase in plasma concentrations. 54 This benefit was most evident when ropivacaine was compared to lidocaine. One study comparing it to prilocaine did not demonstrate an improvement, and further studies are needed to investigate this comparison. The improvement in postoperative analgesia must be weighed against a prolonged recovery for return of motor function in comparison to other LA agents. Furthermore, although no significant side effects were reported in these studies, LA toxicity remains a concern. Prilocaine has fallen out of favor in the past because of concerns regarding risk of methemoglobinemia, but evidence has shown that this is very unlikely to occur at doses appropriate for IVRA. 55 Data records from 1963-1989 indicated that prilocaine was not responsible for any deaths from all modes of use, not just IVRA. 55 Ropivacaine is devoid of the potential toxic dextrorotatory version of racemic LA anesthetic mixtures, but in high doses may still cause CNS and cardiac toxicity. 26 When considering its use, an unanswered question remains regarding its potency ratio compared to other LA agents.
## (s72) Opioids
Number of References: 8

(p72.0) Using basic concepts of peripheral opioid activity, anesthesiologists have attempted to capitalize on the presence of peripheral opioid receptors to improve the quality of intraoperative and/or postoperative regional anesthesia. 56 The scientific basis for this theory was based on the presence of opioid receptors and their endogenous ligands in the peripheral nervous system, and their effect on modulation of inflammatory pain. 57 However, recent systematic reviews have concluded that, in fact, opioids lack significant effect in this setting. 56 As outlined by Choyce and Peng 17 in a systemic review on IVRA adjuncts in 2002, results of early studies evaluating morphine, fentanyl, meperidine, sufentanil, and tramadol as adjuncts were disappointing. Since this time, however, new studies have continued to assess the benefits of several opioids, with a submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress Dovepress focus on sufentanil and tramadol, as well as the combination of opioids with muscle relaxants in an attempt to decrease the required dose of LA. Evidence from this review indicated that morphine did not demonstrate a clinically significant benefit as an adjunct. Fentanyl (as a sole adjunct) failed to demonstrate any benefits, and had an increased risk of minor side effects. Meperidine demonstrated positive findings, but an increased incidence of light-headedness and nausea was a significant disadvantage.
## (s74) Implications for further research
Number of References: 4

(p74.0) Further research is needed to investigate the safety of LA options for IVRA. There is currently no recommended dose for ropivacaine in IVRA, and comparison trials should be completed with full knowledge of the relative LA potencies. 26 More clinical studies are required to examine the safety of the use of ropivacaine. Furthermore, one of the major limitations of IVRA continues to be the lack of postoperative analgesia following tourniquet deflation. Trials to date have failed to identify an adjunct that provides consistent postoperative analgesia without an increase in minor side effects. Future studies should focus their investigations on novel adjuncts that can provide effective postdeflation analgesia.

(p74.1) Further research is needed to investigate the safety of LA options for IVRA. There is currently no recommended dose for ropivacaine in IVRA, and comparison trials should be completed with full knowledge of the relative LA potencies. 26 More clinical studies are required to examine the safety of the use of ropivacaine. Furthermore, one of the major limitations of IVRA continues to be the lack of postoperative analgesia following tourniquet deflation. Trials to date have failed to identify an adjunct that provides consistent postoperative analgesia without an increase in minor side effects. Future studies should focus their investigations on novel adjuncts that can provide effective postdeflation analgesia.
