# Hip fracture protection by alendronate treatment in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis: a review of the literature

CorpusID: 17240943 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b951c6589d7b90f605e3c81c2e1410eca9934bb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b951c6589d7b90f605e3c81c2e1410eca9934bb)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 9

(p0.0) Osteoporosis most commonly affects postmenopausal women, placing them at a signifi cant risk of fractures. In particular, hip fractures are an important cause of mortality and morbidity among postmenopausal women. Approximately 20% of patients with hip fractures die within a year, most of the deaths occurring within the fi rst 6 months after a fracture (Cumming et al 1997). Among the survivors, 30%-50% never regain their prefracture functional status (Cooper et al 1993). Therefore, healthcare expenditure attributable to hip fractures is substantial.

(p0.1) Recent reports have shown that the rate of hip fractures is falling in Ontario and Finland (Jaglal et al 2005;Kannus et al 2006), probably because of recent indications that clinical attention to osteoporosis management is increasing and that specifi c programs of selective screening and aggressive treatment to prevent bone loss may really be able to reduce the fracture rate among the population most at risk (Melton et al 2005). However, there is no indication that the use of effective osteoporosis interventions is increasing dramatically in regions including Asia where the growth in the elderly population is most rapid.

(p0.2) Because elevated bone turnover markers and low bone mineral density (BMD) are independent predictors of hip fracture risk, and the risk is multiplied when both are present (Garnero et al 1996), bone turnover and BMD are important factors in decreasing the risk of hip fractures. Both reduction in bone turnover and increase in hip BMD may be necessary to decrease the fracture risk of the hip, which is primarily composed of cortical bone and may require greater proportionate changes than trabecular bone (Epstein 2007). In fact, drugs with a smaller effect on bone turnover reduce the risk of only vertebral fractures, whereas those with a greater effect reduce the risk of both vertebral and nonvertebral fractures including hip fractures (Delmas 2002). Furthermore, only those drugs associated with relatively large BMD increases together with greater reductions in bone turnover were effective for reducing the risk of nonvertebral fractures including hip fractures (Hochberg et al 2002).
## (s2) Adherence of patients with alendronate treatment
Number of References: 17

(p2.0) A retrospective analysis of a large population of new users of alendronate with diagnosed osteoporosis has confi rmed that both compliance and persistence, in actual practice, is low and inadequate (Rabenda et al 2008). Siris et al (2006) analyzed the fracture probability across the full range of possible compliance values expressed as a medication possession ratio (MPR) (full MPR range: 0.0-1.0 or 0%-100%), which is defi ned as the number of days' supply of a medication with Figure 2 One-year change in BSAP and hip fracture risk among alendronate-treated postmenopausal women. The data from the FIT, a randomized, double-blind clinical trial of 6459 women recruited at 11 US clinical centers, were analyzed. The subjects were postmenopausal women (age range: 55-80 years) with femoral neck BMD = 0.68 g/cm 2 (Hologic QDR-2000) who were naïve to bisphosphonate treatment. Percent change in BSAP and predicted risk (log odds ratio) of hip fractures (solid line) and 95% CI (dotted lines) are reported from logistic regression model. Postmenopausal women treated with alendronate with the greatest percentage reduction in BSAP had the lowest risk of hip fractures, while those with the smallest reduction in BSAP had the highest risk of hip fractures. Reproduced from Bauer DC, Black DM, Garnero P, et al. 2004. Change in bone turnover and hip, non-spine, and vertebral fracture in alendronate-treated women: the fracture intervention trial. Odds ratio hip fractures Figure 3 Rates of hip fractures per 10,000 person-years by attained age. A total of 18 randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, clinical trials of anti-resorptive agents that reported both changes in BMD (or BCM) and incidence of non-vertebral fractures were identifi ed from a systematic literature review and from abstracts in conference proceedings (Hochberg et al 2005 bisphosphonates during a certain period (Sclar et al 1991). At an MPR from 0% to 50%, the probability of fracture during a period of 24 months remains consistent at about 11% and declines progressively once a threshold value of 50% is achieved (Siris et al 2006). Less than half the women were found to be compliant with bisphosphonate therapy (MPR Ն 0.8) and approximately 40% of women persisted with treatment for 12 months without a substantial gap in therapy (Rabenda et al 2008). Poor adherence to alendronate treatment is associated with an increased risk of hip fractures (Rabenda et al 2008). Thus, adherence (compliance and persistence) with treatment has represented a major challenge in patients receiving alendronate.

(p2.1) Once-weekly alendronate, which is the preferred dosing regimen, has been reported to be theoretically equivalent to daily dosing, providing postmenopausal osteoporotic women with a more convenient dosing option that enhances their adherence to treatment (Kendler et al 2004;Rossini et al 2006). Once-weekly alendronate has safety and tolerance profi les similar to daily alendronate in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis (Schnitzer et al 2000;Rizzoli et al 2002;Simon et al 2002).

(p2.2) It has been confi rmed that compliance with bisphosphonate therapy is associated with fracture risk. Rabenda et al (2008) have reported that the MPR is a signifi cant predictor of the occurrence of hip fractures in postmenopausal women treated with alendronate. The logistic regression model has estimated that for each decrease in the MPR of 1%, the adjusted risk of hip fractures increases by 0.4%. As shown in Figure 4 (Rabenda et al 2008), there is a negative estimated linear relationship between the probability of hip fractures and the value of the MPR. The treatment regimen is also an important determinant of hip fracture occurrence: postmenopausal women who receive weekly alendronate are 16.4% less likely to suffer from hip fractures than those on the daily regimen (Rabenda et al 2008). Rabenda et al (2008) have also shown that persistence to alendronate treatment is a signifi cant predictor of incurring hip fractures. The relative risk reduction for hip fractures is 60% for persistent patients compared with nonpersistent patients (hazard ratio: 0.404; 95% CI: 0.357, 0.457; p Ͻ 0.0001).
