# A Review of the Role of Wnt in Cancer Immunomodulation

CorpusID: 174814428 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7e64faa86cbd7f11c1b856b12498c78442e02728](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7e64faa86cbd7f11c1b856b12498c78442e02728)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) The Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway plays a vital role in many cellular functions. Alterations in the pathway are associated with the advancement of cancers. Wnt pathway aberrations have also been correlated with changes in the tumor microenvironment, such as immune evasion, and this has been the topic of two recent reviews [1,2]. The exact mechanisms by which aberrant Wnt signaling modulates anti-tumor immunity need to be further elucidated to facilitate the optimization of cancer therapies. Here, we provide an overview of Wnt signaling pathways and general anti-tumor immunity, then summarize recent literature illustrating how Wnt modulation of the tumor microenvironment (TME) and immune function are being targeted in an attempt to improve cancer treatment outcomes-including both chemotherapies and immunotherapies-for patients with advanced disease. Although there is evidence linking Wnt signaling with metabolic changes that may also impact anti-tumor immunity, we have not addressed this specific topic here, as these findings were recently discussed in detail elsewhere [3,4].
## (s3) The Noncanonical Pathways
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) Most studies have focused on the role of Wnt in the canonical signaling pathway; however, Wnt can also signal through a number of noncanonical pathways. These pathways include the Wnt-JNK, Wnt-RAP1, Wnt-Ror2, Wnt-PKA, Wnt-GSK3MT, Wnt-aPKC, Wnt-RYK, Wnt-mTOR, and Wnt/Ca 2+ signaling pathways. Most of these pathways overlap to transduce calcium-dependent cell signaling [21]. It is thought that the transmembrane receptor Fz is also involved in these pathways, whereas the coreceptor LRP5/6 is thought to function only in canonical pathway signaling. In fact, there is in vivo evidence to suggest that LRP6 may antagonize noncanonical Wnt pathways, possibly to eliminate competition for Wnt ligands [22]. Ror1/2 is the coreceptor often involved in noncanonical pathways. Ligand interaction with this coreceptor causes an increase in inositol triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 causes a release of Ca 2+ from the endoplasmic reticulum, leading to activation of protein kinase C (PKC). PKC activates nuclear factor kappa-B (NFκB) and cAMP response element binding protein (CREB). Calcineurin (Cn) and calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type II (CamKII) are also activated, leading to activation of the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) and NFκB. NFκB, CREB, and NFAT translocate to the nucleus causing transcription of regulatory genes [21]. Although these many mechanisms may not be fully understood, it is clear that Wnt is involved in vital cellular functions, such as assisting in stabilization of proteins during mitosis, through these alternative pathways [23].
## (s6) Stem Cells
Number of References: 15

(p6.0) The Wnt signaling pathway is known to be involved in regulating the self-renewal capacity of non-malignant stem cells. For example, an association between Wnt and adult stem cells was established with the gene disruption of mouse TCF7L2. This gene encodes for T cell factor-4 (Tcf-4), which forms the β-catenin/Tcf-4 transcription complex. A study by Korinek et al. demonstrated that cessation of Wnt signaling resulted in a loss of intestinal stem cells, leading to a breakdown of the intestinal epithelium [30]. Wnt signaling has also been found to help maintain the pluripotency of embryonic stem cells [31]. In contrast, DKK1 overexpression, which results in Wnt pathway inhibition, has been shown to eliminate hair follicles and other skin appendages, suggesting a possible blockade of stem cell initiation [32]. Intriguingly, many studies are now analyzing tumor stem cells as a source of immune evasion, as they have been shown to selectively acquire expression of CD80, a surface ligand that dampens immune recognition by binding Cytotoxic T lymphocyte Antigen-4 (CTLA-4) present on activated T cells [33]. Overexpression of WNT5A, a common Wnt ligand, via epigenetic activation in glioblastoma is thought to lead to stem cell differentiation and invasive growth [34]. Additionally, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis are supported by WNT5A [35]. In addition, mammary tumor stem cells were found to rely on Wnt proteins as rate-limiting self-renewal signals [36]. There is evidence to support Wnt pathway inhibition with the downregulation of PD-L1 expression, associated with a decreased stemness score signature, in triple negative breast cancer [37]. Potential relationships between cancer stem cells and CD8 + tumor infiltration, as related to tumor PD-L1 expression and the effects on cancer progression, are also being investigated [38]. Due to these documented effects of Wnt signaling on promoting stem cell viability and function, it is possible that aberrant Wnt signaling pathways may promote the stem-cell-like qualities of tumor stem cells, thereby facilitating intratumoral immune evasion.

(p6.1) With its role in cellular regulation, there is ample evidence that Wnt signaling affects hematopoietic stem cells. Wnt stimulation of hematopoietic stem cells may increase their self-renewal capacity [39]. For example, limiting β-catenin activation via noncanonical Wnt signaling stimulation was shown to inhibit the differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells [40,41]. However, other animal studies where β-catenin was mutated did not show a significant change in hematopoiesis [42,43]. Induction of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway through inhibition of GSK3β or the use of WNT3A, a stimulating Wnt ligand, was found to arrest CD8 + T cell differentiation into effector cells, promoting self-renewing multipotent CD8 + memory stem cells and maintaining the "stemness" of mature memory CD8 + T cells [44]. This correlation at the cellular developmental level may provide one of the key links between Wnt signaling and alterations in immune functionality in the tumor.
## (s8) Immunity in Cancer
Number of References: 5

(p8.0) Despite tremendous advancements in traditional chemotherapies, many oncology patients continue to experience rapid progression of disease characterized by chemotherapy resistance, which limits therapeutic options. This has led to the pressing need to investigate alternative methods of treatment, such as immune-directed therapies. Many key aspects of the relationship between the immune system and solid tumors have been elucidated over the last 20 years. There is an appreciable complexity of this system that results in either tumor suppression or tumor progression. It is now established that in order for immune cells to recognize cancer cells and control cancer progression and metastasis, they must first infiltrate the tumor, then remain activated in the TME [57]. The presence and activation of these tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) typically correlates with tumors that are more sensitive to chemotherapeutic treatment [58,59]. However, if the tumor has been invaded by tumor-promoting T cells, such as Tregs, there may be decreased treatment sensitivity [60]. In particular, higher frequencies of CD8 + T cells, and high CD8 + /CD4 + ratios have been correlated with improved overall survival in ovarian cancer [61]. The main goal of immunotherapy is to convert the tumor milieu from an immunologically suppressed state to an inflamed state, for tumor recognition, cell destruction, and improved treatment sensitivity.
## (s11) Immunotherapy
Number of References: 10

(p11.0) Some immunotherapies are directed at the proteins that regulate T cell function and cytolytic activity. In particular, immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) are monoclonal antibodies against receptors such as CLTA-4 and Programmed Death-1 (PD-1) that act to down-modulate T cell effector function. ICI are now approved for the treatment of malignant melanoma, non-small-cell lung cancer, classical Hodgkin lymphoma, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, urothelial carcinoma, and renal cell carcinoma [93]. In addition, anti-programmed death-1 ligand (PD-L1) has also shown many promising clinical results [94]. Atezolizumab is an FDA-approved PD-L1 inhibitor that has shown improved progression-free survival and overall survival when used in combination with nabpaclitaxel for metastatic triple negative breast cancer [95]. These results were in patients with known positive PD-L1 tumors. Other anti-PD-L1 therapies include durvalumab and avelumab. Additionally, the monoclonal antibody pembrolizumab (anti-PD-1) was combined with platinum-based chemotherapy in metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer treatment in those who lacked targetable gene mutations. The combination of therapies increased progression-free and overall survival [96].

(p11.1) In a similar fashion, ipilimumab and tremelimumab are monoclonal antibodies to CTLA4, which normally functions to restrain effector T cell activation. Ipilimumab is known for its significant progression-free and overall survival advancement in melanoma [97]. Further improvements in metastatic melanoma were seen following a combination of ipilimumab and anti-PD-L1 therapy [98].

(p11.2) With the rising use of mono-and combinatorial immunotherapy in the clinical setting, there is a need to further understand the TME in patients who do not respond. It has been reported that decreased TILs result in resistance to ICIs [99]. Wnt pathway regulation may play a role in this lack of response, as tumor-intrinsic, active β-catenin signaling in human melanoma has been associated with resistance to anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD-L1 antibodies due to T cell exclusion [88]. It has also been speculated that tumor cells may lack the antigens needed for recognition by TILs, perhaps leading to immunotherapy resistance in these cancers. This was investigated with an analysis of 266 melanoma tumor samples from TCGA. Tissues were divided into categories based on a high or low expression of genes that were associated with T cell infiltration. This was correlated with nonsynonymous somatic mutations as a representative of mutational neoantigens that the tumor may possess. It was concluded that the change in tumor gene expression of infiltrating T cells did not correlate with increased mutational neoantigens [100]. However, gene signatures of these melanoma tissues did support prior evidence of a correlation between Wnt/β-catenin pathway activation and a reduction in T cell infiltration in the tumor [100]. This evidence, in addition to prior stated support, shows a strong correlation between increased Wnt signaling and decreased T cell infiltration in tumors.
