# Influenza at the animal-human interface: a review of the literature for virological evidence of human infection with swine or avian influenza viruses other than A(H5N1)

CorpusID: 17673926 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fa24a61f2b0f9c516517bbfa3159dfcb1308e816](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fa24a61f2b0f9c516517bbfa3159dfcb1308e816)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 7

(p0.0) Influenza virus type A, a member of the family Orthomyxoviridae, is an enveloped virus with a negative-sense, single-stranded RNA genome organised in eight gene segments, which encode at least eleven proteins. Antigenic and genetic diversity of two surface glycoproteins, haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA), is used to classify type A influenza viruses into subtypes; 18 HA and 11 NA subtypes are known to date [1][2][3][4][5]. Water-and shorebirds were identified as reservoirs harbouring all subtypes, except A(H17N10) and A(H18N11) of which RNA was recently detected in bats from Guatemala and Peru, respectively [2,3]. Reservoir animals typically do not display symptoms. In contrast, the diversity of influenza viruses in mammalian hosts is limited to specific subtypes. Human-adapted seasonal influenza viruses since the beginning of the 20th century have had HA subtypes H1, H2 and H3, combined with NA subtypes N1 and N2.
## (s11) Human infection with swine influenza viruses
Number of References: 7

(p11.0) An overview of all studies describing virologically confirmed human SIV cases is given in Table 2. In total, we identified 396 SIV-confirmed patients who were naturally infected (401 including experimental infections) ( Table 2). Beare et al. [45] successfully recovered SIV from five of 20 human volunteers after experimental infection: of seven volunteers infected with SIV A(H3N2) related to A/Hong Kong/1/68, three tested virus-positive), and of 13 infected with a classical swine A(H1N1) virus strain, two tested positive. Of the naturally infected cases, 47 were infected with SIV A(H1N1), two with SIV A(H1N2), seven with SIV A(H3N2) and 340 with SIV A(H3N2)v (Table 2, Figure 2). The majority of these cases were reported in North America, 11 in Europe and six in Asia. One of the six Asian cases was infected with SIV A(H3N2) from the European lineage ( Figure 2) [39]. SIV epidemiology differs between continents and was extensively reviewed for North America, Europe and Asia [81][82][83][84]. In addition to the studies discussed in the review by Myers et al. [26] we identified fourteen studies and reports describing a further 28 human SIV cases; 368 when taking into account 340 cases with SIV A(H3N2)v infection. Details on these studies are described in more detail in the following sections grouped by continent.
## (s13) Human infections with swine influenza A H3 subtype viruses
Number of References: 6

(p13.0) North America: In our search we detected two cases of trSIV A(H3N2) from Canada [95,96] and one from Kansas, US [97] infected before 2011. In Canada, a six year-old boy who lived on a swine farm presented with parotitis, nasal congestion, cough and pharyngitis, but had no fever. The swine appeared clinically healthy [95]. No swine exposure was reported in the second Canadian patient, a seven month-old child, who lived on a community farm and showed ILI symptoms [96]. Similarly, the third case from Kansas presented with ILI and is likely to have contracted trSIV A(H3N2) from swine he was exposed to at a county fair [97]. It is assumed that swine harboured the virus; PCR results performed on swine samples were negative but sera showed raised titres against SIV A(H3N2) indicating prior infection.
## (s16) Conclusions
Number of References: 3

(p16.0) There is evidence of infection of humans with animal influenza viruses belonging to various subtypes. All reported SIV cases have been exclusively associated with subtypes H1 and H3, and most AIV cases were caused by subtypes H5 and H7. Whether this reflects the prevalence of these viruses in birds kept or sold for consumption or a preferential ability to transmit to humans cannot be concluded from the available evidence. Given the often, mild illness associated with non-H5 and non-H7 animal influenza virus infections in humans, such cases likely are underreported [120]. Standardisation of diagnostic methods has significantly improved case ascertainment in recent years, but the monitoring of the evolution of these viruses is less advanced. Recent research pointed out that the majority of Asian and African countries have contributed only few sequences to surveillance networks and do not regularly sequence viruses as part of their surveillance programme [121]. Genetic sequencing is paramount to identifying changes with potential effect on the phenotype of circulating influenza viruses, and could thereby strengthen worldwide epidemic and pandemic preparedness [121]. To be prepared for a potentially emerging influenza virus of animal origin in humans, enhanced global surveillance in animal populations is therefore indicated to monitor evolution and circulation of viruses with yet unknown public health risks.
