# Clinical Interventions in Aging Dovepress Nonpharmacological interventions to treat physical frailty and sarcopenia in older patients: a systematic overview -the SeNATOR Project ONTOP Series

CorpusID: 1710343 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/28d04b00b3a7329b3f159392fea4fdbe813ab9af](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/28d04b00b3a7329b3f159392fea4fdbe813ab9af)

Fields: Medicine

## (s11) Sarcopenia
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Five out of 10 SRs 22-26 included sarcopenic populations. From these SRs, only one primary study (Kim et al) 32 satisfied the inclusion criteria. In most cases, subjects were not defined by having sarcopenia, but by a range of other conditions, and in many cases, healthy subjects were included (Supplementary material 2). In addition, one relevant study was found after manual search. 39 evidence of exercise and amino acid supplementation (AAS) to treat sarcopenia in community-dwelling older people  
## (s14) PF
Number of References: 5

(p14.0) Five out of 10 SRs 27-31 included physically frail populations. From these SRs, 4 RCTs 33-38 (described in 6 articles) were included; three articles [33][34][35] described different aspects of the same study (the Frailty Intervention Trial -FIT), so that they are reported together here. Again, the main reason of exclusion was the use of varied nonstandard definitions of frailty (Supplementary material 3). The number of patients included in these trials ranged from 32 to 241. All trials included participants over 70 years old, except one study performed in nursing homes, that included patients aged over 85 years. 36 One trial included only women. 38 The study characteristics are described in Table 5. In general, risk of bias was low, except for blinding of participants (Table 6).
## (s23) 738
Number of References: 5

(p23.0) Lozano-Montoya et al seem to support this recommendation, as it showed significant improvement on MS and PP (SPPB, gait speed) with a multidisciplinary intervention based on the assessment of deficiencies versus usual care. In addition, the BGS 44 recognizes that exercise, in particular strength and balance training, improves both mobility and functional ability. However, the optimal exercise regimen to minimize frailty and sarcopenia remains uncertain. Moreover, the BGS indicates that nutritional interventions also need to be considered, although evidence to support this remains limited. Nutrition recommendations currently include optimizing protein intake and correcting vitamin D insufficiency. The European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism (ESPEN) 40 recommends that the diet should provide at least 1.0-1.2 g protein/kg body weight/day and up to 1.2-1.5 g protein/kg body weight/day for malnourished/at risk of malnutrition older people, but this recommendation is based on data coming from longitudinal epidemiological studies, not on intervention trials. Higher intake of proteins is recommended for individuals with severe illness or injury. Daily physical activity or exercise (RT and aerobic exercise) should be undertaken by all older people, for as long as possible. These recommendations are in line with the results of the study by Kim et al in 2012 32 included in this overview: an improvement in MS and PP (measured by GS) was achieved with the combination of exercise and AAS. However, in the study by Kim et al in 2015, 38 based on nutritional supplementation with phospholipids, an improvement only on PP was shown.

(p23.1) Although MS and PP are relevant intermediate outcomes, 41 the studies included in this overview did not show improvements on hard outcomes, such as reduction in the incidence of falls or improved basic ADLs, with the exception of the only study performed in a very old population living in a nursing home. 36 In this study, exercise significantly reduced the incidence of falls and attenuated ADL functional loss. Current guidelines of frailty do not consider these outcomes.
