# The clinicopathological significance of FHIT hypermethylation in non-small cell lung cancer, a meta-analysis and literature review OPEN

CorpusID: 17774912 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18af8411290440945739e8c5854e1effaf32b1d9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18af8411290440945739e8c5854e1effaf32b1d9)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s3) Interpretation of results and comparison with other studies.
Number of References: 27

(p3.0) The FHIT gene locates the most common fragile site in the human genome, FRA3B (3p14.2), in which undergoes genomic rearrangement, biallelic loss, and cytogenetic abnormalities in tumors 8,34,35 . FHIT is genetically or epigentically altered in many primary and advanced carcinomas. Inactivation of FHIT by promoter hypermethylation plays an important role in tumorigenesis in several types of tumors including NSCLC 27,[36][37][38][39][40][41][42][43][44] . To date, there have been some studies describing the methylation status of FHIT in NSCLC; however, the roles of methylation of FHIT in NSCLC and clinical significance have not been thoroughly investigated. We conducted the meta-analysis to determine the correlation between FHIT hypermethylation and clinicopathological characteristics in NSCLC. Analysis of the pooled data showed that (1) NSCLC has a higher hypermethylation than normal lung tissue; (2) FHIT hypermethylation is correlated with sex status in which it is higher in male than in female.   poorly differentiated NSCLC than that in moderately or highly differentiated NSCLC. In addition, FHIT hypermethylation is also not significantly higher in advanced NSCLC (III & IV) than that in early staged NSCLC (I & II). (6) The pooled HR for OS shows that FHIT hypermethylation is associated with worsen survival in NSCLC patients. The cumulative evidence in our study is now conclusive that the FHIT gene promoter hypermethylation is associated with lung cancer formation and development, male gender, smoking behavior, and worse survival. In a meta-analyses of the gene methylation versus the cigarette smoking in NSCLC patients by Huang et al. 45 , FHIT methylation was found to be significantly associated with the smoking behavior, which support our conclusions. However, unavailability of meta-analysis or systemic review on other particular outcomes such as NSCLC initiation and development, gender and survival status makes it impossible to compare our results with other similar studies. The results suggest a potential role of FHIT methylation analysis in diagnosis and prognosis of lung cancer in clinical settings. Epigenetic alteration, particularly aberrant DNA methylation, is one of the best-characterized epigenetic modifications that contribute to tumor initiation and progression 5,6 . FHIT  is thought to affect cellular function and behavior largely through its signaling properties. FHIT also activates caspase-8 and caspase-2, which causes the release of cytochrome c and finally induces apoptosis 46 . FHIT and p53, the two most commonly altered tumor suppressor genes, might rely on common mediators and crosstalk among these proteins in regulation of growth-related pathways; thus, the inactivation of both genes results in prominent deregulation of cell proliferation and tumor progression in lung cancer 47 . Huang et al. showed that 7 hypermethylated genes including FHIT were significantly associated with the smoking behavior in NSCLC patients 45 . The difference about the result may be due to the different selected number of studies. They selected only 5 studied which included 518 patients. Our studies searched 9 studies which included 1077 patients. A number of studies showed that inactivation of FHIT can cause tumor aberrant progression and link to clinicopathological characteristics 27,[48][49][50][51] . Therefore, FHIT can be considered as a tumor suppressor, and its inactivation could contribute tumor progression and poor prognosis. Although only four studies evaluated the relationship between overall survival and FHIT hypermethylation in NSCLC, they showed very similar results 25,27,28,32 . Based on this meta-analysis, the pooled HR for OS showed that FHIT hypermethylation was associated with worsen survival in NSCLC patients, HR = 1.73, 95% CI = 1.10-2.71, p = 0.02. Therefore, we may consider that FHIT hypermethylation in NSCLC tends to indicate a poor prognosis.
## (s5) Research and Clinical implications.
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) The results from the current study demonstrate that the hypermethylation rate of FHIT gene promoter in NSCLC is significantly higher than that in the normal lung tissues, indicating that FHIT promoter hypermethylation is common in NSCLC. Since changes in FHIT promoter hypermethylation are reversible, drug treatment through demethylation may be useful to delay carcinogenesis and progression and to improve prognosis. Lung cancer cell clones carrying conditional FHIT transgenes showed significant suppression of xenograft tumor growth, suggesting that treatments to restore endogenous FHIT expression in lung cancers would result in decreased tumorigenicity 17 . In addition, injection of 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (AZA) and trichostatin A (TSA) in nude mice with established H1299 tumors showed suppressed growth of small tumors without apparent toxicity, and responding tumors showed restoration of FHIT 17 . These preclinical studies show the therapeutic potential of restoration of tumor suppressor expression through epigenetic modulation. This approach may bring new direction and hope for cancer treatment through gene-targeted therapy.
## (s7) Risk of bias.
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Publication bias was assessed by using a method reported by Egger et al. 53 . We also explored reasons for statistical heterogeneity using meta-regression, subgroup analysis, and sensitivity analysis. The analysis of meta-regression and publication bias was performed by using STATA version 10.0. Cohen's kappa statistic was used to measure the agreement among the most important step for selecting eligible studies between two researchers. The kappa values were interpreted as follows: < 0.2, poor observer agreement; 0.2-0.4, fair observer agreement; 0.4-0.6, moderate observer agreement; 0.6-0.8, substantial observer agreement; and 0.8-1.0, good observer agreement 54 .
