# Epistemic cognition in medical education: a literature review

CorpusID: 17200177 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c12ab0241605f2316f1f1874a82805d387a4bad](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c12ab0241605f2316f1f1874a82805d387a4bad)

Fields: Medicine, Education, Psychology

## (s7) Study characteristics
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) The majority of the studies (20/27) were published since the year 2000. Disciplinary affiliations of the journals in which these studies appear were concentrated within education (mostly medical education) and sociology. Six of the studies were published in family medicine journals, most of which focused on ambiguity and uncertainty. Most studies reported small sample sizes; about half had 40 or fewer participants, and most included qualitative approaches (16 qualitative and 3 mixed methods). The samples of most studies (16) included medical students, but about half also included physicians and residents. The majority of the studies were conducted in the United States (11) and Western Europe (11), but our review represents research conducted in twelve countries (Appendix 1).
## (s10) Changes in epistemic cognition with experience
Number of References: 10

(p10.0) Several studies indicated that epistemic cognition changes over time and with experience using retrospective reflections of participants or cross-sectional studies. For example, awareness of uncertainty in clinical situations increases over time. 30,31,32 Lingard et al. found that medical students adopted physicians' ways of speaking about uncertainty with greater confidence, 33 and Nevalainen et al. noted that students learn to recognize uncertainty as part of medicine and to accept that their knowledge is incomplete. 20 Reflecting on their experience in medical school, second-year medical students described changes in their epistemic views, Eastwood et al. Epistemic cognition in medical education  especially in certainty of knowledge. In considering humanistic elements of medicine, such as understanding patients' experiences, they began to question black and white conceptions of knowledge and recognize the possibility for error. 25 Furthermore, Gordon et al. conclude that the process of assimilation, in which students reflect upon meanings of experiences and incorporate them into their knowledge structures, is learned over time. 34 Three studies pointed to the transition from medical student to physician as a critical time for assimilation of knowledge and values, gaining awareness of and learning to manage uncertainty, and understanding complexity of patients' stories. 32,34,35 
