# Herbal Remedies for Coccidiosis Control: A Review of Plants, Compounds, and Anticoccidial Actions

CorpusID: 18320800 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6ad60f6007c46884e12f80a44aaccb3f4c56fc09](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6ad60f6007c46884e12f80a44aaccb3f4c56fc09)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 6

(p0.0) Each year, over 50 billion chickens are raised as a source of meat, accounting for over one-third of protein food for humans [1]. However, poultry production is often confronted by avian coccidiosis, flu, and other infectious diseases [1]. Avian coccidiosis is characterized as an infectious protozoan disease caused by gut parasites of the genus Eimeria (Coccidia subclass) [2]. So far, nine Eimeria species, E. acervulina, E. brunetti, E. maxima, E. necatrix, E. praecox, E. mitis, E. tenella, E. mivati, and E. hagani, have been identified from chickens [3]. These parasites can infect and multiply within the mucosal epithelia in different parts of bird guts via oral route. As a result, they cause gut damage (i.e., inflammation, hemorrhage, diarrhea, etc.), morbidity, and mortality in poultry [4]. This disease annually causes a global loss of over 2.4 billion US dollars in the poultry industry, including poor growth performance, replacement of chicks, and medication [1].
## (s9) N-3 Fatty Acids, Flavonoids, Vernoside, and Their Plant
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) Sources. Upon the invasion of Eimeria sporozoites into the intestinal epithelium, reactive nitrogen species (RNS) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) are often produced by host cells, leading to the death of sporulating oocysts [21]. Similarly, another study demonstrated that the extracts from Berberis lyceum, in which berberine was enriched, inhibited the sporozoites of E. tenella in chickens via induction of oxidative stress. Other studies indicated that extracts from Linum usitatissimum [21], Ageratum conyzoides [31], and Vernonia amygdalina [32] controlled coccidian infection via induction of oxidative stress. Moreover, N-3 fatty acids, flavonoids, and vernoside were identified as active compounds present in L. usitatissimum, A. conyzoides, and V. amygdalina, respectively. These compounds were shown to elicit oxidative stress ( Table 2). Oxidative stress is known to cause imbalance of oxidant or antioxidant species in the host and is often observed in a wide range of microbial and parasitic infections including coccidiosis [19]. Moreover, these natural extracts not only enhanced chicken growth but also had no noticeable toxicity.
## (s11) Essential Oils and Their Plant
Number of References: 6

(p11.0) Sources. Essential oils derived from plants showed inhibition of Eimeria species at different developmental stages (Figure 1). Essential oils are an important natural product resource, which are rich in many phytocompounds. Both in vitro and in vivo studies reported that essential oils can be used as feed additives in chickens to control coccidiosis [1,11,12].         Increasing digestion and gut microbiota [93][94][95] ?: unknown.
## (s13) Plants and Compounds That Modulate Host Immunity against Eimeria.
Number of References: 5

(p13.0) From an evolutionary point of view, birds have a complete immune system consisting of innate and adaptive immune responses [96]. Both immune responses are responsible for coccidial clearance and vaccine immunization [12,97]. Medicinal plants often have immunomodulatory compounds which boost antimicrobial immune responses to uphold homeostasis of poultry health [91,98]. Therefore, immunoregulatory plant extracts and compounds could be utilized as an alternative method to reinforce immune response against avian coccidiosis. Immunoregulatory phytochemicals for avian coccidiosis are described in Table 3 and Figure 2.
