# A review of ropinirole prolonged release in Parkinson's disease

CorpusID: 18061016 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2c0a647d9ada830dacba6f2395a0c63080fb249d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2c0a647d9ada830dacba6f2395a0c63080fb249d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Treatment of advanced Parkinson's disease
Number of References: 17

(p3.0) There are multiple treatment options available for advanced PD patients that develop levodopa-induced motor fl uctuations and dyskinesia. 7,8 One approach is to adjust the dosage or dosing frequency of levodopa or to switch to an extended release formulation of levodopa. However, several studies have demonstrated that the extended release formulation of levodopa does not reduce "off" time compared to the immediate release formulation. 7 Another approach is to add an adjunctive therapy to levodopa such as amantadine, an MAO-B inhibitor, a COMT inhibitor, and/or a dopamine agonist.

(p3.1) Amantadine has been shown to be effective in reducing dyskinesia. 7 In a double-blind study, amantadine (100 mg twice daily) was shown to reduce dyskinesia by 24%. 20 Although not available in the US, an intravenous formulation of amantadine (amantadine sulfate) has been shown to reduce dyskinesia by up to 50% after an infusion of 200 mg compared to placebo. 21 The MAO-B inhibitors, selegiline, orally disintegrating selegiline and rasagiline are approved as adjunct treatments to levodopa. Selegiline is generally given twice daily with 5 mg taken in the morning and afternoon. There are insuffi cient data on the effects of selegiline on motor complications and it has been concluded that it may possibly reduce motor fl uctuations. 7 Orally disintegrating selegiline is a newer formulation of selegiline which has fewer amphetamine metabolites and eliminates the need for swallowing pills. It is approved for the treatment of patients with levodopa-induced wearing off and has been shown to reduce "off" time by 2.2 hours per day compared to 0.6 hours with placebo. 22 Orally disintegrating selegiline is initiated at 1.25 mg once daily and increased after 6 weeks if needed to 2.5 mg once daily. The American Academy of Neurology (AAN) evidence-based review of treatment options for motor fl uctuations concluded that rasagiline was effective in reducing "off" time and should be offered as a treatment option. Reductions in daily "off" time ranged between 0.5 and 1.0 hours per day depending on the dose of rasagiline. 7 In advanced PD, rasagiline is initiated at 0.5 mg once daily and increased to 1.0 mg once daily as needed.

(p3.2) COMT inhibitors are another adjunctive option for the treatment of advanced PD. The enzyme COMT breaks down levodopa; therefore, the addition of a COMT inhibitor allows more levodopa to reach the brain. Entacapone and tolcapone are the COMT inhibitors available for the treatment of advanced PD and they are used only in conjunction with levodopa. The AAN evidence-based guidelines concluded that entacapone is effective in reducing "off" time an average of 0.7 to 1.2 hours per day and should be offered to patients with motor fl uctuations. 7 Entacapone is available in 200 mg tablets. One tablet is given with each dose of levodopa, not to exceed a total daily dose of 1600 mg of entacapone. Entacapone is also available in a triple combination tablet containing carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone. There are six strengths of the triple combination available in which each tablet contains 200 mg of entacapone and either 50, 75, 100, 125, 150 or 200 mg of levodopa and carbidopa equivalent to one quarter of the levodopa dose. Tolcapone has been determined to be probably effective in the treatment of "off" time with an average daily reduction in "off" time of 0.9 to 1.8 hours. 7 It was also noted that tolcapone should be used with caution due to potential hepatotoxicity and requires regular safety monitoring. Tolcapone is initiated at 100 mg three times daily and increased to 200 mg three times daily if necessary. If there is no reduction in "off" time after 3 weeks of tolcapone therapy it should be discontinued.

(p3.3) The dopamine agonists pramipexole and ropinirole have been determined to probably be effective in reducing "off" time and should be considered as a treatment option. 7 Pramipexole has been shown to reduce "off" time by an average of 12% to 24% and ropinirole by an average of 7% to 19%. Both medications are generally given three times daily for advanced PD with a maximum daily dose of 4.5 mg of pramipexole and 24 mg of ropinirole. The rotigotine patch is not approved for advanced PD in the US; however, outside of the US it is approved at dosages up 16 mg/24 hours. Rotigotine 8 mg/24 hours was shown to reduce "off" time by 1.8 hours a day and the 12 mg/24 hour dose by 1.2 hours a day. 23 Cabergoline, a once-daily, ergot dopamine agonist, has been shown to reduce "off" time by 18%. 7 Apomorphine is the only injectable medication approved for the treatment of PD. It is a fast-acting, short-duration treatment used for advanced PD as a rescue therapy for patients with severe "off " periods and has been shown to reduce daily "off" time by an average of 2 hours. 24 A common problem in early and advanced PD is patient medication compliance. In early disease, patients generally initially receive benefi t from their treatment regimen in spite of late or missed doses of medication. As the disease progresses, multiple medications are often prescribed with more complicated dosing schedules and in order to maintain benefi t and avoid motor complications, adherence to the prescribed dosing schedule becomes an important issue. In a 4-week study of medication compliance in PD patients with a dosing schedule requiring the intake of medication at least three times daily, only 10% of the patients had complete compliance. Furthermore, it was reported that 51% of the patients missed at least one dose a week, 21% missed at least three doses per week and 82% of patients did not take their medication on time. 25 The most common reasons for non-compliance were forgetting to take their medication or not having access to their medication at the scheduled dosing time. Medication compliance was also measured in a larger multicenter study of 112 PD patients using electronic monitoring bottles. 26 The median overall compliance for taking the amount of medication prescribed was 97.7%, compliance for taking the medication on the right day was 86.2% and compliance for taking it at the right time was 24.4%. It was also shown that those with suboptimal compliance had worse motor scores and those taking once-daily preparations had better compliance than those taking multiple daily doses. This study highlights the need for medications with less complicated dosing schedules with fewer daily doses. In 2008, the FDA approved ropinirole prolonged release which is a once daily 24-hour formulation of the dopamine agonist, ropinirole. This is the fi rst once-daily oral dopamine agonist approved for both early and advanced PD in the US.
