# royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsif Constructing living buildings: a review of relevant technologies for a novel application of biohybrid robotics

CorpusID: 198980764 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ae4fe5aef597a630f40d7e99178a3b9415380e4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ae4fe5aef597a630f40d7e99178a3b9415380e4)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s6) Interaction with groups of animals or environments
Number of References: 20

(p6.0) Animal behaviour as a response to events in the environment or to local interaction between group members has been modelled by several methods, described above. Robotics approaches can allow further investigation of animal behaviour, by replacing swarm individuals with biomimetic robots and then establishing cause-and-effect interaction sequences. The ASSISI Project (Animal and robot Societies Self-organize and Integrate by Social Interaction) [127], introduced a biohybrid society composed of animals (e.g. fish and honeybees) and robots. First, the robots interact with the animals, learning their behaviour and adapting to it in order to be socially accepted. Then, they feed information into the society through physical channels, influencing the system to move towards desired states. Robots and animals can make collective choices in their habitats, while the robots couple separated habitats by sharing information between them [128].

(p6.1) In one approach, [129] develop autonomous robots integrated into groups of live cockroaches to influence collective decision-making. The robots were designed to exhibit similar behaviour to cockroaches and were coated with a chemical blend to bear an acceptable chemical signal. In this work, the robots were able to introduce bias into the decision-making process by influencing the cockroaches into aggregating towards a less favourable shelter. da Silva Guerra et al. [130] follow a different approach for physical acceptance within living crickets (Gryllus bimaculatus). By installing decoys (live cricket heads) on the robots to increase the acceptance and allow for proper interaction, the robotic crickets were able to trigger specific insect behaviours by performing certain repeated movements (e.g. courtship or agonistic behaviour). Also, in the Chicken Robot project [131], a mobile robot (i.e. PoulBot) was developed to collaborate and control a group of chicks. Based on a learned filial imprinting model, the robot was able to integrate and show leadership behaviour using acceptable movement patterns and appropriate emitted sounds.

(p6.2) To investigate interaction with marine animals, [132] construct a robotic fish (stickleback Gasterosteus aculeatus L. replica) which can be remotely controlled to move around in a fish tank. The robotic fish was able to exhibit leadership behaviour by recruiting a single fish from a refuge, and by initiating a turn in singletons and in groups of 10. An interesting observation is that the individuals would respond to the robotic fish to a greater degree than to others. The reasons for this could be the behavioural model (i.e. the robotic fish moves faster than other fish and without stopping) or positioning (i.e. the presence of the robotic fish at the front of the group). In similar work [133], see figure 2b, experiments were conducted implementing the following behavioural patterns with guppies (Poecilia reticulata): swarm following, integration, predator, and recruitment behaviours. Interestingly, a robotic fish was able to recruit a group of fish to the non-favourable area at the centre of the tank. Executing a sequence of behaviours (first integration then recruitment) helped the robotic fish to be integrated and accepted within the swarm, hence, succeeding in its recruitment mission to the desired target points. Later, [136,137] investigate acceptance of the robotic fish within the swarm in further detail. The results indicated that natural appearance and motion significantly increases the acceptance level of the artificial individual. Hence, the precise modelling of animal behaviour and individual characteristics is crucial. Along this line of work, [138] develop a robotic fish (zebrafish Danio rerio replica) which can beat its tail with different frequencies and amplitudes. The experiments concluded that the tail beating rate increases the acceptance level of the robotic fish within the shoal.

(p6.3) The safety of both animals and robots is important within biohybrid environments. The classical robotic task of collision avoidance was re-approached by Gribovskiy & Mondada [139] and Gribovskiy et al. [140] using methods such as fuzzy control with the constraints of the new systems. Interesting tasks for this system are mapping and exploration [141] where the topological information about an unknown environment is obtained based on local interactions without localization. Whitmire et al. [142] follow an acoustic approach where the biobots are equipped with a microphone. The swarm of biobots was able to localize a sound source which allows further investigation in search and rescue applications. In a similar context of search and rescue missions, the concept of an invisible fence composed of biobots as a reliable wireless sensor network is introduced by Latif et al. [143]. Also, the approach allows the biobots to guide each other towards light sources in order to charge their batteries using solar energy in extended mission durations. Yang et al. [144] introduced a protocol for manoeuvring spiders. The spiders were steered successfully in the left or right directions using electrical simulation. This work is considered an important step towards creating a spider biorobot.

(p6.4) Research has also dealt with technological intervention at the scale of full ecosystems, via distributed sensing, tracking, and monitoring of wildlife [145], including animals that can exhibit self-organizing behaviours in groups, such as birds [146,147]. Beyond monitoring, the restoration of overall ecosystem health via mobile robotics has been proposed, to increase biodiversity and combat desertification [148].
## (s11) Scaffolds for animals depositing material
Number of References: 7

(p11.0) In structural systems involving animals that exhibit materialdepositing behaviours, mechanical scaffolds are designed to steer deposition patterns specific to the species used. Silkworms are guided by density in the scaffold, while honeybees are guided by voids. In the Silk Pavilion project by Oxman et al. [183,184], shown in figure 3b, a domed room-sized scaffold forms the substrate for silkworms to deposit their threads. The scaffold comprises frame modules, each of which is prefabricated and robotically wound with a sparse pattern of silk threads. When released, the silkworms seek to patch gaps in the pattern of existing silk threads, as they naturally would for cocoon-building. The silkworms do not cover the entire scaffold in dense silk fibres-rather, their deposition is guided by density of the robotically wound threads, as they are not able to cross gaps larger than their body size. Therefore, intentional windows in the sparse pattern of the scaffold are maintained when the silkworms fill in their dense matte of fibres. In the Co-occupied Boundaries project by Ilgun & Ayres [185], an object-sized 3D printed polymer scaffold is shaped to leave voids for honeybees to construct their comb according to their natural behaviours, as shown in figure 3a. The printed polymer filament forming the scaffold is dense, but maintains gaps large enough for honeybees to pass through, giving them pathways to all sides of the scaffold. The rough material texture of the scaffold and the sloping angles of its sides create surfaces to which the honeybees can easily attach comb. The placement of comb is guided by creating large voids with two or more sides of enclosure. In both of these examples, the mechanical scaffold must be structurally sufficient to support the load of the biologically placed material. In the case of the [183,184] Silk Pavilion, the fibres placed by the silkworms are not selfsupporting and cannot serve a structural role on their own. In the case of the [185] Co-occupied Boundaries, the honeybee comb is self-supporting once formed, although it requires a scaffold for initial placement. The structural properties of the comb are not further investigated by Ilgun & Ayres [185], but due to the wax material of comb, it is unlikely that it would be able to support large external loads. Material deposited by animals, while often capable of serving some structural role on the scale of the associated animal, is unlikely to be stiff enough on its own to carry building scale loads or human occupants. Stiffening methods such as resin impregnation could be investigated for these materials to prepare them for a structural role, but this may be a prohibitively inefficient construction process. Alternatively, these materials could be investigated for non-structural roles in building construction, such as thermal insulation or façade cladding.
## (s12) Scaffolds for microorganisms
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) Microorganisms are integrated with mechanical scaffolds as part of structural systems, as well as for other functional roles such as the cleaning of pollution. For structural systems, [186] cultivate bacterially produced cellulose on 3D printed polymer scaffolds. The bacterial cellulose grows to fully coat the surfaces of the scaffold, and additionally forms membranes across gaps. Similar to the silk fibres described above, these cellulose membranes are unlikely to bear building scale loads, but might be investigated for other roles such as thermal insulation or moisture membranes. In a different approach, mycelium fungus is investigated for soil decontamination by Sollazzo et al. [187] in their Symbiotic Associations project. The mechanical scaffold, in this case, does not serve a structural role for a building, but exclusively supports the growth of the fungus. Though not a direct part of the typical construction process, this approach could be investigated for use on the larger building site or as part of a structure's foundation.
## (s34) Control
Number of References: 4

(p34.0) Construction of living buildings by biohybrid robots is currently too underexplored for the literature to include established, purpose-specific approaches to control. Instead externally standard approaches are used and novel approaches are borrowed from other fields. Here, we restrict our discussion mostly to multi-robot systems. The standard approach in multi-robot set-ups is to limit the robot controllers to simple behaviours for two reasons. First, multiple interactions between robots complicate the system [294,295], hence, one wants to keep as many components simple and manageable as possible. Second, the idea is to create complex behaviours from the interactions between robots and their collaboration, not from complex individual behaviours. This is in line with the concepts of swarm intelligence [296] and emergence [297].
## (s38) Biohybrid design and control
Number of References: 3

(p38.0) von Mammen et al. [317,318] presented a prototype of an augmented reality interface for biohybrid system design ( figure 11). They outfitted the user with a head-mounted display augmented with a pair of cameras to provide a stereoscopic video feed of the environment. This video feed could be overlaid with information about a simulated biohybrid system. In the given case, the user was able to seed simple plant-like structures that would grow upwards and towards light sources. The strategic placement of lamps allowed the user to steer the structural growth, for instance, to climb around a pole. This augmented reality (AR) prototype already hints at the potential design and use-case for the next generation of AR prototypes for biohybrid system design and control. In addition to the different kinds of system components that could be deployed ( plants and lamp-'bots') and configured (at least the technical devices), the system allowed the user to fast forward into the near future and explore the result in a real-world context. Heinrichet al. [319] explored user control of self-organizing construction more generally, through an interactive evolution approach.
