# catalysts European Regulatory Framework and Particulate Matter Emissions of Gasoline Light-Duty Vehicles: A Review

CorpusID: 198356669 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0d75b57dcb383f541cde110d5d5c02714251c62a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0d75b57dcb383f541cde110d5d5c02714251c62a)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s12) PM Mass Emissions
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) The PM mass emissions of PFI vehicles (Figure 1, upper panel) are low and typically <2 mg/km for all regions. Higher emissions were measured for older vehicles (pre-2000) [91,92]. Some aggressive cycles, such as the Common Artemis Driving cycles (CADC), gave also emission levels around 10 mg/km (such cases not plotted in the figure). PM limits in the US were tightened from 6.2 mg/km (1999-2017, Tier 2) to 1.8 mg/km (from 2017, Tier 3). In California, a further reduction to 0.62 mg/km is phased-in starting 2025. Interestingly there are no PM data for US MY after 2013, probably due to the increased research interest on GDIs and their high market share. In China, a PM limit of 4.5 mg/km applies to GDI vehicles only, starting with China 5. The limit continues through China 6a (2020), and further tightens to 3 mg/km with China 6b (2023).
## (s21) Low Ambient Temperature
Number of References: 4

(p21.0) Catalysts 2019, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 30 at 23 °C the emissions on average doubled at -7 °C [152]; however, for lower emission levels they increased up to 3-4 times. While none of the Euro 6 vehicles exceeded the 6 × 10 12 p/km limit, all exceeded 6 × 10 11 p/km at −7 °C. For those GDIs that were equipped with GPF, their tailpipe emissions did not significantly increase at the −7 °C tests and they remained below the 6 × 10 11 p/km limit (MY after 2011).   ; however, for lower emission levels they increased up to 3-4 times. While none of the Euro 6 vehicles exceeded the 6 × 10 12 p/km limit, all exceeded 6 × 10 11 p/km at −7 °C. For those GDIs that were equipped with GPF, their tailpipe emissions did not significantly increase at the −7 °C tests and they remained below the 6 × 10 11 p/km limit (MY after 2011).   Currently, gasoline vehicles have limits for CO and HCs at −7 • C. Discussions are ongoing to introduce a low temperature procedure in the regulations. The results of the two figures can support in deciding future limits. Figure 6 summarizes the results of studies that measured (solid) particles sized below 23 nm, which is currently the lower size limit defined in the EU regulation. Additionally, based on the size distributions of solid particles shown in Figure 3, the fraction of particles below 23 nm was estimated assuming a lognormal distribution and was added in Figure 6. The assumption of monomodal size distributions is not necessarily true and underestimates the cases with a separate nucleation mode. Until early 2000s, there are only estimations of the particle number fraction below 23 nm. Due to the large GMD, this fraction is found to be below 15% of the total number. The estimated percentage after 2009 raises up to 45% for both GDIs and PFIs (one 2012 GDI estimated at close to 100%). The measured percentage for GDIs is in the same range with a few measurements in the 45 to 60% range. However, for PFIs the measured percentage is up to 75% (95% in one case). Currently, gasoline vehicles have limits for CO and HCs at −7 °C. Discussions are ongoing to introduce a low temperature procedure in the regulations. The results of the two figures can support in deciding future limits. Figure 6 summarizes the results of studies that measured (solid) particles sized below 23 nm, which is currently the lower size limit defined in the EU regulation. Additionally, based on the size distributions of solid particles shown in Figure 3, the fraction of particles below 23 nm was estimated assuming a lognormal distribution and was added in Figure 6. The assumption of monomodal size distributions is not necessarily true and underestimates the cases with a separate nucleation mode. Until early 2000s, there are only estimations of the particle number fraction below 23 nm. Due to the large GMD, this fraction is found to be below 15% of the total number. The estimated percentage after 2009 raises up to 45% for both GDIs and PFIs (one 2012 GDI estimated at close to 100%). The measured percentage for GDIs is in the same range with a few measurements in the 45 to 60% range. However, for PFIs the measured percentage is up to 75% (95% in one case).  Figure 7 plots the ratio of particles above over below 23 nm as a function of the emission levels following the regulatory method (SPN23). Generally, there is a tendency of a higher percentage with lower emissions. This is an indication that for high concentrations coagulation takes place and increases the GMD [153]. In addition, the relative contribution of lubricant increases as soot from combustion decreases. The percentage can be >30% for emission levels <1 × 10 12 p/km.  Figure 7 plots the ratio of particles above over below 23 nm as a function of the emission levels following the regulatory method (SPN 23 ). Generally, there is a tendency of a higher percentage with lower emissions. This is an indication that for high concentrations coagulation takes place and increases the GMD [153]. In addition, the relative contribution of lubricant increases as soot from combustion decreases. The percentage can be >30% for emission levels <1 × 10 12 p/km. Currently, gasoline vehicles have limits for CO and HCs at −7 °C. Discussions are ongoing to introduce a low temperature procedure in the regulations. The results of the two figures can support in deciding future limits. Figure 6 summarizes the results of studies that measured (solid) particles sized below 23 nm, which is currently the lower size limit defined in the EU regulation. Additionally, based on the size distributions of solid particles shown in Figure 3, the fraction of particles below 23 nm was estimated assuming a lognormal distribution and was added in Figure 6. The assumption of monomodal size distributions is not necessarily true and underestimates the cases with a separate nucleation mode. Until early 2000s, there are only estimations of the particle number fraction below 23 nm. Due to the large GMD, this fraction is found to be below 15% of the total number. The estimated percentage after 2009 raises up to 45% for both GDIs and PFIs (one 2012 GDI estimated at close to 100%). The measured percentage for GDIs is in the same range with a few measurements in the 45 to 60% range. However, for PFIs the measured percentage is up to 75% (95% in one case).  Figure 7 plots the ratio of particles above over below 23 nm as a function of the emission levels following the regulatory method (SPN23). Generally, there is a tendency of a higher percentage with lower emissions. This is an indication that for high concentrations coagulation takes place and increases the GMD [153]. In addition, the relative contribution of lubricant increases as soot from combustion decreases. The percentage can be >30% for emission levels <1 × 10 12 p/km. Measured: Based on 23 nm and 10 nm condensation particle counters (CPCs) downstream of a thermal pretreatment unit. Estimated: Based on solid particle size distributions (Figure 3). No corrections for particle losses. Dashed lines show the 6 × 10 11 p/km limit for 23 nm (vertical) and 10 nm (diagonal).
