# A Survey on Hardware-based Security Mecha-nisms for Internet of Things

CorpusID: 198967727 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/25a3a164acfefaef93a476e6882b3939c35da619](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/25a3a164acfefaef93a476e6882b3939c35da619)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s1) Review of Recent Relevant Survey Papers and the Contributions of this Paper
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) This survey aims to focus on the applicability of PUFs-based hardware security for key generation and authentication of IoT devices. The paper offers a unique and timely survey compared to existing survey papers in the literature by investigating the role of PUFs in IoT security, in particular providing an additional level of security to common key-based cryptographic methods to generate the keys from the devices. In 2018, authors of [28] discuss the standards of wireless communication in Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) and IoT and focus on security of these systems. The paper does not study the physical side channel attacks in implementation of security mechanisms for these systems. The paper explains in detail, the various wireless communication standards and protocols. Later, it briefly reviews the security threats in IoT and CPS domains and concludes the paper with recommendations on careful selection of devices from sensors to routers, and auditing the systems using dedicated third party surveillance technologies. The paper does not address the problems in identifying malicious nodes and authenticating known users in the network. In [178], several recent challenges are identified as a result of the introduction of IoT and CPS systems are discussed. This work focuses on different attacks and threats for these systems as well as challenges related to implementation of CPS and IoT in the wireless network.

(p1.1) In [97], the security and privacy challenges of IoT in general and possible attacks in different layers of IoT devices were discussed. In particular, this paper discusses the security challenges of fog/edge computing-based IoT. In [11], the use of information-centric networking (ICN) as a possible protocol for addressing IoT devices was introduced.
## (s7) I) Authentication:
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) The authentication refers to the process of verifying the identity of devices to grant them with information access. Data integrity and unauthorized access to the IoT networks such as impersonating attacks are critical issues in these systems. The objective of the authentication process is to assure that the nodes only carry validated information from the legitimated sources. In order to manage numerous IoT networks offered by different vendors, the IoT devices need to be authenticated to validate their identities before routing any information. The authentication mechanisms usually rely on a certification authority (CA) that involves a fairly heavy load of message exchange between the CA and the low power IoT nodes. The authors of [62] proposed an authentication scheme based on hashing and element extraction used for application layer in IoT nodes. An access control method is implemented in [116] that adopts an ECC-based key establishment. For access control policy, the authors utilized a role-based access control (RBAC) authentication method employing the nodes' particular role(s) and applications in the corresponding IoT network. One drawback of this work is that it incurs a large number of overhead messages during the access control and authentication mechanisms. In [182], a new authentication method is developed which considers the IoT perception layer. This method enhances mutual authentication between the user and the sensor nodes, and intermediate processes.
## (s22) HARDWARE-BASED SECURITY
Number of References: 2

(p22.0) In the previous section, we reviewed software-based security challenges and attacks. However, based on the production line for Integrated Circuits (ICs), there are several vulnerabilities based on hardware designs. Figure 7 shows this semiconductor manufacturing process chain which consists of different tasks. As a result of the fast and growing trends in IC manufacturing and production, this global supply chain can be targeted and attacked at different vulnerable points. Some common threats faced by the manufacturing process include fake copy, side-channel attack, reverse engineering, Intellectual Property (IP) hijacking, and hardware Trojans. Next, we review hardware-based attacks and threats disuccesed in [128,129].
