# Various Indices for Diagnosis of Air-gap Eccentricity Fault in Induction Motor-A Review

CorpusID: 196007574 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50f5b4b7d7a340438fa549fea4d91d7a6aaff0a9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50f5b4b7d7a340438fa549fea4d91d7a6aaff0a9)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Physics

## (s1) Air gap eccentricity fault
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) There are basically three axes i.e. rotor symmetry axis Or, stator symmetry axis Os and rotor rotation axis Ow in an induction motor which coincides with each other in ideal condition. If eccentricity exists then there is a dislocation of any of the axis from the other two axes or dislocation of all the axes [4]. Eccentricity results in the unequal air-gap length along the stator to rotor circumference. This unequal air-gap length may either be static or dynamic depending upon the type of eccentricity. If stator symmetry axis Os separates from the other two axes, the minimum/maximum air gap length is static and is called as static eccentricity. If rotor symmetry axis Or separates from the other two axes and the minimum/maximum air gap length is dynamically moving then it is dynamic eccentricity. If all the three axes separate then it is mixed eccentricity. Three types of eccentricity are shown in (Fig. 1). There is a generation of radial Unbalanced Magnetic Pull (UMP) between rotor and stator due to eccentricity which amplifies the degree of eccentricity within the motor. An enormous amount of burden is created on the machine which causes the wear and tear of the ball bearings. Also, the undesirable vibrations are produced in the stator windings due to radial magnetic forces caused by eccentricity. The worst happens when eccentricity causes rotor to stator rub which permanently damages stator core and rotor cage [6], [8].
