# polymers A Review on Porous Polymeric Membrane Preparation. Part II: Production Techniques with Polyethylene, Polydimethylsiloxane, Polypropylene, Polyimide, and Polytetrafluoroethylene

CorpusID: 199469400 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/978eefd89f142a143cab4b27d97126f362ce22bb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/978eefd89f142a143cab4b27d97126f362ce22bb)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Chemistry, Engineering

## (s10) Effect of TIPS Conditions on the Membrane Morphology
Number of References: 8

(p10.0) The TIPS process for membrane formation can be represented in terms of a temperaturecomposition phase diagram. As shown in Figure 3 [63,64], the membranes produced via TIPS often follow two different paths: a solid-liquid (S-L) or liquid-liquid (L-L) separation with subsequent crystallization [65]. Several investigations showed that the phase separation mechanism significantly alters the resulting membrane structure [4,5,65,66]. At the same time, the membrane performance strongly depends on the membrane pore size and porosity. As a consequence, a good control of the microporous structure is of the utmost importance in membrane fabrication [52]. Usually, when the polymer concentration is above the monotectic point (typically >30%), the dope solution goes through the crystallization temperature boundary then directly enters the solidliquid (S-L) separation region. Conversely, the phase separation proceeds via liquid-liquid 
## (s11) Effect of TIPS Conditions on the Membrane Morphology
Number of References: 8

(p11.0) The TIPS process for membrane formation can be represented in terms of a temperaturecomposition phase diagram. As shown in Figure 3 [63,64], the membranes produced via TIPS often follow two different paths: a solid-liquid (S-L) or liquid-liquid (L-L) separation with subsequent crystallization [65]. Several investigations showed that the phase separation mechanism significantly alters the resulting membrane structure [4,5,65,66]. At the same time, the membrane performance strongly depends on the membrane pore size and porosity. As a consequence, a good control of the microporous structure is of the utmost importance in membrane fabrication [52]. 
## (s12) Effect of TIPS Conditions on the Membrane Morphology
Number of References: 9

(p12.0) The TIPS process for membrane formation can be represented in terms of a temperaturecomposition phase diagram. As shown in Figure 3 [63,64], the membranes produced via TIPS often follow two different paths: a solid-liquid (S-L) or liquid-liquid (L-L) separation with subsequent crystallization [65]. Several investigations showed that the phase separation mechanism significantly alters the resulting membrane structure [4,5,65,66]. At the same time, the membrane performance strongly depends on the membrane pore size and porosity. As a consequence, a good control of the microporous structure is of the utmost importance in membrane fabrication [52]. Usually, when the polymer concentration is above the monotectic point (typically >30%), the dope solution goes through the crystallization temperature boundary then directly enters the solidliquid (S-L) separation region. Conversely, the phase separation proceeds via liquid-liquid separation with subsequent crystallization at relatively lower polymer fractions. Note that if the  Usually, when the polymer concentration is above the monotectic point (typically >30%), the dope solution goes through the crystallization temperature boundary then directly enters the solid-liquid (S-L) separation region. Conversely, the phase separation proceeds via liquid-liquid separation with subsequent crystallization at relatively lower polymer fractions. Note that if the initial polymer content in the casting solution is lower than the critical point, a continuous solvent-rich phase and a discontinuous polymer-rich phase could be formed. As a result, the final products are powders instead of a solid membrane. If a suitable polymer concentration is selected, the separation path plays a critical role on the membrane morphology [63].
## (s18) (II) Decreases with increasing polymer concentration
Number of References: 9

(p18.0) In the highly polymer-rich case, since the initial composition is beyond the eutectic composition, the L-S phase separation is triggered by the polymer crystallization. As shown in Figure 8, pore sizes decrease with increasing polymer concentration. There are two main reasons for this phenomenon. Firstly, a change in the phase separation temperature is consistent with polymer concentration change, as reported in Figure 4. The temperature difference between the phase separation temperature and the crystallization temperature increases with increasing polymer concentration. This results in greater driving force and longer time for crystal growth. Thus, spherulite size increases as the polymer concentration increases, as less space is available for the exuded dilute droplets. Secondly, the viscosity of the polymer-rich matrix phase increases with the polymer concentration. Thus, it is more difficult for the diluent droplets to flow and aggregate. After the extraction of the diluent droplets, the membrane has a corresponding pore size distribution. wt. % (left) or 34 wt. % (right) HDPE solution, adapted from [5]. Figure 9 shows that, for some diluents, when their crystallization temperature is higher than the polymer, diluent crystallization occurs before the polymer. This phenomenon continues until the eutectic solidification begins. This induces a fixed structure-an integrally skinned porous membrane produced by extracting the diluent crystals from the solidified samples [90].  Figure 9 shows that, for some diluents, when their crystallization temperature is higher than the polymer, diluent crystallization occurs before the polymer. This phenomenon continues until the eutectic solidification begins. This induces a fixed structure-an integrally skinned porous membrane produced by extracting the diluent crystals from the solidified samples [90]. wt. % (left) or 34 wt. % (right) HDPE solution, adapted from [5]. Figure 9 shows that, for some diluents, when their crystallization temperature is higher than the polymer, diluent crystallization occurs before the polymer. This phenomenon continues until the eutectic solidification begins. This induces a fixed structure-an integrally skinned porous membrane produced by extracting the diluent crystals from the solidified samples [90]. (III) Decreases with the presence of nucleating agents Due to the extremely high nucleation density, the polymer crystals size is much smaller with the presence of a nucleating agent (heterogeneous nucleation). This substantially affects the membrane porosity in terms of higher pore numbers and smaller pore sizes [5,94]. (III) Decreases with the presence of nucleating agents Due to the extremely high nucleation density, the polymer crystals size is much smaller with the presence of a nucleating agent (heterogeneous nucleation). This substantially affects the membrane porosity in terms of higher pore numbers and smaller pore sizes [5,94].
## (s23) Effect of Temperature
Number of References: 9

(p23.0) In the MSCS process, the annealing temperature is an important factor affecting the micropores formation process and the pore structure of PE hollow fiber membranes [99]. It is known that the crystalline structure is reorganized when PE membranes are annealed. The aligned PE crystallinity is effectively characterized by birefringence (BR) measurements. When recrystallization occurs, more "perfect" crystalline structures are produced, and the BR increases [99,110]. Some researchers quantitatively examined the BR variation with respect to the annealing temperature [20,99]. It was shown that increasing the annealing temperature increased the BR, indicating that the micropores became more oriented. It was also found that the lamellar thickness further increased at higher annealing temperature.

(p23.1) As shown in Figure 12, the unique microporous structures showing a slit-like shape in a pocket fashion are highly affected by the annealing temperatures. Lee et al. [99] suggested that the effect of annealing temperature on the pore structure is mainly by changing the concentration and the strength between the stressed tie molecules in the amorphous region and the crystallites lamellae. By increasing the annealing temperature, the segments of loose tie chains can be drawn into the crystallites, leading to thicker lamellae and higher overall degree of crystallinity. Elyashevich et al. [111] suggested that higher annealing temperature results in narrower length distribution of tie chains, meaning that more stretched tie chains are produced in the inter-lamellar regions. Chen et al. [110] also confirmed that the lamellae thickness increased with increasing annealing temperature up to the peak melting temperature, but higher temperature led to the formation of long-period lamellar spacing. It is assumed that the application of an annealing temperature during the stretching process can control the final structure. Xi et al. [22] suggested that it is necessary to control the stretching process with a proper temperature in MSCS, such as the application of a two-step stretching process. In the first stretching step, the interaction between the lamellae is mainly broken under the stretching of annealed hollow fibers, and then microvoids are created on the fiber wall. Subsequently, the second stretching step results in the formation of larger micropores. In order to smoothly develop the microvoids into larger micropores, a suitable temperature below the PE melting point is the main factor to prevent microvoids collapse during the second stretching process.
## (s26) Effect of Cooling Ways
Number of References: 7

(p26.0) Luo et al. [21] prepared hollow fiber membranes by MSCS and selected air, water, and di-isononyl-cyclohexane-1,2-dicarb-oxylate (DINCH) as the cooling media to investigate the effect of various cooling methods and cooling rates on the membrane morphology. The results showed that when water and DINCH were used as the heat transfer medium, a layer of amorphous phase and fewer uniform pores-which only had a small part of the slit-shaped pores-were obtained on the surface, because the fast cooling rate froze the surface molecules and decreased the crystallinity and orientation. However, when air was used as the cooling medium, higher crystallinity and better orientation of the annealed hollow fibers were obtained, mainly due to the slow cooling rate. As a result, hollow fiber membranes prepared by slow cooling had better pore interconnectivity and performances [21].

(p26.1) As demonstrated above, although several parameters must be controlled in MSCS, the key factors significantly influencing the membrane morphology can be classified into temperature, stretching ratio, stretching rate, and cooling conditions. The stretching ratio and the stretching rate mainly govern the crystalline lamellae alignment, while the stretching temperature and the cooling conditions significantly influence the number of stretched tie chains and fibrils bridging the narrow cracks [22,99,102,103,110]. It is possible to control these four key parameters inside an optimum range during the stretching process to improve the porous structure and the overall performances of hollow fiber membranes. For higher membrane porosity and more uniform pore distribution, the following strategies can be used:
## (s38) Imprinting/Soft Molding
Number of References: 5

(p38.0) A technique of transferring imprinting pattern is called soft molding [35,36]. Figure 20 presents the process of through-hole pattern on a flat PDMS membrane via imprinting/soft molding. Firstly, the PDMS solution was spin-coated to a specific thickness on a substrate with an adhesion reduction layer. Then, a selected mold was carefully placed on the PDMS membrane with an appropriate pressure to displace and penetrate through the uncured PDMS membrane to form the desired patterns. Susquently, the membrane with the mold was fully cured while maintaining the load, hence a desired perforated membrane was sucessfully produced [131]. It is worth mentioning that the volume shrinkage of the photopolymerizable polymer used for imprinting during the photopolymerization was different, resulting in the mold being easily released after imprinting, hence a polymeric membrane with the desired through-holes was obtained [119,136]. 
