# Biofouling in marine aquaculture: a review of recent research and developments

CorpusID: 198191981 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c15fc2b87d0785c6152e1a520c95deac565d384c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c15fc2b87d0785c6152e1a520c95deac565d384c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s5) Farm productivity
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) The aforementioned impacts coupled with the substantial cost of removal has spurred considerable interest in quantifying the total impact of biofouling on farm productivity. For example, based on impacts to yield and seed-stock supply, fouling within greenlipped mussel farms by M. galloprovincialis was estimated to cost the New Zealand industry US$16.4 million per year, representing 10% of the industry's value . In the same region, the direct and combined economic impacts of two key biofoulers (the tunicate Styela clava and the polychaete Sabella spallanzanii) were estimated at NZ$26.4 million over a 24-year period (the timeframe at which models predict total farm infestation would occur [Soliman and Inglis 2018]). Similar estimates from around the world (eg Adams et al. 2011) mean that biofouling prevention and treatment are critical areas of research and that suitable AF methods are pertinent to efficient production within the shellfish industry.
## (s9) Novel antifouling control technologies
Number of References: 10

(p9.0) Natural compounds that inhibit larval metamorphosis may be useful antifoulants in shellfish aquaculture (Cahill et al. 2012;Cahill, Burritt, et al. 2013;Moodie et al. 2017). These products typically have a contact active mode of action, whereby they are effective while remaining bound within a stable matrix, so effects are limited to coated surfaces (Cahill and Kuhajek 2014). Although these compounds are suggested to have little environmental impact, be applicable to both farm infrastructure and shellfish, and reduce biofouling , the present authors are not aware of any commercialscale trials to test the effectiveness or feasibility of this method. Other natural compounds, such as extracts from shellfish periostracum, exhibit strong AF properties and can be designed for commercial use. For example, periostracum dichloromethane extracts containing oleamide reduce algal spore settlement (Kang et al. 2016), and crude periostracum extracts inhibit the attachment of barnacles, diatoms and marine bacteria (Bers et al. 2006). Shellfish periostraca and biogenically derived microtopographies present a nontoxic, environmentally friendly substratum to prevent the settlement and attachment of a range of fouling organisms. However, many of the tested topographies that reduce biofouling settlement are species-specific and thus not particularly useful as a broad AF treatment (Bers and Wahl 2004;Magin et al. 2010;Scardino and de Nys 2011;Vucko et al. 2013). Furthermore, developing suitable methods to apply these types of compounds to shellfish is a major challenge. Coating shellfish with an AF formulation may be unviable from a logistical, fiscal, or consumer perspective. However, with additional research these products may becomeat a minimuma useful future tool for the shellfish aquaculture industry to protect infrastructure from biofouling.
