# Overview of the relevance of PI3K pathway in HR-positive breast cancer

CorpusID: 209427128 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ec6f99ba18d75c30830285b71a76fe8ecfa1e50](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1ec6f99ba18d75c30830285b71a76fe8ecfa1e50)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Epidemiology of PI3K pathway alterations in HR-positive breast cancer
Number of References: 3

(p0.0) The PI3K pathway in cancer Activation of the phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) pathway occurs in a variety of cancers. (Figure 1). The PI3K pathway integrates extracellular signals that activate receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and is necessary for normal growth and proliferation [1]. PI3K-alpha (PI3Ka) is a heterodimeric protein complex composed of the catalytic subunit p110a (coded by the PIK3CA gene) and the regulatory subunit p85a (coded by the PIK3R1 gene) [2]. p110a binds to and is inhibited by the regulatory subunit p85a and catalyzes the phosphorylation of the lipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5bisphosphate (PIP2) to phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3) [2]. Other p110 isoforms including p110b can signal through this pathway to produce PIP3. Accumulation of PIP3 at the plasma membrane functions as second messenger to initiate a downstream signaling cascade involving the activation of AKT by the PIP3-binding protein phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1) and by mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2). Activated AKT phosphorylates and disinhibits tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (TSC2), which is a negative regulator of mTOR and leads to downstream mitogenic signaling. PI3K requires multiple inputs for full activation, including binding by membrane-bound RTKs and Ras. Conversely, PIP3 can be dephosphorylated to PIP2 by the lipid phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN). Cellular and tumor dependence on the PI3K pathway occurs in several manners, including PIK3CA and AKT oncogene mutation, RTKs overexpression, and PTEN tumor suppressor loss of function. In this review, we discuss the molecular epidemiology of PI3K pathway alterations in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive (ERþ) breast cancer (BC).
## (s1) PIK3CA mutations in ER1 BC
Number of References: 19

(p1.0) The most common PI3K pathway alteration in ERþ BC is PIK3CA oncogenic mutations, while PIK3CA gene amplification in the absence of mutation is relatively rare [3]. PIK3CA mutations are present in up to 40% of ERþ human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative primary and metastatic tumors and result in constitutive enzymatic activity [4][5][6]. Many retrospective studies, including a large meta-analysis of >10 000 patients with early-stage BC [7], have proposed that PIK3CA mutations are prognostic markers for improved relapse-free survival on univariate analysis [8,9]. However, these studies have also confirmed that, when controlling for additional favorable-risk clinical variables such as ER positivity and receipt of hormonal therapy alone without chemotherapy, PIK3CA mutations are not prognostic for improved relapse-free survival or overall survival [7,8]. A study in HER2-positive (HER2þ) BC has found that PIK3CA mutations predict for decreased overall survival [7], suggesting additivity between upstream RTK signaling and PIK3CA mutation, and this has provided the preclinical rationale for investigating combination anti-HER2 therapy with PI3K pathway inhibition [10].

(p1.1) Many distinct cancer-associated PIK3CA mutations have been identified. The most frequent mutations are hotspot single amino acid substitutions in the helical (E545K and E542K in exon 9) or kinase (H1047R in exon 20) domains [11]. The mechanisms of activation of E545K and H1047R are distinct, where E545K mimics activation by RTK phosphopeptides and is dependent on Ras, and H1047R increases lipid membrane binding promoting access to PIP2 substrate and is Ras-independent. Some small studies analyzing mostly ERþ tumors have demonstrated decreased survival for patients with E545K-as compared with H1047R-containing tumors [12,13], but these differences have not proven significant in a larger meta-analysis [7]. There is also a long tail of less frequent mutations scattered across the PIK3CA gene, the majority of which lead to partial activation in biochemical and cellular models [14]. The functional and clinical consequences of these mutations are less clear since most clinical studies focus on exon 9 and exon 20 mutations only. While these additional mutational mechanisms may be distinct, they likely converge on a model where PIK3CA mutations structurally open the PI3K complex, increasing membrane binding and kinase activity owing to less inhibition of p110a by p85a [15]. It should be noted that these mutations were probably underestimated in earlier studies where principally the E545K and H1047R hotspots (or some but not all exons) were sequenced. Using a targeted sequencing approach analyzing all exons of 417 genes including PIK3CA, our group has demonstrated that some novel rare PIK3CA mutations are associated with endocrine resistance in metastatic ERþ BC [6]. Despite the large number of PIK3CA mutations, inactivating PIK3R1 mutations that activate PI3K by disinhibiting p110a [15] are rarely observed in ERþ BC (3%).
## (s2) Other PI3K pathway alterations in ER1 BC
Number of References: 5

(p2.0) Upstream RTKs overexpression or mutations can hyperactivate their downstream signaling pathways including PI3K. ERBB2 amplification/HER2 overexpression is found in 10% of ERþ BCs [16], and rare HER2 mutations associated with endocrine resistance have also been characterized [17,18]. Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) amplification is found in up to 12% of ERþ BCs [19]. There are multiple direct and indirect mechanisms of interactions between upstream RTKs and the PI3K pathway, rationalizing combination therapies of PI3K inhibitors with RTK inhibitors. Mutations in Ras, which is also upstream of PI3K, are infrequent in BC (<1%, TCGA), though loss of negative regulators of Ras have been reported in luminal B tumors [20].  Figure 1. Signaling by the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT-mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway. The PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway is activated by various growth factor receptors such as HER2, fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1), insulin-like growth factor 1 R (IGF1R) among others. PI3K proteins are recruited to the plasma membrane, leading to phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol 4,5bisphosphate (PIP2) to generate phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3). PIP3 recruits to the membrane the AKT kinases that, once activated by PDK1 and mTORC2 phosphorylation, are able to phosphorylate TSC2 and negatively regulate the activity of the kinase mTOR. mTORC1 also phosphorylates and activates S6K. Also shown are few examples of PI3K-AKT-mTOR inhibitors in clinical trials.
## (s4) Crosstalk between ER and PI3K pathway
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) Many years of work, from classical investigations of transcription factor (TF) function and growth factor signaling regulation to modern genome-wide epigenomic assays, have demonstrated that there is important crosstalk between ER and PI3K pathway. Even more importantly, these findings have shown to have significant implications for the biology of BC and response to both PI3K inhibitors and endocrine agents. In over 70% of patients with ERþ BC, ER serves as a master cellular regulator that controls transcriptional repertoires favoring uncontrolled cell proliferation and tumor growth [37]. The binding of estrogen to ER triggers receptor dimerization and recruitment of ER to the cis regulatory elements of its target genes to regulate transcription. ER binding to its target genes leads to recruitment of additional cooperating TFs and chromatin regulators which are critical for the function of this intricate network (referred to as the classical genomic signaling pathway) [38]. Estrogen genomic signaling induces the expression/activation of proteins important for tumor growth such as the insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR), insulin growth factor II (IGFII) and downregulation of genes such as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and HER2. As such, ER is inhibited clinically using the ER antagonist tamoxifen, the AIs letrozole and exemestane, or the ER degrader fulvestrant.
