# Guidelines for the Search Strategy to Update Systematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering

CorpusID: 208211463 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88d81fba50ecc372f39c5c0811b3a6e5f2972abc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88d81fba50ecc372f39c5c0811b3a6e5f2972abc)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s7) SLR for evaluating the guidelines
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) The first step of our evaluation was to select a suitable SLR, requiring both an original SLR and an update of the original SLR. We wanted an SLR that had a well-motivated update, and we used the results from a separate line of research that investigated how to determine when the update of SLRs is well-motivated [42]. In [42], we identified six SLRs that are well-motivated to update and that have been updated (see Table 4). As can be seen from Table 4, two SLRs (SLR2 and SLR6) include both an original conference publication and an extended journal version of the original SLR. In both cases, the extended journal version, which is published later, covers the same search span used in the conference paper version. SLR2 is the SLR used in Section 4.1, and hence it cannot be selected at this stage. To decide upon which of the other SLR candidates to choose, we formulated a set of criteria to make an informed decision, as described in Section 3.2.
## (s30) Ensuring comparability between the SLR updates
Number of References: 2

(p30.0) There was a need to remove papers from 2012 included in the original SLR to make the SLR update by Manikas [32] comparable to our update. According to the updated SLR, it included 141 new papers, i.e. not included in the original SLR. When looking more closely at the list of 141 papers, it was observed that it included the original SLR [33]. Given that an updated SLR ought to list only new papers (primary studies) published after an SLR, we removed the original SLR from the number of papers found by Manikas. Thus, the total number of new papers included in the updated SLR was 140.
