# What is Green Manufacturing? A Quantitative Literature Review

CorpusID: 204626888 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ce2e79da5920a2eaa3b4e2ca28af50690b2506e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ce2e79da5920a2eaa3b4e2ca28af50690b2506e)

Fields: Environmental Science, Business, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) The topic of GM emerged in the early 1990s, and was driven by human concerns about the environment [1]. Initially, GM's focus was only on process-oriented, reducing waste in the production process. This focus then develops into product-oriented, reducing resources, polluting material, and energy [1]. Green manufacturing (GM) has a variety of word similar, such as cleaner production or green practices [2]. This topic growth rapidly in this last decade. The term of green become an important and interesting topic discussion for several reason, such as the increasing of pollution and waste, the limitation and decreasing of natural resources, and global warming effect [3].
## (s1) Literature Review
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) The literature review research on GM was examined by Rehman and Shrivastava in 2013 in sufficient detail [1]. They concluded that research on GM was classified into 12 branches, namely green design, design for environment, green technologies, life cycle assessment, green process planning, green supply chain, reverselogistic, green purchasing/marketing, green organization culture, green regulation, green productivity, green economics, and green disposal. Their paper concludes that GM includes a comprehensive set of processes in all activities in business that have an impact on the environment. Research in past, present and probably future have same direction but different focus. In the past, researchers highlighted industrial behavior that paid more attention to the final process, 'end of pipe' process, how to reduce waste or pollution. At present, researchers assess that the company's focus shifts to the 'pressure' of government or the environment to adopt GMs. Whereas in the future, it is estimated that research will focus on the life cycle and product design that are still a little highlighted [1].
