# materials Optimal Design of Plated/Shell Structures under Flutter Constraints-A Literature Review

CorpusID: 209408596 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/16ddf1894c821f5f610372ec6dfcb6927a42192e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/16ddf1894c821f5f610372ec6dfcb6927a42192e)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s2) Remarks on the Formulation of Optimization Problems
Number of References: 8

(p2.0) of the critical aerodynamic pressure that corresponds to the loss of stability. The values of the critical aerodynamic pressures are different for various vibrational modes. As it is shown in Figure 1 the mechanical (material) properties may change drastically both the pre-flutter and post-flutter behavior-the modes of frequency coalescence may be totally different for isotropic and anisotropic structures.  The flutter characteristics, demonstrated schematically in Figures 1 and 2, are functions of many parameters. Their effects will be discussed later in view of the optimal design. Early reviews, dealing particularly with parametric investigations, on plate/shell flutter are presented by Fung [18], Dowell [19]. Recent, more comprehensive review of researches in the area of flutter behavior of structures can be found in Pettit [20] and Kouchakzadeh et al. [21]. The flutter characteristics, demonstrated schematically in Figures 1 and 2, are functions of many parameters. Their effects will be discussed later in view of the optimal design. Early reviews, dealing particularly with parametric investigations, on plate/shell flutter are presented by Fung [18], Dowell [19]. Recent, more comprehensive review of researches in the area of flutter behavior of structures can be found in Pettit [20] and Kouchakzadeh et al. [21].
## (s23) Numerical (Finite Element) Packages
Number of References: 5

(p23.0) The numerical (finite element) study on supersonic panel flutter has received much attention in literatures. Finite element method to panel flutter analysis by Olson [271] in 1967 and then the review of existing works was presented by Bismarck-Nasr [272,273]. Many of the researchers have built their own procedures to analyze flutter problems. The flutter analysis can be also investigated with the use of commercial FE packages as e.g., Ansys, Nastran, Abaqus, or Nisa II Family of Programs (Nisa/Areo). Recently, the package ZEUS (ZONA) [274,275] is a new proposal for aeroelastic design/analysis.
