# Using Deep Learning to Solve Computer Security Challenges: A Survey *

CorpusID: 209324068 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4f3f6ccafc2c0da44fd6013be700a8071281691c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4f3f6ccafc2c0da44fd6013be700a8071281691c)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s19) A closer look at applications of Deep Learning in systemevent-based anomaly detection 8.1 Introduction
Number of References: 20

(p19.0) System logs recorded significant events at various critical points, which can be used to debug the system's performance issues and failures. Moreover, log data are available in almost all computer systems and are a valuable resource for understanding system status. Recently, a large number of scholars employed Deep Learning techniques [8,[38][39][40][41][42] to detect anomaly events in the system logs and diagnosis system failures. The raw log data are unstructured because their formats and semantics can vary significantly. To detect the anomaly event, the raw log usually was parsed to structure data, then transformed into a representation that fit into an effective Deep Learning model. Finally, the anomaly event was detected by Deep Learning based classifier or predictor.

(p19.1) In this section, we will review the very recent six representative works that use Deep Learning for system-event-based anomaly detection [8,[38][39][40][41][42]. DeepLog [8] utilizes LSTM that processes the system log as a natural language sequence, which automatically learns log patterns from the normal event, and detects anomalies when log patterns deviate from the trained model. LogAnom [38] employs Word2vec to extract the semantic and syntax information from log samples. Moreover, it uses sequential and quantitative features simultaneously. Desh [39] uses LSTM to predict node failures that occur in super computing systems from HPC logs. Andy Brown et al. [40] presented RNN language models augmented with attention for anomaly detection in system logs. LogRobust [41] uses FastText to represent semantic information of log events, which can identify and handle unstable log events and sequences. Christophe Bertero and others [42] map log word to a high dimensional metric space using Google's word2vec algorithm and take it as features to classify. Among these six works, we select two representative works [8,38] and summarize the four phases of their approaches. We direct interested readers to Table 1 for a concise overview of these two works.
## (s21) A closer look at applications of Deep Learning in solving memory forensics challenges 9.1 Introduction
Number of References: 19

(p21.0) In the field of computer security, memory forensics is security-oriented forensic analysis of a computer's memory dump. Memory forensics can be conducted against OS kernels, user-level applications, as well as mobile devices. Memory forensics outperforms traditional disk-based forensics because although secrecy attacks can erase their footprints on disk, they would have to appear in memory [45]. The memory dump can be considered as a sequence of bytes, thus memory forensics usually needs to extract security semantic information from raw memory dump to find attack traces. Several challenges exist in memory forensics such as lack of adequate domain knowledge, lack of robustness and low efficiency. Researchers have been using Deep Learning to address these challenges [45][46][47][48].

(p21.1) In this section, we will review the very recent four representative works that use Deep Learning for memory forensics [45][46][47][48]. DeepMem [45] recognized the kernel objects from raw memory dumps by generating abstract representations of kernel objects with a graph-based Deep Learning approach. MDMF [46] detected OS and architecture-independent malware from memory snapshots with several pre-processing techniques, domain unaware feature selection, and a suite of machine learning algorithms. MemTri [47] predicts the likelihood of criminal activity in a memory image using a Bayesian network, based on evidence data artefacts generated by several applications. Dai et al. [48] monitor the malware process memory and classify malware according to memory dumps, by transforming the memory dump into grayscale images and adopting a multi-layer perception as the classifier.

(p21.2) Among these four works [45][46][47][48], two representative works (i.e., [45,46]) are already summarized phase-by-phase in Table 1. We direct interested readers to Table 1 for a concise overview of these two works.
