# Magnetic resonance imaging assessment of degenerative cervical myelopathy: a review of structural changes and measurement techniques

CorpusID: 20704281 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d6863948d09e29353991b24a784ed988f19383d0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d6863948d09e29353991b24a784ed988f19383d0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) sagittal Alignment
Number of References: 13

(p4.0) It is becoming increasingly recognized that sagittal alignment might be a contributor to disease severity in patients with DCM and is certainly an important factor in the selection of an anterior or posterior surgical approach. 4,68herefore, assessment of the cervical spine should include evaluation for scoliosis, hyperlordosis, and kyphosis.Sagittal balance and alignment can be assessed optimally by using standing radiographs of the whole spine, but some measurements, made by using cervical MRI, have been reported, and they might prove useful in the absence of upright films.

(p4.1) For assessing cervical kyphosis, Ruangchainikom et al. 92 used a previously described but modified method for radiographs, 80 which classified cervical kyphosis as 1 of 3 forms: C type (global), S type (sigmoid), and R type (re-  verse sigmoid).In addition to the assessment of kyphosis, the radiographic method also included criteria for evaluating hyperlordosis, which presumably would also be feasible for adoption with MRI.It has been shown also that MRI has utility similar to that of radiographs for the assessment of thoracolumbar kyphosis and scoliosis using Cobb angle measurement. 15,96,106,126However, the reliability and validity of MRI-based Cobb angle measurements for evaluating the cervical region have yet to be established.

(p4.2) Another measurement technique that can be used to assess cervical curvature was described by Batzdorf and Batzdorff 13 for radiographs and later used on MRI by Chen et al. 19 For this measurement, a line is drawn from the posteroinferior aspect of the C-2 VB to the posteroinferior aspect of the C-7 VB, and no portion of the C3-6 VB should cross the drawn line. 13,19Ames et al. 4 also described several additional measures of cervical sagittal alignment based on radiographs, including the chin brow vertical level, the T-1 slope, the sagittal vertical axis, the Harrison posterior tangent method, and Jackson physiological stress lines, 4 but the validity of these measurements using MRI has yet to be reported in the literature.Overall, the supine positioning of patients for conventional MRI limits its utility in assessing alignment, but at least it can provide a superficial assessment of alignment for scenarios in which upright films are unavailable.
