# Edge Computing Enabled Smart Cities: A Comprehensive Survey

CorpusID: 202676686 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d26c7bc3aa6b9a801841c4309ab38351feaef547](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d26c7bc3aa6b9a801841c4309ab38351feaef547)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s13) Edge Computing
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) Edge computing refers to practices that move computing and storage resources to the network edge. In the literature, three different practices, such as cloudlets, fog computing, and mobile edge computing have been used, that extend cloud computing to the network edge. All of these three terms used in the literature refer to edge computing [24], [33], [51]. Edge computing is distributed architecture that enables real-time data processing and acceleration of datastreams with low latency. Along with this, edge computing also minimizes the Internet bandwidth usage, which further reduces network congestion and delay.
## (s16) Smart Transportation Applications
Number of References: 3

(p16.0) Giang et al. in [60] discussed the development of smart transportation applications leveraging fog computing. They have discussed the requirements, state-of-the-art, and research challenges regarding implementation of the fog computing enabled smart transportation applications. Although the authors discussed the requirements of scalability and context-awareness in fog computing assisted vehicular networks they did not consider service migration [64] and security [82], which have significant importance in vehicular networks. The vehicle might change connectivity from one roadside unit to another during video streaming. Therefore, service migration must be considered in the design of fog assisted application for vehicles. Similarly, the security aspect must be addressed to avoid any accidents and physical damage. For example, if a hacker accesses the vehicle and alters the lane change information, this might result in accidents, specifically in autonomous cars.
## (s36) Cloud-Fog-Based Smart Grid Model
Number of References: 3

(p36.0) In [72], a three-layered framework named cloud-fog-based smart grid is proposed. The first layer is the end users layer, followed by the second fog layer, and the third cloud layer. The end layer comprises of buildings which have homes. Energy storage systems with renewable energy generation units are installed at every home. The information related to energy generation and consumption is sent to the fog layer. The fog layer that physically exists close to the consumers region, performs effective management of the network resource with low latency. Furthermore, the authors proposed hybrid artificial bee ant colony optimization (HABACO) algorithm for optimal allocation of virtual machines in the cloud-fog-based smart grid model. The authors considered two scenarios for performance evaluation of their cloud-fogbased smart grid model but did not consider the commercial scenario that has a significantly different nature than residential areas. A reference model for integration of fog computing and smart grids is introduced in [71]. The three-tier model consists of smart grid tier, fog tier, and cloud tier. The smart grid tier has the responsibility of enabling communication between different smart devices, such as smart meters, mobile devices, electrical vehicles, and smart appliances. The fog tier acts as an intermediate layer between the cloud and smart grid tier. Every fog server communicates with smart meters for the collection of data of their associated users. Additionally, the fog layer servers take the private data from the smart grid layer in encrypted form to ensure the privacy of the users. The fog server does not have the capability to decrypt the data and the key is only shared among the cloud and the users. The main purpose of the fog servers is to provide temporary storage and computation capability for the smart grids data. The prime limitation of their work lies in non-consideration of the challenge of interoperability, which is one of a most important issue among different power domain areas due to the usage of multiple semantic data models in a smart grid environment [83].
## (s38) Smart Precision Agriculture
Number of References: 3

(p38.0) In [73], a distributed IoT-based smart framing infrastructure assisted by edge nodes is proposed to experience farmer with enhanced benefits. The proposed architecture consists of four levels, i.e., things layer, edge layer, fog layer, and communication layer. In things layer, a thing can be either actuators, controller or sensors, which are designed to meet production facility. The function of edge computing is to provide interoperability, storage, smart analysis, and prediction near the edge. Reason for using edge computing is due to the low latency requirements of control, analysis response, and monitoring sensors. Although authors considered interoperability but did not consider caching in the proposed framework. Caching can be utilized to further improve the performance of the smart framing [85]. In [85], a joint latency and energy optimized communication were achieved through data caching algorithm in Precision Agriculture (PA) system. The data caching algorithm was based on the optimization of sleep-up/wake-up time of wireless sensor network nodes. Data requests of sensor nodes are analyzed in a cache prior to transmission. This prolongs the life of the sensor nodes and thus, improves the energy efficiency of the PA system.
## (s39) Smart Animal Welfare Monitoring System
Number of References: 3

(p39.0) In [74], a smart farm assisted by edge computing for the welfare of animals is proposed. The proposed architecture consists of an animal-centric system, environmental system, and farm controller. The farm controller can be implemented either in a centralized fashion or in a distributed fashion. A Raspberry Pi (R-Pi) which is a small sized micro-computer is used in the implementation of the environmental subsystem and animal-centric system. In system implementation, the environment R-Pi monitors the environment, whereas wearable R-Pi monitors the health of animals. A workstation that implements the farm controller performs the central tasks of the system. One of the most prominent advantages of the proposed architecture is its ability to send alarms to mobile. These alarms are use full to detect whether animals are ill or not, especially when the cow is pregnant which can be detected from its body temperature [86]. The authors did not consider the robustness of the sensors network used for the collection of data which might suffer from the data loss due to battery depletion or other sources as observed in the [87].
## (s41) IoT based Smart Homes
Number of References: 2

(p41.0) A smart home architecture is presented in [76], that leverages edge computing and Long-Term Evolution (LTE) network. Different alternatives for placement of edge computing servers are considered that include:(a) placement of edge computing server at Evolved Node B (eNB), (b) placing the edge computing server at femtocells BS in a home, and (c) placing the edge computing server at User Equipment (UE). The positioning of edge computing server at eNB needs to cover a large number of far users and thus, require high computational power. On the other hand, placement of edge computing server near the UEs require less capacity due to its small coverage area. Simulation for two different scenarios, such as device-to-infrastructure (D2I) and D2D communication in IoT was performed using SimuLTE tool [88].
## (s43) Smart Mobile Gaming
Number of References: 5

(p43.0) Smart mobile gaming leverages AR/VR, the Internet, edge computing, smart devices, among others, to provide immersive gaming experiences. In [78], Premsankar et al. discussed different edge computing platforms and architectures. The key applications of IoT that leverage edge computing are also discussed. Along with this, the authors also carried out an experimental evaluation of edge computing enabled mobile gaming. Such mobile gaming relies on high reliability and low latency communication along with mobile devices sensors data [90]. For example, Pokemon Go [91] is a game that leverages sensor information (i.e., location of the user) and AR [92]. The authors selected a resource-intensive and open-source 3-D arcade game, Neverball, for evaluating the performance of edge computing in mobile gaming. The authors considered scenario where an input from the mobile device is sent to the gaming server. The server, in turn, streams the video and provided the content to the mobile device. In such a scenario, edge computing is necessary to enable the users with AR assisted mobile gaming [93], [94].
## (s49) Resources
Number of References: 5

(p49.0) Edge computing converges information technology and telecommunication services to enable computation of resource-intensive tasks at the network edge. To carry out the above process, we need three types of resources, such as computation resources, communication resources, and storage resource [24]. Computation resource can be either a local device or server. A user offloads either all components of an application (binary offloading) [96]- [98] or some components of an application to the edge server (partial offloading) [99], [100]. A complication might arise in partial offloading when the task components are dependent on each other, and making it difficult to separate the task components for local execution and execution at server. Apart from computation resource there are two types of communication resources, that are required to enable edge computing in smart cities. One is the access network, which allows connectivity of the end-user devices to the edge servers, and the other is a core network communication resource, which allows transmission of data from the edge server to cloud server at the time of insufficient computation resources at the edge server. Different from computation and communication resources, storage resources can be either at a local device or at an edge.
## (s50) Resource Management Strategies
Number of References: 12

(p50.0) In smart cities enabled by edge computing, the key resources are the massive number of smart devices, edge servers, and communication infrastructure. To enable edge computing-based smart environments, it is necessary to effectively manage the available resources. The main aspects of resource management include resource discovery, resource management tools, and resource management criteria. Fairness [101], [102], QoS [103], [104], throughput [105], energy [106]- [109], among others, can be utilized as criteria to design resource management schemes. Other than resource management criteria, we can use optimization-based schemes [110], game theory-based schemes [111], heuristic [112], graph theory-based schemes [58], and hybrid schemes (which jointly utilize optimization and game theory) [113], for resource allocation. An optimization-based technique can be either dynamic programming, linear programming, convex optimization, or integer programming. On the other hand, game theory-based schemes can be based on either cooperative games or non-cooperative games.
## (s53) Sustainability
Number of References: 5

(p53.0) Sustainability refers to the use of energy efficient designs and renewable energy resources to reduce the overall carbon footprint. In future smart cities, densification of devices and servers is expected, which in turn will result in energy limitations. Therefore, sustainable developments are required. Sustainability in edge computing can be achieved by using renewable energy sources [124], energy harvesting [125]- [127], and energy-efficient design [128]. Renewable energy sources include biomass, geothermal, and wind energy. Energy efficient design has three important aspects, such as energy efficient software, energy-efficient hardware, and energy efficient resource management. Other than energy efficient design and renewable energy sources, energy harvesting deals with the extraction of energy from external sources for further use in the operation of small devices, such as sensors and wearable devices. Energy can also be harvested either from the environmental sources, such as wind, solar, and thermal, or from radio frequency sources. There are significant variations in the harvested energy from both natural sources and radio frequency sources [125]. Therefore, it is imperative to design hybrid systems that utilize both harvested energy and energy from the grid. A hybrid system initially must entirely use harvested energy, and then later use energy from the grid in instances when the harvested energy level becomes lower than the required energy for operation.
## (s76) Intelligent Caching
Number of References: 14

(p76.0) In smart cities, connectivity of billions of smart IoT devices is expected. According to CISCO, 507.9 ZB data will be generated by smart IoT devices in 2019 [177]. This rapid rise in data has resulted in a major bottleneck that requires higher back-haul data rates. To tackle the dilemma of back-haul congestion, caching can be used which deals with the storage of popular contents at different locations in a network to avoid repeated transmissions [178]. Additionally, caching enable different real-time IoT-based smart city applications by reducing latency and energy consumption [179]. On the other hand, caching has two main aspects: network type and caching strategy. Network type deals with cache positioning, such as cache enabled macro cellular networks [120], cache enabled heterogeneous networks [180], cache enabled D2D networks [181], and cache enabled cloud radio access networks [182]. The caching strategy has two main phases, such as cache decision phase and content delivery phase.

(p76.1) The main challenges that exist in intelligent caching at the edge include the cold-start user problem [183] and security and privacy [184]. Intelligent caching based on machine learning uses information and data from all users within its range. However, the mobility of the users poses many challenges and it is very difficult to satisfy this requirement for intelligent caching. To cope with user mobility, mobilityaware hierarchical caching was proposed in [117]. Furthermore, we can leverage reinforcement learning for effective scheduling in mobility-aware caching [185]. Additionally, intelligent cache decisions are based on the future content popularity, whose computation is considerably challenging. The prediction of content popularity using deep learning has been considered to enable intelligent cache decision making [183], [186]- [188].
## (s80) Network Slicing
Number of References: 6

(p80.0) In smart cities, a wide range of players including cloud server providers, edge computing service providers, telecommunication services providers, and IoT service providers, will interplay with one another. The goals of these service providers are to increase profit, whereas, users want to improve their QoS. To enable easier and efficient resource management among users and service providers, the concept of network slicing was introduced [199]- [202]. Network slicing exploits software-defined networking (SDN) and NFV to separate the control plane from the data plane [200]. The concept of network slicing is based on the creation of logical networks on top of a physical network infrastructure.

(p80.1) To enable network slicing in smart cities, it is imperative to tackle the challenges, such as end-to-end slice management and orchestration, slices security, and adaptive service function chaining. A network slicing architecture consists of different layers: a service layer, resource layer, and network slice instance layer [203]. End-to-end slice management and orchestration spans all three layers and handles the creation and management of slices. Moreover, it deals with translation of all the smart city use cases into slices with its associated network functions. To enable effective network slicing, game theoretic, deep reinforcement learning, and auction theory-based schemes can be used [204]- [206]. Apart from management and orchestration of slices, slice security is another key challenge in realization of network slicing in smart cities. The presence of numerous authorities and multiple stakeholders in network slicing pose several novel security challenges. Network slicing security involves challenges of multiple operator resource sharing security and SDN-based orchestrator security. The slices defined for different use cases have unique security requirements. For instance, a smart health-care slice has stronger security concerns than the infotainment slice. Therefore, we must consider different security mechanisms for individual slices. Overall, security must be ensured during resource sharing of the infrastructure. However, network wide-security has different nature than of individual slices security. Therefore, the development of novel and effective security policies for network resource sharing and individual slices is necessary.
## (s84) Future Prospects
Number of References: 5

(p84.0) In the future, we expect virtualization to widely be adopted in developing smart cities. Currently, there are millions of devices that are deployed in cities. Further, the addition of billions of smart devices and sensors is expected. All of these devices generate data traffic that require instant analytic services. Edge computing will enable such instant analytics. Apart from edge computing, novel communication technologies with high throughput are required for data transmission. Additionally, the development of the smart cities must be sustainable and reliable. To enable smart cities through novel developments, different players such as telecommunication network operators, edge computing service providers, cloud service providers, and IoT service providers will interplay with each other. One issue is how to effectively enable such interplay to maximize profit and improve QoS? Virtualization-based network slicing is an answer, which can be leveraged to improve the QoS and increase profit. This allows to create multiple logical networks (called slices) on top of a physical infrastructure of different service providers [214]- [217]. SDN and NFV are key enablers of slicing-based smart cities. SDN offers separation of the control plane from the data plane, and NFV allows use of a generic hardware for implementation of different network functions. Network slicing-based smart cities will offer a wide variety of slices for different smart services. Different references, such as [218]- [221] have considered network slicingbased smart city advancements. These slices have diverse requirements and must share the same physical infrastructure resulting in a cost-efficient operation. Allocation of an end-to-end network for a typical slice would be expensive. Therefore, it is necessary for multiple slices to coexist simultaneously. However, resource management of resources between co-existing slices is challenging, thus requiring novel resource management schemes. Different organizations are also attempting to enable smart applications via network slicing. For instance, consider reference [218], which introduces a network slicing-based testbed using edge computing at Hamburg port. Additionally, many organizations are working on the AutoAir project in the UK to produce a testbed based on edge computing and network slicing for testing connected and autonomous vehicles. To sum up, edge computing and network slicing will be the dominant solution for enabling future smart cities. See table 7. 
