# cancers Pituitary Adenomas and Invasiveness from Anatomo-Surgical, Radiological, and Histological Perspectives: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 208634984 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7fe564e7b6791501f1a6f4d744ada706014177ed](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7fe564e7b6791501f1a6f4d744ada706014177ed)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 7

(p0.0) Pituitary adenomas (PAs), also defined as pituitary neuroendocrine tumors (PitNETs) as explained in the following sections, are generally benign and slow growing tumors that can cause a "mass effect" on nearby anatomic structures, which are generally displaced or remodeled over time (e.g., sellar enlargement). The main features of some PAs include: 1) more aggressive biologic behavior, which typically corresponds to a proliferative index that is higher than usual; 2) an invasive behavior, so that the PAs extend in the extrasellar region and/or histologically invade the surrounding dural, periosteal, or mucosal tissues. Aggressiveness and invasiveness are sometimes used as synonyms, as the two features are frequently present in the same tumor, but they should not be confused as they describe two distinct characteristics of PAs ( Figure 1) [1][2][3][4][5][6][7]. . Invasive and aggressive PAs represent two subgroups of the main population, which overlap. The blurred region underlines that both definitions can vary according to different authors and points of view. In clinical practice, an aggressive pituitary adenoma with a high proliferative index is usually invasive. A pituitary adenoma that extends in the cavernous sinus is frequently considered invasive from a radiological point of view, but might not be from surgical or histological points of view; on the other hand, in theory, even a small, intrasellar pituitary adenoma might be invasive. Furthermore, while aggressiveness is generally defined by the clinical behavior of the lesion, invasiveness can be described in different ways, according to the point of view. The aim of this study is to provide a systematic review of the concept of invasiveness from anatomo-surgical, radiological, and histological perspectives.
## (s5) PAs and Surgical Invasiveness
Number of References: 20

(p5.0) Surgical observations have the fundamental role of providing data for diagnosis of extension or invasion of PAs [7,[58][59][60][61].

(p5.1) From a surgical point of view two anatomical corridors have been identified relative to the ICA: the medial and lateral ones [58,[62][63][64].

(p5.2) The medial corridor may have a tetrahedron or hexahedron shape, and is delimited laterally by the C portion of ICA (C4 and C5 segment), medially by the MWCS, posteriorly by the petroclival ligaments and posterior clinoid process; the lateral one is located between the anterior genu and horizontal segments of ICA, medially, and LWCS, laterally [58,65,66].

(p5.3) Knosp et al. [67] divided the cavernous space into four venous compartments with regards to the ICA: the medial, superior, lateral and inferior compartments. If there was compression of three or more venous compartments or the lateral venous compartment, surgical diagnosis of invasion was made [67]. Connor et al. [68] reported that extension in the inferolateral or lateral venous compartments was related with incomplete surgical resection. Fernandez-Miranda et al. [69] proposed a surgical anatomy classification of the CS, distinguishing between four different compartments (superior, posterior, inferior, and lateral). In their work, the most commonly invaded compartment was the superior (65 patients, four with bilateral invasion), followed by the posterior (60 patients, six with bilateral involvement), inferior (34 patients, seven exhibiting bilateral involvement), and lateral (23 patients, one with bilateral invasion). In cases with multiple compartment invasion, the most common pattern was the superior/posterior (n = 32) followed by the inferior/superior/posterior/lateral (n = 17), inferior/superior/posterior (n = 14), and superior/lateral (n = 11). It was found that no patients had growth into the inferior/posterior/lateral compartments without invasion of the superior compartment [69]. Trevisi et al. [70] proposed a four-quadrant classification derived from the clock method previously suggested by Moreau et al. [71,72] (see Radiology section for further details).
## (s6) Radiology and PAs Invasiveness
Number of References: 18

(p6.0) The radiological study represents the first essential step for evaluation of PA invasiveness. Tumor size plays a key role: the larger the lesion, the greater the correlation with invasiveness [9,10,12,15,30,31]. The tumor may infiltrate many structures: the sellar floor, involving inferiorly the sphenoid sinus and nasopharynx; the cavernous sinus laterally, with an incidence ranging from 10% [67,71] to 21% [10]; superiorly, the tumor frequently extends in the suprasellar region, rarely invading the arachnoid [84][85][86]; anteriorly, it might extend in the ethmoid and orbital region; posteriorly, in the clivus (8.2%) [32] and, rarely, in the posterior fossa [11,87]. Inferior extension seems to be more typical in older patients, while patients with cavernous sinus invasion are usually younger [15]. Sphenoid invasion seems to be related to the size of the PA [31] and to male gender [12].
## (s8) Radiological Technical Advancements
Number of References: 10

(p8.0) Different technical aspects have been described to improve the radiological accuracy of a diagnosis of CS invasion. Three-tesla MR imaging is superior to standard 1.5T MR imaging, in particular for examining the medial wall of the cavernous sinus (MWCS) [122]. Cao et al. tried to better characterize the dural layers that form the MWCS through the use of proton-density-weighted imaging (PDWI), identifying defects of the MWCSs and distinguishing between compression and invasion of CS [123]. However, the MWCS is a very thin dural layer and it is difficult to establish its involvement by tumors through MRI only [68]. Other sequences have been suggested as well, including VIBE [124], CE SPACE (contrast enhanced sampling perfection with application-optimized contrasts using different flip-angle evolutions) [125], and T1-weighted three-dimensional (3D) fast spin echo (FSE) [126].

(p8.1) Recently, radiomics is playing an increasingly important role: its preoperative prediction of CS invasion based on contrast-enhanced T1 and T2-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) imaging might support clinical decision-making and predict outcomes [127]. Three-dimensional anisotropy contrast (3DAC) MR imaging [128], CE-MRA 3T (contrast-enhanced MR angiography) [129] or CE 3D FIESTA (contrast-enhanced 3D fast-imaging employing steady-state acquisition) [130] might be used to evaluate CS invasion and study the involvement of its cranial nerves.
## (s9) Histological Evidence of Invasiveness
Number of References: 16

(p9.0) Dural invasion by PAs can be sometimes histologically documented, as previously reported in different studies [9,131]. Infiltration of the adjacent dura is recognized when single tumor cells or small aggregates are embedded within the dural layers [9,132]. Generally, this finding is associated with a high proliferative index [133,134] and increasing tumor size [59,132,133], although it has been reported in microadenomas with a low proliferative index, suggesting that invasive behavior may be related to the intrinsic biological properties of PAs rather than the rate of tumor growth [9]. In their work, Selman et al. [131] estimated that invasiveness defined by histological analysis is a more frequent finding (51 of 60 cases; 85%) than its evaluation at surgery (performed with the microscope in 1986). Apparently contrasting data have been reported by Scheithauer et al., who reported an invasion rate of 35% in 365 PAs [9]. The discrepancy between different studies reflects the problematic assessment of invasion based only on histological features and in the absence of valid biomarkers. Interestingly, stratifying the data based on the different types of PAs, invasion was 50% higher for GH (50%), PRL (52%), silent ACTH (82%) and TSH (75%) PAs, along with plurihormonal PAs (50%) and in Nelson's syndrome (64%). As expected, invasion was found at a higher rate in pituitary macroadenomas extending outside the sella [9]. Of note, according to Meji and colleagues [132], patients who underwent trans-sphenoidal surgery for the first time showed dural invasion in 54.2% of null-cell adenomas, while this percentage decreased to 30-35% of patients in other PAs; in patients who underwent repeated pituitary surgery, the incidence of dural invasion was increased up to 90.9% for gonadotroph, 75% for PRL, and 73.3% for ACTH secreting PAs. Lonser et al. [59] reported histological dural invasion in 34% patients with CD: in 60% of cases, the invasion occurred at the level of the medial wall of the cavernous sinus, and in the remaining 40% it was found in other regions of the CS. Nishioka et al. [77] reported invasion in 71% of 150 acromegalic patients from a histological perspective and in 37% from a radiological point of view.
