# sustainability The Economics of Arundo donax-A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 201319858 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7d850d033793efaccb675ce99221dc5622bfc327](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7d850d033793efaccb675ce99221dc5622bfc327)

Fields: Environmental Science, Economics

## (s9) Biomass Production-Country and Crop Specific Studies
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Biomass potential of giant reed is a key aspect of related research (see Table 2). An early study of Alderucci, et al. [11] has identified giant reed as one of the most promising biomass plant for Sicily, Italy. The estimation expected to contribute 20% of the island's total energy requirement which giant reed could be a part of, together with other candidates, also including nitrogen-fixing trees. The Sicilian biomass potential was also analysed by Chinnici, et al. [12] and they found that after livestock sewage, dedicated bioenergy crops represent the second highest amount of biomass potential. Among the perennials giant reed can offer a valid alternative to arable farming, especially on marginal lands. However, the low processing capacities make bioenergy potential underexploited.
## (s13) Invasiveness
Number of References: 4

(p13.0) Our sample contains eight studies written on the invasiveness of giant reed (see Table 8). Albers, et al. [53] analysed the role of restoration and key ecological invasion mechanisms in optimal spatial-dynamic management of invasive species, including giant reed. By using a bioeconomic modelling approach, their results suggest that more aggressive invasive species and more invasion-susceptible ecosystems require greater investment in habitat restoration despite its relative expense. Barney and DiTomaso [54] analysed the invasive characteristics of switchgrass, giant reed and Miscanthus in the United States. Switchgrass was found to be highly invasive in California, giant reed in Florida, while Miscanthus was not found to be invasive. The authors propose a screening procedure to provide reasonable assurance that bioenergy crops, including giant reed, pose a minimal risk of damaging the local environment.

(p13.1) Goolsby, et al. [55] also analysed the invasiveness of giant reed in the USA and searched for the impact of a biological control agent on giant reed in Texas. Their results suggest that by using biological control, yields of giant reed decreased on average by 22%, though this control also resulted in the saving of 4.4 million dollars of per year in agricultural water. Seawright, et al. [56] also analysed the invasive potentials of giant reed in the Rio Grande Basin and showed $4.38 of benefits for every dollar of public investment for a biological control project for giant reed. For the economic impact analyses, economic output is $22,000, value-added is $11,000, and no employment is supported by the water savings from giant reed. Additionally, the per-unit cost of water saved was estimated to $44.08.
