# Hand sanitizers: A review of ingredients, mechanisms of action, modes of delivery, and efficacy against coronaviruses

CorpusID: 219799832 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a22b146ece97908c2b5aaa7f2c8a965f7d1ac39c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a22b146ece97908c2b5aaa7f2c8a965f7d1ac39c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s3) ALCOHOL MECHANISM OF ACTION AGAINST BACTERIA
Number of References: 7

(p3.0) The compound, n-propanol, is the most commonly used alcohol compound in biocides. 7 It is not known with much confidence the exact mechanism of alcohol's antimicrobial activity, however, it may be related membrane damage, and inhibition or uncoupling of mRNA and protein synthesis through effects on ribosomes and RNA polymerase, 9 or associated with protein denaturation. 7 For activity against bacteria, its optimal bactericidal efficacy is achieved at concentrations between 60% and 90%. 10 In fact, absolute alcohol, or alcohol that is no more than one percent water, is less bactericidal than alcohol between the aforementioned range. 10 Water is thus critical in the protein denaturation process. No matter which process, if not multiple, are affected by alcohol, essential metabolic pathways, membrane damage and loss of cellular integrity ultimately occur. 7 It is important to note, however, that alcohols exhibit bactericidal activity against vegetative bacteria-those undergoing metabolism and binary fission-but not against spores. 11 
## (s10) FOAM VERSUS GEL
Number of References: 8

(p10.0) Three common modes of delivering the active ingredient in hand sanitizers, whether alcohol or other disinfectants, are foams, gels, and sprays. There is limited research on comparing the efficacy of various sanitizer delivery systems on virucidal efficacy. One study with 30 human volunteers showed >3 log10 reductions of H1N1 viral counts on finger pads with foam, gel, and wipes with no differences in efficacy among delivery types. 50 Similar findings were seen by Grayson et al, comparing ethanol based gel and liquid forms on H1N1. 51 Both of these studies suggest that there could be some varying differences in efficacy due to the method of mechanical friction that could contribute to physical removal of pathogens, but there needs to be further research conducted to compare the efficacy between the various hand sanitizer delivery systems.

(p10.1) Aside from virucidal efficacy, the formulations of hand sanitizers were identified as one factor influencing compliance to hand hygiene, though conflicting results exist. A single pump from foam dispensers provides approximately 1.1 mL of hand sanitizer. 52 Manufacturers suggest different recommended volumes for application, but a recent study compared gel and foam hand sanitizers and found no statistically significant difference of complete hand coverage upon usage of equal volumes. 52 It did, however, conclude that volumes <2 mL resulted in high rates of poor coverage (67%-87%), whereas volumes ≥2 mL generated a lower rate of incomplete coverage (13%-53%). The World Health Organization does not have a specific volume of sanitizer they suggest but recommend to "cover all surfaces of the hand" (https://www.who.int/gpsc/5may/tools/who_guidelines-handhygie ne_summary.pdf). Contrary to the previous results, 52 a study comparing foam and gel with equal concentrations of ethanol determined that foam spreads more than gel and that the average log10 reduction of foam was superior against E. coli bacteria than gel. 53 To translate these experimental findings to clinical practice, however, the compliance of utilizing adequate amounts of foam sanitizer must be met. A study reviewing the potential compliance of various hand sanitizer varieties found that foams containing 62% ethanol have a long drying time, and given this, health care workers in clinical practice likely use inadequate volumes of the product in order to quicken the drying time, and consequently do not use a sufficient amounts of foam hand sanitizer for complete hand coverage. 54 Indeed, a focus group of nurses strongly rejected high volumes (3 mL) of hand sanitizers in gel, foam, or liquid form as "there is not enough time to apply such large doses whilst working on a busy ward." 55 Moreover, the gel and foam formats were considered more desirable than the liquid due to some key desirable properties, including fast absorption, soft/moisturized hand feel, clean nonsticky feel, and low smell. 55 Another study compared the tolerability of gel and liquid forms with varying ingredients (ethanol or propanol) among dental students and found that all types were tolerated. 56 Multiple studies suggest that there are other factors, such as sanitizer ingredients, addition of skin moisturizer, and accessibility in the workplace, that affect compliance and ultimately make it difficult to directly compare the different types of hand sanitizers. Further studies need to be conducted to determine the long-term compliance of the various sanitizer forms, which are more useful in settings where consistent hand hygiene is crucial.
