# plants In Vitro Propagation, Phytochemical and Neuropharmacological Profiles of Bacopa monnieri (L.) Wettst.: A Review

CorpusID: 214731185 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b470ffcac5132a3825a87d58f1ae67ef85bac55b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b470ffcac5132a3825a87d58f1ae67ef85bac55b)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s2) Organogenesis
Number of References: 6

(p2.0) In B. monnieri various researchers have reported adventitious bud formation and shoot organogenesis in vitro. However, there are very few reports on callus induction and indirect shoot organogenesis in the species [37,47,53]. The morphogenic potential of plant cells leading to whole plant regeneration is known to depend on both endogenous and exogenous factors [69]. However, the expression of totipotency of cells of excised leaf and stem explants from in vitro B. monnieri plants in plant growth regulator (PGR) free medium makes this species a model system to study the causes of morphogenesis in vitro Figure 1 [65] The rate of shoot organogenesis in B. monnieri among other factors also depends on type and position of explants [65] while Joshi et al. [34] reported both direct and indirect shoot organogenesis depended on the orientation of explants on the shoot induction medium.
## (s3) Organogenesis from In Vitro Derived Explants
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) Nearly 20% of the published reports on micropropagation of B. monnieri have used leaf and internode explants from in vitro grown plants for whole plant regeneration through direct shoot organogenesis. Tiwari et al. [21] reported direct adventitious shoot regeneration (~80 shoots/leaf explants) on MS [67] medium supplemented with BA (6-benzylamino purine). In a later publication, Tiwari et al. [24] reported the rate of adventitious shoot bud formation was enhanced (93 shoot buds/leaf explant in seven days) using TDZ instead of BA in shoot induction medium (SIM). After three subcultures on shoot multiplication medium (SMM) containing BA yielded a higher number (~130) of adventitious shoot buds/leaf explant.
## (s4) Organogenesis from In Vitro Derived Explants
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) Nearly 20% of the published reports on micropropagation of B. monnieri have used leaf and internode explants from in vitro grown plants for whole plant regeneration through direct shoot organogenesis. Tiwari et al. [21] reported direct adventitious shoot regeneration (~80 shoots/leaf explants) on MS [67] medium supplemented with BA (6-benzylamino purine). In a later publication, Tiwari et al. [24] reported the rate of adventitious shoot bud formation was enhanced (93 shoot buds/leaf explant in seven days) using TDZ instead of BA in shoot induction medium (SIM). After three subcultures on shoot multiplication medium (SMM) containing BA yielded a higher number (~130) of adventitious shoot buds/leaf explant.
## (s5) Organogenesis from Ex Vitro Derived Explants
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) Shoot regeneration using leaf and internode explants excised from ex vitro plants has been demonstrated in nearly 36% of the published reports. Optimum shoot regeneration (110 shoots/leaf explant) was reported by Binita et al. [26] within three weeks of culture on medium supplemented with BA and IAA (Indole-3-acetic acid). Using Kinetin (Kn) instead of BA, Praveen et al. [31] obtained shoot induction and proliferation to a maximum frequency of 155 shoots/leaf explant after 18 weeks. Kn has been used similarly to induce high frequency shoot regeneration in leaf explants by Umesh et al. [53], while shoot induction frequency was low with 2ip (N6-2-isopentenyl adenine) [72]. On the other hand, in internode explant, significantly higher shoot induction (324 shoots/internode explant) was obtained in a combination of BA and Kn after three subcultures [29]. It can be concluded that both internode and leaf explants derived from ex vitro plants show significantly higher potential for micropropagation (155-324 shoots/explant) than similar explants derived from in vitro plants.
## (s8) Culture in Bioreactors
Number of References: 5

(p8.0) Bioreactor based micropropagation was found to increase the multiplication rate of shoot cultures using nodal segments, for commercial propagation of B. monnieri plants [38,56]. Jain et al. [38] reported enhanced biomass production in Growtek ® bioreactor with 10% aeration using nodal explants. Maximum growth index (10.0) with~2000 shoots/L and 16.5 g/L DW was recorded when cultured on liquid MS medium fortified with 2.5 mg L −1 BA and 0.01 mg L −1 IAA. In another study, using airlift bioreactor, nearly 443 shoots proliferated from~48.33 excised shoots after four weeks of culture in liquid MS medium (1.5 l) supplemented with 1 mg L −1 BA (Sharma et al. [56]. Investigations on biosynthesis of bacosides (A 2 + A 3 ) in in vitro shoot cultures of B. monnieri grown in two bioreactor systems, i.e., Growtek ® (1 L) and modified bench top air lift bioreactor (5 L) revealed that the maximum content was obtained in shoot biomass using ALB system (10.15 mg g −1 DW) as compared to Growtek ® culture (6.08 mg g −1 DW) due to higher aeration facility for improved oxygen transfer during bacoside synthesis [56]. Thus, further studies using bioreactors can be explored for the commercial production of bacosides in mass propagated shoot cultures.
## (s12) Anti-Oxidant Properties
Number of References: 10

(p12.0) Antioxidants have been documented to prevent oxidative damage from free radicals responsible for a number of human disorders such as arthrosclerosis, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, arthritis, Alzheimer's disease, ischemia gastritis and AIDS [80,109]. The antioxidant properties of Bacopa can offer protection against free radical damage in cardiovascular disease and certain types of cancer [110]. Reportedly, bacosides scavenge free radicals such as superoxides, peroxides and hydroxyl radicals.

(p12.1) Antioxidant effects of alcoholic and hexane extract of B. monnieri on lipid peroxidation by cumene hydroperoxide and ferrous sulphate is reported in rat homogenate liver [111]. Bacosides were found to have antioxidant activity in the hippocampus, frontal cortex and striatum on the basis of animal studies [112] and to modulate the expression of certain enzymes involved in generation and scavenging of reactive oxygen species in the brain and demonstrated that bacoside A3 had an inhibitory effect on superoxides released from polymorphonuclear cells in a nitroblue tetrazolium assay in the hydroalcoholic extract of the whole plant [113]. Sumathy et al. [114] reported the hepatoprotective activity of its orally administered alcoholic extract on the liver antioxidant status of morphine-treated rats. The defensive function of methanolic extract in rat astrocyte culture against the toxicity caused by the NO donor (S-nitroso-Nacetyl-penicillamine, SNAP), thus preventing DNA damage [2]. Janani et al. [104] reported the neuroprotective effect of the herb against aluminum triggered oxidative stress in the rat brain hippocampus. The free radical scavenging activity of the plant's methanolic extract provided protection against DNA damage in non-immortalized fibroblasts human [115].
## (s13) Anti-Cancer/Cytotoxic Properties
Number of References: 6

(p13.0) The ethanolic extract of B. monnieri contains bacoside A and B, betulinic acid, brahmine, and cucurbitacins, among which cucurbitacins have strong anti-tumorigenic and anti-proliferative activity by inducing cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase and formation of multiplied cells. Mallick et al. [116] reported the cytotoxic activity of ethanolic extract of dichloromethane (DCM) fraction of B. monnieri on two different cell lines such as MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231 due to the presence of cucuebitacins and betulinic acid in DCM fraction. B. monnieri extracts induces cell death by apoptosis in murine sarcoma-180 cell culture [98]. Two new dammarane glycosides, the 20-deoxy derivatives of pseudojujubogenin along with eight novel compounds were isolated and tested them for cytotoxic, antileishmanial, anti-inflammatory, antimalarial activities. Some of these compounds demonstrated mild to moderate activity against non-cancerous kidney cell lines [117]. In addition, compared to bacoside B fraction, bacoside A fraction and its individual components were found to be more active [118]. B. monnieri shows curative and protective effects on gastric ulcers due to its improved mucosal activity in brine shrimp lethality assay (an assay that is predictive of potential anticancer activity) [119,120].
