# The prognostic role of steroid hormone receptor signaling pathways in urothelial carcinoma Review Articles on Urothelial Carcinoma

CorpusID: 214755285 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19913a0a859b183cdf9c0ac1061048fad2f425e7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19913a0a859b183cdf9c0ac1061048fad2f425e7)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) PR
Number of References: 7

(p4.0) A case-control study demonstrated a significantly lowered risk of developing bladder cancer in multiparous women or those using oral contraceptives (56). Using a transgenic model for bladder cancer, multiparous female mice were also found to develop significantly smaller tumors than nulliparous females (57). These findings suggested that not only estrogens but also progestogens could prevent urothelial tumorigenesis.

(p4.1) Using hormone-binding assay, PR was shown to be positive in 1 of 3 non-invasive and 3 of 3 advanced urothelial tumors (58). An immunohistochemical study then detected immunoreactivity for PR in 18 of 20 bladder tissues from boys aged 1-12 years (59). However, subsequent larger immunohistochemical studies failed to detect PR signals in 198 (22) and 410 (23) cases of bladder cancer. Another study, using 120 cases of surgical specimens, showed PR expression in 2% of non-neoplastic bladders and 4% of bladder cancer tissues (12). More recently, we demonstrated that PR was positive in 13% of control urothelial tissues from the UUT and 16 (16%) of 99 UUT tumors (15). Although the levels of PR expression were not significantly altered in lowgrade versus high-grade or NMI versus MI UUT tumors in our study, PR positivity in pT3-4 tumors was associated with a significantly higher risk of disease-specific mortality. Moreover, patients with ERα-positive and/or PR-positive pT3-4 UUT tumor had a significantly higher risk of disease-specific mortality, and positivity of either ERα or PR, or both was an independent prognosticator (HR=2.434; P=0.037) in this subgroup of patients. In support of our data (15), the status of ERα and PR expression in MI bladder cancers was shown to help stratifying a subgroup of patients into those with significantly poorer outcomes (39).
