# Local feature extraction based facial emotion recognition: A survey

CorpusID: 218799814 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/baabdf4f6a27d7ab9107eac4ba4a883eb386e14b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/baabdf4f6a27d7ab9107eac4ba4a883eb386e14b)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s3) EVALUATED STATE-OF-THE-ART LBP VARIANTS
Number of References: 5

(p3.0) The pioneering LBP work [4] and its success in numerous computer vision problems and applications has inspired the development of great number of new powerful LBP variants. LBP descriptor is adaptable to suit in many different applications requirements. Indeed, after Ojala's work, e.g., Heikkila et al [8], several modifications and extensions of LBP have been developed with the aim to increase its robustness and discriminative power. These extensions and modifications of LBP, developed usually in conjunction with their intended applications (see Table 1), focus on several aspects of the LBP method such as, Quantization to multiple level via thresholding; sampeling local feature vectors and pixel patterns with some neighborhood topology; combining multiple complementary features within LBP-like and with non-LBP descriptors for both images and videos and finally, regrouping and merging patterns to increase distinctiveness. There are several researches reported in the literature that are devoted to surveying LBP and its variants. One can cite: (a) Hadid et al. [42] reviewed 13 LBP variants and provided a comparative analysis on two different problems which are gender and texture classification. (b) The work of Fernandez et al. [43] attempted to build a general framework for texture examination that the authors refer to as histograms of equivalent patterns (HEP). A set of 38 LBP variants and non LBP strategies are executed and experimentally assessed on eleven texture datasets. (c) Huang et al. [44] displayed a survey of LBP variants in the application region of facial image processing.
