# diagnostics Mucinous Cancer of the Ovary: Overview and Current Status

CorpusID: 210870359 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cdea50a9d4d6e6b6adc9288079e2fde0eb4e333c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cdea50a9d4d6e6b6adc9288079e2fde0eb4e333c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Background
Number of References: 6

(p0.0) Ovarian cancer is the second most common gynecological malignancy, but the most lethal [1]. Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the most common histological type. EOC is classified, based on molecular and clinic-pathologic differences, into Type 1 tumors, which include low-grade serous carcinoma, endometrioid carcinoma, clear cell carcinoma, and mucinous ovarian carcinoma (MOC), and Type 2 tumors, which include high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) [2,3]. While HGSC is the most frequent histological subtype, mucinous carcinoma of the ovary is sporadic. MOC was believed to constitute around 12% of ovarian malignancies. However, recent estimations show the true incidence to be at around 3% [4,5]. The two main reasons for this drop in incidence are the identification criteria, which separate benign mucinous tumors from invasive mucinous carcinoma, and better recognition of clinical and pathological features to differentiate between primary mucinous carcinoma and metastatic carcinoma of the ovary [6].
## (s6) Genomic Profile
Number of References: 8

(p6.0) Advancement in pathology and molecular data has allowed for consideration of MOC as a separate entity from other EOC subtypes. Cheasley et al. recently reported a comprehensive analysis of the MOC genetic profile in comparison to many histological types and proved that MOC is a genetically-unique entity [30]. Table 2 compares the frequency of molecular mutations in MOC, HGSC, and mucinous and non-mucinous CRC [6,11]. KRAS mutation is the most frequent molecular alteration in MOCs, with 46% having this mutation. While TP53 mutation is typically associated with HGSC, about 25% of MOCs harbor this alteration as well. The amplification of HER2 is also observed in 18% of MOCs. Moreover, high microsatellite instability (MSI-H) has been reported in MOCs [31]. Aberrant signaling in the wingless (WTN) pathway in the form of a mutation in CTNNB1 or APC gene has also been documented. It is believed that the KRAS mutation develops as a first event, as the mutation is detected in the surrounding borderline and benign lesions, and HER2 amplification or TP53 mutation occurs at a later stage during malignant transformation, as this is observed exclusively in carcinomas [6,11,12]. To explore the molecular alterations in MOC, Friedlander et al. extensively evaluated the molecular profile of 304 cases of MOCs to investigate potential therapeutic targets. Alterations in MAP kinase pathway were the most common (49% mutations in KRAS and 3.5% in BRAF). mTOR pathway alterations were less likely (PIK3CA in 12% and PTEN in 6%). cMET overexpression was observed in 33% of cases, but no cMET gene amplification was seen. p53 mutation was documented in 37% of cases and EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor) gene amplification was seen in 50%. HER2 gene amplification was found in 11% of cases. PD-1 positivity was detected in tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in 43% of cases and PD-L1 was positive in 14% cases [32]. At the molecular level, MOC is a heterogeneous disease and its molecular landscape still poorly understood.
## (s9) Magnetic Resonance Images (MRI)
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) A computed tomography (CT) scan is an essential part of evaluating the possibility of carcinoma. It aids in identifying the primary carcinoma and in evaluating the extent of disease. An MRI may provide additional information to differentiate primary MOC from metastatic mucinous carcinoma [38]. In MRI, an MOC tumor appears as a multilocular cystic lesion containing a solid part of intermediate intensity on T2-weighted MR images, hyperintense on diffusion-weighted images, and, with a type-3 enhancement curve, earlier enhancement relative to the myometrial curve. Extra-ovarian spread indicates malignancy [39].
## (s15) Appendectomy
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) Appendectomy has been recommended in all mucinous ovarian tumors. Lin et al. performed a retrospective analysis to assess the role of appendectomy in the surgical management of mucinous ovarian tumors. They concluded that the appendix should not be removed unless it is grossly abnormal, as there was no abnormal pathology found in the normal-appearing appendix [52]. A retrospective chart review by A. Cheng et al. assessed 164 patients based on the necessity of an appendectomy in MOC. Among 44 patients with MOC who had an appendectomy, there were 5 unusual looking appendixes with abnormal pathology and one normal-appearing appendix with microscopic involvement by primary MOC. They therefore recommended that careful intraoperative inspection of the appendix is mandatory, but a normal-looking appendix should not be routinely removed [53].
## (s16) Fertility Sparing Staging (FSS)
Number of References: 5

(p16.0) MOC is the most prevalent epithelial carcinoma among women of reproductive age [8] with 80% of all MOC presenting as stage I [10]. FSS is frequently addressed during the management of such pathology. Gouy et al. looked at the outcome of stage I MOC after FSS, according to histological subtype (expansile and infiltrative). They retrospectively evaluated 21 patients, 12 expansile and 9 infiltrative subtypes. The histological subtype did not influence the oncological outcome. They concluded that FSS is safe for stage I MOC with an excellent prognosis but should not be offered for stage IC3 and beyond [55]. However, Rodriguez et al. reported a worse survival with more relapses with the infiltrative subtype when they evaluated 26 patients with MOC [56]. Bentivegna et al. reported the long-term outcome of over 500 EOC patients treated with FFS. The most common subtype was MOC, with 280 patients. The recurrence rate was 6.8%. The majority recurred as extra-ovarian disease with it being lethal in 63% of patients [57]. It is debatable whether the recurrence was because of preserving the ovary or because of the nature of the disease. The role of FSS should therefore be adequately discussed in these patients.
## (s24) EGFR Monoclonal Antibodies
Number of References: 4

(p24.0) Cetuximab use results in enhanced response rate and duration of response in the first-line treatment of metastatic CRC in patients where there is EGFR expression and where the tumor is KRAS wild-type [90]. The results of cetuximab on ovarian cancer as a single therapy or in combination with the standard chemotherapy were disappointing [91,92]. However, these phase II trials included all EOC subtypes without specification of KRAS status. Sato et al., in a preclinical study, reported that cetuximab was only able to employ anti-proliferative activity in MOC cell lines, which did not have KRAS mutations [93]. Hence, the value of anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody therapy may be limited to KRAS wild-type cases. Further data is required on the effectiveness of cetuximab on KRAS wild-type MOC.
## (s25) Anti-HER2 Therapy
Number of References: 4

(p25.0) Anti-HER2 therapy has been proven to be successful in managing HER2-amplified breast cancer [94]. Trastuzumab, a HER2 monoclonal antibody, showed benefits to OS in HER2-positive gastric carcinoma [95]. McAlpine et al. reported the anecdotal efficacy of trastuzumab in combination with chemotherapy in 2 out of 3 patients with MOC who had HER2 amplification [96]. Jain et al. published a single case of successful treatment of progressive HER2-positive MOC with trastuzumab and lapatinib [97]. Nevertheless, more data on anti-HER2 therapy in HER2-amplified MOC is needed.
