# Drug-induced Acute Angle-closure Glaucoma: A Review

CorpusID: 214099556 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed6c11dc43346a2f98e978aaa75302c9aeab901d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed6c11dc43346a2f98e978aaa75302c9aeab901d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Beta 2 -adrenergic Agonists
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) Beta 2 -adrenergic agonists (e.g., albuterol and salbutamol) are most commonly used for the treatment of asthma because of their bronchodilatory effects. Salbutamol is often nebulized or aerosolized for optimal delivery through the respiratory tract. However, nebulized medications have been reported to inadvertently enter the unprotected eye and exert its effects. 10,11 When stimulated, β 2 -receptors induce ciliary muscle relaxation, mydriasis, and increased aqueous humor production from ciliary epithelium. Despite the increase in aqueous humor production, salbutamol also increases uveoscleral outflow to an overall net effect of lowered IOP. 12 Ultimately, Coakes' work suggests that exposure to β 2 -agonist alone will not cause an increase in IOP nor trigger AACG. However, there is a report of exposure to nebulized albuterol alone that triggered mydriasis and subsequent AACG. 10 This patient was successfully treated with Nd:YAG LPI, prednisolone acetate, brimonidine tartrate, and acetazolamide (Table 1).
## (s6) Sulfonamides (Topiramate)
Number of References: 11

(p6.0) Sulfonamides are a class of medications defined by a particular sulfur-based functional group found in the drug's molecule. Sulfa drugs were initially used for their antifolic properties as an antibacterial agent. Since then, medicinal chemists have discovered a wide variety of clinical uses for the sulfonyl functional group including antidiuretics, anticonvulsants, diabetes medications, and many more. 35 With sulfa drugs permeating through every specialty of medicine, general physicians and ophthalmologists have the difficult task of remaining vigilant when scanning patients' medication lists for AACG triggers. Sulfa-based medications implicated in AACG include topiramate and less commonly acetazolamide, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, zonisamide, chlorthalidone, and hydrochlorothiazide. [36][37][38][39] Topiramate, commonly prescribed for seizures and migraines, is classically associated with AACG 32 (Table 1). Angle closure typically occurs within 2 weeks of starting topiramate, but reports have ranged between 1 days and 262 days. 31 The proposed mechanism is ciliary detachment and ciliary body edema, which causes relaxation of the zonules and thickening of the lens. As the lens enlarges, the lens-iris diaphragm is displaced anteriorly, and the anterior chamber becomes more shallow and increasingly susceptible to angle closure. These anatomical changes have been confirmed with ultrasonography and UBM. 40 It is important to emphasize that obstruction is not a result of pupillary block, but rather due to anterior rotation of the lens-iris diaphragm resulting in a closed angle.

(p6.1) Treatment for topiramate-induced AACG is immediate discontinuation of medication, cycloplegia, topical corticosteroids, and mannitol. 41 By paralyzing and relaxing the ciliary body, the tension on the zonules is increased and the lens-iris diaphragm is pulled posteriorly. 36 Ultimately, this increases the ciliary body diameter, deepens the anterior chamber, and allows the angle to reopen for aqueous drainage. Notably, the mechanism of topiramate-induced AACG does not involve pupillary blocktherefore, peripheral iridectomy and cholinergic agents (e.g., pilocarpine) will not ameliorate angle closure. In addition, cholinergic agents may actually worsen the angle closure by inducing further anterior rotation of the lens-iris diaphragm and exacerbate preexisting intraocular inflammation. 31,32 It is important to note that in clinical encounters, a history of topiramate use may not be elicited or reliable, and that LPI should be performed when topical medications fail to break the angle closure. In other words, the pupillary block mechanism should always be ruled out first by performing LPI.
## (s7) Serotonergic Medications
Number of References: 17

(p7.0) Serotonin [5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)] receptors are found throughout the central nervous system, blood vessels, gastrointestinal tract, and the eye. Serotonergic medications are used to treat depression, obsessive compulsive disorder, and many other psychiatric disorders. Common serotonergic drug classes include selective serotonergic reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRI), monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, and triptans. 5-HT 1A and 5-HT 7 receptors are found on the ciliary body, choroid, trabecular meshwork, and iris sphincter muscle. 42 Stimulation of the 5-HT 7 receptors causes relaxation of the iris sphincter muscles, mydriasis, and increased production of aqueous humor. In addition to 5-HT receptor activity, SNRIs also affect adrenergic and dopaminergic receptors-causing mydriasis and increased aqueous humor production, respectively 42 (Table 1).

(p7.1) In a large study conducted in Taiwan, researchers found a 5.80-fold increase in risk of AACG in patients taking SSRIs daily. 43 They found that patients who were older, female, and taking a daily SSRI dose greater than 20 mg were also at increased risk of AACG. Numerous reports of AACG occurring with SNRIs (e.g., venlafaxine and duloxetine) have been documented. 44,45 The mechanism of AACG in most SNRI-induced cases is attributed to mydriasis and closure of the iridocorneal angle-which resolves with peripheral iridotomy. Other medications with serotonergic properties (e.g., triptans and aripiprazole) have also been reported to cause AACG via this aforementioned mechanism. 46,47 However, like topiramateinduced AACG, not all serotonergic-induced AACG can be treated with pilocarpine and peripheral iridotomies. Selective serotonergic reuptake inhibitors and SNRIs (e.g., escitalopram and venlafaxine, respectively) have been reported to cause uveal effusions, which results in anterior rotation of the lens-iris diaphragm and obstruction of the iridocorneal angle. 48 In these cases, miotic agents and iridotomies are not effective-instead, offending drugs should be discontinued and patient should be treated with corticosteroids, topical aqueous suppressants, and cycloplegia. 36,48 Supplements Supplements have been used to complement or replace conventional medical treatments in many common illnesses. Glaucoma is no exception; supplements have been used with the intention of reducing IOP or improving ocular blood flow. Some studies have shown that flavonoids and gingko biloba extract improve ocular blood flow and forskolin significantly reduces IOP. 49,50 However, not all supplements are beneficial or even benign. Consuming supplemental oxidants (e.g., iron and calcium) above a certain threshold is associated with glaucoma. 51 Some studies have found high levels of caffeine consumption to be associated with increased IOP in susceptible patients. 52 Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) is a nutritional supplement that is commonly found in detox products (e.g., cortex and basic detox nutrients). Methylsulfonylmethane is used as an antiinflammatory, antioxidative, and anti-histamine medication. 53 There is a report of AACG associated with MSM use as a detox supplement. 54 Methylsulfonylmethane has a sulfonyl moiety that is similar to that found on other sulfa-based drugs (e.g., topiramate and hydrochlorothiazide). Like topiramate-induced AACG, MSMinduced AACG is due to uveal effusion and anterior rotation of the lens-iris diaphragm 54 (Table 1). Similarly, treatment with peripheral iridotomy and miotic agents is likely to be ineffective and can worsen the situation.
