# Short-Term Traffic Flow Prediction Methods: A Survey

CorpusID: 218782998 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8fdf652e9f7a0a1c952f9dd89504447c04b08fc6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8fdf652e9f7a0a1c952f9dd89504447c04b08fc6)

Fields: Mathematics, Engineering, Computer Science, Physics

## (s3) 2.2RNN based model
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) Wang, Xiangxue et al. [14] proposed an urban road network traffic forecast framework that would mainly include two modules using data-driven approach. A collection of data processing algorithms are included in the first module. The second section deals with the short-term multi-stage projection. The time series is first split into a variety of averages, with clear understanding of traffic patterns and randomness. Once two time series have been recovered, template learning and avoidance based on a neuronal long-term memory recuperation network (LSTM-RNN). Yang, Bailin et al. [15] suggested an enhanced method that links the significantly long series of times to the current time stage with the high-impact quality and the attention mechanism collects these high-impact traffic flow values. We simultaneously smooth certain information beyond the standard range in order to obtain better results. The experimental results demonstrate that in short-term traffic flow forecasts the proposed prediction model is certainly competitive.
## (s4) 2.3Sparse Autoencoder (SAE) model
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) Jin, Yinli et al. [26] presented a new combination of the model and method of dropout with a deep learning stacked self-encoder (SAE). The role and pattern in the data is modeled and the output date is not linear. The greedy layering approach is also used to optimize that layer's parameters and to achieve ISCME 2019 Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1486 (2020) 052018 IOP Publishing doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1486/5/052018 5 the best prevention performance, the network is done. The short-term traffic forecasting approach for deep learning was proposed by Zhao, Xinran et al. [27]. A nominee has been chosen for the traffic information from the Second Ring Road, Beijing, China, and microwave detectors. A stacked auto encoder neural network (SAE-DNN) model is deployed to forecast short-term traffic conditions.
