# molecules Molecular Crystallization Inhibitors for Salt Damage Control in Porous Materials: An Overview

CorpusID: 216108980 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb56f511333097a74d3b07c7a8623dd1a970887a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb56f511333097a74d3b07c7a8623dd1a970887a)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s21) Microscale Experiments
Number of References: 2

(p21.0) The aim of the microscale experiments was to study and determine the microscopic characteristics of salt crystallization and growth in both non-porous and porous media. These tests allow the researchers to assess (a) crystallization from a solution droplet at different relative humidity Figure 9. A schematic diagram of the NMR setup used for droplet drying experiments (right) and for the brick drying experiments (left) [106]. Reproduced with permission from [106]. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.
## (s26) Numerical Modeling
Number of References: 3

(p26.0) As mentioned above, the numerical simulation of different crystal growth processes at the micro scale, without considering the influence of the salt modifiers has been successfully implemented in the past. However, practically no reports are available in the literature, which deals with modeling salt crystallization phenomena in the presence of crystallization modifiers. More specifically, Kelnar et al. [122] developed a diffusion-advection model for salt solution transport, which considered both water movement due to the moisture gradient and diffusion and dispersion effects within the liquid phase due to the concentration gradient. Salt crystallization in the porous medium was modeled using an equilibrium model, taking into account the effect of crystallization inhibition. The computational simulations of three parameters, i.e., moisture diffusivity, salt ions' diffusion coefficient, and moisture transfer coefficient, were realized using the so-called Galerkin finite element method. These three parameters were experimentally determined by carrying out a drying experiment of limestone samples saturated by sodium chloride (NaCl) solutions both with and without sodium ferrocyanide (Na 4 Fe(CN) 6 ·10H 2 O; NaFe(CN)) inhibitor (0.001M). The drying experiments were performed using a NMR set-up developed by Gupta et al. [106] (see Section 4.1). In this apparatus, moisture and free chloride concentration profiles were measured every two hours. Kelnar et al. [122] demonstrated that in the process of drying of limestone saturated with NaCl solution, both water and salt ion (chloride) transport was slowed down by the presence of the inhibitor. This was ascribed to an increase of the viscosity of the salt solution and/or decrease of the interface tension in the pore walls. Nevertheless, the authors stated that this hypothesis needed to be verified by further experimental work.
