# An Overview of the Latest Progress and Core Challenge of Autonomous Vehicle Technologies

CorpusID: 213932272 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd8b18b76f9ee69d0ba5f4a1e15e7dbc70c93b2a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd8b18b76f9ee69d0ba5f4a1e15e7dbc70c93b2a)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s3) Automotive radar
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) Radar is an electronic device that detects targets by electromagnetic wave. It can be divided into narrow band and wide band by bandwidth and the larger offers higher range resolution. 24 GHz and 77 GHz are two dominant bands: the former is for short and medium range detection of 5-70m and the latter is mainly for medium and long range detection of 100-250m. With the improvement of accuracy requirements of automotive radar system, 77 GHz with ultra-high frequency band will become the mainstream. Radar can also be divided into short-range radar (SRR), medium-range radar (MRR) and long-range radar (LRR) by covered area. SRR has higher range resolution and wider field of view (FoV ±65°~± 80°), which is used for collision avoidance and object detection, and its typical applications include blind spot surveillance, parking assist and ACC support. MRR (typical FoV ±40°~±50°) is used for LCA; LRR has high gain and narrow beam for long detection range and accurate direction measurement, with smaller FoV around ±10º and more range resolution tolerance, which is mainly used for ACC, FCW, and AEB [3][4]. Key radar sensor manufacturers in the world include Bosch, Delphi, Continental, Denso, Valeo, ZF-TRW, etc. Freescale, Infineon, ST, Texas Instruments and ADI are the key chip suppliers. Automotive radar has the following technology development trends in order to satisfy the autonomous driving requirements of high range resolution, high angular resolution, high distance /speed/angle accuracy, long detection range, wide opening angle, high ASIL, low power consumption, low cost and small size. (1) Moving to higher frequency (77~81 GHz): Highresolution millimeter-wave radar that operates in the 79 GHz band is expected to replace 24 GHz SRR completely in the future, with combination of high transmit power and high bandwidth allowing for simultaneous long range and high range resolution, smaller antenna size for a given bandwidth, better angular resolution, and smaller sensors reducing volume/weight related costs. (2) Chip technology roadmap: GaAs has high output power, high gain, very low noise, good linearity, but low integration level. SiGe has an adequate performance at mmWave bands, size and performance advantages, high temperature tolerance. CMOS is cheaper, allowing for higher levels of integration, lower power consumption. It is expected that chips will develop along the route from GaAs to SiGe and then to CMOS. (3) Bistatic over monostatic: Bistatic Radars have higher transmitter output power, better noise performance, and improved conversion gain of the receiver. (4) Multi-mode sensors: Multimode sensors usually support both MRR and LRR configurations in one sensor module, thus providing a significant cost reduction to automakers.
