# molecules Toxicity Effects of Functionalized Quantum Dots, Gold and Polystyrene Nanoparticles on Target Aquatic Biological Models: A Review

CorpusID: 21687885 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0440b9cf7408f67b8c476bbbf3c1f73f971961dd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0440b9cf7408f67b8c476bbbf3c1f73f971961dd)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology, Chemistry

## (s3) Gold Nanoparticles (AuNPs)
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) AuNPs have received great attention because of their unique characteristics that make them suitable for a series of application in the biomedical field such as diagnostics and therapeutics [36], drug delivery and cancer treatment [37]. This increased use has led to a diffusion of AuNPs into the environment, which represents a hazard for aquatic ecosystems. Cytotoxic effects of AuNPs were identified in several mammalian cell lines, and different toxic effects have been reported and correlated to size, shape and coating but also to cell lines or murine models used [38,39]. The results are conflicting and some reports suggest that in vivo and in vitro effects are not comparable. In fact, some authors state that AuNPs are toxic to certain organisms, while others that they are not toxic to the same organisms [40,41]. Thus, it is important to investigate the ecotoxicity of AuNPs both in their functionalized and non-functionalized forms using toxicity tests to provide a background for ecotoxicological hazard assessment. Functionalized AuNPs have attracted attention for imaging, diagnosis and delivery of antibacterial drugs because NPs not only protect the drug from the external environment, but will also concentrate it at the desired infection site with doses higher than those reachable with the administration of free molecules. AuNPs can be easily functionalized with a great variety of AMPs with an improvement of their activity and a decrease of environmental toxicity.
## (s9) Xenopus laevis
Number of References: 7

(p9.0) Exposing living organisms to NPs is potentially hazardous especially during embryogenesis thus this endpoint deserves full attention [104]. X. laevis is a consolidated biological model used for embryotoxicity studies associated to bioimaging [105].

(p9.1) Uncoated PSNPs of 48 nm administered during early stages of larval development of X. laevis, using either contact exposure or microinjections, are lethal depending on concentration, and affect embryonic development showing toxic/teratogenic effects. These effects may be due either to the amount of NPs that penetrate into the cells and/or the "corona" effect caused by the interaction of PSNPs with cytoplasm components [105]. Symens et al. [106] using the Xenopus nuclear envelope re-assembly assay, found that the nuclear enclosure of NPs were dependent on size and charge of the polystyrene beads. Stylianou and Skourides [107] assessed relatively long-term effects of NIR pulses on embryonic development through the tadpole stage. They developed parameters for near infrared (NIR) pulses that did not affect embryonic viability or morphology and delivered QDs as effectively as manual injection. Higher intensities of NIR pulses caused permanent damage to the targeted cells, and thus NIR pulses may also prove useful for ablation of specific cells within tissues. They are the first to report the use of NIR QD's to image mesoderm migration in vivo with single cell resolution and provide quantitative in vivo data regarding migration rates.

(p9.2) Mogi et al. [108], injected quantum dot nanocrystals and polystyrene beads in X. laevis embryos to study the development of larval brain ventricles and the patterns of cerebrospinal flow via an imaging assay. X. laevis embryos raised in Frog Embryo Teratogenesis Assay (FETAX)-Xenopus containing QDs or gH625-QDs showed that NPs localized in gills, lung and intestine with different distributions, indicating that the uptake of gH625-QDs was enhanced; the functionalized QDs had a significantly lower toxic effect on embryos' survival and phenotypes [101].
