# A Review on Electrical Characteristics of Nanofluid based Transformer Oil

CorpusID: 210758736 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/10d37f048840e32d344c3b40ee65b6700035b6b3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/10d37f048840e32d344c3b40ee65b6700035b6b3)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering

## (s5) DC Breakdown Strength
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) The dielectric strength of TiO 2 dispersed transformer oil under high voltage DC is examined by 23 . The addition of semiconductive nanoparticles can improve 28% value of negative DC breakdown strength. However, the positive DC breakdown voltage was lower than the host oil. Table 3 shows the obtained values during the investigations carried out by them 23 .

(p5.1) In 24 have observed that the dispersed semiconducting NPs can provide the augmentation to the insulation strength under DC voltage due to its trapping and de-trapping nature. The augmentation of dc dielectric strength of nanofluid was 1.27 times more than the host oil. Figure 13 shows the results of investigation conducted by researchers for the influence of dispersing Fe 3 O 4 nanoparticles as a function of gap length 25 . The formation of bubbles due to localized heating and the injection of field-emitted electrons with and without magnetic field can reduce DC breakdown voltage at 2% concentration. Figure 14 represents the influence of nanoparticle's volume fraction on DC breakdown voltage strength of vegetable oil based nanofluid examined by 52 . Due to the polarization of the nanoparticles under applied DC field, the electrons produced by the ionization will trapped by the formulated electrical charge around the surface of NPs and thus helps in reducing the probability of ionization to prevent the breakdown.   To investigate the DC dielectric strength 59 have prepared the fluid by dispersing the single type and multiple type nanoparticles in transformer oil. They noticed that the breakdown strength is decreasing when the Fe 2 NiO 4 nanoparticle is dispersed along with CdS in transformer oil. Increase in nanoparticles concentration would result in reducing the separation between two particles and increase the chance of agglomeration. These clusters lead to distort the electric field extensively and additionally reduce the electron trap surface.
