# micromachines State-of-the-Art and Perspectives on Silicon Waveguide Crossings: A Review

CorpusID: 214785108 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/52f5cc3cd91d174f39786cbe192b168663c5a750](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/52f5cc3cd91d174f39786cbe192b168663c5a750)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Physics

## (s1) The Key Technologies of Silicon Waveguide Crossing
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) Silicon waveguide usually consists of a 2 µm silica lower cladding, 220 nm silicon core and silica upper cladding on the 200 mm (8 inch) wafers, as shown in Figure 1a. It is fabricated by the deep ultraviolet (DUV) lithography and this technique can provide fast and reliable patterns. The refractive indexes of silicon and silica are 3.45 and 1.44, respectively, at 1550 nm, and the high refractive index contrast between the core and cladding results in strong optical confinement and ultra-small bending radius for fundamental modes [21]. The dimension of silicon core fulfills the optical single-mode condition and the experimental propagation losses of the fundamental mode are 2.4 ± 0.2 and 0.59 ± 0.32 dB/cm for transverse-electric (TE) and transverse-magnetic (TM) modes, respectively [22,23]. For the low refractive index contrast structure, such as optical fiber, direct waveguide crossings are just a minor perturbation of the straight waveguide [24]. However, side effects of the direct waveguide crossings cannot be ignored in the SOI platform for the beam is dramatically diffracted in the silicon intersection region, as shown in Figure 1b. suddenly disappears and the optical power begins to scatter in all directions, resulting in severe effects of insertion loss, crosstalk and back-reflection. This section is organized to introduce several silicon waveguide crossing designs and explains their principles for improving the crossing performance. 
## (s2) Shaped Taper Method
Number of References: 6

(p2.0) Shaped taper waveguide crossing is to tailor the width of the silicon channel towards the center region, which decreases the diffraction effects by avoiding the shape mutation between the channel waveguide and crossing region. Shaped taper design includes different mathematic types, such as linear taper, parabolic taper, exponential taper and Gaussian taper [26]. With the shaped taper structure, the guided modes are expanded and the wide-angle spatial components are reduced, since the widths of waveguides are smoothly getting larger [27]. The diffraction side effects can be greatly controlled when the optical modes have fewer wide-angle spatial components.

(p2.1) The elliptical taper profile is used to get a narrow angular spectrum of the expanded mode, as shown in Figure 2a. The insertion loss and crosstalk of the device are <0.1 and <−30 dB with a footprint of 7.2 × 1.5 μm 2 , respectively [18]. For the nonadiabatic taper, the higher-order leaky optical modes will be excited and a sizable fraction of the power will be radiated away in the core region. The adiabatic taper can smoothly expand the guided modes, while the large taper footprint is not preferred for highly integrated PICs. As a result, a trade-off between its optical performance and footprint needs to be carefully considered. The double etching scheme consists of the high-contrast photonic wires in the upper level and the shadow-etched parabolic tapers in the lower level, as shown in Figure 2b. The confinement of the high refractive index contrast is maintained in the upper part and the lower parabolic expanded tapers play a role to adjust the optical phase fronts. The double DUV etching scheme waveguide crossing can greatly shrink the footprint to 6 × 6 μm 2 and the insertion loss and crosstalk are 0.16 and −40 dB, respectively [28]. However, the additional DUV stepper lithography increases the fabrication complexity and cost of the dual-etching device are much higher than that of the conventional single DUV etching process, which are the main limitations of this kind of waveguide crossing design. Different from the assumed mathematical taper profile with only a few parameters to be determined, a numerical optimization method has more degrees of freedom by separating the entire taper into many spaced segments with different widths, as shown in Figure 2c. The shaped taper can be formed by connecting all the segments with the spline function and the optimization process is implemented to minimize the insertion loss and crosstalk by tuning the widths of all the segments with the help of advanced algorithms. The insertion loss and crosstalk are <0.2 and <−40 dB, respectively. The footprint is 6 × 6 μm 2 for the silicon waveguide crossing designed by genetic algorithm (GA) [29]. For particle swarm optimization algorithm (PSO) assisted silicon waveguide crossing design, the insertion loss and crosstalk are −0.0278 ± 0.0092 and <−37 dB, These phenomena can be approximately explained by the mode-conversion relationship between ray angle of the light and horn angle of the waveguide [25], as shown in Figure 1c. The silicon waveguide allows a total internal reflection of over 60 • incidence angle due to the large refractive index contrast, while the horn angle jumps abruptly to 90 • at intersection region for the direct waveguide crossing design. Huge mismatch between the projection angle and horn angle cannot maintain a smooth power transition. The large portions of light are excited into leaky higher-order modes and propagate into the vertical waveguides at the core region, resulting in the side effects of crosstalk and large insertion loss. From another point of view, the light is kept well confined in the silicon waveguide channel due to high refractive index difference before entering the "dangerous" core section. Once entering the intersection region, the horizontal silica cladding suddenly disappears and the optical power begins to scatter in all directions, resulting in severe effects of insertion loss, crosstalk and back-reflection. This section is organized to introduce several silicon waveguide crossing designs and explains their principles for improving the crossing performance.
## (s3) Shaped Taper Method
Number of References: 11

(p3.0) Shaped taper waveguide crossing is to tailor the width of the silicon channel towards the center region, which decreases the diffraction effects by avoiding the shape mutation between the channel waveguide and crossing region. Shaped taper design includes different mathematic types, such as linear taper, parabolic taper, exponential taper and Gaussian taper [26]. With the shaped taper structure, the guided modes are expanded and the wide-angle spatial components are reduced, since the widths of waveguides are smoothly getting larger [27]. The diffraction side effects can be greatly controlled when the optical modes have fewer wide-angle spatial components.

(p3.1) The elliptical taper profile is used to get a narrow angular spectrum of the expanded mode, as shown in Figure 2a. The insertion loss and crosstalk of the device are <0.1 and <−30 dB with a footprint of 7.2 × 1.5 µm 2 , respectively [18]. For the nonadiabatic taper, the higher-order leaky optical modes will be excited and a sizable fraction of the power will be radiated away in the core region. The adiabatic taper can smoothly expand the guided modes, while the large taper footprint is not preferred for highly integrated PICs. As a result, a trade-off between its optical performance and footprint needs to be carefully considered. The double etching scheme consists of the high-contrast photonic wires in the upper level and the shadow-etched parabolic tapers in the lower level, as shown in Figure 2b. The confinement of the high refractive index contrast is maintained in the upper part and the lower parabolic expanded tapers play a role to adjust the optical phase fronts. The double DUV etching scheme waveguide crossing can greatly shrink the footprint to 6 × 6 µm 2 and the insertion loss and crosstalk are 0.16 and −40 dB, respectively [28]. However, the additional DUV stepper lithography increases the fabrication complexity and cost of the dual-etching device are much higher than that of the conventional single DUV etching process, which are the main limitations of this kind of waveguide crossing design. Different from the assumed mathematical taper profile with only a few parameters to be determined, a numerical optimization method has more degrees of freedom by separating the entire taper into many spaced segments with different widths, as shown in Figure 2c. The shaped taper can be formed by connecting all the segments with the spline function and the optimization process is implemented to minimize the insertion loss and crosstalk by tuning the widths of all the segments with the help of advanced algorithms. The insertion loss and crosstalk are <0.2 and <−40 dB, respectively. The footprint is 6 × 6 µm 2 for the silicon waveguide crossing designed by genetic algorithm (GA) [29]. For particle swarm optimization algorithm (PSO) assisted silicon waveguide crossing design, the insertion loss and crosstalk are −0.0278 ± 0.0092 and <−37 dB, respectively. The device has a footprint of 9 × 9 µm 2 [30]. However, DUV steppers are not designed for high resolution purposes and the performance begins to degrade for small designs. The small numerical optimized shaped taper can be fabricated with single etch process, while the fabrication tolerance is small since the performance is sensitive to the device geometry. The design performance varies greatly in terms of the fabrication errors in DUV technology and this is the main drawback for this crossing design. For the conventional silicon waveguide crossing, the crossing angle is 90 • and the device is consisted of two perpendicular arms. Researchers find that the crosstalk can be improved by more than 10 dB without degrading transmission losses where the crossing angle is set to be 60 • for the direct waveguide crossing. For the double-etched waveguide crossing, the crosstalk can be reduced by 3.7 dB without degrading transmission losses by titling waveguide crossing angle to be 60 • [31], as shown in Figure 2d. The offset crossing with a small angle of 20 • is also proposed and proves to be beneficial for further reducing the crosstalk [32]. respectively. The device has a footprint of 9 × 9 μm 2 [30]. However, DUV steppers are not designed for high resolution purposes and the performance begins to degrade for small designs. The small numerical optimized shaped taper can be fabricated with single etch process, while the fabrication tolerance is small since the performance is sensitive to the device geometry. The design performance varies greatly in terms of the fabrication errors in DUV technology and this is the main drawback for this crossing design. For the conventional silicon waveguide crossing, the crossing angle is 90° and the device is consisted of two perpendicular arms. Researchers find that the crosstalk can be improved by more than 10 dB without degrading transmission losses where the crossing angle is set to be 60° for the direct waveguide crossing. For the double-etched waveguide crossing, the crosstalk can be reduced by 3.7 dB without degrading transmission losses by titling waveguide crossing angle to be 60° [31], as shown in Figure 2d. The offset crossing with a small angle of 20° is also proposed and proves to be beneficial for further reducing the crosstalk [32]. 
## (s5) Multimode Interference Method
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) The structure of the multimode interference (MMI) device is such that single-mode waveguide connects to both sides of a multimode waveguide, and there exists the self-imaging phenomena that an input signal pattern is replicated, at periodic intervals, once or multiple times along the direction of propagation along the waveguide [33]. If the light is launched at the center position of the waveguide, only the even symmetric modes will be excited and a symmetric field profile is obtained by the linear combinations of the even modes [34]. For the symmetric field interference, the light from the single-mode waveguide firstly diverges in the first half and focus at the middle-central position where the replicated optical spot size from the single-mode waveguide is much smaller than the MMI waveguide cross-section. Then the light diverges in the next half of the MMI section and recouples to the single-mode waveguide. The self-imaging property in the MMI structure proves to be robust where the lateral confinement is relieved in the silica waveguide crossing design, which is quite suitable for the waveguide crossing design [35].
## (s12) The Future Trends of Silicon Waveguide Crossing
Number of References: 3

(p12.0) As there is an increasing demand for ultra-high capacity optical interconnects, different silicon-based multiplexing technologies have been investigated to achieve a high-data rate [69,70]. Polarization-division-multiplexing (PDM) and mode-division-multiplexing (MDM) technologies are becoming hot research topics, because they make it possible to increase the optical link capacity by introducing dual polarization states as well as several mode states in the optical channel [71]. Polarization dependent loss (PDL) and the mode dependent loss (MDL) become additional FOMs for the silicon waveguide crossing design. Polarization and mode insensitive silicon waveguide crossings are the future trends and have great potential to be employed in the dense photonic integrated systems. Table 2 summarizes the FOMs of silicon waveguide crossing designs with multiplexing technologies and detailed characteristics will be discussed in the following paragraphs. Table 2.
## (s15) Polarization-Division-Multiplexing Technology
Number of References: 5

(p15.0) TE mode is general used in silicon channel application due to its ultra-small bending radius as small as 2.5 µm, while a few tens of micrometers are needed for TM-like mode [86]. Polarization splitters and rotators (PSRs) are used in the polarization diversity systems [87][88][89]. For the previously proposed waveguide crossing designs, they are more focused on TE-like mode while TM-like mode has not attracted much attention. It is intuitive that PDM technology with dual polarizations is capable of doubling the link capacity in silicon waveguide, since optical polarization states can be intrinsically divided into two perpendicular polarization states, TE and TM polarizations [90]. However, the high structural birefringence of SOI platform introduces a large effective refractive index gap and an imbalanced performance of TE and TM polarizations in the previous proposed silicon waveguide crossing designs.
