# Pedodontist's Role in Managing Speech Impairments Due to Structural Imperfections and Oral Habits: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 218948888 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/650bb74063b6f7b601c5860395ec9dd0624e6746](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/650bb74063b6f7b601c5860395ec9dd0624e6746)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Cleft Lip and Palate
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) Speech development in cleft lip and palate patients is deviated, 14 which is definitely anatomical based resulting from intraoral structural insufficiency. Such speech is characterized by deviant and restricted sound development, lack of labial (/p/, /b/) and lingual (/t/, /d/, /k/, /g/) plosives, and dominance of glottal and pharyngeal articulations. 15 Voice is shaped in the mouth and oropharynx as the adequate velopharyngeal sphincter separates oral and nasal cavities. Hypernasality is mainly due to excessive resonance in nasal cavity which is due to velopharyngeal incompetency. The other conditions that result in hypernasality are fistulae and residual palatal cleft. 16 Hypernasality due to these conditions can be corrected by occluding palatal fistula which increases intraoral pressure causing improved velopharyngeal movement. 17 The consonants that depend on nasal resonances are /m/, /n/, /ng/ which are affected in conditions such as inadequate nasal airways, deviated nasal septum, and enlarged adenoids producing hyponasal tone.
## (s5) Tongue-tie (Ankyloglossia)
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) It is an inherent defect of tongue which is characterized by hindered movement of the tip of the tongue 19 due to thick fibrous membrane (lingual frenum) which runs from the underside of the tongue to the floor of the mouth. 20 There is no evidence that tongue-tie causing prevention or delay in the onset of speech. 21 Pronunciation of "/t/,/d/,/n/" requires the use of the tonguetip contacting the palate but can be managed by the body of the tongue. "/l/,/s/,/z/" needs tip to be pointed upward but can also be pronounced pointing the tip downward. Commonly affected sounds are the one containing "/r/". 19 By adapting the oral movements, most of the children having the problem of tongue-tie successfully pronounce the above sounds.
## (s9) Early Childhood Caries
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) The stomatognathic system is affected by ECC which performs the functions such as breathing, sucking, chewing, and phonoarticulation. All these functions are related to the integrity of dental arch. The early loss of incisors due to ECC may lead to the development of harmful oral habits and altered speech development. 33 It also compromises the child's quality life, as the early loss of teeth affects Esthetics, nutrition, speech development, dental arch integrity, and development and eruption of permanent successor teeth and contributes to the establishment of deleterious oral habits. 34 The strategies of myofunctional therapy are isotonic exercises for mobility of the tongue and cheek, isometric exercises to tone cheek, and awareness of the correct chewing pattern.
