# Graph-based Ontology Summarization: A Survey

CorpusID: 21693765 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d66d9b9b8d5f1f7e396aef1e67d19da383f6e275](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d66d9b9b8d5f1f7e396aef1e67d19da383f6e275)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) An ontology provides an explicit specification of a vocabulary for a shared domain [7]. Terms in that vocabulary are mainly classes and properties denoting concepts and their relationships in the domain, respectively, forming a conceptualization of the world that we wish to represent for some purpose. In an ontology, the interpretation and use of terms are constrained by formal axioms. As ontologies can help people and organizations reach consensus on conceptualizations, they have found wide application in knowledge management, information integration, data access, etc. In particular, they play an important role in the recent explosive growth of Semantic Web deployment, where an ontology is frequently used as the schema of a knowledge base.
## (s3) Class Graph
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) In order to directly represent semantic relations between classes, Wu et al. [21] presented a graph model where nodes represent classes and directed arcs represent binary relations between classes, which we call a class graph. Figure 2 illustrates a class graph for the ontology in Fig. 1. Note that some axioms (e.g., owl:Restriction) are not covered by this graph representation. As to the relations between classes, if we only allow rdfs:subClassOf, the resulting graph will be a class hierarchy representing subsumption relations, as considered in [12]. More generally, a relation can also be a property defined in the ontology, connecting from its domain (which is a class) to its range (also a class).
## (s5) Vocabulary Dependency Graph
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Based on RDF sentences, Zhang et al. [24] propose vocabulary dependency graph, where nodes represent terms, and edges connect terms that co-occur in an RDF sentence. Co-occurrence in an RDF sentence indicates dependency between terms. Figure 4 illustrates a vocabulary dependence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1, derived from Fig. 3. Compared with the class graph in Fig. 2, this new graph covers more terms (e.g., properties), though the edges are unlabeled. Essentially, in a vocabulary dependence graph, each axiom (represented by an RDF sentence) as a complex relation over multiple terms is decomposed into multiple binary relations.
## (s6) Term-Sentence Graph
Number of References: 6

(p6.0) Zhang et al. [22] present a bipartite graph model, where terms and RDF sentences are both represented by nodes, which we call a term-sentence graph. A directed arc connects an RDF sentence to a term if the term is described in that RDF sentence. Figure 5 illustrates a term-sentence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1, derived from Fig. 3. Zhang et al. [22] differentiate between three types of arcs, depending on the structural role of term in RDF sentence, which we will 

(p6.1) not elaborate. The model is simplified in [4], where edges are undirected and unlabeled.
## (s16) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) An ontology provides an explicit specification of a vocabulary for a shared domain [7]. Terms in that vocabulary are mainly classes and properties denoting concepts and their relationships in the domain, respectively, forming a conceptualization of the world that we wish to represent for some purpose. In an ontology, the interpretation and use of terms are constrained by formal axioms. As ontologies can help people and organizations reach consensus on conceptualizations, they have found wide application in knowledge management, information integration, data access, etc. In particular, they play an important role in the recent explosive growth of Semantic Web deployment, where an ontology is frequently used as the schema of a knowledge base.
## (s19) Class Graph
Number of References: 4

(p19.0) In order to directly represent semantic relations between classes, Wu et al. [21] presented a graph model where nodes represent classes and directed arcs represent binary relations between classes, which we call a class graph. Figure 2 illustrates a class graph for the ontology in Fig. 1. Note that some axioms (e.g., owl:Restriction) are not covered by this graph representation. As to the relations between classes, if we only allow rdfs:subClassOf, the resulting graph will be a class hierarchy representing subsumption relations, as considered in [12]. More generally, a relation can also be a property defined in the ontology, connecting from its domain (which is a class) to its range (also a class).
## (s21) Vocabulary Dependency Graph
Number of References: 2

(p21.0) Based on RDF sentences, Zhang et al. [24] propose vocabulary dependency graph, where nodes represent terms, and edges connect terms that co-occur in an RDF sentence. Co-occurrence in an RDF sentence indicates dependency between terms. Figure 4 illustrates a vocabulary dependence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1, derived from Fig. 3. Compared with the class graph in Fig. 2, this new graph covers more terms (e.g., properties), though the edges are unlabeled. Essentially, in a vocabulary dependence graph, each axiom (represented by an RDF sentence) as a complex relation over multiple terms is decomposed into multiple binary relations.
## (s22) Term-Sentence Graph
Number of References: 6

(p22.0) Zhang et al. [22] present a bipartite graph model, where terms and RDF sentences are both represented by nodes, which we call a term-sentence graph. A directed arc connects an RDF sentence to a term if the term is described in that RDF sentence. Figure 5 illustrates a term-sentence graph for the ontology in Fig. 1, derived from Fig. 3. Zhang et al. [22] differentiate between three types of arcs, depending on the structural role of term in RDF sentence, which we will 

(p22.1) not elaborate. The model is simplified in [4], where edges are undirected and unlabeled.
