# Cholesterol Oxidation Products (COPs) in Ruminant Meat: A Biological and Pathological Approach: A Review

CorpusID: 213662227 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b799e4249cc4a8b17e80d539f1deeb6a901b34b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b799e4249cc4a8b17e80d539f1deeb6a901b34b)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Biology

## (s8) Illumination
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) Various COPs are formed through the oxidation of cholesterol during illumination, and their quantity increases with an increased illumination time. In addition, COPs are more concentrated at the surface of the meat than throughout the rest of it during illumination. The COPs produced include free radicals formed by triplet sensitizer-reducing substrate interaction (Hwang and Maerker, 1993). Hwang and Maerker (1993) have reported that the irradiation of raw beef and veal at ten kGy increased the COP content, and the increase in COPs in those meats during storage was greater in the irradiated meat than the non-irradiated meat. The same results have been reported for other meat species Lee et al., 2001).
## (s10) Lipid content and composition
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) The composition and content of fats in meat play an important role in the oxidation rates of lipids and cholesterol . As a general rule, the more unsaturated a fatty acid is, the faster and more intense the formation of COPs is (Vicente et al., 2012). For example, Li et al. (1996) and Min et al. (2015) have reported that a high level of PUFAs leads to increased production of COPs. In addition, the synergistic decrease in the levels of cholesterol, and PUFAs provides evidence that cholesterol oxidation is promoted by the oxidation of PUFAs.
## (s12) metAbolIsm o F coPs
Number of References: 10

(p12.0) Cholesterol oxidation products (COPs), or oxysterols, tend to be more polar than cholesterol and can be absorbed in the human intestinal tract and distributed to tissues by a mechanism similar to that of cholesterol absorption. The absorption of COPs is lower than that of cholesterol, likely due to the lower solubility of COPs in micelles, the lower susceptibility to esterification in enterocytes, and the cytotoxic effects in mucosal cells (Osada et al., 1994). In addition, each type of COP is absorbed to different degrees; 7β-OHCh, 7-keto, and 5α, 6α-epoxycholesterol are detected in greater amounts than 5β, 6β-epoxycholesterol, and 25-OHCh (Vine et al., 1998). Notably, in contrast to 7β-OHCh, 7-keto is slightly absorbed and rapidly metabolized by the liver (Schweizer et al., 2004).

(p12.1) Oxysterols are able to pass through lipophilic membranes much faster than cholesterol (Linseisen and Wolfram, 1998). They can enter the blood circulation with dietary cholesterol and biliary cholesterol (endogenous cholesterol) as part of the chylomicron structure (Savage et al., 2002;Shazamawati et al., 2013) and lipoprotein, primarily low density lipoprotein (LDL) and, to a lesser degree, high density lipoprotein (HDL) (Staprans et al., 2003). 7α/β-OHCh and 7-keto are the most abundant oxysterols in lipoproteins (Linseisen and Wolfram, 1998;Vine et al., 1998). Recent studies have shown that unesterified cholesterol oxides associate readily with serum albumin (Lin and Morel, 1995).
## (s18) Oxysterols as developmental process regulators
Number of References: 4

(p18.0) The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is indispensable for normal patterning of multicellular embryos and also functions in postembryonic development and adult tissue homeostasis, including the regulation of stem cell physiology (Jacob and Lum, 2007). Corcoran and Scott (2006) have ROR, retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor; Bcl-2, B-cell lymphoma 2; IgA, immunoglobulin A; CNS, central nervous system. reported evidence that cholesterol or certain oxysterols are required for Sonic Hh pathway signal transduction and proliferation of medulloblastoma cells. Additionally, Dwyer et al., (2007) have demonstrated that naturally occurring oxysterols exert osteoinductive effects through the activation of the Hh signaling pathway. Similarly, Kim et al. (2007) have provided evidence that the inhibition of bone marrow stromal cell differentiation into adipocytes by 20(S)-OHCh occurs through an Hh-dependent mechanism.
## (s20) Oxysterols as pro-apoptotic and cytotoxic factors
Number of References: 3

(p20.0) Apoptosis is genetically programmed cell death that has been conserved throughout evolution and used to maintain normal cell numbers in the organism, including during growth. It is a coordinated and active process characterized by specific morphological changes: chromatin condensation and nuclear fragmentation, membrane blebbing, and apoptotic body formation. Apoptosis is triggered through both an extrinsic, or death-receptor-mediated, pathway and an intrinsic, or mitochondrial, pathway. Both pathways appear to be activated by a variety of biologically relevant oxysterols that exert strong pro-apoptotic effects. Some findings support the involvement of death receptors in oxysterolinduced apoptosis. 27-OHCh and 22-OHCh induce tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) in macrophagic cells (Gargiulo et al., 2015), and upregulation of TNF receptors has been observed in human aortic smooth muscle cells after challenged with 7-keto (Lee et al., 2005). With respect to cytotoxic activities, several routes have been proposed for COPs: perturbation of intracellular calcium levels, intracellular ROS overproduction, mitochondrial and lysosomal membrane modifications, and polyamine metabolic perturbations (Sottero et al., 2009).
## (s24) Oxysterol and cancer
Number of References: 4

(p24.0) The 27-OHCh oxysterol is the most abundant oxysterol in plasma, and its involvement has been demonstrated in the pathogenesis of several cancers, including breast and prostate cancer. For example, in breast cancer, oxysterols are important navigators that stimulate bone metastasis formation (Silva et al., 2006). 27-OHCh has been found to accumulate in breast tissue and stimulate tumor growth via the oestrogen receptor. Although most tissues express CYP27A1, its highest levels are in macrophages. Therefore, more attention has been given to the production of 27-OHCh in subendothelial macrophages as part of reverse cholesterol transport (Javitt, 2015).

(p24.1) In men, 27-OHCh may influence prostate carcinoma by stimulating the proliferation of prostatic cells, enhancing the expression of prostate-specific antigen, and increasing androgen receptor transcriptional activity (Raza et al., 2016). However, its role in colorectal cancer has not been investigated. Warns et al. (2018) treated Caco2 and SW620, two well-characterized colon cancer cells, with low, physiological, and high concentrations of 27-OHCh, and found that 27-OHCh reduced cellular proliferation in these cells.
