# Blockchain Consensus Algorithms: A Survey

CorpusID: 211066631 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/330ed3413bd1ae096a5171271f246bf3abf72e8e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/330ed3413bd1ae096a5171271f246bf3abf72e8e)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s2) BACKGROUND: DISTRIBUTED CONSENSUS
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) Consensus mechanisms in distributed systems have been a well studied research problem for nearly three decades. Such mechanisms enable consensus to be achieved regarding a shared state/data among a set of distributed nodes. The need for a shared state originated the notion of replicated database systems in order to ensure resilience against node failures within a network. Such database systems ensure that data is not lost when one or more nodes fail to function in an excepted fashion. The notion of the replicated database can be generalised with the concept of State Machine Replication (SMR) [11]. The core idea behind SMR is that a computing machine can be expressed as a deterministic state machine. The machine accepts an input message, performs its predefined computation, and might produce an output/response. These actions essentially change its state. SMR conceptualises that such a state machine, with an initial state, can be replicated among different nodes. If it can be ensured that all the participating nodes receive the same set of input messages in the exact same order (the phenomenon known as atomic broadcast), then each node would be able to evolve the states of its state machine individually in exactly the same fashion. This can guarantee consistency and availability regarding the state of the machine (as well as data it holds) among all (applicable) nodes even in the presence of node failures. Once this occurs, it can be said that a distributed consensus has emerged among the participating nodes. It is imperative that a protocol is defined to ensure timely dissemination and atomic broadcast of input messages among the nodes and, in many ways, dictates how a distributed consensus is achieved and maintained. Hence, such a protocol is aptly called a consensus protocol.
## (s17) Proof of Work (PoW)
Number of References: 2

(p17.0) A Proof of Work (PoW) mechanism involves two different parties (nodes): prover (requestor) and verifier (provider). The prover performs a resource-intensive computational task intending to achieve a goal and presents it to a verifier or a set of verifiers for validation that requires significantly less resource. The core idea is that the asymmetry, in terms of resource required, between the proof generation and validation acts intrinsically as a deterrent measure against any system abuse. Within this aim, the idea of PoW was first presented by Dwork and Naor in their seminal article in 1993 [33]. They put forward the idea of use PoW to combat email spamming. According to their proposal, an email sender would be required to solve a resource-intensive mathematical puzzle and attach the solution within the email as a proof that the task has been performed. The email receiver would accept an email only if the solution can be successfully verified.
## (s113) BACKGROUND: DISTRIBUTED CONSENSUS
Number of References: 2

(p113.0) Consensus mechanisms in distributed systems have been a well studied research problem for nearly three decades. Such mechanisms enable consensus to be achieved regarding a shared state/data among a set of distributed nodes. The need for a shared state originated the notion of replicated database systems in order to ensure resilience against node failures within a network. Such database systems ensure that data is not lost when one or more nodes fail to function in an excepted fashion. The notion of the replicated database can be generalised with the concept of State Machine Replication (SMR) [11]. The core idea behind SMR is that a computing machine can be expressed as a deterministic state machine. The machine accepts an input message, performs its predefined computation, and might produce an output/response. These actions essentially change its state. SMR conceptualises that such a state machine, with an initial state, can be replicated among different nodes. If it can be ensured that all the participating nodes receive the same set of input messages in the exact same order (the phenomenon known as atomic broadcast), then each node would be able to evolve the states of its state machine individually in exactly the same fashion. This can guarantee consistency and availability regarding the state of the machine (as well as data it holds) among all (applicable) nodes even in the presence of node failures. Once this occurs, it can be said that a distributed consensus has emerged among the participating nodes. It is imperative that a protocol is defined to ensure timely dissemination and atomic broadcast of input messages among the nodes and, in many ways, dictates how a distributed consensus is achieved and maintained. Hence, such a protocol is aptly called a consensus protocol.
## (s128) Proof of Work (PoW)
Number of References: 2

(p128.0) A Proof of Work (PoW) mechanism involves two different parties (nodes): prover (requestor) and verifier (provider). The prover performs a resource-intensive computational task intending to achieve a goal and presents it to a verifier or a set of verifiers for validation that requires significantly less resource. The core idea is that the asymmetry, in terms of resource required, between the proof generation and validation acts intrinsically as a deterrent measure against any system abuse. Within this aim, the idea of PoW was first presented by Dwork and Naor in their seminal article in 1993 [33]. They put forward the idea of use PoW to combat email spamming. According to their proposal, an email sender would be required to solve a resource-intensive mathematical puzzle and attach the solution within the email as a proof that the task has been performed. The email receiver would accept an email only if the solution can be successfully verified.
