# coatings Smart, Photocatalytic and Self-Cleaning Asphalt Mixtures: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 210632722 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b6187fe6e0f5bdc788630b23cb0882fa69963ca6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b6187fe6e0f5bdc788630b23cb0882fa69963ca6)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Chemistry, Engineering

## (s8) Testing, Results Analysis of Photocatalytic Asphalt Mixtures
Number of References: 14

(p8.0) In order to evaluate the photocatalytic ability, the literature presents gas degradation tests, such as NO x and VOCs, most of them according to the standards ISO 22197-1 and JIS TR Z 0018 [60,67,70], and tests of photocatalytic efficiency via the degradation of different organic dyes, such as methylene orange (MO) [61], methylene blue (MB) [6,67] and rhodamine B (RhB) [7,8], which use spectrophotometric techniques ( Figure 4). Both tests can be used to evaluate the photocatalytic gas degradation, considering both air depollution and dye degradation for self-cleaning applications. Nevertheless, both tests are clearly related as they are used for measuring the ability of pollutant photodegradation.

(p8.1) Regarding the first test, some gases have been used: some VOCs: HC [84], benzene, toluene, xylene and trimethylbenzene [59], SO 2 [9] and mainly NO, NO 2 or NO x [68,71,83]. Briefly, the gas flow with a controlled concentration passes into a chamber where the sample containing the semiconductor material resides inside and is subjected to light irradiation (Figure 4a). The gas concentration is monitored at the outlet of the system and the photocatalytic efficiency can be further evaluated. It is possible to control humidity, temperature, light irradiation (wavelength and power), gas flow rate and concentration, and other physical parameters.
## (s11) Photocatalytic Applications in Real Context or Small Road Sections
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Regarding the application in real scenario context or small test sections, some first approaches were performed ( Figure 6). Bocci et al. applied a bituminous emulsion containing TiO 2 and cement mortar made of sand, cement, additives, and TiO 2 sprayed over asphalt mixtures onto Highway A14 in Italy. The coatings were applied to the right and emergency lanes of the road and their performance was monitored for 527 days. The most important variables that contributed to the decrease in emulsion efficiency were the low temperatures and rainfall. Its efficiency has been reduced by about 80% in just 100 days. The authors concluded that, for tunnel applications, where weathering would be avoided, the best alternative should consist of the application of a bituminous emulsion, while, for the case of emergency lanes, the best option could fall on the use of cement mortar [73]. Moreover, Chen and Liu also applied a photocatalytic coating composed of TiO2 nanoparticles dispersed in silane on the asphalt mixture of Highway G11 from Tsitsihar to the Nehe River, China. They showed a photocatalytic efficiency from 6% to 12% under real scenery of outdoor road traffic [69].
