# Wilms tumor: a review of current surgical controversies

CorpusID: 214752918 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/116f6e6189c05c8dfefa7b928d3fefec20f7a5fd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/116f6e6189c05c8dfefa7b928d3fefec20f7a5fd)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Technical considerations
Number of References: 10

(p2.0) The most commonly performed NSS is partial nephrectomy (PN) (3,8), as this allows for resection of the tumor with a rim of normal tissue. Other options include wedge resection and enucleation (8) (see Figure 2). The traditional approach to PN is through a trans-abdominal incision (3,22), although a retroperitoneal approach has been described (23). The kidney should be fully mobilized on the vascular and ureteric pedicle, and then walled off from the peritoneum using large abdominal swabs (3) or by surrounding the kidney with sterile plastic (22). Vessel loops should be placed around the vascular pedicle to facilitate control in case of bleeding, even if the surgeon does not intend to clamp the vessels. A bloodless field is essential to safe surgery, and this can be achieved by simply placing bulldog or other vascular clamps on the hilar vessels. Many surgeons avoid clamping off the vascular pedicle entirely however, opting instead to occlude the pedicle with a finger (22), or to digitally compress the renal parenchyma proximal to the tumor (3). The administration of intravenous Mannitol 5-7 minutes prior to vascular occlusion may prevent ischemic renal damage by decreasing intracellular edema and intrarenal resistance (3,24). Simple clamping of the vessels allows the surgeon around 20-30 minutes of warm ischemic time in which to perform the resection, but cooling the kidney either with either surface ice slush or with continuous in situ cold perfusion allows for a longer time to work. Ex vivo 'back-bench' tumor resection with auto-transplantation is seldom used (3).
## (s3) Outcomes
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) Data on NSS in children with WT remains scarce, and most studies are retrospective cohorts and case series (22). From the SIOP WT 2001 study, 91/2,800 (3%) of patients underwent NSS for unilateral WT. Compared to the patients in the same study who underwent RN, there was no difference in the reported number of tumor capsule ruptures or lymph node ruptures. In the subgroup amongst these patients with a Stage III tumor, 87% of these were Stage III due to a positive margin. A quarter of these patients underwent conversion to RN, and another quarter had radiotherapy only. The 5-year OS and EFS were 100% and 94.9% respectively, which was not statistically different from the survival outcomes in the RN group when looking at the localized disease population only. There was a trend towards a higher number of surgical complications in the NSS group, but this did not achieve statistical significance (8).
## (s4) Minimally invasive surgery
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) Advances in technology and equipment have led to a drastic increase in the use of minimally invasive surgical (MIS) techniques across all surgical specialties, but the use of MIS in the treatment of WT is still an area of controversy and more clinical trials are needed to settle the question of its safety. Laparoscopic and robotic urologic surgery is often the technique of choice for radical nephrectomy in the adult population. Although lagging initially, the adoption of MIS in the pediatric urologic population has become increasingly common. Use of MIS for oncologic resection, however, remains low compared to non-oncologic indications. During a recent survey, only 13% of pediatric surgeons favored MIS approaches for WT, in contrast to 88% for appendectomy and 90% for fundoplication (27). Data from the National Cancer Database finds that 5% of surgeries for WT are performed using MIS (28).
## (s5) Benefits
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) The benefits of MIS in general are well documented. Optimal visualization allows for precise dissection. Smaller incisions and lower operative trauma allow for less pain, earlier post-operative feeding, shorter postoperative hospital stays and quicker return to regular activity (30). In patients with WT, laparoscopic surgery has been shown to have shorter hospital stay and less narcotic use compared to open techniques. The small Pfannenstiel incision generally employed during laparoscopic WT surgery has advantages over a large subcostal or transverse laparotomy incision in that it is cosmetically more acceptable and allows for more rapid post-operative recovery. Studies have shown that overall oncologic outcomes are similar (28), and risk of local recurrence following laparoscopic nephrectomy is as low as 3.8% (36), although this may be biased by the fact that patients undergoing MIS have tumors of lower stages.
## (s7) Lymph node sampling
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) Lymph node sampling at the time of tumor resection is critically important (21). Lymph node stage affects pathologic staging and directs adjuvant treatment. Due to the known discrepancy between clinical assessment and histologic findings, surgical harvest is essential, and sampling of ipsilateral nodes is the current standard of care. Presence of node positive disease within the abdomen advances pathologic staging to 3, while node positive extraabdominal findings upgrade to stage 4. Studies have shown that up to 41% of patients with stage 3 reach that diagnosis based on pathological lymph node positivity alone (38). LN density, which is the proportion of positive LNs relative to the total number of LNs evaluated, can also be used to predict OS, with a LN density of ≤0.38 being a positive predictor for 5-year survival (39). Figure 3 demonstrates the surgical bed around the IVC which in the process of being cleared of lymph nodes. The majority of children with WT undergo cross sectional imaging, most often with CT scan. The reported correlation of CT staging and pathologic staging varies from 38% to 75%. Recent arguments have centered around the lack of size criteria for nodal positivity in children. In adults, a lymph node of >1 cm on CT scan is interpreted as abnormally enlarged. Lubahn et al. have established that in children with WT, a diameter of 7mm or more is associated with node positivity with a negative predictive value of 89.0%, a sensitivity of 70.0% and a specificity of 57.1% (40). In those patients enrolled in the SIOP trials, it has been demonstrated that radiologic changes in tumor volume following preoperative chemotherapy do not indicate lymph node status (41).
## (s9) Contralateral exploration
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) With the availability of modern high-quality crosssectional imaging, contralateral renal exploration for patients undergoing surgery for unilateral WT is largely unnecessary. Historically, contralateral exploration was recommended when excretory urography was the only preoperative imaging modality. Now, with the advancement of CT scan and MRI, lesions measuring millimeters can be detected pre-operatively. Several studies have demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity (close to 100%) with these modalities, with no evidence of missed disease during contralateral exploration (49). Ritchey et al. found that routine contralateral exploration may yield a small number of occult lesions not identified on pre-operative imaging, but that omission of routine contralateral exploration is unlikely to affect the outcome of any children with newly diagnosed WT, as long as they underwent CT or MRI scan prior to surgery (50).
## (s10) Adrenal preservation
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) Little guidance is given regarding ipsilateral adrenalectomy in either the SIOP or the COG protocols. It is described historically as a standard step in RN for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and is supported by the finding of malignant involvement of the adrenal gland in both surgical and pathological specimens. In a retrospective chart review of two groups of WT patients-one group who underwent adrenalectomy and one group where the adrenal gland was preserved-Moore et al. (51) found that the adrenal gland showed malignant invasion in only 1/58 patients, and periadrenal fat involvement was noted in 3/58 patients. There was no statistically significant difference in retroperitoneal recurrence between the groups. Subsequently, these findings were confirmed by COG on review of the NWTS-4 and -5 cohorts (52). Where surgically feasible, it seems that adrenalectomy can be avoided during RN (21,52). radical nephrectomy for WT.
## (s11) Pulmonary metastasectomy
Number of References: 6

(p11.0) Approximately 10% of patients with WT present with pulmonary metastases (PM), but they still have good OS rates (53). Traditionally, lung nodules are treated with whole-lung radiation with good disease outcomes, but this is associated with a significant increase in the incidence of pulmonary disease in the long-term (54).

(p11.1) Historically, PM were diagnosed and followed on chest X-ray (CXR), but the introduction of CT scan allowed the diagnosis of lesions that were less 1cm in diameter, and which could not be seen on CXR (55). The new appreciation of these undiagnosed lesions brought with it the question of how these lesions should be addressed. As many as 26% of these lesions might prove to be benign on biopsy, and might not require treatment (56), but data also demonstrates that children with CT-only lesions are at higher risk for pulmonary relapse if these lesions are not treated (57). A report from COG on the NWTS-4 and -5 found that these patients had improved 5-year EFS if they received 3 chemotherapeutic drugs rather than 2, although the OS between the 3-and 2-drug subsets was the same. In these patients with CT-only nodules, there was no difference in EFS or OS whether or not they had lung radiation (55).
