# biomimetics Biomimetic Nanomembranes: An Overview

CorpusID: 219284372 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fdc711b2c07ea752f7c07b54aff26b080ef0f54](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fdc711b2c07ea752f7c07b54aff26b080ef0f54)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Chemistry, Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s8) Diamond
Number of References: 7

(p8.0) Freestanding sub-micrometer diamond membranes were reported in [63]; however, their smallest achieved thickness was 210 nm. To produce these diamond membranes, the authors used a double-implant process, followed by annealing, and finally wet etching. For many years, the reported thickness was a de facto standard for ultrathin diamond membranes [64][65][66]. However, Yoshikawa et al. succeeded in producing nanocrystalline diamond freestanding nanomembranes with the thickness values between 10 nm and 50 nm [67]. Many freestanding diamond membranes were used to fabricate 3D self-assembled forms using the methods of rolled-up nanotechnology [65]. The obtained forms included, among many others, tubes, nested tubes, rings, nested rings, nanoribbons, jagged nanoribbons, and various helical structures. Diamond nanomembranes were used for helical biomimetic structures with controllable properties in [66].
## (s13) Freestanding Inorganic Monomolecular Sheets
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) The prototype monomolecular materials are MXenes [40], defined as compounds consisting of carbides, nitrides or carbonitrides of early transition metals (Ti, Cr, Sc, V, Nb, Zr, Hf, No or Ta). Their atoms form 2D monolayer sheets that are interconnected into laminar structures such that the manner of obtaining the sheets is to exfoliate them by chemical etching. They can be described as electrically conductive clays. There is a large number of 2D materials that belong to MXenes, with a wide range of different properties, with the most frequently encountered one among them being titanium carbide [77]. Other 2D compound materials include gallium arsenide, transition-metal dichalcogenides, sulfides, selenides and tellurides of tungsten, niobium, molybdenum or tantalum, aluminum carbide, cadmium selenide, and many more.
## (s15) Interpenetrated Structures
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) Usually this term denotes structures made of polymers and reinforced or otherwise functionalized by inorganic nanofillers. As an example, in 2006 Vendamme et al. produced hybrid organic/inorganic nanomembranes using spin-coating. They fabricated freestanding, 35-nm-thick membranes with lateral dimensions of several centimeters consisting of polyacrylate interpenetrated with zirconia (ZrO 2 ) [51]. In 2007 the same research team fabricated another type of large interpenetrated organic/inorganic membranes, this time a few tens of nanometers thick, of elastomeric polyacrylate networks interpenetrated with silicon dioxide [78]. Polymer membranes to which reinforcing nano-building blocks were added could also be classified to this group, a prime example being nanomembranes reinforced with single-or multiple-walled carbon nanotubes (CNT.)
## (s31) Block Copolymer Self-Assembly
Number of References: 4

(p31.0) A copolymer is a polymer produced by simultaneous polymerization of two or more starting monomers. A block copolymer is a kind of copolymer in which there are two or more distinct kinds of blocks that consist of a single pure copolymer (homopolymer) produced from one monomer and are chemically different and even immiscible. These blocks are covalently bonded among themselves. Block copolymers in solution naturally tend to self-organize in various shapes. To date, more than 20 aggregate shapes have been recognized, including spherical micelles, lamellae, rods, tubules, onion-shaped forms, egg-shaped forms, tubules, etc. An excellent tutorial on block copolymer self-assembly has been published by Mai and Eisenberg [114]. Self-assembly of block copolymers has gained distinct popularity for fabricating complex dielectric nanostructures for optical, photonic crystal and metamaterial applications [29]. Its application in the fabrication of various types of freestanding nanomembrane has been extensive. One of the useful traits of block copolymer self-assembly is that it generates ordered patterns that can be useful for membrane functionalization, while at the same time producing the membrane and performing its functionalization. Examples include self-supported perforated polymer nanomembranes intended for protein separation [83] and UV-polymerized nanomembranes of phospholipid and copolymer fabricated by Langmuir-Blodgett method at the air-water interface [115].
## (s37) Functionalization
Number of References: 2

(p37.0) Similarly to their biological counterparts, the role of synthetic nanomembranes would be more or less purely mechanical and protective if there were no additional functionalities. Most of the roles performed by biological nanomembranes are due to built-in protein structures that ensure additional functions. A very similar situation is encountered in synthetic structures. The difference is that structures enabling biological functionalities are much more sophisticated than the artificial ones, but for the price that they resort to a much smaller toolbox, in the sense of chemical composition and the available choice of materials, operating temperature and humidity ranges and available functionalities. With artificial structures the methods are much more crude and imperfect, but the number of possible ways to perform functionalization is much larger, and the material choice is wider, as is the pure range of functionalities. The latter include many options and paths not encountered in nature. One is free to avoid the limitations of protein chemistry and reach for a much larger toolbox to incorporate in a biomimetic way many novel non-biological properties, including plasmonic, magnetic, electric and optical ones. In 2010, the authors published a review of possible approaches to multifunctionalization of nanomembranes [117]. Here we give just a brief overview of the methods and approaches, concentrating to the more recent findings published in the meantime and to the methods that were skipped in [117].
## (s78) Wearable Artificial Kidneys
Number of References: 4

(p78.0) The development of wearable artificial kidneys [221,222] is of great interest for patients with kidney failure (chronic kidney disease and end-stage renal disease). The need to keep the patients connected to large systems for dialysis for prolonged periods of time is disabling, drastically altering their life, the procedure is slow and painful, and abrupt changes in blood composition may cause a shock to the patient (the so-called dialysis washout), requiring at least hours to recover. On the other hand, prolonged periods between dialysis sessions may leave the patient with increased levels of toxins in blood. A wearable device for dialysis would ideally allow for continuous detoxification and at the same time permit the patient to be mobile while under treatment, thus drastically improving his/her quality of life. Most contemporary portable devices weigh somewhere between 3 and 30 kg [223]. Because of this, one of the key targets of contemporary microfluidics and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology is the development of wearable or even implantable kidneys through a decrease of their dimensions and an increase in efficiency [224].
## (s85) "Living" Plasmonics and Metamaterials
Number of References: 2

(p85.0) One promising direction of research is the integration of plasmonics with functionalized biomimetic membranes. The use of nanomembranes for plasmonics and metamaterials was considered in [27]. A further logical direction would be research into biomimetic plasmonics. Publications in this promising area are almost nonexistent. One of the rare papers in the field investigates sensors of tumor cells using surface plasmon resonance functionalized by artificial lipid bilayer membranes [238]. Even more scarce are publications on biomimetic metamaterials.
## (s88) Shape-Shifting Nanomembrane Bulges with Active External Control
Number of References: 4

(p88.0) The curvature and the overall profile of spatially sculpted nanomembranes could be externally controlled. It is known that several macroscopic properties of micro and nanosurfaces are influenced or even defined by their surface shapes-examples include self-cleaning and superhydrophobic behavior, actually a drop-repellent property (the lotus leaf effect) [239,240], and drop-pinning on hydrophobic surfaces (the rose petal effect) [241]. An active control of the surface microstructure could switch between these two modes of superhydrophobic behavior. Another property dictated by the shape of the surface details is adhesion, observed in some organisms ranging from simple bacteria to such sophisticated organisms as some frog species (e.g., Litoria caerulea), where the active control over the adhesive properties is obtained through the change of the surface shapes. A practical approach to control over the adhesion properties of membranes was considered in [242] for the case of thick elastic membranes. The actuation needed for the surface relief change was obtained through pneumatic mechanism.
