# INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH IN PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCES A Review on Halodule uninervis -A Potent Seagrass Production and Hosted by

CorpusID: 213215533 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/061ffd00d3ae3ff065e56fab609fa1a9e29ee5dd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/061ffd00d3ae3ff065e56fab609fa1a9e29ee5dd)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Biology

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) Nature is being stated to treat, protect and prevent many ailments. In the ancient medical system, naturally derived products have been an integral part. In India, there are many medicinal plants habituated are used as a treatment for various infectious diseases as well as to manage and cure the disorders. Not only the terrestrial plants were used as a medicine, the marine angiosperms also used as a remedy to treat fever, cardiac disease, malaria, cough, skin diseases, early stages of leprosy, and as a paste to treat wounds (Namadevan et al., 2017). Marine angiosperms are the hydrophytes that grows completely submerged saline environment. They are called as seagrass as they resemble the family Poaceae. As they grow and complete their life cycle in a stress environment, they were rich in Phyto protectants that are unique and novel. These phytocompounds are secondary metabolites that can act as an antibacterial, antioxidant and can act as ef icient nutraceuticals. There are a totally 14 species that are grown in southeast coastal regions of India in those predominantly seen are Thalasssiahemprichii, Cymodocea serrulata, Cymodocearotundata, Halodule uninervis, Syringodium isoetifolium, Halophila beccarii, Halophila ovalis and Halophila ovata. Each seagrass is unique in their photo components (Newmaster et al., 2011). This study elaborates the botanical features, morphology, phytocompounds and pharmacological aspects of Halodule uninervis. It is the main diet for dugongs and green turtles as it is rich in calorie and also their smaller leaf structure makes them to easily digest.
## (s12) Nutritional value
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) Halodule uninervis is mostly preferred food for sea dungeons. It is maybe due to needle-shaped leaves, which are easy to digest, or it is maybe due to its high calori ic value, which makes them store energy for the longest time. The complete phytochemical analysis of Halodule uninervis shows the presence of carbohydrate, protein, lipid, tannin and phenol, cardiac alkaloids, lavones, glucosides, saponins, palmitic acid, linoleic acid, phenylethanederivative, (S)-methoxy-(3-,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxyphenyl) ethanediol, 3,4,5-trihydroxy benzoic acid, (E)-3-(4-methoxyphenyl)-2-propenoic acid, syringin (7), 5-hydroxy-3-4 7-trimethoxy lavone, and 4'hydroxy-3',5,7-trimethoxy lavones (Kannan et al., 2010). The calori ic value of Halodule uninervis leaves is determined to be 40.15 kcal g-1 and its rhizomes to be 37.16 kcal g-1. There is a higher content of protein and carbohydrate in rhizomes than the leaves. This suggests that the seagrass Halodule uninervis stores its soluble carbohydrates and protein in the rhizomes and shoots and mobilized for plant growth (Dhawan et al., 1977).
