# sustainability Developing Students' Action Competence for a Sustainable Future: A Review of Educational Research

CorpusID: 214435034 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/60adbd6ec7de87a1f79818f7e0675b2d9c43de96](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/60adbd6ec7de87a1f79818f7e0675b2d9c43de96)

Fields: Environmental Science, Sociology, Education

## (s2) Inclusion Criteria
Number of References: 5

(p2.0) In the present study, SCOUPUS and Web of Science databases were selected to maintain the quality of our reviewed studies. The journal articles, citing the article of Jensen and Schnack [21], publishing from 1997 to 2017 were searched. To ensure the quality of this review effort, the selected articles must meet the following criteria: (1) published in peer-reviewed journals, (2) first-hand empirical studies, and (3) using action competence as the foundation for instructions in the educational context. Pertaining to the third criteria, first, the studies had to cite the publication of Jensen and Schnack [21] as the theoretical foundation of their research design. Second, the concept of action competence had to be delivered in the instructional content. In the initial search, a total of 324 studies from the two databases were found, of which 92 were duplicates. According to the PRISMA 2009 guideline [27], articles classified as conference paper, book chapter, editorial, and review were eliminated. Then, 170 articles fit the eligibility of this research endeavour and further evaluated twice to ensure they met the selection criteria of adopting action competence in their design of research. Two papers were not available. For not specific ones, participants in three studies were not clear while four papers did not elaborate the details of their instruction. Most of the papers belonged to the survey and the development of the model, theory, or tool. Although some of the papers were empirical studies, the research design did not target at the development of action competence. Finally, the selection of the systematic literature review included 34 articles in our data analysis. The inter-rater reliability was conducted by choosing one fifth of the articles for both authors to analyse individually. With constant comparisons, all discrepancies were discussed until agreements were achieved. Figure 1 showed the literature search and review process. overview of these articles. Then, the research design, pathway of intervention, instructional setting, and learning outcome were coded by authors independently as described above. The pathway of intervention comprised the subject matter domain and teaching topic. The instructional setting consisted of the educational level, duration of instruction, and learning context. Further, possible factors were inferred from political, social, and environmental aspects to explain the results we obtained [3]. 
## (s14) Educational Level
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) The categories of educational level include pre-school (year 4-6), elementary school (year 7-12), middle school (year 13-15), high school (year 16-18), and higher education (undergraduate/graduate). Additionally, research on teachers is also considered because teachers often acted as designers of the environmental program and facilitators of students' learning [30,43]. Pre-service and in-service teachers were included in our analysis of the educational level. Figure 3 shows the range of the educational level presented in each study. Some studies were conducted with participants of more than one educational level. One example in the study of Simovska and Jensen [33] aimed to foster students to make a difference on the topic of alcohol use. Students of four different countries discussed about the causes and effects of alcohol on the e-forum. Teachers created a learning environment for genuine participation of students where they acted as facilitators and supporters in developing action competence for students. In the later phase, students along with their teachers attended the WHO conference and presented their voices about alcohol consumption and the related problems. Students had opportunities to interact with experts and delegates from different countries to broaden their views concerning the issue. In this case, teachers empowered students to be active learners who are responsible for the decision of the action.
## (s17) Learning Context
Number of References: 3

(p17.0) According to the categorization of learning context [55], formal, informal, and non-formal education were sorted out. The judgement of the learning context was based on the research context or intervention program described by the researchers [56]. The majority of the studies were related to the formal learning context (76%), followed by informal (65%) and non-formal (12%) learning contexts, while some studies combined the formal and informal learning context (35%). After 2010, the non-formal learning context started to appear in the design of research. Only one study implemented in the non-formal learning context was conducted recently [53]. They adopted information and communication technology tools to assist community members to learn sustainability in non-formal context. These community stakeholders, including teachers, environmental authorities, and tourism providers, explored sustainability issues in the interactive web-site. Most of the participants demonstrated positive learning outcomes and obtained new perspectives toward the issues. In addition, they also carried out actions toward the community issue while individual actions dominated. The results suggested that non-formal education in the local community providing a new path for cultivating participants' transformative understanding of local issues and competence of action.
## (s20) Limitations
Number of References: 6

(p20.0) A limitation of this review is the definition between behaviour and action. Some researchers still consider behaviour equalling to action [3,63]. Taking this confusion into account, we discard those who do not cite the article of Jensen and Schnack [21] as the starting point of EE/ESD. Therefore, some studies might have been excluded from this review, which could limit our interpretations about differences between behaviour change and action competence.

(p20.1) Typically, articles reviewed are constrained by a publication bias [64]. While peer-reviewed journals prefer to publish positive outcomes rather than negative ones [3], the articles selected in this review tend to report significant effects more than non-significant effects as research outcomes. Some negative outcomes are ignored by researchers without further exploration [65].
