# Acupuncture therapy for Alzheimer's disease A protocol for an overview of systematic reviews of Multiple Systematic Reviews-2 (AMSTAR-2) tool, Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta Analyses Statement (PRISMA) checklist and Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system, respectively

CorpusID: 219171683 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c95728e1aa4322458b64581dbf9c89fb91e1deb4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c95728e1aa4322458b64581dbf9c89fb91e1deb4)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Types of outcomes.
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) (1) Mini-mental state examination (MMSE): MMSE was developed more than 4 decades ago. [1] MMSE is a simplified, scored form of the cognitive mental status examination. It is "mini", but the realm of cognitive is thorough. And it requires only a few minutes to administer, therefore it is practical to use routinely. [26] (2) Activities of daily living (ADL): ADL measurement method was proposed by Katz, which was developed to study results of treatment and prognosis in the elderly and chronically ill. It offers a means of making quantitative assessments. [27] The 6 basic activities in the ADL consist of eating, dressing, indoor mobility, bathing, using the toilet, and continence. [28] (3) Alzheimer's disease assessment scale-cognitive section (ADAS-cog): The ADAS is a rating instrument which was designed specifically to evaluate the severity of cognitive and noncognitive behavioral dysfunctions characteristic of persons with AD. [29] 3.1.5. Types of studies. We will include SR of randomized control trials (RCTs) which evaluate the effect and safety of acupuncture therapy for AD.
