# Survey Paper on Various Methods of Automating the Water System using Dust Sensor to Suppress the Dust in Mining Kavyashree M K

CorpusID: 219901113 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d98797bfe04c8a5261d4399bf3c61bda49896c32](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d98797bfe04c8a5261d4399bf3c61bda49896c32)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s1) International Journal of Engineering Research & Technology (IJERT)
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) ISSN: 2278-0181 http://www.ijert.org the primary stage, the raspberry pi3 board is made ready to start. It works on OS. Python is used to write the source code and this code is compiled and debugged onto the Raspberry pi system. Subsequently, a buzzer is employed to provoke the precautionary actions. At last, they conclude that using this system the user can monitor the work place from the control room. Since, wi-fi is used in the system, the data can be easily sent from one point another point. [2] This article portrays air and water splashing frameworks, planned at the KOMAG Institute of Mining Technology, utilized in long wall shearers, in road headers, at move purposes of transports and in roadways. The straightforward and lightweight structure of this air and water spraying system guarantees that the arrangements can be utilized anyplace that residue happens noticeable all round. The utilization of air and water spraying systems can decrease the concentration of dust by up to 80% and they add to a huge decrease of concentration of dust noticeable all around. A few results of tests concerning the viability of air and water spraying gadgets are introduced in this paper, also discussed the check trial of the author's solution for spraying spots. This system is proposed for regions in mine with noteworthy dust generation., where there is a requirement for clean air. The two medium spraying nozzles require only a little volume of water (somewhere in the range of 0.1 and 0.4 dm3/min) and a little volume of air (somewhere in the range of 50 and 150 dm3/min). During the longwall shearer activity, the convergence of absolute dust was decreased by 42%, and the centralization of respirable portion was decreased by 93%. The VIRGA and Bryza-1200 spraying gadgets, planned and designed for belt moving points, are additionally successful in dust control, surpassing over 70% of decrease in dust concentration. The BRYZA roadway dust defensive obstruction decreases concentration of dust by about half in the whole roadway cross section. The after effects of coal dust control meet the full desires of the mines. Adaptability and flexibility of the solutions discussed in this paper for dust control permits utilizing them in different regions, where a comparative issue of airborne dust may exist. [3] In this paper they have briefly discussed about an airmicrofluidic miniaturized wearable respirable dust monitor (WEARDM) and presented a plan, fabrication and experimental evaluation of each components used in WEARDM. WEARDM directly measures the respirable mass fraction of the dust in underground coal mines. To maintain or preserve uniform collection efficiency over the respirable particle dispersion, device uses a dual resonator gravimetric sensing approach. WEARDM is optimized for low flow rate which equalizes low power utilization and little form factor. The main components used in this system are (1) An elutriator used as an inlet to avoid large size particles entering and blocking the small channels, (2) A Virtual impactor also called as respirable fractionator is used for selecting the respirable fraction based on ISO convection, (3) RH preconditioner or dryer is utilized to eliminate water droplets and moisture so that to manage the effect of the environmental conditions, (4) Dual resonator mass sensor is used here for real time mass measurements, where larger particles or settled on a QCM (quartz crystal microbalance) using inertial impactor, and smaller particles are settled on MSR (mass sensor resonator) using thermophoresis force, and (5) a pump which is used to pull the air through the device. All the components mentioned were experimentally evaluated and the results showed that the device successfully operated as expected such as removing the large particles, separating respirable fraction, drying, and measuring the PM4 mass concentration very accurately. They also conclude that the device is suitable for personal PM exposure monitoring other than coal mine application because of the low flow rate of the WEARDM monitor which has many advantages like smaller size, low power requirements, and a long period battery life.
