# A literature review on reducing carbon emission from supply chain system: drivers, barriers, performance indicators, and practices

CorpusID: 212801017 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/918addf36bdea6a2c1b2dd293d02a8223c98b69e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/918addf36bdea6a2c1b2dd293d02a8223c98b69e)

Fields: Environmental Science, Business, Physics

## (s1) Literature Review
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) Tapia Granados and Spash [5] suggest that annual costs in emissions are highly correlated with economic growth. In California, the cap-and-trade scheme has been implemented since 2013, and it did not have a significant impact because the energy supply was minimal. When making decisions about cap-and-trade allowance allocations or carbon tax designs, policymakers should consider that industries may be concentrated and thus already limit output below socially optimal levels [6]. Carbon cap-and-trade regulation and green technology investment is an effective method of reducing carbon emissions however carbon cap-and-trade regulation and green technology investment is an effective method of reducing carbon emissions Bai, et al. [7].
## (s7) Practice
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) In the literature, this review found a variety of practices that had been submitted by previous researchers. Various policies from the government have a good impact on reducing gas emissions. These policies include renewables energy, carbon-pricing, low carbon development, and incentive mechanism policy. To produce the best output, these policies must be supported by all stakeholders. According to Tapia Granados and Spash [5], policies that have been made will run smoothly if balanced with the availability of renewable material and energy supply. Thus, the policy to reduce gas emissions will not succeed if it is not balanced with the supply of renewable energy. Renewables energy policies were only eligible for high-income countries [11]. Supporting technology is very important for the success of policy [12].
