# Citation: Rana SVS (2020) A Comprehensive Assessment of Hepatotoxicity Induced by Engineered Nanoparticles-A Review

CorpusID: 227183057 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0fe5bd47b65a52dd5459e19d81e780ce0efbc1b7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0fe5bd47b65a52dd5459e19d81e780ce0efbc1b7)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) It was during the meeting of American Physical Society (1959) when Richard. P. Feynman asked, "What would happen if we could arrange the atoms one by one the way we want them"? This meeting gave birth to the concept of nanotechnology. The word nano is linked to a Greek term "nanos" meaning dwarf. Today, nano is popular label in science, technology and medicine. During 1990-2000, new processes for the synthesis of nanoparticles (NPs) were developed. In subsequent years, health hazards posed by NPs were recognized. NPs have emerged as a new class of environmental pollutants that may affect atmosphere, terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Their prevalence in ecosystems can be harmful to human beings, animals, plants and aquatic species [1]. Furthermore, occupational exposure to NPs during their production, commercial and biomedical use may lead different health problems and safety issues [2].
## (s10) Titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TiO 2 NPs)
Number of References: 5

(p10.0) Titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TiO 2 NPs) are now widely used in food, cosmetics, agriculture, medical devices and building engineering related processes. Their effects on human health have recently been reviewed. Liver disorders caused by TiO 2 NP were reported to increase the level of serum trans-aminases, LPO and oxidative stress in Wistar rats treated with 300 mg/kg of TiO 2 NP for 14 days by gavage [83]. These researchers showed that glycyrrhizic acid (GA) protected the rats against hepatic injury caused by TiO 2 NP. In vitro and in vivo toxicity of TiO 2 NP enhanced under oxidative stress conditions. A study made on BRL-3A liver cells and in the liver of Sprague-Dawley (SD) rat suggested a synergy between oxidative stress and TiO 2 NP induced hepato-toxicity [84]. Further cell death ratio was significantly enhanced (up to 2.62 fold) in BRL-3A cells exposed to OS and TiO 2 NP. A comparative study on the hepatotoxicity of TiO 2 NPs and sodium oleate coated iron oxide nanoparticles (OC-Fe 3 O 4 NPs) was made in Wistar rat [85]. Based on results on redox defences, these researchers concluded that OC-Fe 3 O 4 NPs do affect redox results on serum transaminases and histopathological findings [70]. Coating of AuNPs with citrate and chitosan also affected the hepatotoxicity of AuNPs. Chitosan capped NPs were less toxic than citrate capped ones in Swiss mice. This observation was made by after analysing the inflammation related genes using RT-PCR [71].
## (s11) Platinum nanoparticles (PtNPs)
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) Platinum nanoparticles (PtNPs) are widely used in cosmetics, industry and diagnostics. On absorption, nanoplatinum can accumulate in soft tissues viz: liver, spleen, kidney, lungs and heart. A study from Poland recently reported that PtNPs can induce DNA damage and apoptosis in liver [72]. Dose dependent hepato and renotoxicity of PtNPs has also been demonstrated. NP of 1 nm diameter when administered with CCl 4 or cisplastin induced hepatotoxicity whereas those of 8 nm did not exaberate the toxicity in mice [73]. Toxic effects of subnanosized platinum particles (snPt) in mouse liver were also studied. Increased levels of inflammatory cytokines and histopathological changes in liver of mice were observed after intravenous administration of snPt at 15 mg/kg body weight. However, administration of nanosized platinum particles did not produce these abnormalities [74].
## (s13) Copper nanoparticles (CNPs)
Number of References: 5

(p13.0) Copper nanoparticles (CNPs) work as anti-biotic, anti-microbial and antifungal agents when added to plastic items and textiles. They are used in conductive inks and pastes as a substitute for expensive metals in electronic displays and transmissive conductive thin film applications. Toxicity of CNPs is not fully understood. However, available data show that CNPs at a high dose (200 mg/kg/d for 5 days) could induce overt hepatotoxicity in rats. An integrated metabolomic study revealed mitochondrial failure, enhanced ketogenesis, fatty acid β oxidation and glycolysis to contribute in its toxicity [96]. High dose(s) of CNPs could elevate serum enzymes, triglytcerides and bilirubin. Histopathological observations exhibited necrosis. Further, gene expression studies indicated that genes related to oxidoreductases, metabolism and signal transduction pathways were involved in the development of hepatotoxicity [97]. CNPs have been found to be toxic in fish also. A fresh water fish, Cyprinus carpio, when exposed to CNPs and CuO at 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5 mg/L showed higher values for malondialdehyde in the liver. It was concluded that LPO contributes in the hepatotoxicity of CNPs [98].

(p13.1) Amelioration of CNPs induced hepatotoxicity by extracts of green tea has also been reported [99]. Theses researchers concluded that green tea offered protection against hepatotoxicity of CNPs (20-30 nm) administered at a dose of 40 mg/kg/b w. Green tea improved the activity of liver enzymes, antioxidant status and suppressed DNA fragmentation and the expression of caspase-3 and Bax proteins. Another agent that offered protection against CNPs induced liver damage was α lipoic acid [100]. Status of LPO, NO, copper and apoptotic genes (c-myc and c-jun) improved in CNPs treated rats when co-adminstered with α lipoic acid. These results suggest that CNPs induce hepatotoxicity through oxidative stress in rat.
## (s18) Silicon nanoparticles
Number of References: 6

(p18.0) Silica nanoparticles are employed in several commercial, agriculture and medical applications. However, the information on their health effects remains elusive. A few studies are available on their effects on structure and function of liver. Size of silica nanoparticles seems to be a confounding factor in their toxicity. It was reported that silica particles having a diameter of 300 to 1000 nm elicited no adverse effects while SP-70 could induce liver injury at 30 mg/kg b.w. [104]. Repeated administration of SP-70 twice a week for four weeks at 10 mg/ kg b .w. caused hepatic fibrosis. Serum enzyme markers were also increased. Hasezaki, et al. also confirmed that SP-70 is potent hepato-toxin [105]. Silica nanoparticles (14 nm) were found to induce apoptosis in human liver (HepG 2 ) cells that was regulated by ROS through p53, bax/bcl-2 and caspase pathways. ROS scavenger, vitamin C modulated apoptotic markers [106].

(p18.1) There are reports suggesting that SiO 2 NPs (10-80) when administered to rats (nm) disturb tricarboxylic cycle and liver metabolism. It can induce oxidative stress and alter liver cell morphology (150 µg) for 90 days [107]. Another study supported these results through global metabolomic study on SiNPs treated human hepatoma cells (HepG 2 ) and ICR mice liver. This study concluded that glutathione metabolism and oxidative stress are amongst the principal causes of SiNP induced hepatotoxicity [108]. SiNPs influence CYP 450 both in rat and human hepatocytes [109]. In addition to apoptosis, SiNPs can induce pyroptosis through NLRP3 inflammasome activation which is caused by mesosporous sil- flammatory cytokines. Smaller CdSNPs induce greater hepatotoxicity than larger NPs. Earlier studies demonstrated TiO 2 NPs affect metabolic function of liver. IONPs were found to cause ER stress. Copper nanoparticles can cause mitochondrial failure. However, CeO 2 NPs offer protection against dimethylnitrosamine toxicity. Available reports indicate that redox imbalance is the principal cause of SiNP induced hepatotoxicity. Dendrimers do affect growth inhibition, mitochondrial function and induce apoptosis.
