# An overview of traffic congestion detection and classification techniques in VANET

CorpusID: 225040516 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9fc9fa09584c0876198aee1a16c8ddaea6a1749](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9fc9fa09584c0876198aee1a16c8ddaea6a1749)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s4) Fuzzy logic
Number of References: 9

(p4.0) Fuzzy logic is also a popular mechanism used in VANET. Besides been utilized in detecting traffic congestion as in COTEC [19], CARTIM [20], Rui et.al [21], and most recently Wang et.al [22] and TraD-VANET [23] it is also implemented in localization, clustering, beaconing dissemination, aggregation, and other processes in VANET [24][25][26][27]. The fuzzy mechanism detects traffic congestion based on vehicular speed and traffic density. The local traffic density is obtained through CAM messages of neighboring vehicles, which is further calculated with the number of neighboring vehicles, distance to the estimating vehicle, and the number of lanes on the road. These values are then used to classify the traffic congestion level through a fuzzy-based decision system.  
## (s5) Artificial neural network
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) Apart from using fuzzy logic mechanism, artificial neural network (ANN) which is a bio-inspired based system is also been developed to solve different complex problems and can be used efficiently to categorize the congestion states as applied in UCONDES [28], INCIDEnT [29] and ICARUS [30]. ANN is composed of several "neurons" or elementary processing units that are connected with each other in accordance with some assigned weights. Each "neuron" takes input from a source of information and produces output with the help of transfer function [31].

(p5.1) A Multi-Layer Perceptron ANN is used in [17] and [30] to detect traffic congestion in urban environment which is using the vehicle speed and neighboring vehicles density as input parameters for ANN to detect and classify the level of traffic congestion. Three layers are configured; (i) two neurons to represent speed and surrounding density at the input layer; (ii) four neutrons at a hidden layer that is able to learn and classify congestion levels; and (iii) an output layer neuron representing the classification of the level of congestion on the roads. Figure 1 illustrates a basic form of an ANN topology used in detecting, identifying and classifying traffic congestion as applied in several techniques such as UCONDES. 
## (s6) Classifiers
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) SCORPION (System with COoperative Routing to improve traffic cONdition) [32] and CHIMERA (Congestion avoidance through a traffIc classification MEchanism and a Re-routing Algorithm) [33] were developed in tandem in terms of years. Both mechanisms are based on a hybrid system in utilization of the RSU which offers traffic congestion detection, traffic congestion classification and route suggestion to avoid the congestion. Traffic detection applied for both mechanisms is similar to [7] and [8], using weighted graphs. Single-hop, long-range communication adapting 4G and LTE is used as a communication medium in transmitting information consisting of the vehicle"s ID, current position, route, and destination from vehicles to a central hub (RSU). Traffic congestion classification is fulfilled using K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) classifier; which will be briefly described in the following section.
## (s10) K-NN classifier
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) The K-NN is a simple machine learning algorithm that stores all available cases and classifies data or case based on a similarity context of the aggregated data. The classification is accomplished by a majority vote of the most common of the predominant class known among its k nearest neighbors. It is also characterized as a lazy algorithm, defined as having less ability and is labor intensive when dealing with large datasets [22,23]. The operation of this algorithm is based on comparing a newly received record with the training records and finding training records identical to it. All training records are stored in an n-dimensional space, and each record with n attributes represents a point in the n-dimensional space.
## (s12) SIMULATION MODELS AND TOOLS
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) There are various tools providing a myriad of models in simulating VANET environments interactions be fitting the requirements of scalability and applicability, some calibration with one another [48]. As shown in Table 2, SUMO (Simulator for Urban MObility) is the most widely used traffic mobility simulation tool. SUMO supports the simulation of multimodal traffic and vehicle mobility traces to be evaluated with a network simulator on-line [49]. Network simulators listed in Table 2  (Objective Modular Network Testbed in C++), ns-2 (Network Simulator 2) and ns-3 (Network Simulator 3) which are most commonly used to simulate VANET environment. These network simulation tools, however, are not able to simulate road traffic. Therefore iTETRIS and VEINS (Vehicles in Network Simulation) are needed as tools to provide modular simulation platforms that integrate traffic mobility simulator and network simulator to enable wireless communication in real time road traffic simulations. iTETRIS integrates and extends SUMO and ns-3, while VEINS integrates SUMO with OMNeT++.
