# Camouflaged Object Detection and Tracking: A Survey

CorpusID: 229018344 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/24327d7766a03f2dcac854b50b2f86e0c32fe5fa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/24327d7766a03f2dcac854b50b2f86e0c32fe5fa)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s3) Motion Features
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) Motion is considered as an essential feature to detect an object. Several techniques have been developed based on the motion of the objects. McKee et al. [27] concluded from their experiments that stereopsis is generally useful on breaking camouflage when both the observer and the scene are non-dynamic. Here, motion is a helpful feature for breaking camouflage on a static background. If the background is non-static, the motion feature fails to extract camouflaged objects from its surrounding. In this direction, Ternovskiy and Jannson [42] have proposed a motion prediction approach to detect the target in the camouflage environment. This method is suitable for the sequences where changes occur due to the object and camera movement only. If changes occur due to illumination variation, this method considers changes occurring due to object movement. Hence, this method can not work correctly in such a situation. On the other hand, for breaking camouflage, Huimin et al. [24] developed a computational model of visual moving image filtering in which Reichardt's elementary motion detectors [32] are employed for detecting motion information. As this method relies on motion (due to object movement) information, motion due to other conditions like illumination variation, environmental condition changes, etc. produces more false alarms. All these techniques mentioned above are context-dependent and may not work well for various types of camouflaged objects.
## (s4) Texture Features
Number of References: 9

(p4.0) Sometimes, the object's color is similar to the background, but they have different texture patterns. The texture is considered to discriminate against the object from its surrounding. Galun et al. [11] developed a technique to detect camouflaged objects using a bottom-up aggregation framework that combines structural characteristics of texture elements with filter responses. It adaptively identifies the shape of texture elements and characterizes them by their size, aspect ratio, orientation, brightness, etc. Then various statistical measures of these properties are taken into account to distinguish between different textures. The said approach is applied to images containing various kinds of textures. This method works well for images containing different textures for objects and backgrounds. However, if the object and background contain a similar texture, this technique may fail to produce good results. In [3], Nagabhushan and Bhajantri proposed a technique for multiple camouflage breaking using co-occurrence matrix [33] and Canny edge detector [7]. The co-occurrence matrix is used to analyze the given image's texture, whereas the Canny edge detector is considered to detect the edges. A combination of both co-occurrence matrix and the Canny edge detector enhances the separability between objects containing different textures. Though this method provides good results for synthetic images, it is not applied to real-life data. Also, background information needs to be known before executing this method.

(p4.1) Neider and Zelinsky discussed in [29] the detection of camouflaged targets by looking through the distracters or by scrutinizing the target-similar background. In [3], Bhajantri and Nagabhushan proposed a technique to detect the camouflaged defect. Here, co-occurrence matrix-based texture features are computed within a small image region. The defective portion is detected by cluster analysis and watershed segmentation. The accuracy of this method depends on the texture feature. It may not work well for sequences where objects and background contain similar kind of texture. Sengottuvelan et al. [34] developed a technique to detect the camouflaged portion of the object and extract it from the environment in a given image. Here, the grey level co-occurrence matrix (glcm) based texture feature and dendrogram are used to detect the camouflaged object. This technique is very timeconsuming due to the given image's division into several blocks or smaller regions. It does not work for images containing shading effects and object & background containing similar textures.

(p4.2) Liming and Weidong [21] proposed a technique based on weighted structural similarity (wssim) to design and evaluate camouflage texture. Here they used weighted structural similarity and original image feature to create a camouflage image. It can be used for breaking the camouflage. In [30], Owens et al. introduced several background matching algorithms that attempt to make the object look like whatever is behind it. It is impossible to match the background from every possible viewpoint exactly. But the proposed models are forced to make trade-offs between different perceptual factors, such as conspicuousness of occlusion boundaries and the amount of texture distortion.
## (s5) Gradient Features
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) When the object has a similar color, texture as the background, it is challenging to detect objects using these features. For those sequences, gradient information is useful to extract the object from the background region. In this direction, various methods have been developed to detect the camouflaged object. In [31,[37][38][39][40][41], Tankus and Yeshurum proposed a Darg operator (context-free) to enhance an area whose shading corresponds to a convex (or concave) 3D object to separate such area from a flat background having similar features (like color and texture). Darg is applied directly to the grey-level function of the image. It responds to smooth three-dimensional convex or concave patches in objects and is not limited by any particular light source or reflectance function. Results obtained using the Darg operator are highly dependent on threshold values. The selection of a suitable threshold is a major issue. Further, this method does not work well for an environment containing concave background and dark-colored objects.
## (s7) Deep Features
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) As the color of the camouflaged object is similar to the background, detection of it is challenging. In [19], the authors considered the image enhancement technique to increase the discrimination between object and background. The region proposal network (rpn) is considered to estimate the required target's accurate positioning. The deep neural network is used to identify extracted RoI. Finally, the detection of a camouflaged object is done. In this direction, Fang et al. [47] proposed strong semantic dilation network to detect camouflaged people. The authors claimed that full use of semantic information in convolutional neural networks and dilated convolutions are also added to enlarge the receptive field to find camouflage people. The authors presented impressive results on a standard dataset.
## (s8) Other Techniques
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Some other approaches that exist in the literature are discussed in this section. Marouani et al. [26] developed aircraft recognition technique in the presence of camouflage. It works on low-level matching between segments of the projection of a 3D model of the objects of interest. In [36], Guilan and Shunqing discussed the use of spectral pattern recognition techniques to distinguish color camouflage from green vegetation background. Here, the considered spectral feature is the basic characteristic for recognizing the target. Experimentally, they concluded that the considered feature is optimum for recognition than other state-of-the-art features. However, it cannot provide good results for camouflaged objects in the background other than green vegetation.
