# REVIEW DECONTAMINATION OF AFLATOXINS WITH A FOCUS ON AFLATOXIN B1 BY PROBIOTIC BACTERIA AND YEASTS: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 222121380 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ac946935578a2c26ee8d01f366ba218a6569c3d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ac946935578a2c26ee8d01f366ba218a6569c3d)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Biology

## (s1) PROBIOTICS AS AFLATOXIN BINDERS
Number of References: 10

(p1.0) Probiotics are described by FAO (2016) as 'viable microorganisms that, while ingested in sufficient amounts, exert health benefits on the host'. The main benefits for health include: lactose intolerance reduction, gut mucosal immunity support, a possible hypocholesterolemic effect, preventing the diarrheas or respiratory infections, colon cancer or inflammatory bowel disease inhibition, Helicobacter pylori or intestinal pathogens prevention, and antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic activities (Sanders et al., 2014;Yu, Chang and Lee, 2015). Recently, the use of microorganisms, especially probiotics, has been studied for their potential to aflatoxins elimination with an indirect health effect on the host (Bovo et al., 2012). Several probiotic strains have been investigated for their ability to bind aflatoxins (El-Nezami et al., 1998;Bueno et al., 2006;El Khoury et al., 2011;El-Nezami et al., 2002). Lactobacillus (L.) and Bifidobacterium (B.) species are the most known commonly probiotic bacteria, as well as the yeast Saccharomyces (S.) cerevisiae and Bacillus species and some strains of Escherichia (E.) coli. A functional classification of nontoxigenic, nonpathogenic, and fermentative probiotic bacteria are Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) witch are mainly related to the human gastrointestinal tract and widely used in food industry (Zoghi et al., 2017). LAB are Gram-positive, organotrophic, nonsporulating, fermentative rods or cocci, air and acid tolerant, which produce mostly lactic acid as the end-product of carbohydrate fermentation. All of them are anaerobic, but some of them can tolerate low levels of oxygen. Enterococcus, Lactococcus, Pediococcus, Oenococcus, Leuconostoc, Streptococcus, and Lactobacillus species are industrially important genera. The genus Bifidobacteria is also used as LAB, however they are phylogenetically unrelated and have unique sugar fermentation pathways. LAB are widely used in the world food production, vegetables, meat, and fermented dairy products. LAB play a significant role in improving the flavour, texture, and shelf-life of food products (Perczak et al., 2018). It is demonstrated that living and dead probiotics are able to decontaminate aflatoxins by attaching the toxin to their cell wall components. This phenomenon can be described as adsorption by components of the cell wall rather than by metabolism or covalent binding (Santos et al., 2006). 
## (s9) BINDING OF AFLATOXINS BY YEASTS
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) Data found in the literature indicate that in addition to LAB, other organisms such as S. cerevisiae have the potential to bind aflatoxins. Yeast cells can bind to different molecules such as toxins as complexes on their cell wall surfaces (Baptista et al., 2004). Corassin et al. (2013) evaluated the AFM1 binding ability of L. rhamnosus, L. delbrueckii spp. bulgaricus, and B. lactis in combination with heat-treated S. cerevisiae. This mixture could bind with 100% of AFM1. In a study, S. cerevisiae and Candida krusei were tested for AFB1 binding and they could bind more than 60% (w/w) of the added mycotoxins in PBS. They emphasized the AFB1 binding was highly strain specific (Shetty and Jespersen, 2006). In another research, when dried yeast and yeast cell wall (include mannan-oligosaccharides) with AFB1 were added to rat-ration feed, a significant decrease in the toxicity was observed (Baptista et al., 2004).
