# A Review of Technical Standards for Smart Cities

CorpusID: 225363973 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18365e8c77e615ca96cf939aecebf3fdc2cc7e83](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18365e8c77e615ca96cf939aecebf3fdc2cc7e83)

Fields: Environmental Science, Business, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s50) Country Description Brazil
Number of References: 2

(p50.0) Macke et al. [104] described that the city of Curitiba, Southern Brazil to be a green, inclusive and livable city. It is the top ten smartest cities globally speaking. Curitiba has several well-known sustainability programs. Effective leadership and devotion to intelligent transportation planning aided Curitiba to turn into a sustainable city and a standard for effective urban planning. The city's achievements are considered in six factors namely integrated urban planning, pedestrian priority zones, environmental awareness, waste management system, effective public transport system, and social justice. Smart living can be attained by delivering the four factors namely, community integration socio-structural relations, material well-being, and environmental well-being. International standards are not discussed in the work. Afonso et al. [105] studied Brazilian capital indicators and developed a maturity model called Brazilian Smart City Maturity Model to allow transform public databases into useful indicators to assist city managers in planning. The authors mentioned that the ISO 37120 standard provides 100 different performance indicators for cities. The standard consists of 17 themes, 46 core indicators, and 54 indicators that can help define public policies based on different domains. The model is an ongoing work.
