# LITERATURE REVIEW Immune development of children born from Caesarean section

CorpusID: 222454319 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b8d7e90a20232b5b7ea824fbbf5d53698941f5b9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b8d7e90a20232b5b7ea824fbbf5d53698941f5b9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 14

(p0.0) Caesarean section (C-section) is a surgical procedure developed to prevent or treat lifethreatening maternal or fetal complications such as antepartum hemorrhage, fetal distress, abnormal fetal presentation, and hypertensive disease. 1 The number of C-section in the US has risen by up to 48% since 1996. 2 The WHO recommends that in up to 15% of deliveries, C-section may be indicated. However, 37 of 60 developed countries currently surpassing this guideline and taking women undergoing pre-labor, elective C-section without a clear medical indication may present risks to the child. 2,3 Simultaneously with the increase of rising C-section levels, there has been an increasing number of autoimmune and allergic diseases. 4 Possible mechanisms for these associations may include lower and untimely activation of the fetal immune system due to lack of stress response caused by contraction of the uterus and fetal hypoxia, 3 and alteration of the bacterial colonization of the infant's gut after C-section. 2 Dysbiosis occurs when there is irregular colonization of the body intestine, also considered to be a mismatch between commensal and pathogenic microbes. 5 Intestinal bacterial flora is critical for immune growth, and children with atopic diseases have been shown to have lower gut levels of Bacteroides and Bifidobacterium species than children without atopic disease. Bifidobacteria are associated with reduced risk of atopic disease in children. C-section has been shown to disrupt and change the development of bacterial intestinal flora in infants. This may, in turn, alter development of the immune system and increase the risk of atopic disease in children. 6 Uterus contraction and fetal hypoxia during childbirth cause a stress response in both the mother and the fetus, raising the substantial levels of cortisol and catecholamine in newborns. Multiple studies show a low level of cortisol and catecholamine in the absence of contraction in the C-section delivery, variations in levels of stress hormones at birth may alter the immune responses and influence the immune system later in life. 3,7 Cortisol may remove uterine preleukemic clones. 7 There is also evidence of altered DNA methylation patterns that are important to immune regulation after C-section. 7,8 Methods This article focused on how the delivery mode affects the neonate's immune system. This analysis was prepared by conducting a search to identify related journals and articles published in 2010 until before April 2020 in several electronic databases, i.e. Pubmed and Medline. The search terms included variants of "delivery mode," "cesarean section," "immune system," "allergy," "asthma," "diabetes," "celiac disease," "allergy to food," "prebiotic" and "probiotic" Additional articles were found by manual search, either in English or Indonesian, from manual references cited in relevant reviews.
## (s3) The innate and adaptive immune system
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) Microorganisms that successfully enter the body will be immediately recognized by the cells and mechanisms of the innate immune system within hours of an antigen-specific response being developed by the adaptive immune system a few days later. 18,19 . Innate immune cells are commonly located along with physical barriers such as skin and mucous membranes, where they release defensive biomolecules such as defensins and complements. Upon pathogen identification, dendritic cells and macrophages (often known as antigen-presenting cells, APCs) are activated to phagocytose the invader, digest, and process pieces (antigens) on the cell surface in the form of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. 20 Adaptive cells include T-cells that primarily target intracellular microbes, along with B-cells that produce antibodies, most of which target extracellular pathogens. Innate immunity is primarily involved in the initial control of microbes. Adaptive defense is mainly concerned with the final clearance of the invader. Adaptive immunity also maintains certain cells as immune memory cells; these antigen-experienced memory cells do not need the same degree of innate immune support for secondary infection with the same (or similar) pathogen and react much faster and more efficiently. 19
## (s4) Impact of C-section on child's immune development
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) For the postnatal development of the immune system, it is important to microbially colonize the infant gut gastrointestinal tract. C-Section delivered infants, either lacked or displayed a slow colonization of one of the main intestinal phylums, the Bacteroidetes, because the infant does not enter the mother's birth canal. Therefore, the delayed colonization leads to low-diversity of the intestinal microbiota, which leads to a lack of regulatory T cell and/or Th1-like responses to avoid Th2 domination. In addition, the dysbiosis in the C-section children is associated with lower circulation of CXCL10 and CXCL11 chemokines related to Th-1 when the risk of allergies increases. 6 The "hygiene hypothesis" was introduced in 1989 when researchers argued that the increase in allergic diseases was due to a lack in microbial exposure due to improved sanitization practices following a low incidence of early childhood allergy infection. 21 Modern medicines and changes in sanitation and public health have led to an era of unprecedented cleanliness and the near eradication of previously common pathogens. However, these improvements coincided with the rise of autoimmune diseases and other immune disorders. Strachan and others indicated that a certain amount of microbial stimulation is required to prevent disease. 5 Microbiome includes both pathogens and commensals, which play a role in immune development.
## (s7) Asthma, allergic rhinitis and food allergy
Number of References: 4

(p7.0) There are reports that there is a risk of developing allergic disease, allergic rhinitis, asthma and asthma hospitalization and food allergy, whereas there was no association with inhalant atopy and eczema/atopic dermatitis. 25,31 Almqvist et al 32 reported the outcome of a cohort study in 2012 in which there was an increased risk of asthma and asthma diagnosis during the follow-up year in children born with a C-section. Increased risk of asthma medication in the emergency-born, but not elective, category suggests that there is no causal effect due to vaginal microflora. A more likely explanation should be sought in the emergency Csection. Changed immune function in infants delivered by C-section compared to vaginal delivery is documented by reduced production of cytokines involved in neonatal immunity, in this respect increased levels of IL-13 and IFN-supposed associated with atopy. 27 The frequent presence of C. difficile in the feces at 1 month post-partum by Csection delivery has an association with the development of wheeze, eczema, and sensitization to food allergens in the first 2 years of life. 25 A recent cohort study from Mitselou N et al 33 using a large population database, shown an increased risk of food allergy in children born through elective or emergency Caesarean delivery compared to those delivered vaginally. This positive association aligned with the theory that exposure to vaginal microflora might reduce the risk of offspring atopic manifestations. The altered composition of the intestinal flora involves these improvements to the immune response to a more atopic profile. The colonization of intestinal microbes appears to stimulate a non-allergic Th1 reaction of the immune system while IgE synthesis seems to be downregulating. C-Sectional children are seemed to have weak immune recognition, especially when born to an allergic mother to foods that are supposed to be tolerated. 34
## (s9) Gastrointestinal disease
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) Bacterial flora of the newborns plays a role in the development of celiac disease. Studies showed a positive association between elective C-section and development of celiac disease, but not for an emergency C-section. 35,37 However, the incidence of inflammatory bowel disease has not been affected by the mode of delivery. 3 Maternal microbial and immune status, infant nutrition and antibiotic exposure affect the development of the intestinal microbiome and therefore the development of the immune system. Dysbiosis can lead to immunemediated diseases, including allergies and necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). 5
