# Frequency-Hopping MIMO Radar-Based Communications: An Overview

CorpusID: 224705448 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44b5c0b05fad0ef04335af860582e2c1a2713528](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44b5c0b05fad0ef04335af860582e2c1a2713528)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s1) B. Signal Model
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) The FH-MIMO radar is based on fast frequency hopping. Namely, each pulse is divided into H sub-pulses, also referred to as hops [14]. The centroid frequency of the transmitted signal changes randomly across hops and antennas, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Denote the radar bandwidth as B. By dividing the frequency band evenly into K sub-bands, each sub-band has the bandwidth of B/K. Out of the K centroid frequencies, M (< K) frequencies are selected to be the hopping frequencies per hop, one for each antenna. Let k hm denote the index of the sub-band selected by antenna m at hop h. To ensure the waveform orthogonality of FH-MIMO radar, the following constraints are imposed for the radar [23],
## (s2) III. OVERVIEW OF EXISTING SIGNALING STRATEGIES FOR FH-MIMO DFRC
Number of References: 7

(p2.0) Several signaling strategies have been specifically designed for FH-MIMO DFRC. Overall, the existing strategies can be categorized into two groups, one based on conventional phase modulations [10]- [13] and the other exploiting the diversity in frequency hopping [14]. In this section, the existing signaling strategies are first reviewed with their modulation and demodulation processing illustrated. Then the strategies are compared from various aspects.

(p2.1) A. Information Modulation 1) Phase Modulations: In [10], [11], phase shift keying (PSK) is introduced to FH-MIMO DFRC by embedding PSK phases into radar signals. More specifically, a constant phase

(p2.2) is the J-bit PSK constellation. In [12], the differential PSK (DPSK) is proposed to replace PSK, so as to reduce range sidelobes and out-ofband transmission. To further improve the spectral shape of the modulated radar signal, the continuous phase modulation (CPM) is introduced in FH-MIMO DFRC [13]. The underlying principle is that signals with smoother modulating phase correspond to lower out-of-band transmission.
## (s4) C. Comparing Signaling Schemes for FH-MIMO DFRC
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) The aforementioned signaling schemes are compared in terms of their impact on radar performance, their communication performance and the necessary information for demodulation. The comparison is summarized in Table I. Note that the radar ambiguity functions and spectral containment of the signaling schemes have been comprehensively compared in [15]. The data rates of different schemes are provided in the works [10]- [14]. Yet, the necessary information is overlooked in most of the existing works which consider ideally known (I1)-(I3).
