# molecules In Vivo Biosynthesis of Inorganic Nanomaterials Using Eukaryotes-A Review

CorpusID: 220747441 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c796a422a6579233d777fae2a40d883e2c817bf4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c796a422a6579233d777fae2a40d883e2c817bf4)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Environmental Science, Biology, Engineering

## (s3) Effect of Cell Surface on NP Formation
Number of References: 24

(p3.0) The cell surface chemistry plays a vital role in NP production since the cell surface adsorption-reduction of metal cations contributes more to NP synthesis than intracellular NP formation following the metal uptake [12]. Many studies have reported the cell surface involvement in the production of NPs, as presented in Table 1 [72][73][74][75][76][77]. The negatively charged surface groups of the cells, such as hydroxyl, carboxyl, and phosphate, have an affinity for metal cations [78,79]. The algal cell surface also contains biomolecules with redox capacity, e.g., hydroxyl (-OH), carboxyl (-COOH), amino (-NH 2 ), phosphate (-PO 3 ), and sulfhydryl (-SH), to reduce metal cations into metallic NPs, causing an NP accumulation on the exterior envelope of the cell [79]. The amount of negatively charged groups on the cell surface depends on the cell culture conditions and the alga's species-specific surface characteristics [12,80].

(p3.1) In microalgal mediated NP synthesis processes, the cells are generally washed with deionized water (DIW) to give rise to the washed biomass before being exposed to various precursors [5,69,81]. Hereafter, the washed biomass refers to the cells of a given organism that are harvested and washed before being resuspended in deionized water. These washed cells remain viable for long enough to begin growing should they be transferred into a suitable culture medium. The use of washed cells for NP synthesis purposes is a method that separates the cells from the EPS in the cell culture supernatant, but can also remove cell surface biomolecules that could bioreduce precursor ions to metallic NPs. Nevertheless, many studies have reported NP synthesis by this method. For example, Arévalo-Gallegos et al. reported the accumulation of nanosilver on the cell surface of Botryococcus braunii that was washed with distilled water before incubation with AgNO 3 [5]. However, the colloidal stability of the as-produced Ag NPs was not discussed. In this regard, Rahman et al. recently used washed cells of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii to produce colloidally unstable Ag NPs whereas both the complete cell culture (i.e., unwashed cells) and cell culture supernatant produced very stable Ag NPs of controlled size and shape [69], confirming that the EPS was required for NP stability. In a similar study, Pytlik et al. reported the formation of Au NPs when the sea water diatom Stephanopyxis turris was cultivated with HAuCl 4 . These Au NPs were found to be associated with the diatom cell surface, but the NP stability was not discussed [82].

(p3.2) Although neither of the above studies examined the effects of cell rupture or cell wall integrity after washing or exposure to metal cations, Satapathy et al. reported sustained integrity of Chlorella vulgaris cell walls after producing Ag NPs starting from silver nitrate [83]. These Ag NPs aggregated on the cell surface and dislodged during stirring and harvesting, a fact that could facilitate the recovery of these particles. Stephanopyxis turris, living culture [82] Au-silica nanocomposite

(p3.3) Stephanopyxis turris, living culture [97] [104] Algal flagella can also promote the synthesis of nanoparticles, as reported by Barwal et al. [6]. In addition to the internalization of Ag NPs by the flagella, this group reported a distribution of particles outside the flagella. However, more flagella-located Ag NPs were internal than external, as indicated by the distention of the flagella. NP formation on the cell surface or outside of the flagella may be significantly less than the extracellular formation by EPS or intracellular formation by the cell. For instance, Rahman et al. used the wild type and the cell wall deficient strains of C. reinhardtii, but did not observe any differences in Ag + to Ag NP conversion in the presence or absence of the cell wall. Therefore, cell wall components did not significantly enhance nor inhibit Ag NP formation and the reaction was likely controlled by the EPS-facilitated reduction of Ag + [98]. Nevertheless, further experiments are needed to completely understand the contribution of the cell surface and its role in the production of nanomaterials. Additionally, the stability and recovery of the as-produced nanomaterials will be further discussed in the current review.
## (s5) Post-Processing of In Vivo Synthesized Nanomaterials
Number of References: 10

(p5.0) To date, no systematic review of the post-processing of algal-synthesized nanomaterials has been published. The major post-processing steps include the collection or recovery, purification, quantification, and storage of the as-biosynthesized NPs. It is worth noting that these post-processing steps can be applied to any in vivo or in vitro microbial NP synthesis process. However, two important factors to consider in the post-processing are the colloidal stability of the NPs and the location of their synthesis since these factors determine the process. Internally synthesized NPs have been reported to diffuse out of cells (e.g., C. reinhardtii) with an EPS coating, which provides colloidal stability to the NPs. The EPS-coated NPs are reported to be colloidally stable from several hours to a few months in various solutions, including saline water, acetone and ethanol [88,98]. Although various methods, such as sedimentation [87], filtration [83] and centrifugation [110], have been proposed and used to collect intracellular NPs, no real attempts to quantify the NP amount have been carried out [11].

(p5.1) The ultrasonication is one of the most widely used techniques to disrupt the cells to recover the intracellular NPs [111]. When the NPs are strongly bonded to intracellular components, robust recovery methods are needed. One possible method is the wet heat sterilization process that was used to recover selenium NPs from bacterial cells [110]. The method includes passivation of the cells at 121 • C and 118 kPa gauge pressure for 20 min to disrupt the cells and release the NPs that were then treated by an "extracellular recovery" method (i.e., centrifugation) before being purified by washing and sonication. This method is advantageous because it does not chemically change the NPs. Although no disadvantages were reported, there could be irreversible thermal denaturation of protein fraction of the EPS that are often found to be associated with the colloidal stability of algal-synthesized NPs [112]. However, a recent study reported thermal denaturation temperatures of up to 107 • C for protein concentrates and isolates developed from the algal species Spirulina sp. LEB 18. This heat sterilization process as a cell disruption technique in algal NP downstream processing is a possible area for future research [113].
## (s6) In Vivo Biosynthesis of Inorganic Nanomaterials Using Yeasts
Number of References: 23

(p6.0) The in vivo synthesis of nanomaterials using yeast began in 1989 when Dameron et al. reported the intracellular production of cadmium sulfide QDs of~2 nm in size after exposing Candida glabrata and Schizosaccharomyces pombe yeast cultures to cadmium precursors [116]. The yeast adapted to the presence of the Cd salts in the growth medium by producing short peptides that chelated and controlled the growth of the CdS nanocrystals. Using the same species, Williams et al. [117] used a culture freeze-thaw method to release the intracellularly yeast-produced CdS NPs without breaking the cells. The same authors investigated the optimal fed-batch conditions to synthesize CdS crystals using S. pombe. They found that adding cadmium sulfate during the mid-exponential growth phase enabled the concomitant uptake of Cd precursor and inorganic sulfide yielding the formation of CdS crystals [118]. In another paper, they also determined the optimum conditions capable of maximizing S. pombe biomass yield for an enhanced production of CdS QDs [119]. A similar investigation was carried out by Krumov et al. [120] using S. pombe and C. glabrata where they compared Cd uptake by both species and demonstrated that CdS formation was exclusively intracellular as the NPs were evenly distributed within the cell cytoplasm. Moreover, phytochelatins were determined to be the capping agent of the as-produced QDs. Additionally, washed cells of S. pombe were reported to promote the intracellular production of ZnS QDs of 30-40 nm in diameter [121].

(p6.1) Saccharomyces cerevisiae can efficiently biosynthesize CdSe and CdTe QDs. For instance, Cui et al. [65] produced CdSe QDs via a 2-step procedure (Figure 3a). The live stationary phase yeast cells were co-incubated with Na 2 SeO 3 for 24 h then CdCl 2 was added to this mixture and shaken in dark for 10-40 h. Owing to the action of glutathione (GSH), an antioxidant found in most aerobic organisms [122], Se 4+ is reduced into organoselenium compounds during the first step, resulting in the production of CdSe QDs during the second step. Fluorescence microscopy shows that the produced intracellular QDs are less than 3 nm in diameter (Figure 3b). Moreover, the concentration of the precursors impacts the biosynthetic process. Above a certain concentration, the metabolism of the cells is inhibited, thus hindering the synthesis of CdSe QDs. The same group also performed the synthesis procedures using both the wild type (WT) S. cerevisiae and a GSH-deficient mutant of the same species to determine the role of GSH in the biosynthesis of CdSe QDs [123]. As a result, the GSH deficient mutant displayed a lower intracellular CdSe QD production when compared to the WT strain. On the other hand, strains with galactose-inducible GSH genes produced more CdSe QDs than the WT. These findings highlight the significant role played by GSH in the S. cerevisiae-mediated synthesis of CdSe QDs.  [124]. In another study, Bao et al. used the same species of yeast to carry out the fabrication of well-dispersed CdTe QDs of~3.6 nm in diameter [8]. However, the process occurred in the presence of mercaptosuccinic acid and sodium borohydride.

(p6.2) Live cells of different species of yeast have been exploited to produce metallic NPs. For instance, Kowshik et al. synthesized Ag NPs by adding AgNO 3 to the mid-exponential growth phase strain of MKY3 [125]. Elahian et al. used a Pichia pastoris mutant that overexpresses a metal-resistant variant of cytochrome b15 reductase enzyme to promote the production of Ag NPs and Se NPs [126]; the same mutant was also screened for its ability to produce Au NPs and Pd NPs [127]. Lin et al. demonstrated that the dry biomass of P. pastoris WT strain could act as an adsorbent for AuCl 4 and, subsequently, promote the formation of Au NPs that display interesting catalytic activities [128]. The chemical modification of the cell surface of the same species does not seem to bring any significant advantage regarding AuCl 4 − adsorption when compared to its WT parent [129].

(p6.3) Agnihotri et al. used washed cells of Yarrowia lipolityica to biosynthesize Au NPs [130]. As a follow-up, the same group studied the impact of Y. lipolytica biomass amount and gold precursor concentration on the morphology of the Au NPs synthesized either by the live cells or their supernatant [131]. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs show Au NPs of different shapes and sizes on the surface of Y. lipolytica. Fluorescence imaging of the cells would aid in accurately determining the formation site of these Au NPs, as previously demonstrated in the study of CdSe QD synthesis using yeast (vide supra). TEM is also an excellent technique to study the size and the shape of the NPs, either synthesized in the supernatant or released to it [132]. For example, TEM imaging of washed cells of Pichia jadinii [133] and S. cerevisiae [134] show Au NPs inside the cells. In addition to metallic NPs, autoclaved, deactivated biomass of S. cerevisiae keeps its reductive capabilities while still promoting the formation of metalloid Se NPs [135].
