# SPECIAL SECTION ON KEY ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES FOR PROSUMER ENERGY MANAGEMENT Paving the Path for Two-Sided Energy Markets: An Overview of Different Approaches

CorpusID: 229374792 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/416e84520981609e0dd83f8a210f151041f51bf0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/416e84520981609e0dd83f8a210f151041f51bf0)

Fields: Business, Economics, Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s13) 2) BLOCKCHAIN
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) In recent years, blockchain has received a tremendous attention as a communication framework for smart grid [47], [48]. Blockchain is an immutable database, shared across all participants, that stores the history of communications. In case a communication involves transferring data, the hash of the data is recorded in the blockchain while the raw data is stored off-chain, e.g., in a local or cloud storage, that in turn ensures blockchain scalability and reduces the associated overheads. The data owner authorizes the nodes to access data stored either in cloud or local storage. Any data modification or access is recorded in the blockchain that enables the data owner to monitor their data.
## (s17) B. VIRTUAL POWER PLANT 1) OVERVIEW
Number of References: 5

(p17.0) The VPP is an approach which supports the transition to a two-sided market by aggregating and coordinating DER across the network to exploit their flexibility [6]. A VPP can be considered as an alternative version of DR programs, which includes DR aggregation by focusing on flexible loads [66]. VPP enables demand-side participation in the market, either by direct control of their flexibility [67], or influencing their energy consumption pattern by sending indirect control signals, such as price signals [68]. A VPP involves the collaboration of a number of stakeholders including consumers and prosumers, aggregators, system operators, network providers, and regulatory bodies to form a kind of collaborative business ecosystem with high degree of interactions and interdependences. The role of an aggregator or coordinator in the VPP is crucial as it schedules, coordinates and controls participating end-users by providing control instructions or price signals to deliver specific services to the network. The emergence of VPP concept is supported by different principles from different fields of study including ICT, electrical and electronics engineering, social sciences, and economics [69].
## (s22) VI. DISCUSSION
Number of References: 12

(p22.0) Different approaches explained in Section V are compared and discussed here in relation to the way they facilitate a two-sided market implementation. The efficient integration of end-users in a two-sided market allows to exploit their capabilities and provides value streams for them and the power network. Though DR programs enable exploiting flexibility of demand-side for providing different services, there are many barriers which prevent the full potential of DR being realized, including economic, social, technological, and regulatory issues. These programs are usually concentrated on the consumption part of the network and neglect the importance of active participation of the supply-side. DR programs rely on scheduling flexible demands of end-users, and hence, they would affect the comfort level of energy consumers. Though negawatt trading enables end-users to participate in a two-sided market taking into account their preferences, uncoordinated operation of flexible end-users hinders to unlock their potential values for the network. More details on challenges and barriers in implementing DR programs and negawatt trading can be found in [15], and [56].

(p22.1) Alternatively, coordinated operation of flexible end-users in VPPs can unlock potential values for both end-users and the network by increasing network efficiency, reducing pollution, and increasing energy security [6]. VPPs can coordinate and orchestrate responsive demands to integrate them in the two-sided market, and provide new value streams to customers and other stakeholders. By being aggregated in a VPP, the assets in the demand-side can be forecasted, optimized, and traded like a single power plant. However, due to the top-down coordination scheme of VPPs, there are some challenges with regard to end-users autonomy and preference consideration. End-users may have various preferences in terms of environmental and social concerns and energy security. To effectively integrate end-users in a VPP, the VPP operator needs to know their preferences. However, it endangers the privacy of end-users as they need to reveal their private information with a third party. Also, VPPs that use direct control strategies threaten autonomy of end-users and hinder exploiting their flexibility efficiently (see [82] for more details on challenges in VPP). Some of these challenges can be alleviated through a P2P trading structure, that enables direct interaction between endusers, while each end-user is in control of its assets [84]. Compared to a VPP, P2P trading can offer additional source of values such as energy matching, uncertainty reduction, and preference satisfaction [82]. However, lack of a central operator in P2P approaches makes it difficult to have an accurate assessment of the network state, which may endangers the security of the system [89]. Besides, P2P trading needs decentralized algorithms to match demand and supply, without the intervention of a third-party. Furthermore, there are some other challenges in implementing P2P trading as reviewed in [23], including the definition of a unified model, the coordination of trading at different levels, and the interaction with the grid.

(p22.2) Given this context, TE can be used as an approach for integrating end-users in the grid while operating the system safely and efficiently. Unlike direct load control DR programs, TE systems respect end-users preferences by integrating their individual decision model into the market-based coordination. Also, different from price-based programs that do not consider the potential load response resulted from the broadcasted price signals, TE uses internal price, designed according to specific control objectives and preferences of the end-users [104]. TE approaches can also be employed in VPPs to from a transactive VPP. This type of VPP is the best fit for two-sided markets as it allows to aggregate and coordinate resources in VPP through a market-based coordination scheme. The P2P trading is fully related to the TE concept as it presents a market-based energy management approach to coordinate peers in the market. Indeed, TE systems can include P2P trading to make the small-scale producers and consumers capable for trading energy directly and locally. However, TE represents a broad set of activities that includes much more than P2P trading. The application for TE approaches include network management, transactive control, and P2P trading [30]. In TE, all customers can participate in the market, either in the demand or supply side, exploiting their local resources, such as PV and storage systems, to create benefit by responding to price signals. Despite extensive attention in recent years, the research on TE systems is relatively new. In order to employ TE approaches in two-sided markets, different challenges should be addressed by future research activities and industrial projects. The implementation of TE approaches is costly as they need a set of automation, and communication infrastructures. Data are a substantial asset of TE systems without that generating value-based signals for coordination is not possible. Hence, the privacy and security of end-users' data are of utmost importance. The other challenge with TE approaches is related to physical or cyber-attack issues, which may affect the resiliency of the system (see [30] and [32] for more details on challenges in TE systems). A summary of main features and challenges of different trading arrangements is provided in Table 4.
