# Roads to objectivity: Quantum Darwinism, Spectrum Broadcast Structures, and Strong quantum Darwinism -a review

CorpusID: 220403353 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66f74c4cb15e2e0807d7f294c01ac7fd1ba8f703](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66f74c4cb15e2e0807d7f294c01ac7fd1ba8f703)

Fields: Philosophy, Computer Science, Physics

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 7

(p0.0) The fact that classical limit of quantum theory should not only reproduce the correct kinematics and dynamics of classical theory, but on a deeper level also its objective character, has been noted fairly late, at least to the author's knowledge, by W. H. Zurek and collaborators (see e.g. [1][2][3] and the references therein). Quantum measurements inevitably perturb measured system, unless the state of the system is specially tailored for a given measurement, thus precluding in general any objective character of the measured quantity as different observations will yield different results. This is in a stark contrast to classical mechanics, where system's characteristics, e.g. positions or momenta, have an objective, observer-independent character. This problem of objectivity, unlike the well studied problems of uncertainty and contextuality, arises already at the level of a single observable. In recent years several objectivization mechanism have been proposed, in particular quantum Darwinism [3], Spectrum Broadcast Structures (SBS) [4,5], and strong quantum Darwinism [6]. The aim of this work is to analyze these ideas from a foundational point of view and study their mutual interrelations in an attempt to bring more clarity to the growing field.
## (s4) V. SPECTRUM BROADCAST STRUCTURES (SBS)
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) In [4,5] another approach to the objectivity problem was taken. Instead of using somewhat classically motivated conditions for redundant information proliferation, the authors formalized Def. 1 and surprisingly were able to derive a unique state structure compatible with it. I will repat the process below, generalizing it compared to the original derivation [5] Let us look at the phrase 'finding out of the state of S by many independent observers' of Def. 1. First of all, the 'state of the system' is understood as one of the eigenstates |i of the reduced density matrix of the system:
## (s5) Theorem 5 (SBS).
Number of References: 7

(p5.0) Definition 1 ⇐⇒ state (34) with property (39), in the sense that (34,39) is the only state structure compatible with Def. (1). The above version of the SBS theorem together with its proof is a substantial generalization of the original result from [5] as nothing is assumed about the structure of the states i apart from (39). In the original SBS derivation [5] an additional assumption of the, so called, strong independence was used: The only correlation between the parts of the environment is common information about the system. This forces a fully product structure (cf. [38]):
