# Shift-work: a review of the health consequences Article History

CorpusID: 229405284 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a378688f3fedaaf45f0bc01f2ac737344e0789b7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a378688f3fedaaf45f0bc01f2ac737344e0789b7)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Psychology

## (s19) PARASOMNIAS
Number of References: 2

(p19.0) Parasomnias are described as recurrent episodes of incomplete awakening, absent or inappropriate responsiveness, limited or no cognition or dream report and partial or complete amnesia for the episode (Sateia, 2014 nurses working two shift (day and evening) and nurses working three shift (day, evening and night) rotational schedules had increased risk of confusional arousal, a NREM-related parasomnia, compared to nurses working daytime only (OR=2.10 and 1.71, respectively). Similarly, nurses working two and three shift rotational schedules had increased risk of nightmares, a REM-related parasomnia (OR=1.64 and 1.57, respectively). This is likely related to the circadian rhythm misalignment and sleep deprivation caused by such shift schedules. Is this study, the other parasomnias evaluated (sleepwalking, sleep terror, sleep-related eating, sleep-related violence and sexsomnia) were not significantly associated with work schedule. It is also worth notice that, in this study, working night shifts only, was not associated with any of the parasomnias (Bjorvatn, Magerøy, Moen, Pallesen, & Waage, 2015).
## (s21) METABOLIC SYNDROME
Number of References: 7

(p21.0) Metabolic syndrome can be defined as a set of various risk factors, namely high blood pressure, obesity, lowered high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, high fasting glucose and high triglycerides. All of which are frequently present simultaneously in an individual. A pioneering study revealed that unlike workers who perform their activity at the normal daytime schedule, shift workers are gravely vulnerable to three metabolic problems, namely high levels of triglycerides, obesity, and hypertension (Chen, Lin, & Hsiao, 2010). Other study conducted by Burgueño, Gemma, Gianotti, Sookoian, & Pirola (2010), also found a heightened susceptibility to the metabolic syndrome among night shift health care professionals is a result of poor sleeping and resting habits, associated with their professional activity and the time at which they execute it.

(p21.1) Some studies have established a link between shift workers and increased food intake, with a preference for carbohydrate-rich foods, and changes in lipid parameters, especially in triglyceride levels (Al-Naimi, Hampton, Richard, Tzung, & Morgan, 2004). A study conducted in China with 26.382 workers (11.783 men and 14.599 women), with a total of 9.088 shift workers, also established a strong link between shift work and the metabolic syndrome, without adjusting for any confounder's factors. In female shift workers, every 10 years spent in shift work was associated with an increase of about 10% (95% IC:1%-20%) higher odds of developing metabolic syndrome. They also found that shift workers were significantly associated with higher blood pressure levels, higher waist circumference, and increase in glucose levels, all components of metabolic syndrome (Guo et al., 2015). Similarly, a study conducted in Japan involving 3.094 individuals in the daytime work group, 73 in the fixed night time work group, 1.017 in the shift work group and 243 in the day-to-night work group, showed that fixed shift work and night time work, contributed strongly to the number of workers with metabolic syndrome, compared to daytime work (Kawabe et al., 2014).

(p21.2) Social jet lag is a key factor in developing metabolic syndrome since it induces changes in cholesterol levels and implies changes in food processes. It was observed in an experiment that social jet lag potentiated body weight gain by increasing overconsumption of food. As a result, it promoted high levels of insulin and dyslipidemia indicating the risk of metabolic syndrome (Espitia-Bautista et al., 2017). It is also important to mention, in combination with shift work, that a chronic shift in light/dark cycles induces obesity, increases body weight and glucose intolerance, leading to the accumulation of fat in white adipose tissues, and also changes in the expression profiles of metabolic genes in liver (Oike, Mutsumi, Ippoushi, & Masuko, 2015). Trough the studies mentioned above, the connection between shift work and the development of metabolic problems is undenied.
## (s26) CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
Number of References: 10

(p26.0) Cardiovascular disease associated with shift work is one of the problems that have been studied for more than two decades since it has long been assumed that shift work has a detrimental effect on the vascular system. This assumption was strengthened by several studies conducted in this same area (Karlsson, Knutsson, & Lindahl, 2001;Puttonen et al., 2009;Van Amelsvoort et al., 2004). However, more recent studies have been questioning the absolute causal relationship, since they consider that the evidence is limited, and there are still some studies that conclude that there is no relation between shift work and cardiovascular diseases (Frost et al., 2009;Hublin et al., 2010).

(p26.1) Studies have shown that the relative risk of developing cardiovascular disease in men who work in shifts is 1.5 times higher than that in men working at regular schedules (Akerstedt & Knutsson, 1997). However, risk factors of 0.64-2.25 were reported in other studies and a higher relative risk was still reported in a woman who works in shifts (Bøggild & Knutsson, 1999;Frost et al., 2009;Ha & Park, 2005;Puttonen et al., 2009).
