# Compact Gearboxes for Modern Robotics: A Review

CorpusID: 221117393 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/311257a5e5fdafbb44accc2f40db79f33e52f500](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/311257a5e5fdafbb44accc2f40db79f33e52f500)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s14) Cycloid Drives: for High Robustness and Torsional Stiffness
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) Since their invention by Lorenz Braren in 1927 (Li, 2014), cycloid drives have found application mainly in boats, cranes, and some large equipment as steel strip rolling trains or CNC machines. In cycloid drives, an eccentric input motion creates a wobbly cycloidal motion of a single, large planet wheel, which is then converted back in a rotation of the output shaft and results in a high reduction capacity (Gorla et al., 2008), see Figure 5. Table 3 includes the market leader (NABTESCO RV) in this segment and the main challengers (SPINEA and SUMITOMO). The RV from NABTESCO and the Fine-Cyclo T-series of SUMITOMO include a pre-gearing, conventional PGT stage. The payload capability of these devices is larger than required for our benchmark and results in large weights. This provides already a valuable insight: more compact solutions are not available in the market and are-according to the information provided by some of the manufacturers-less interesting because they would need extreme manufacturing precision and ultimately result in high costs. Shapes are similar to those of strain wave gearboxes, while weights are larger and closer to those of the PGTs, for the aforementioned reasons. Torque-to-weight ratios are larger than those of PGTs but slightly lower than for strain wave gearboxes. The main advantage of cycloid drives lies precisely in their ability to withstand large loads and particularly impact loads, and in the little maintenance required.
