# A Review of Classic Torque Control Techniques for Switched Reluctance Motors

CorpusID: 221903199 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b6f6871212d747330e223b97609814f9b4c6f2b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b6f6871212d747330e223b97609814f9b4c6f2b)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) Switched reluctance machines (SRMs) main advantages are their simple structure, without coils, and rare materials in the rotor, low cost, ruggedness, brushless operation, operation in high temperature environments, high reliability, fault tolerance, wide speed range of operation, high efficiency and high torque, and power density. These advantages enable SRMs as competitive to more traditional electric machines, such as induction motors, permanent magnet synchronous machines (PMSM), and DC machines in many applications [1,2].

(p0.1) Besides the advantages, SRMs are strongly dependent in electronic converters for its drive. Also, automatic control of these machines is complex due to nonlinear characteristics. Furthermore, the efficiency and power factor of SRM are generally lower than those of PMSM as a result of higher losses in SRM. The switched reluctance machines have doubly salient structure and nonlinear characteristics, thus, these machines present elevated torque ripple and acoustic noise. These are the predominant disadvantages encountered in SRMs [3,4].
## (s9) Current profile creation
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) After obtaining the reference torque signals for each phase with the TSF, the reference current signals per phase (i * k ) must be determined. This procedure may be accomplished by inverting the Ti , θ ðÞ lookup table into an iT , θ ðÞ lookup table. In [25], the authors use the inverted Ti , θ ðÞ LUT to estimate electromagnetic torque and compare to a non-unity torque reference. The inverted Ti , θ ðÞ LUT is also applied in [26,27], and in these cases, the contribution of the authors is to propose an alternative to commonly used TSFs. Alternatively, a nonlinear function of current as function of torque and rotor position can be used. The development of such function is cumbersome and requires a mathematical approach that models the inductance variation as function of electric current and rotor position. The analytical inversion function is expressed in Eq. (18), where L 0p θ ðÞis the inductance derivative for one SRM phase before saturation, that is, with low electric current, f θ ðÞis the function that describe the ratio change between the produced torque and the electric current according to the saturation level. More detailed explanation about the derivation of Eq. (18) may be found in [28].
