# Manipulation of Lateral Pharyngeal Wall Muscles in Sleep Surgery: A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 220839965 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ecad2e6d310be200648a528097207625f5021991](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ecad2e6d310be200648a528097207625f5021991)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) Partial Section of Muscular Fibers
Number of References: 6

(p8.0) The progressive interest in the treatment of OSAS has led to the elaboration of an increasingly conservative approach, allowing its application to a more delicate population such as pediatrics. On the heels of the excellent outcomes shown first by K. Pang and T. Woodson, and later by G. Sorrenti and O. Piccin, S.O. Ulualp [17] presented a modified ESP, applied to a pediatric population. In fact, in order to reduce tissue removal, after bilateral tonsillectomy, a partial section of the PPM anterior fibers is performed at the junction of the upper third and mid-third. Then, superolateral tunneling of the soft palate is prepared, and the upper portion of PPM is pulled up in the muscular tunnel and sutured to it. Not only the lateral side but also the anterior portion of the soft palate has been reported to be modified during LPW surgery. In this regard, M.J. Kim et al. [18] introduced a modified uvulopalatal flap with a partial LP in order to widen the retropalatal space anteroposteriorly and transversely. The posterior pillar is cut at its junction with the uvula, and once trimmed, it is sutured to the anterior pillar. After having calculated the mucosa and submucosal fat to be removed by measuring the halfway point between the junction of the soft and hard palates and the tip of the uvula, a diamond-shaped area of the soft palate is removed. Then, a suture of the muscular and mucosal rims is performed. In some cases, a bilateral tonsillectomy is performed, and the patients are submitted to concomitant nasal septoplasty and turbinate surgery. Following the interest in conservative approaches, and thanks to material technology improvements, in 2015, C. Vicini et al. [19] introduced an innovative tissue-sparing approach based on the use of barbed knotless bidirectional reabsorbable sutures named barbed reposition pharyngoplasty (BRP). All patients are submitted to bilateral tonsillectomy, and once PPM is demarcated, a partial incision is made at its inferior portion. A triangular-shaped mucosal and submucosal portion of the tonsillar fossa at its apex is removed in order to widen the oropharyngeal inlet. Then, the barbed sutured is utilized to superolaterally add tension to the upper portion of PPM and to stiffen LPW and the palate. In particular, the first pass of the needle is introduced at the center of the palate and passed laterally, reaching the pterygomandibular raphe. Passing around the pterygomandibular raphe, the needle reaches the upper portion of PPM through the tonsillar fossa. In this way, the muscular fibers are pulled up and anchored at the pterygomandibular raphe. The same procedure is applied to the other side. Effective and simple to perform, this technique has shown important results as both a single-stage procedure and a multilevel procedure associated with other upper airway corrective surgeries like base of tongue resection, hyoid suspension, and nasal surgery [26,27]. To minimize mucosal and muscular resection of the uvula, M.A. Babademez et al. [20] suggested some modifications using a monodirectional reabsorbable barbed thread to expand the upper part of the oropharyngeal inlet in a more conservative manner. In fact, in order to pull the uvula forward and superiorly, once PPM is fixed to the pterygomandibular raphe, the suture is passed horizontally through the root of the uvula to reach the opposite tonsillar bed, and then, PPM is anchored to the pterygomandibular raphe in the same fashion.
