# foods Mycotoxin Occurrence, Exposure and Health Implications in Infants and Young Children in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Review

CorpusID: 226242842 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/27f5ec0e72066425fb3284143f9b92c34283b844](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/27f5ec0e72066425fb3284143f9b92c34283b844)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s2) Cereal-Based Products
Number of References: 18

(p2.0) Cereals are ranked the major susceptible crops to mycotoxin contamination, with maize being at the forefront [54]. Because of their excellent energy and nutritional sources, these crops serve as the main ingredient used in the production of foods for IYC [55]. Although studies have shown that the processing of food can lead to a reduction or degradation of mycotoxins, it is important to highlight that mycotoxins can be carried over to the final processed products, thus necessitating the need for good quality raw material [56][57][58]. Available studies in the world have revealed the occurrence of both regulated and non-regulated mycotoxins in foods for IYC, including the so-called "emerging mycotoxins" [59][60][61][62][63][64][65][66][67][68][69][70][71]. In SSA, only a few studies have focused on food products for infants and children. Notwithstanding the few available data, the prevalence of mycotoxins in IYC foods is obvious.
## (s8) Country
Number of References: 31

(p8.0) Sample   Gong et al. [34], using serum AF-albumin adducts, reported the high AF exposure of children in Benin, West Africa, with AF-albumin levels as high as >1100 pg AF-lysine equivalents per milligram of albumin. There were strong variations in the levels of AF exposure depending on the village and geographical region. This is possibly linked to the climatic conditions (temperature and humidity) of the environment, which favours the growth of fungi and subsequently mycotoxin production. The pre-and post-agricultural practices, which differ from region to region, may also be a contributory factor [135]. This is evident in the variation of AF-albumin prevalence (February (98%), June (99.5%), and October (100%)) observed by the authors as a result of seasonal changes, even though the variation was not significant [34]. Earlier studies by this group of authors observed a remarkable increase in IYC exposure to AFs following the introduction of and increase in the consumption of weaning foods [34,126]. Similar results were reported in a South African study on non-breastfed infants [136]. Significant levels of OTA were detected in the plasma of non-breastfed infants at 6 weeks old as compared to breastfed infants. The authors also highlighted a progressive trend in the exposure up until the 8th week. Further studies originating from other countries in SSA using serum and plasma biomarkers have also indicated the exposure of IYC to AFs and FBs [33,36,[126][127][128][129]137].

(p8.1) Consistent with these data, exposure studies using urinary biomarker approaches have indicated high concentrations of mycotoxins in IYC [128,[130][131][132][133][134]137,138]. A Cameroonian study investigated the mycotoxin exposure of 220 children between the age of 1.5-4.5 years using urinary biomarkers [130]. Of the children investigated, mycotoxins were detected in 73% of the urine samples, with OTA being the most prevalent (30%) toxin, occurring within a concentration range of 0.04-2.4 ng/mL. Other mycotoxins detected in the urine samples included FB1 (11%), DON (17%), AFM1 (14%), ZEN (4%), α-zearalenol (α-ZEL) (4%), and β -zearalenol (β-ZEL) (8%), with up to two, three, and four mycotoxins co-occurring in samples at a rate of 35%, 5%, and 5%, respectively [130]. The detection of multiple mycotoxins in IYC urine has also been reported by other studies from the region. Ezekiel et al. [133] detected FB1, AFM1, OTA, and deoxynivalenol-15-O-glucuronide in the urine samples of Nigerian children, with a mycotoxin prevalence rate of 47.3% (9/19). Using an ultra-sensitive stable isotope-assisted quantification method, the same group of authors further confirmed the exposure of Nigerian IYC to multiple mycotoxins [138].

(p8.2) Ayelign et al. [131] indicated the presence of AFs in 17% of urine samples of Ethiopian children, with AFM1 being the most prevalent (7%) toxin. Other AFs were detected in 4.5% (AFB2), 2.5% (AFG1), and 3% (AFG2) of samples. A similar study in Guinea reported the occurrence of AFs in children's urine samples at a higher occurrence rate of 86% [132]. While AFB1, AFB2, AFG1, and AFG2 were detected in the samples, AFM1 was the dominant mycotoxin, occurring at a frequency and concentration range of 64% and 8.0-801 pg/mL, respectively. Using a urinary biomarker, Shirima et al. [128,137] revealed high levels of FBs among Tanzanian IYC, with individual levels as high as 698.2 ng/L. The authors further observed a discrepancy in mycotoxin exposure levels between the sampling times, which could be linked to the effects of consumption of contaminated food as well as seasonal variation of mycotoxin contamination levels [128]. The same trend was observed for DON among IYC in Tanzania, with concentration ranges of 800-1400 ng/L, 1700-3200 ng/L, and 4100-7900 ng/L at recruitment, after 6 months, and after 12 months, respectively [134].
## (s12) Fumonisin Exposure and Infant Growth
Number of References: 10

(p12.0) Shirima et al. [128] observed that the concentrations of urinary FBs (0.31, 0.17, and 0.57 ng/mL) detected in a cohort of 166 healthy children were negatively associated with growth impairment (rate: 44%, 55%, and 56%) at recruitment, 6 months, and 12 months, respectively, suggesting a possible association between FBs and child growth (Table 5). Chen et al. [41] also reported a negative association of FBs with stunting, though at a higher incidence rate of 75%, which is attributed to the higher urinary FB concentration (mean: 1.3 ng/mL) recorded in the study when compared to Shirima et al. [128]. This therefore implies a possible dose-dependent effect between FBs and stunting (increase in FB concentration = increase in stunting) [41]. An earlier study originating from the same country reported a similar trend [38]. The authors examined the effect of FB exposure on the growth performance of 215 infants complemented with maize-based complementary foods. They revealed that infants exposed to FBs above the PMTDI of 2 µg/kg body weight/day established by the JECFA were significantly shorter (1.3 cm) as compared to the other infants [38]. Another three-time point (1, 3, and 5 months) study investigating the relationship between FB exposure and stunting or underweight in 143 Tanzanian infants under 6 months of age showed insignificant associations between the variables [76]. Furthermore, it is important to mention that the influence of mycotoxins on infant growth is not only an SSA problem, as studies originating from other regions of the world have reported strong correlations between mycotoxin exposure and infant growth impairment [148][149][150].
## (s13) Postulated Mechanism for Growth Impairment
Number of References: 5

(p13.0) Although the mechanism by which mycotoxins influence child growth is yet to be fully understood, Smith et al. [151] suggested two possible pathways by which these toxins may contribute to stunting, including the induction of environmental enteric dysfunction and systemic immune activation, resulting in the interruption of the insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) axis. Castelino et al. [152] investigated the relationship between AF and IGF1 in 199 Kenyan schoolchildren, and observed that AF-albumin concentrations were inversely associated with both IGF1 and IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP3). IGF facilitates most of the growth-promoting effects of growth hormone, and thus plays a major role in the growth of a child [153]. AFs may also induce stunting by exerting an immunosuppressive effect, which often increases the susceptibility of infants to infection, loss of appetite, and reduced nutrient absorption [154]. In addition, AFs may exert infant growth impairment by mediating intestinal damage through the inhibition of protein synthesis [151]. Other mycotoxins like DON have also been postulated to exert growth impairment through this mechanism.
## (s14) Child Immune and Nervous Systems
Number of References: 21

(p14.0) Exposure to mycotoxins has been shown to hamper immune responses in humans and animals, thus leading to a decrease in resistance to infectious diseases [35]. The mechanism through which mycotoxins exert immunosuppressive or immunostimulatory effects on humans and animals may vary depending on toxin type and exposure dose, as well as the investigated parameters highlighted in several reviews [161][162][163]. Bondy and Peska [162] highlighted the ability of mycotoxins to promote the expression of a diverse array of cytokines through inflammatory responses, with a potential to upregulate and downregulate a wide array of immune functions. While mycotoxins impair cell-mediated immunity and phagocytic cell function, exposure to AFs increases the T cell proliferation-inducing capacity of porcine monocyte-derived dendritic cells, therefore enhancing the antigen-presenting capacity of the cell [164]. The inhibition of humoral, cellular, and innate immunity by AFs, OTA, and FBs, leading to a reduced response to vaccines, has been reported in animal species [162,165].

(p14.1) Notwithstanding the evidence that IYC, especially in SSA, are most vulnerable to mycotoxin exposure, only a few scientific studies, mostly focusing on AFs, have been conducted to elucidate the effects of these fungus metabolites on the immunity of IYC. Allen et al. [166] investigated the relationship between AF exposure, hepatitis B infection, and the prevalence of malaria in 391 Gambian children between the age of 3 and 8 years, and found that a higher AF-albumin adduct concentration was associated with increased Plasmodium falciparum parasitaemia (p = 0.01) and hepatitis B surface antigen (p=0.04) carrier status of the children. However, the authors observed no consistent association between AF-albumin level, malaria infections, malaria-specific antibody, or lymphoproliferative responses. A later cross-sectional study from the same country, using a cohort of 472 children, studied the effect of dietary AF exposure on immune parameters, including secretory IgA in saliva (sIgA) and cell-mediated immunity, as well as antibody response to rabies and pneumococcal vaccines [35]. A remarkably lower sIgA level of children with detectable AF-albumin in their blood was seen compared to no AF-albumin detectable children (p < 0.0001). However, out of the four pneumococcal serotypes, only one response was weakly associated with higher levels of AF-albumin adducts. On the other hand, no association was observed between AF-albumin and cell-mediated immunity or rabies [35].

(p14.2) Other West African studies, specifically in Ghana, showed the potential effects of AF exposure on immune responses of HIV-positive participants [167][168][169][170], and tuberculosis patients [171], however, no such study on the infant population in these regions has been reported. Another study investigated the effect of OTA on T cell activation using a cohort of South African HIV-exposed infants and HIV-unexposed infants as controls [136]. The authors observed a correlation of OTA plasma levels with the activation of CD4 T cells (HLADR and CCR5) and a chemokine, CXCL10. Increased expression of CXCL10, HLA-DR, and CCR5 has been associated with a variety of human diseases, including HIV, immune dysfunction, chronic inflammation, infectious diseases, tumour development, and encephalopathy, known as a major cause of infant mortality in Africa [136,[172][173][174], thus suggesting an increased risk of morbidity and mortality due to OTA exposure.
