# fishes The Application of Single-Cell Ingredients in Aquaculture Feeds-A Review

CorpusID: 222129854 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bdeb514e000c252739deae93e280b4f5afb9650f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bdeb514e000c252739deae93e280b4f5afb9650f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Biology

## (s9) Shrimp
Number of References: 18

(p9.0) The use of microalgal SCP and SCO has been particularly active in shrimp nutrition and has been examined in a range of studies in the past decade [124][125][126][127][128][129][130][131][132][133][134].

(p9.1) The majority of the studies found to have examined microalgal SCI resources were those focusing on the application of omega-3 enriched SCO resources as a means of replacing fishoil and/or fishmeal. The earliest study found was that by Patniak et al. [124], who examined the inclusion of two different SCO sources in diets for Pacific white shrimp, one a microalgal Schizochytrium SCO meal (rich in DHA) and the other a fungal Mortierella SCO meal (rich in 20:4n-6). In this study the authors combined both SCOs into either of two diets at different inclusion levels (5 g/kg up to 20 g/kg) and compared performance against shrimp fed a fishoil (Menhaden) control and a commercial reference diet. At the end of the 15-week study there were no significant differences among any of the treatments, although numerically the commercial reference performed the best and the fishoil control the worst. In a subsequent series of two studies, Samocha et al. [125,126] also examined the inclusion of a Schizochytrium SCO meal (rich in DHA) and a Mortierella SCO meal (rich in ARA) in Pacific white shrimp. In the first study, fishmeal free diets were supplemented with both SCOs (at up to 50 g/kg inclusion) or fishoil (Menhaden), whilst also testing the application of some other novel protein resources. None of the SCO diets produced growth equal to that achieved with the fishoil treatment, although the inclusion of the SCO resources resulted in better growth than from shrimp fed the diets with no added LC-PUFA. In a second study, the two different SCOs were examined at various different inclusion levels (maximum of 5.2 g/kg). In particular, the authors were examining the response of shrimp to changes in the level of ARA (20:4n-6), with only one diet made to be relatively deficient in DHA. Ironically, all shrimp in each treatment grew well, but again those fed the fishoil control grew significantly better than any of the microalgal SCO treatments. Shrimp fed the diet deficient in DHA grew the poorest, indicating that the shrimp were more sensitive to changes in DHA level than ARA level. But that all the microalgal SCO diets grew poorer than the fishoil based control diet perhaps indicates other constraints with these resources as well. Notably, the levels of ARA and DHA in the muscle reflected those of the diet, but the level of EPA (20:5n-3) in the muscle, in most cases exceeded the levels of ARA in each treatment despite that its levels in the diet were generally lower than those of ARA. A similar Schizochytrium SCO meal was fed to Pacific white shrimp post-larvae by Wang et al. [129]. These authors found that inclusion of up to 60 g/kg was well utilised by the shrimp, with best performance observed at 20 g/kg inclusion. A similar result was reported by Allen et al. [130] who also used a Schizochytrium SCO meal was fed to Pacific white shrimp. The use of an Aurantiochytrium SCO was reported by Araujo et al. [131], who included this microalgal SCO in diets for Pacific white shrimp at a range of levels up to 10 g/kg. The authors noted an improvement in growth with increasing inclusion level of the Aurantiochytrium SCO as well as increase in the DHA content of the lipids of the shrimp muscle. Another recent study also reported the use of an Aurantiochytrium SCO as a source of n-3 fatty acids in the diet for Pacific white shrimp [132]. Similarly, these authors found that the inclusion of the microalgal SCO improved growth of the shrimp when included at 40 g/kg in the diet, replacing about 50% of the fishoil. Additionally, with the use of the Aurantiochytrium SCO an increase in the levels of DHA in the shrimp tail muscle was observed.
## (s11) Marine Species
Number of References: 14

(p11.0) There has also been considerable application of microalgal SCP and SCO in the diets of various marine-fish species [20,[140][141][142][143][144]. Some of the logic behind this is that many of the microalgal sources are quite rich in the important n-3 LC-PUFA that are so important for the nutrition of many marinefish species and, as such, there has been a focus on the use of SCO resources as alternative sources of these n-3 LC-PUFA. Early work by Harel et al. [140] demonstrated that SCO resources made from Crypthecodinium, Chlorella, Schizochytrium and the fungus Mortierella alpina could each be used in various ways as components of either broodstock diets or larval enrichments for a range of marine fish species. Results were variable across the different fish species, with some applications showing no differences among the different SCO resources and others showing an enhanced benefit of Schizochytrium compared to Crypthecodinium.

(p11.1) A series of studies with European (gilthead) seabream (Sparus aurata) have shown some application of Crypthecodinium, Nannochloropsis, Phaeodactylum and Schizochytrium SCO resources in starter feeds [20,142,144]. In the study by Atalah et al. [20], Crypthecodinium and Phaeodactylum SCOs were included in diets at up to 39 and 48 g/kg respectively. There were no differences in growth rate among any of the treatments in the study, although fish fed the Phaeodactylum SCO performed numerically better than fish fed either the fishoil reference or the Crypthecodinium SCO. Survival, however, was significantly better with fish fed the Crypthecodinium SCO. Ganuza et al. (2008) also explored the use of Crypthecodinium, but compared its application against Schizochytrium, another DHA producer in seabream microdiets. In a series of two trials the SCOs were used on both a wholecell biomass basis, as well as homogenised. Inclusion of the Crypthecodinium ranged from 20 g/kg up to 156 g/kg, where as the inclusion of the Schizochytrium ranged from 25 g/kg to 212 g/kg. In the two trials, the first used a protein base of whole squid, whereas in the second trial the diets were based on defatted squid meal. The amounts of each SCO added were modulated slightly to balance the DHA provision in each diet. When added to microdiets based on whole squid there were no significant effects on survival or growth. However, in the second trial with the defatted squid meal none of the SCO treatments performed as well as the squid lipid reference diet. The main difference Isonitrogenous and isoenergetic replacement of fishmeal by a Nannochloropsis SCP resulted in equal feed intake but led to a 9% reduction in growth. By comparison, fish fed a diet containing 80% soybean meal also had better feed intake than the microalgae diet, but growth of the soybean-fed fish was was equal [135]. In this study, the body composition of the tilapia fed with the Nannochloropsis SCP were more enriched with EPA and DHA compared to the fish fed the fishmeal diet and especially compared to the soybean diet, reflecting the differences in the levels of these fatty acids in the diets. Also, the only tilapia study on microalgae SCO [36] showed substantial shifts in EPA and DHA filet content. Isonitrogenous and isoenergetic replacement of 9% fishoil by 16.1% Schizochytrium sp. increased filet DHA content by 81% while EPA content declined by 89%, which reflected the fatty acid pattern of the source of Schizochytrium sp. used. In this study the replaced of fishoil by microalgae SCO resulted in reduced feed intake by 13%. Despite the lower feed intake, weight gain increased by 13% and coincided with an increase in PER from 2.4 to 3.1 g/g.
## (s12) Marine Species
Number of References: 13

(p12.0) There has also been considerable application of microalgal SCP and SCO in the diets of various marine-fish species [20,[140][141][142][143][144]. Some of the logic behind this is that many of the microalgal sources are quite rich in the important n-3 LC-PUFA that are so important for the nutrition of many marine-fish species and, as such, there has been a focus on the use of SCO resources as alternative sources of these n-3 LC-PUFA. Early work by Harel et al. [140] demonstrated that SCO resources made from Crypthecodinium, Chlorella, Schizochytrium and the fungus Mortierella alpina could each be used in various ways as components of either broodstock diets or larval enrichments for a range of marine fish species. Results were variable across the different fish species, with some applications showing no differences among the different SCO resources and others showing an enhanced benefit of Schizochytrium compared to Crypthecodinium.

(p12.1) A series of studies with European (gilthead) seabream (Sparus aurata) have shown some application of Crypthecodinium, Nannochloropsis, Phaeodactylum and Schizochytrium SCO resources in starter feeds [20,142,144]. In the study by Atalah et al. [20], Crypthecodinium and Phaeodactylum SCOs were included in diets at up to 39 and 48 g/kg respectively. There were no differences in growth rate among any of the treatments in the study, although fish fed the Phaeodactylum SCO performed numerically better than fish fed either the fishoil reference or the Crypthecodinium SCO. Survival, however, was significantly better with fish fed the Crypthecodinium SCO. Ganuza et al. (2008) also explored the use of Crypthecodinium, but compared its application against Schizochytrium, another DHA producer in seabream microdiets. In a series of two trials the SCOs were used on both a whole-cell biomass basis, as well as homogenised. Inclusion of the Crypthecodinium ranged from 20 g/kg up to 156 g/kg, where as the inclusion of the Schizochytrium ranged from 25 g/kg to 212 g/kg. In the two trials, the first used a protein base of whole squid, whereas in the second trial the diets were based on defatted squid meal. The amounts of each SCO added were modulated slightly to balance the DHA provision in each diet. When added to microdiets based on whole squid there were no significant effects on survival or growth. However, in the second trial with the defatted squid meal none of the SCO treatments performed as well as the squid lipid reference diet. The main difference between the reference and the treatment diets was the level of EPA, which was largely deficient in the treatment diets. However, the experiment did also demonstrate that there was nominal apparent nutritional difference between the Crypthecodinium and Schizochytrium SCOs. Another study by Eryalçın et al. [142] examined the use of Crypthecodinium and Nannochloropsis SCO resources. Each SCO was examined individually (at 80 and 110 g/kg inclusion respectively), with a third treatment examining a combination of the two. All three SCO treatments were compared against a fishoil based reference. After 34 days, fish fed the reference diet performed the best and significantly better than both treatments containing the Nannochloropsis SCO. The fish fed the diet containing the Crypthecodinium SCO meal grew poorer than the reference, but not significantly so.
## (s18) Bacterial Resources
Number of References: 6

(p18.0) In contrast to the volume of work with microalgal SCI resources, studies that deal with the specific application of bacterial resources in the feeds for aquaculture species have been relatively rare [8,186]. Although work began on bacterial protein production about 50 years ago (even earlier if we consider Spirulina, which has long been used as a feed ingredient [187]), the revival of these resources has attracted some attention in recent years as a de novo source of producing protein, those that are non-competing with human food production based on the production of other plant or animal resources. What we could not find, however, were any studies where bacterial resources had been used to create a viable SCO resource. There has also been some speculation on the environmental credentials of some of the methanotrophic bacterial production systems in terms of their use of greenhouse gases, although whether there is credibility to that argument or not remains another question [188]. However, these resources too are certainly progressing both in terms of becoming reliable sources of protein [8,186]. This next section reviews a selection of studies examining the palatability and utilisation (growth) responses of key aquaculture species groups fed bacterial SCP resources.
## (s20) Shrimp
Number of References: 9

(p20.0) Of the bacterial SCP studies reported in shrimp, most centre on the application of Spirulina [194][195][196]. Very few studies were found on other bacterial SCP products [197]. By contrast, there were many studies examining the application of microbial bioflocs, which include bacterial biomass, but those will be covered in a later section. There were several studies that reported the evaluation of bacterial fermented plant-products [198,199] but, given that the bacterial component of those is so small, they will not be considered in the context of this review.

(p20.1) A study by Hanel et al. [194] examined the replacement of fishmeal by a lyophylized powder of Spirulina in diets for Pacific white shrimp (L. vannamei). These authors found that by adding powdered Spirulina to a shrimp diet that they were able to significantly improve the performance of that diet to become equivalent to that of a higher-quality diet. Not only were there improvements in growth, but also pigmentation benefits were noted. Other studies have also shown benefits beyond nutrient source provision from Spirulina in shrimp. Silvia-Neto et al. [195] reported improvements in palatability when Spirulina SCP was included, whereas Machias-Sancho et al. [196] found that a small inclusion (100 g/kg) stimulated the production of granular hemocytes in the hemolymph of the shrimp. Good growth performance was also observed in this study up to an inclusion of 300 g/kg, above which there was a significant deterioration in both growth and feed conversion.
## (s22) Marine Species
Number of References: 5

(p22.0) There have been relatively few studies on the application of bacterial protein resources in the diets of marine species. In addition to the suite of studies undertaken with rainbow trout and Atlantic salmon on the Methyolocuccus SCP, Aas et al. [201] also evaluated the same SCP resource in Atlantic halibut (Hippoglossus hippoglossus). Performance of the halibut was examined at either of three inclusion levels (0, 90 and 180 g/kg). A negative impact was observed on growth and feed intake at the 180 g/kg inclusion level, but not at the 90 g/kg inclusion level. Of the other studies with marine fish that were identified, both examined the use of a purple phototrophic bacterial biomass when included in diets for Asian seabass, but each comprised a different bacterial species [202,203]. The earlier study by Shapawi et al. [202] examined the use of a Rhodovulum SCP at very low inclusion levels of 3, 6 and 9 g/kg and found no impact on growth or feed intake over the 12-week duration of the study. The later study, by Delamare-Deboutteville et al. [203], examined the use of a mixed culture of purple phototrophic bacterial (PPB) biomass based on Rhodopseudomonas sp. and Rhodobacter sp. In the second study, fishmeal was progressively replaced by the PPB at 0, 100, 200 and 300 g/kg in the diet. After 7 weeks of feeding on the diets there were clear, significant effects on growth and FCR of PPB inclusion at every inclusion level based on a regression analysis of the data. The effects were not linked to palatability effects, with no significant differences in feed intake among the treatments.
## (s24) Shrimp
Number of References: 25

(p24.0) Shrimp perhaps represent the main species where biofloc SCI products have been applied with some success in the past decade [75][76][77]206,207]. Various types of harvested microbial bioflocs have been produced, including those from specific pond-based production, sequencing-batch reactors, and recirculated aquaculture systems [75,76,206,207]. Notably, the different systems have reported markedly different compositions of the protein content in the bioflocs, with a 10-fold range in levels from~50 g/kg to 500 g/kg.

(p24.1) Application of a biofloc SCI in the diets of both Pacific white shrimp (L. vannamei) and black tiger shrimp (Penaeus monodon) species have shown some remarkable properties in being to be able to stimulate the growth of shrimp, in some cases by more than 50% [75][76][77]206,207]. Early studies by Ju et al. [206] included whole and various biofloc fractions in diets fed Pacific white shrimp and found that adding an intact biofloc to the diet at 200 g/kg improved the growth rate about 17% and that this bioactive benefit could be attributed to the acetone-soluble fraction, which was suggested to contain carotenoids, bromophenols and other phenolic compounds. Other studies examining the inclusion of bioflocs have also reported growth improvement. Kuhn et al. [75] reported an improvement in growth of Pacific white shrimp of~50% when using a high-protein (490 g/kg) microbial biofloc produced using a sequencing-batch reactor, included at 157 g/kg in the diet. By contrast, Glencross et al. [76,77], who used a low-protein microbial biofloc (~40 g/kg) in two separate studies at 100 g/kg inclusion in diets fed to black tiger shrimp, reported growth improvements of 42% and 50%, respectively. This consistency in performance, despite the vagaries in protein level seem to insinuate that the bioactivity is not linked to the protein content of the biofloc and reinforces to some extent the observations of Ju et al. [206].

(p24.2) The growth stimulation benefits reported by various groups have also been used in various practical applications to compensate for either a reduction in diet protein or the complete replacement of all marine resources (fishmeal and fishoil) in shrimp diets. In the case of compensating for a decrease of dietary protein levels from 480 g/kg protein to 360 g/kg protein a significant improvement in the utilisation efficiency of protein was also observed [77]. Other studies have demonstrated that it is possible to produce shrimp with no losses in growth or feed efficiency when using zero marine resource inclusion (i.e., no fishmeal or fishoil) [76,207]. In both the study by Bauer et al. [204], and the study by Glencross et al. [76], the authors noted an improvement in the FCR with increasing inclusion of the microbial biomass, this was in contrast to the study by Arnold et al. [205] where it was shown that one of the main benefits of the microbial biomass addition was that it stimulated feed intake, with no effect on FCR being observed, but significant effects on growth.
## (s25) Tilapia
Number of References: 3

(p25.0) Azim and Little [208] demonstrated that Nile tilapia (O. niloticus) production was enhanced if the fish were cultured in situ with a microbial biofloc. The use of a high (350 g/kg) or low (240 g/kg) protein diet did not affect the composition of the biofloc produced, which had a protein content of 380 g/kg. Although produced in situ, the authors did make substantial comment about the nutritional quality of the biofloc as a fish food. In comparison to fish fed the same diet but without biofloc present, a 43% enhancement in growth was noted, along with a 30% improvement in FCR, indicating that there was both an increase in feed intake, as well as nutritional quality. In a second study by these authors, they focused on the production of the biofloc as a separate protein resource based on the discharge from Nile tilapia production and were able to produce a biofloc with 500 g/kg of protein [209]. However, recent work by Simon et al. [210] demonstrated the 100 g/kg inclusion of a microbial biofloc in the diets of Nile tilapia resulted in a significant improvement in growth (~35%) despite the fact that the microbial biofloc (Novacq™) material was almost devoid of protein. The authors noted that the main effect was an improvement in feed intake, with no improvements in FCR observed.
## (s29) Product Quality Influences
Number of References: 17

(p29.0) One of the primary applications of many of the SCO resources has been to fortify the flesh of target species with an increased level of n-3 LC-PUFA [22,86,114,115]. Consequently, there has been a proliferation of studies assessing aspects of product (flesh) quality influences when fed various SCOs. While most of the work in this area has been with Atlantic salmon, there is a spread of studies on several other aquaculture species as well.

(p29.1) A series of studies by Kousoulaki et al. [86,114,115] has reported benefits to flesh quality from the inclusion of a Schizochytrium SCP in feeds for Atlantic salmon. In addition to an elevated level of both EPA and DHA, improvements to various other in the flesh quality attributes, including pigmentation, reduced gaping, and the absence of melanin spots have also been observed [86,114]. Additionally, the authors found no impacts on the sensory attributes of the flesh from fish fed the Schizochytrium SCP based on the analysis of a trained sensory panel [115]. In addition to reporting enhanced levels of DHA in the flesh of Atlantic salmon fed a different Schizochytrium SCP, Sprague et al. [122] also reported a reduction in the levels of persistent organic pollutants such as polychlorinated biphenyls.

(p29.2) Various flesh quality responses with other microbial SCP and other aquaculture species have been reported [195,219,223]. Lu et al. [223] fed Nile tilapia with raw Spirulina as the sole feed input and found a series of flesh quality traits, assessed both mechanically and sensorially, had improved, making the fish more suitable for sashimi. Also using Spirulina, Teimouri et al. [193] reported improved pigmentation in rainbow trout compared to fish fed a non-pigmented control diet. An improvement in the colour of fillets of Nile tilapia when fed various microbial biomasses (bacterial and fungal), at very low levels (<5 g/kg), was also reported by Grassi et al. [219]. This effect was concomitant with a reduced level of malonaldehyde in the fillets which was used as a measure of antioxidant status.
