# Teaching for inclusion -a review of research on the cooperation between regular teachers and special educators in the work with students in need of special support

CorpusID: 228902790 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a671180dd1e41cb536bc81e63d90693bfdcbb0da](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a671180dd1e41cb536bc81e63d90693bfdcbb0da)

Fields: Sociology, Education

## (s12) Special educational consultations
Number of References: 8

(p12.0) Four studies described and analysed special educational consultations. Different models of consultations were reported that could be classified, using Sundqvist's (2012) categorisation, as both reflective conversations (Kjaer and Dannesboe 2019) and cooperative conversations (Pettersson and Ström 2017). Kjaer and Dannesboe (2019) describe consultations between educational psychologists and regular teachers as having a therapeutic character, where teachers were supposed to search within themselves for alternative instructional approaches, attitudes and behaviours. Kjaer and Dannesboe (2019) argue that consultations of this kind do not take advantage of the educational psychologists' expertise and transform teachers into coached employees rather than autonomous professionals. In the consultations analysed by Pettersson and Ström (2017), there was also an emphasis on the learning environment instead of individual students' deficits. However, Pettersson and Ström (2017) describe an even distribution of power between regular teachers and special educators in these consultations, which they noted were marked by professional dialogue and problem solving through mutual sharing of expertise. The special educators were supporting teachers in their everyday challenges, but the teachers were active agents in these meetings, rather than passive receivers.

(p12.1) The two other studies on special educational consultations both discussed challenges related to insufficient communication. Hemmingsson, Gustavsson, and Townsend (2007) examine teachers' cooperation with therapists working at habilitation centres regarding participatory arrangements for students with physical disabilities. The results showed that the cooperating actors held different views on the purpose of their cooperation. The teachers emphasised group belonging and participation in collective learning activities, whereas the therapists focused on independence and access to all sorts of activities. Hemmingsson, Gustavsson, and Townsend (2007) argue that institutional barriers and lack of communication hindered the cooperating actors' ability to understand each other's views. On the contrary, tensions emerged, as the teachers perceived the therapists as 'controllers', while the therapists considered themselves 'pushers' struggling with teachers who did not prioritise this area of their work. The interprofessional cooperation in Bray and Russell's (2018) study on regular teachers' implementation of IEPs written and monitored by special educators can also be considered an advisory form of special educational consultations, although in written form. The special educators in the study experienced strong institutional demands to connect the IEPs tightly to general curriculum standards. This resulted in texts with limited guidance for regular teachers on how to attend to individual students' needs and to mere surface adaptions in the instructional activities.
## (s13) Mixed forms of cooperation
Number of References: 5

(p13.0) Four other studies examined mixed forms of cooperation between regular teachers and special educators. Strogilos (2012) investigated a school's implementation of an inclusion programme that consisted of professional development for teachers, the forming of a local inclusion team, and interprofessional cooperation through co-teaching and monthly multidisciplinary meetings. Vernon-Dotson (2008) studied three schools that put together teacher leadership teamsconsisting of regular teachers, special educators and administratorswhich organised meetings and workshops in order to support regular teachers in their efforts to differentiate instruction. In one of the schools, coteaching was also introduced. Olson, Leko, and Roberts (2016) examined how a school that won a prestigious inclusive education award provided access to the general curriculum for all students through the use of a variety of forms of interprofessional cooperation. Each grade in the school had two teams consisting of regular teachers and a learning strategist, which were supposed to share ideas and solve problems together. Other forms of cooperation included joint planning, team teaching, and IEP teams that worked together with teachers to develop curricular goals for students. Another form of mixed cooperation was described by Eisenman et al. (2011), who investigated a collaborative consultation model at a high school where two special educators mixed teacher consultations with temporary co-teaching and direct work with students through coaching and additional teaching after school.

(p13.1) Several positive outcomes of these mixed forms of cooperation were reported. Eisenman et al. (2011) claim that the model in their study enhanced flexibility for special educators and supported an equal professional relationship between them and the regular teachers. In all studies, it was argued that the cooperation model in focus increased the number of students in need of support who were physically placed in the general classroom. Moreover, all studies described increasingly positive attitudes towards inclusion among teachers, towards shared responsibilities for students, and towards school cultures that value cooperation. Strogilos (2012) suggests that the combination of support inside the general classroom with interprofessional cooperation through discussions and consultations both challenged the teachers' assumptions about special needs and strengthened their beliefs that inclusion is possible. In some cases, benefits of the models in terms of student progress were described by respondents in the studies. For example, the special educators in Eisenman et al. (2011) study suggested that the instructional arrangement was an important reason that more students in need of support were accepted to their top choices for further education.
