# sustainability The Production of Sustainable Concrete with the Use of Alternative Aggregates: A Review

CorpusID: 224846307 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cafa06899cd32aab6105ec09021e03fa50f757d9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cafa06899cd32aab6105ec09021e03fa50f757d9)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Engineering

## (s9) Physical Properties
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) Residues from waste treatment led to a reduction in workability due to the hygroscopic behaviour of ISSA particles and the increase in porosity, for MSWI ash, that reduce the final density. Addition of MSWI fine ash as fine aggregate influences physical properties of concrete: the workability gradually decreases while the porosity linearly increases with the substitution rate. Samples with different substitution rate studied by Kuo et al. [7] reported, with a porosity range of 24-27.5%, a slump test result of 270 mm. Fineness of ISSA particles underline its suitability as a substitute for fine aggregates. However, according to data [71], increasing the ISSA share in concrete significantly affect the workability: over a 15% of substitution rate zero slump is achievable. The cause can be found in a reduction in water/cement ratio and in the "hygroscopic nature" of ISSA particles due to the particles work in cement matrix as free water absorbers [72]. The use of sewage sludge (SS) as a substitute of fine aggregates has caused a reduction in density and an increase in capillary water absorption, thus partially compromising mechanical performance [72].
## (s12) Metallurgical Industry by-Products
Number of References: 13

(p12.0) Moving to metallurgical industry, concrete has shown to be a suitable material where waste foundry sands (WFS) can be adopted to partially replace natural fine aggregates [28]. This is a high-quality sand coming as a by-product of industrial metal castings [80]. The partial replacement through solidification/stabilization process, not exceeding 20% by weight, leads to a final product with performances close to RC [81]. Processed ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBFS) becomes a granular product that can be dried and ground into a fine powder. In this shape, it is a natural substitute for fine aggregates: a 100% replacement of sand can be reached, but GGBFS incorporation hugely affects the final performance of composites. The compressive strength increased with an increasing GGBFS content [82]. Resistance to high temperature, surface abrasion, and durability properties of concrete are other characteristics affected by the substitution [83]. In road construction, there is a heavy metal industry waste suitable as a substitute: lead slag. Primary and secondary lead slag can be turned both in fine and coarse aggregates through a cement-based stabilization/solidification process [84]. It has shown a better grain size curve than sand itself, complying with the compressive strength requirements [85]. Alwaeli [86] has demonstrated that the incorporation of granulated lead-zinc slag in concrete works as a shield to the gamma radiation, so it would properly fit in laboratories construction where radiation are generally used. A full replacement of sand is theoretically achievable: results have shown that compressive strength increases with the content of lead slag.

(p12.1) Electric-arc furnace dust is a further typical metallurgical waste of the iron industry. Potentially, it can fully replace ordinary coarse aggregates [87]: benefits involve both mechanical and durability strength of final composite. Side effects of its incorporation, however, mainly concern the workability [88] and the dimensional stability performance [89]. The physical properties and chemical composition of electric-arc furnace dust widely varies according to the source, so a complete evaluation of its impact in concrete performance is difficult if not pre-processed to make it more stable [30]. The reduction in terms of workability is caused by a more uneven distribution of coarse aggregate size than RC, but both compressive, tensile, and shrinkage test attested the material reliability [90].
## (s16) Other By-Products
Number of References: 8

(p16.0) Coming from a completely different sector, mixed sheet glass is another kind of waste mainly disposed to landfill that can be recycled in concrete manufacturing. The substitution of natural sand and fine aggregates with sheet glass powder represents both an economical way to manage waste glass and a natural resources conservation strategy. With a replacement percentage around 10-20%, the concrete performances are perfectly aligned with those containing natural sand aggregates [104]. In fact, the chemical composition and the pozzolanic properties of glass resemble those of sand [105]. Particle size mainly affects the concrete performance in bearing capacity and cohesion. A low particle size guarantees the pozzolanic reaction between the waste glass and the cement producing a higher resistance [105,106]. The decrease in the flexural strength of the final product in case of excessive waste glass addition is caused by a lower adhesion [107] due to the glass particle surface [108,109]. Recycled glass from bottles is another source for alternative fine aggregates. It decreases the water-cement ratio and the unit weight of concrete [110].
## (s18) Mechanical Properties
Number of References: 6

(p18.0) Glass powder registered a loss around 10-20% of both compressive and flexural resistance due to the particle size that can cause the cracking of the aggregate. At lower replacement levels, the use of glass sand instead of natural sand does not highly affect the mechanical performance of concrete: compressive, flexural, and tensile strength are close to RC under 10-15% of substitution. Nevertheless, different research [105,117,118] has shown that the alkali-silica reaction is responsible for cracking of aggregates during the production phase. The particle size has been proven to influence this process, as it increases with increasing the particle sizes of the waste glass aggregate. Therefore, compressive strength results lower, around 51% than RC, when increasing the percentage of glass powder up to 60%. A similar trend has been detected when investigating on the flexural strength: the reduction with an increasing percentage of the waste glass aggregate depends on the decrease in adhesive strength of glass particle surface [104,105]. Tensile strength, instead, showed the opposite behaviour increasing with the amount of glass used as fine aggregate [109].
## (s19) Environmental Properties
Number of References: 2

(p19.0) Glass particle finesses and low porosity of specimens showed a positive effect increasing the resistance to chloride ion penetration. Concrete mixture integrating glass powder showed "no segregation or bleeding during mixing and casting" [105]. In terms of chloride permeability, all the mixtures with a range share of glass powder between 0-50% presented high values: the highest, 6764 Coulombs, in the case of natural sand. Glass colour affected this property as the charges passed with a 50% replacement level for brown, green, clear, and mixed glass sand were 93%, 69%, 71%, and 64%, respectively. The lower porosity and the finer size of glass particles integrated in concrete have positively affected the resistance to chloride ion penetration. Regarding sulphate attack, the different mixtures registered comparable weight loss [109].
