# Biomass Pretreatment and Characterization: A Review

CorpusID: 224928544 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd1e5b1d34cd0a8b2f88e86b4c75e15e7ee96129](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd1e5b1d34cd0a8b2f88e86b4c75e15e7ee96129)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry

## (s3) Physical pretreatment
Number of References: 11

(p3.0) Physical pretreatment of biomass is intended to reduce particle size by mechanical comminution in order to increase surface area and pore size. For LCB materials,  [17][18][19][20].

(p3.1) physical pretreatment decreases cellulose crystallinity and degree of polymerization. It is a vital step prior to both the biochemical and thermochemical conversion of biomass [7,26]. However, there is limited information about the mode of action of physical pretreatment processes, particularly with respect to how the chemical composition of biomass is modified or how its structure is affected. The application of biomass determines the type of physical pretreatment method to be applied. For instance, biochemical conversion of LCB will require size reduction through milling in order to improve enzymatic digestibility of lignocellulosic components. For thermochemical conversion applications of biomass, milling is required for densification, pelletization and even torrefaction prior to thermochemical conversion. In both conversion pathways (biochemical and thermochemical), prior size reduction is necessary in order to eliminate mass and heat transfer limitations. Chipping is also another physical pretreatment technique commonly employed when the biomass is to be used as feedstock in thermochemical conversion processes. This is because most thermochemical conversion systems are size specific hence require feedstock size in the range 50 mm by 50 mm in diameter [7]. As previously stated, densification, pelletization and torrefaction are all considered physical pretreatment methods for biomass intended as feedstock for thermochemical conversion processes [7]. These pretreatment techniques use heat to initiate changes that leads to improved biomass characteristics. A major drawback of the physical pretreatment technique however is its lack of ability to get rid of the lignin content of LCB materials, which renders the cellulose content of the material inaccessible. Other shortcomings include high energy consumption and the prohibitive cost of scale-up for commercial purposes. Studies [26,27] have shown that the process of lignin removal from LCB materials could be one of the major reasons for the high energy demand of physical pretreatment techniques hence the overall energy efficiency of a bio refinery process may be ultimately affected by this pretreatment method [26].
## (s4) Chemical pretreatment
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) Chemical pretreatment of biomass involves the use of organic or inorganic compounds to bring about disruption of biomass structure through interaction with intra-and inter polymer bonds of primary organic components. Biomass, particularly LCB materials are resistant to chemical breakdown hence biomass is regarded as being recalcitrant in nature. A host of factors are responsible for the recalcitrance nature of biomass including the structural complexity and heterogeneity of biomass, the crystalline nature of its cellulose content, and the extent of lignification [7,28]. Throughout the chemical pretreatment process, the structural recalcitrance of LCB is disrupted, resulting in the reduction of cellulose crystallinity and depolymerization as well as the degradation of cellulose and the breakdown of lignin [29,30]. For biochemical conversion of biomass, particularly LCB, chemical pretreatment is commonly undertaken in order to isolate the respective biopolymeric constituents of the material. Figure 3 shows the effect of chemical pretreatment on LCB.
## (s6) Biomass characterization
Number of References: 6

(p6.0) Heterogeneity remains an inherent characteristic of biomass. The feasibility and viability of products recovery from biomass depends upon its properties. The two main conversion pathways earlier mentioned are basically used to recover products of value from biomass. The choice of the conversion route also depends on the features of biomass hence characterization is essential to better understand quintessential physicochemical properties of biomass that will determine how suitable the material is for conversion; these properties are keys to the efficient utilization of biomass in bioconversion processes [1,7]. However, the characteristics of biomass are largely swayed by its primary organic components (cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin), which vary depending on biomass source, species, climatic conditions, etc. Depending on the end use of biomass, characterization of biomass is commonly determined and reported in terms of proximate and ultimate analysis using a variety of analytical tools some of which are described in subsequent sections of this review. This provides vital information for evaluating various application potential of biomass, particularly its energy production potential, which also takes into account heating value when the biomass is used as feedstock in thermochemical conversion processes such as gasification [25]. Table 3 presents the most important characteristics of various lignocellulosic and non-lignocellulosic biomass materials. The proximate analysis estimates the physical properties of biomass with direct influence on the combustion performance of biomass, while ultimate analysis provides a qualitative and quantitative estimation of chemical properties in terms of the weight fractions of elemental components (such as C, H and O) and determines the heating value of biomass, a vital property of biomass materials intended as feedstock for thermochemical conversion processes; the amounts of other elements such as N, S and Si can help determine the environmental impact of using biomass as a fuel [25,50,51]. The proximate and ultimate analyses are discussed further in the following section.
## (s9) X-ray diffraction analyzer
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) To the best of the author's knowledge, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) is the only analytical instrument able to reveal comprehensive structural information of materials. Structural information that can be obtained includes chemical composition, deformation, crystal structure, crystal size and orientation as well as layer thickness. This instrument can be used to analyze a wide range of materials including nanomaterials. The XRD is equally a valuable analytical tool for studies involving biomass characterization for various applications. In XRD analysis, the extent of crystallinity is calculated based on an equation: (Eq. (1)) [52,53]:
## (s10) Solid state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) For the analysis of biomass materials considered for the purpose of biofuels, biochar or chemicals production, the solid state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (SSNMR) is the ideal technique. This technique allows detailed structural elucidation of major constituents of biomass, particularly lignocellulosic biomass such as wood. It complements the XRD technique since the degree of cellulose crystallinity can also be determined. Nonetheless, the XRD is based on the proposition that X-ray scattering can be divided into two structural components that are amorphous and crystalline [54], while SSNMR is characterized by orientationdependent interactions that are observed in a very broad spectrum that provides detailed information on material chemistry, structure and dynamics in the solid state. The production of biofuels and chemicals from lignocellulosic biomass require an unfettered access to cellulose and hemicellulose, thus SSNMR can be used to comprehend bioconversion of biomass as a function of process conditions [55].
## (s11) Thermo-gravimetric analysis analyzer
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) When there is a need to investigate the combustion behavior of biomass materials, the thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) is particularly useful and valuable for determining thermal parameters relevant to the thermochemical conversion of biomass. Proximate analysis data can be obtained from TGA. In this technique, the sample is combusted at desired heating rates in a chemically inactive atmosphere of nitrogen or argon such that the mass of the sample is monitored as temperature increases. The change in mass of the sample is usually plotted as a function of time or temperature. The TGA is a high temperature analytical instrument that adequately mimics the conditions existing in a typical thermal energy production system [56]. For studies involving the need to determine the kinetics of thermal decomposition of biomass, TGA is equally very helpful as it provides qualitative information that can be used to understand process conditions and design parameters of thermochemical conversion systems [57]. This requires that TGA be conducted at different heating rates and its derivative (DTG) used to simplify the reading of the characteristic peaks obtained from the thermogram of change in mass versus temperature.
