# ουδα » αν in Acts 2:9 a Diachronic Overview of its Conjectured Emendations

CorpusID: 220370542 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f17db40a15c8a375221d3e8f013fee7c77d38ec1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f17db40a15c8a375221d3e8f013fee7c77d38ec1)

Fields: Philosophy

## (s2) When in doubt, leave it out
Number of References: 4

(p2.0) Of the many solutions to the interpretive problem of Ἰουδαίαν in Acts 2:9, the remedy to regard it as a later inclusion²⁴ or a very early corruption²⁵ of the text for which we are not able to identify the original has been widely discussed. The idea to regard it as a corruption was introduced by the English theologian, historian, and mathematician William Whiston²⁶ (1746), although an early citation in Theophylact²⁷ (1097) might hint in its direction. This line of reasoning stems from the observation that a certain geographical clustering can be perceived in the enumeration of countries and peoples if Ἰουδαίαν is left out.²⁸ The view has been reinvented twice²⁹ and has been equally opposed³⁰ as advocated.³¹ Among its advocates, it finds Richard Pervo.³² Pervo's other option, to mark the spot with a blank space, indicating that the original cannot be identified with reasonable certainty, resonates with the opinion of Johannes Marinus Simon Baljon (1898), who was familiar with the readings Συριαν, Aρμενιαν, Bιθυνιαν, Iδουμαιαν, and Ποντον τε και Aσιαν and their originators. Ultimately, Baljon regarded Ἰουδαίαν as a corruption. He did not adopt any of the offered emendations.³³

(p2.1) Of the many solutions to the interpretive problem of Ἰουδαίαν in Acts 2:9, the remedy to regard it as a later inclusion²⁴ or a very early corruption²⁵ of the text for which we are not able to identify the original has been widely discussed. The idea to regard it as a corruption was introduced by the English theologian, historian, and mathematician William Whiston²⁶ (1746), although an early citation in Theophylact²⁷ (1097) might hint in its direction. This line of reasoning stems from the observation that a certain geographical clustering can be perceived in the enumeration of countries and peoples if Ἰουδαίαν is left out.²⁸ The view has been reinvented twice²⁹ and has been equally opposed³⁰ as advocated.³¹ Among its advocates, it finds Richard Pervo.³² Pervo's other option, to mark the spot with a blank space, indicating that the original cannot be identified with reasonable certainty, resonates with the opinion of Johannes Marinus Simon Baljon (1898), who was familiar with the readings Συριαν, Aρμενιαν, Bιθυνιαν, Iδουμαιαν, and Ποντον τε και Aσιαν and their originators. Ultimately, Baljon regarded Ἰουδαίαν as a corruption. He did not adopt any of the offered emendations.³³
## (s9) When in doubt, leave it out
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) Of the many solutions to the interpretive problem of Ἰουδαίαν in Acts 2:9, the remedy to regard it as a later inclusion²⁴ or a very early corruption²⁵ of the text for which we are not able to identify the original has been widely discussed. The idea to regard it as a corruption was introduced by the English theologian, historian, and mathematician William Whiston²⁶ (1746), although an early citation in Theophylact²⁷ (1097) might hint in its direction. This line of reasoning stems from the observation that a certain geographical clustering can be perceived in the enumeration of countries and peoples if Ἰουδαίαν is left out.²⁸ The view has been reinvented twice²⁹ and has been equally opposed³⁰ as advocated.³¹ Among its advocates, it finds Richard Pervo.³² Pervo's other option, to mark the spot with a blank space, indicating that the original cannot be identified with reasonable certainty, resonates with the opinion of Johannes Marinus Simon Baljon (1898), who was familiar with the readings Συριαν, Aρμενιαν, Bιθυνιαν, Iδουμαιαν, and Ποντον τε και Aσιαν and their originators. Ultimately, Baljon regarded Ἰουδαίαν as a corruption. He did not adopt any of the offered emendations.³³

(p9.1) Of the many solutions to the interpretive problem of Ἰουδαίαν in Acts 2:9, the remedy to regard it as a later inclusion²⁴ or a very early corruption²⁵ of the text for which we are not able to identify the original has been widely discussed. The idea to regard it as a corruption was introduced by the English theologian, historian, and mathematician William Whiston²⁶ (1746), although an early citation in Theophylact²⁷ (1097) might hint in its direction. This line of reasoning stems from the observation that a certain geographical clustering can be perceived in the enumeration of countries and peoples if Ἰουδαίαν is left out.²⁸ The view has been reinvented twice²⁹ and has been equally opposed³⁰ as advocated.³¹ Among its advocates, it finds Richard Pervo.³² Pervo's other option, to mark the spot with a blank space, indicating that the original cannot be identified with reasonable certainty, resonates with the opinion of Johannes Marinus Simon Baljon (1898), who was familiar with the readings Συριαν, Aρμενιαν, Bιθυνιαν, Iδουμαιαν, and Ποντον τε και Aσιαν and their originators. Ultimately, Baljon regarded Ἰουδαίαν as a corruption. He did not adopt any of the offered emendations.³³
