# A Survey: Intrusion Detection System for Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs)

CorpusID: 226419872 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/665b394ebe0cc1c161ee84e8ace7dd9d8aa4028d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/665b394ebe0cc1c161ee84e8ace7dd9d8aa4028d)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s1) Security Requirements in VANETs
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) Security in VANET is critical due to vulnerabilities exist during information transmission in VANET, which causing VANET exposed to the attacks. In order to maintain a secure vehicular communication and networks, VANET security system should satisfy with the requirements. Some of the requirements are essential for all networks, but some are definite for VANET only [5]. Those requirements are: 2.1. Authentication: in order to allow the communication between vehicles which sending and receiving information, VANET should authenticate each of them. This process may comprise the identification of the sender identity and the legitimacy of the sender to use the network [5]. Authenticity involves proof of identity. Users should be able to identify each other's identity with which they are interacting. It can be verified through authentication process so the unauthorized entity cannot participate in the communication.
## (s4) Attackers in VANET
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) 3.1. Passive Attackers: As the name suggests these attackers do not participate in the communication process but only surveillance the wireless channel to bring out information and pass them to other attackers that is they have an indirect involvement in the attack [6]. 3.2. Active Attackers: Active attackers have a direct involvement in the attack. These kinds of attackers either generate a wrong set of information or do not forward the correct information received that is the message is misinformed [6].
## (s12) Gray Hole attack:
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) This attack occurs if some node dropping 50% of the packets and rest 50% is sending by altering the message [6]. 4.4. Black hole attack: is the attack that is carried out to disrupt the normal performance of the networks. It is a security attack in which malicious node absorbs all data packets by sending fake routing information and drops them without forwarding them. In black hole attack, a malicious node uses its routing protocol in order to advertise itself for having the shortest path to the destination node or to the packet it wants to intercept. Attacker node will always have the availability in replying to the route request and thus intercept the data packet and retain it. In protocol based on flooding, the malicious node reply will be received by the requesting node before the reception of reply from actual node; hence a malicious and forged route is created. When this route is establish, now it's up to the node whether to drop all the packets or forward it to the unknown address [7]. 
## (s13) Selective Forwarding Attack:
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) In this attack, malicious node acts as a normal node but it selectively drops some packets [8]. Black hole attack is the simplest form of selective forwarding attack in which all packets are dropped by the malicious node. 4.6. Wormhole Attack: In this attack, the adversary node creates a virtual tunnel between two ends. An adversary node acts as a forwarding node between two actual nodes. The two malicious nodes usually claim that they are one hop away from the base station. The wormhole attack can also be used to convince two distinct nodes that they are the neighbors by relaying packets between two of them [9]. 4.7. Sinkhole Attack: In this attack, malicious node attracts network traffic towards it. To launch these types of attack, a malicious node attract all adjacent nodes to forward their packets through the malicious node by showing its routing cost minimum. The attacker creates an attack by introducing false node inside a network [8].
## (s14) Sybil Attack:
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) In this attack, the node has multiple identities. The routing protocol, detection algorithm and cooperation processes can be attacked by a malicious node [8]. 4.9. Hello Flood Attack: In a sensor network, the routing protocol broadcast hello message to announce its presence to its neighbors. A node which receives the hello message may assume that the source node is within its communication range and add this source node to its neighbor list [10].
## (s15) Intrusion detection system
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) Intrusion Detection System (IDS) is used to monitor the malicious traffic in particular node and network. It can act as a second line of defense which can defend the network from intruders. IDS can be a software or hardware tools. IDS can inspect and investigate machines and user actions, detect signatures of well-known attacks and identify malicious network activity. The goal of IDS is to observe the networks and nodes, detect various intrusions in the network, and alert the users after intrusions had been detected. The IDS works as an alarm or network observer it avoids damage of the systems by generating an alert before the attackers begin to attack. It can detect both internal and external attacks. Internal attacks are launched by malicious or compromised nodes that belong to the network, whereas external attacks are launched by third parties who are initiated by outside network [6]. IDS detect the network packets and determine whether they are intruders or legitimate users. There mainly three components of IDS: Monitoring, Analysis and detection, Alarm. The monitoring module monitors the network traffics, patterns and resources. Analysis and Detection is a core component of IDS which detects the intrusions according to specified algorithm. Alarm module raised an alarm if intrusion is detected [6].
