# Stroke Epidemiology in South, East, and South-East Asia: A Review

CorpusID: 22221174 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/df96d57ec7ef966b52e5f6bd356d5e4cdd53052e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/df96d57ec7ef966b52e5f6bd356d5e4cdd53052e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Incidence
Number of References: 10

(p4.0) Stroke incidence data are available for most countries in East Asia, but only for some in the other regions (Table 1). [6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15] The lowest rate is observed in Malaysia (67/100,000 person-years). The highest rates are in Japan (422/100,000 person-years among men and 212/100,000 person-years among women) and Taiwan (330/100,000 person-years). However, the results are not strictly comparable, as the methods used were variable and the studies were performed at different time points. However, the observed variations may reflect differences in the risk-factor prevalence, screening/detection method and level of control.
## (s5) Prevalence
Number of References: 14

(p5.0) Data on stroke prevalence are more readily-available than those on incidence; especially so in East Asia (Table 1). [6][7][8][9]12,[15][16][17][18][19][20][21][22][23] Comparisons of the studies are difficult to perform as differing study methods were used for case-finding, and differing age bands were investigated. These studies were also conducted at different time points. As prevalence reflects the balance between incidence and mortality, a low prevalence may be due to low incidence or high mortality or both; conversely, a high prevalence may be due to high incidence or low mortality or both. Competing illnesses such as coronary artery disease may reduce the number of stroke survivors and provide a falsely low stroke prevalence value. Prevalence still, however, reflects the status of disease in the community that healthcare services for chronic diseases need to actively deal with.
## (s9) Geographical variations within countries
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) Variations in stroke epidemiology have been found within many countries. Studies in China have shown that the stroke incidence is higher in the northern regions compared to the south, 9 with double the incidence along the stroke belt. 41 In India, on the contrary, the incidence is higher in rural areas. 7 In Thailand, the stroke prevalence is highest in the cities, and then, in a decreasing fashion, in the central, south, north, and northeast regions of the country. 23 Similarly, stroke prevalence was found to be higher in cities and urban areas than in rural regions, in Indonesia. 20 These differences have been attributed to the differences in the risk factors between various regions in the same country. However, there is no difference in the age-standardized stroke mortality between the metropolitan cities of Korea and the other regions in the country. 12
## (s11) South-East Asia
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Brunei Myanmar than stroke patients. However, in some countries, the converse is true, wherein the stroke-related mortality exceeds the mortality caused by ischemic heart disease (in China by 11.9%, Korea by 9.9%, Mongolia by 8.0%, Thailand by 6.6%, etc.). Yet, the stroke mortality in Asia is higher than in North America or Europe. 43 Likewise, globally, the disease burden-as measured by the DALYs lost-associated with stroke is lower than that associated with ischemic heart disease. 42 However, in terms of mortality, the stroke burden exceeds the ischemic heart disease burden in the same countries in which an excess stroke mortality is observed-China, Mongolia, and Thailand.
