# Clinical Medicine Bilateral Subthalamic Nucleus Deep Brain Stimulation under General Anesthesia: Literature Review and Single Center Experience

CorpusID: 221886488 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d0e9d76b5adc55a36d9a9046a8d105c8df5a67a2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d0e9d76b5adc55a36d9a9046a8d105c8df5a67a2)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) STN DBS Using Intraoperative Imaging or Microelectrode Recording Under GA
Number of References: 5

(p1.0) The DBS surgical procedure can be divided into two stages: the intracranial implantation of DBS electrodes and the implantation of implantable pulse generator (IPG). In the case of IPG implantation, GA is generally preferred because tunneling is required subcutaneously. For intracranial electrode implantation, the STN DBS procedure under LA and GA are similar, but the specific details are different. The main difference between the STN DBS surgical procedure under LA and GA is the intraoperative verification method for the intended target acquisition, i.e., test stimulation or intraoperative imaging with or without MER. An accurate electrode location is a key factor to determine the postoperative prognosis after STN DBS surgery [17][18][19][20]. Image verification of the lead position is an important step, whether intra-or postoperatively [21]. For STN DBS under GA, some centers perform intraoperative verification using MER even under GA, and other centers use intraoperative imaging without MER. We reviewed each method of STN DBS under GA using intraoperative imaging or MER, respectively (Table 1). 
## (s3) Intraoperative CT
Number of References: 9

(p3.0) In some centers, intraoperative computed tomography (iCT) during surgery is used to verify the accuracy of lead placement (Table 1). This is achieved through fusion of iCT scans and preoperative MRI scans after intracranial electrode implantation [31,37,41,44,47]. In awake DBS surgery with MER guidance, iCT provides useful information, such as hemorrhage and a general idea of electrode location when fused with preoperative MRI [21]. According to a study about the accuracy of microelectrode trajectory in patients receiving MER-guided awake DBS using iCT, median (IQR) radial error 0.59 (0.64) mm, and median (IQR) absolute x and y coordinate errors were 0.29 (0.52) and 0.38 (0.44) mm, respectively [21]. Burchiel et al. fused and compared iCT and trajectory planning images after electrode implantation for various targets [37]. The mean vector error and mean deviation of trajectory was 1.59 ± 1.11 mm and 1.24 ± 0.87 mm, respectively, and the intraoperative replacement was performed on one electrode with a vector error of more than 3 mm. There was a significant correlation between the distance from the ventricle and the error. Kremer et al. stated that the mean difference between lead tips was 0.98 ± 0.49 mm, and the upper confidence interval did not exceed the non-inferiority margin described when comparing postoperative MRI with iCT [48].
## (s4) Intraoperative MRI
Number of References: 27

(p4.0) Other centers use intraoperative (interventional) MRI (iMRI) to guide DBS electrode placement to the STN (Table 1) [23][24][25][26][27][28][29]44,[62][63][64]. For example, the UCSF group reported their experience about bilateral STN DBS in PD patients using a first-generation MRI system (Nexframe, high-field interventional MR-imaging) [25] and ClearPoint system (ClearPoint interventional MRI) [27]. There have been few published studies on the use of intraoperative MRI [23,24,[26][27][28]44,[62][63][64][65][66][67]. One of the reported advantages of iMRI is that it provides a real-time image acquisition to prospectively guided both trajectory planning and intended target verification prior to electrode placement [66]. Therefore, iMRI is one of the most useful methods for DBS targeting that allows precise validation of the real location of electrodes relative to the intended targets [66].
## (s5) Targeting Accuracy
Number of References: 14

(p5.0) The theoretical assumption of STN DBS under GA surgery is that the accuracy in targeting STN is not less and the results are better than STN DBS surgery under LA using MER. Kochanski et al. analyzed MER trajectories after STN DBS using 227 iCTs and found that 1.2 ± 0.2mm of radial error occurred in comparison with the location of the intended targets [68]. These errors may be related to the mechanical errors related with the frame, arc, guide tube, and frame, which can lead to lead deviation [69]. In a large-scale study of DBS patients who underwent surgery using iCT, there were greater Euclidean error and greater medial deviation in the trajectory targeting Vim. The authors found that there are systematic tendencies in stereotactic error that differ with respect to the structure targeted [70]. In the study analyzing stereotactic accuracy of iMRI, the DBS lead placement using iMRI guidance showed a radial targeting error of 0.6-1.2 mm, while the error using iCT was 0.8-1.24 mm [22,25,27,28,31,37,71]. STN DBS surgery under GA using confirmatory iCT is based on the assumption that CT-MRI merge was performed correctly, but there may be some errors in the fusion of imaging modality, which may lead to suboptimal targeting [38,72,73]. The advantage of STN DBS surgery with iMRI guidance is that it has less dependence on image fusion and can reflect brain shift after dura opening. Analysis of the iMRI study revealed that the deep brain structure moves about 2 mm after opening the dura [74].
## (s8) Is MER Possible Under GA?
Number of References: 5

(p8.0) STN DBS under GA has traditionally been used in patients who are unable to tolerate awake surgery including pediatric patients, or in patients who do not require clinical testing, such as obsessive-compulsive disorder or epilepsy. The biggest concern with STN DBS surgery under GA for movement disorder is the possibility of diminution of MER signals. A few small-sized retrospective studies have reported that MER obtained from STN, GPi, substantia nigra in STN DBS surgery under GA with both volatile and intravenous anesthetics in PD and dystonia patients showed no significant difference compared with patients awake during the procedure [54,[88][89][90][91]. Notably, the neural activity of typical burst pattern disappeared when higher anesthetic doses were used. However, the results of these studies are controversial given the small sample size and heterogeneity of the anesthetic used. A prospective, double-blinded study is needed to compare the effects of anesthetic agents on MER quality in patients undergoing STN DBS surgery under GA.
## (s9) Intraoperative Imaging vs. MER in STN DBS under GA
Number of References: 19

(p9.0) Recent meta-analysis reported that no significant difference was found in the improvement of UPDRS III score or LEDD between LA and GA cohort (Tables 2-4) [16,33,46,54,55,107]. Lefaucheur et al. reported that the rate of reduction in UPDRS III axial, gait, postural stability, and rigidity subscores tended to be greater when performed under LA compared to GA, but the difference was not statistically significant [33]. On the other hand, Chen et al. reported that the LA cohort showed greater improvement in posture and walking than the GA cohort (p = 0.054), while the GA cohort showed a significant decrease in cognitive function (p = 0.017) [55].

(p9.1) Some studies have used MER in STN DBS surgery under GA (mean 1.92 ± 0.68) and LA cohort (mean 2.27 ± 1.31) with respect to the maximum error of each read (p = 0.557) despite the varying targets [33,52,55]. Ho et al. reported that there was no significant difference between GA (mean 1.92 ± 0.68) and LA cohort (mean 2.27 ± 1.31) with respect to the maximum error of each lead (p = 0.557), but their study included a variety of targets [16]. The number of lead passes and the incidence of intracranial hemorrhage and infection were lower in STN DBS under GA, but treatment-related side effects based on the UPDRS IV "off" score were lower in DBS under LA (LA cohort 78.4% vs GA cohort 59.7%, p = 0.022) [16,35]. However, other studies showed no difference in the UPDRS IV subscore between the GA and LA groups [24,107]. As for LEDD, some studies reported that the 6-months postoperative LEDD reduction was significantly greater in the LA group, while others showed statistically similar reductions (LA cohort 38.27%, GA cohort 49.27%, p = 0.4447) [26,107]. Tsai et al. reported that symptoms of the patients with PD improved after DTN DBS in both LA and GA cohorts without significant differences in LEDD and UPDRS IV scores [52].
## (s10) SNUH Experience
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) Our  [114,115], these patients were included for the comparison. After approval by the institutional review board (IRB No. 1904-015-102), we retrospectively reviewed all patient medical records and databases (unpublished data). The scales that evaluated patients were as follows: UPDRS, Hoehn and Yahr (H&Y) Staging, Schwab & England ADL, dyskinesia disability, LEDD, Short Form-36 Health Survey (SF-36), and neuropsychological tests. All clinical evaluations were performed before surgery and 6 months after surgery by experienced neurologists. Patients were evaluated in both off-and on-medication states, respectively.
