# A survey on application of machine learning to manage the virtual machines in cloud computing

CorpusID: 225156886 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ec5f4f60455dad84e9c6bc716b5671b51a226689](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ec5f4f60455dad84e9c6bc716b5671b51a226689)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s1) Virtualization
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) The technique of virtualization has the aim of efficient management of extremely large datacenter by executing different operating systems in isolation on individual host or PM. It performs as a layer between computer hardware and the operating system. The hardware resources split into the logical unit known as VMs and virtualization enable the system to place more than one VM to share the resources of a single PM. Each VM hosts the operating system and has access to the hardware resources of PMs. This technique enables cloud datacenter with more flexibility and provides better support for on-demand resource allocation using VM migration. Migration is a mechanism in which a VM is relocated from one PM to another without any interruption [1]. However, it reduces the performance of running applications in a VM [2]. Virtualization is the key characteristic of cloud framework that differentiates cloud computing from the earlier computing paradigm (e.g., grid computing, distributed computing, parallel computing). It provides dynamic management of VMs, cost-effective utilization, and PM resources to different users with isolation. VMware, XEN hypervisor, and Kernel-based Virtual Machine (KVM) are widely used virtualization platforms to create a virtual environment in a cloud datacenter.
## (s8) Selection of PM
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) The selection of PM to place migrating VMs is done to complete the consolidation process to maintain the SLA and power consumption cost. In a cloud datacenter, VMs are required to place in appropriate PM for the best service delivery and minimum power cost. Migrating VMs from overloaded PMs were placed using various techniques, in this survey we found that the RL technique was applied for the selection of PM. The algorithm, based on Best RAM and bandwidth (BRB) was developed in which,PMs with enough resources for VM was assigned a mark (as a ratio of the required VMs random access memory (RAM) and available BW of PM) and the lowest mark PM was opted for placement of migrating VM [27]. In order to achieve the optimum cost of EC and SLA, the process of VM scheduling and placement optimization (Algorithm 1) is started from the prediction of resource utilization to detect overloaded (Algorithm 2) and underutilized PMs. All VMs are migrated from the underutilized PM and PM has to be made switched off or in sleep mode for maintaining the power consumption cost. VM is selected (Algorithm 3) from overloaded PM for the migration to maintain the load and finally, a PM is selected to place the migrated VM (Algorithm 4) [14].
