# Lightning search algorithm: a comprehensive survey

CorpusID: 226254694 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72f9ae448e49a495663516987d4a18e76fde76ca](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72f9ae448e49a495663516987d4a18e76fde76ca)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s8) Basic of lightning search algorithm
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) LSA is an abbreviation of the Lightning Search Algorithm, which is a recent population-based meta-heuristic algorithm developed by Shareef et al. [64]. LSA is based on a lightning step leader propagation structure. It regards the fast projectiles (particles) involvement in the binary tree structure formation of step leader. LSA algorithm mainly consists of 3 steps: projectile and propagation of the step leader, properties of the projectile, and projectile modeling and movement. A projectile loses its kinetic energy when traveling under reasonable conditions. This paper aims to propose an algorithm (LSA) to solve the problems of restrictions [64]. This depends on the phenomenon of lightning in nature and uses the concept of rapid particles called bombers, through which three types of planes were developed and produced. In the first stage, the leader of the population. The second stage, produced space projectiles that want to become a pilot, and the third is a lead shell that depends on the best missile from the commander. The exploration feature was designed using exponential and random fencing of the projectile, which coincides with the leader's advice at common points and relies on opposition theory. Where the proposed algorithm was evaluated by doing a test of (LSA) based on a set that has 24 functions of different characteristics.This study utilizes four different known methods, where the results were better than other methods.
## (s12) Multi-objective of lightning search algorithm
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) The problem of the distributed systems lies in their loss of energy in addition to the stability of the effort, and this gives the studies and researches interest [72]. Therefore, it became necessary to pay attention to research and improve operating conditions. Various studies and research have discussed how to reduce energy losses and how to enhance voltage stability. In this paper, a new methodology is proposed to achieve optimal allocation using the Lightning Search Algorithm (LSA) [73]. The research includes a unique multi-objective function that reduces energy losses and maximizes the voltage stability indicator, where different loads are used from light to maximum load with a step size. The optimum amount of storage in each download level is calculated. The proposed method is tested on the IEEE 33 and 69 system. The results confirmed that the main goal is achieved as the stability of the effort is enhanced; the energy losses are reduced by using the LSA. This work is adopted in the long run in planning distribution networks. The results illustrated that the proposed algorithm archived better results in comparison with other optimization methods.
## (s15) Machine learning applications
Number of References: 3

(p15.0) Machine learning domain is a promising search area [78]. In another work, the LSA algorithm has been used for classification [79]. Initially, problems were identified for the first time and the convergence speed of sophisticated and progressive algorithms [79]. Through the LSA algorithm, a trainer was adopted with a set of performance studies. Moreover, represented by measurement data such as (appendicitis, liver, breast cancer, primary diagnosis, second diagnosis, Parkinson's disease, and diabetes) and then used a set of quantitative and qualitative measurement tools for comparison. To achieve the goal, research training algorithms (GA, DE, ES) and swarm-based algorithms (PSO, ACO, ABC) and gradient algorithms (LM, BP) were used. The results showed that this algorithm works more powerfully than the rest of the algorithms in analyzing the results by determining the cause of the problem and by relying on the calculation and analysis of the standard deviation of the results.
## (s19) Benchmark functions
Number of References: 11

(p19.0) In this section, we provide a depth set of benchmark evaluation problems (as seen in Tables 2-3) to test, analyze and demonstrate the efficacy of the LSA algorithm in comparison to other relative optimization algorithms including Whale Optimization Algorithm (WOA) [100], Salp Swarm Algorithm (SSA) [101], Dragonfly Algorithm (DA) [102], and Ant Lion Optimizer (ALO) [103]. All experiments are conducted 30 times (runs), and the maximum number of iteration is fixed to 1000 for all tested algorithms to make fair comparisons. The parameters setting are taken from the original papers, as mentioned before. The algorithms codes are taken from the Mathworks site as follows.

(p19.1) 1-WOA 1 2-SSA 2 3-DA 3 4-ALO 4 5-LSA 5 The setting parameters values for the comparative methods are presented in Table 1. Figure 4 show the details of the used 23 benchmark function that generally used to test any optimization algorithm [104][105][106][107][108]. Table 2 show the results of the comparative methods on 13 benchmark functions (F1-F13) and Table 3 show the results of the comparative methods on 10 benchmark functions (F14-F23).
## (s21) Problem 1: tension/compression spring design
Number of References: 9

(p21.0) The problem of tension/compression spring design is given to degrade the entire weight of a given spring [42]. Three variables are examined in this problem: (1) wire diameter (d), (2) mean coil diameter (D), and (3) the number of active coils (N), as presented in Fig. 6. The result of the comparative methods are given in Table 5. The comparative methods are HHO [109], PSO [110], RO [51], HS [111], ES [112], BA [113], MFO [114], and LSA [64]. The results in Table 5 showed that the LSA got comparative results compared to other published methods. As shown in Fig. 7, the LSA reached the optimal solution very fast in the first iterations, which reflect the ability of the LSA in solving the complex real-world problems, especially, in solving the Tension/compression spring design problem.
## (s22) Problem 2: pressure vessel design
Number of References: 10

(p22.0) The problem of pressure vessel design is given to degrade the entire weight of a given pressure vessel [115]. Four variables are examined in this problem: (1) width of the shell (T s ), (2) the width of the head (T h ), (3) internal radius (R), and (4) height of the cylindrical part without studying the head (L), as shown in Fig. 8. The result of the comparative methods are given in Table 6. The comparative methods are HS [116], CPSO [110], CSCA [117], HPSO [118], GSA [119], ACO [120], MVO [48], ES [112], and LSA [64]. The results in Table 6 revealed that the LSA produced also comparative results compared to other published methods. As presented in Fig. 9, the LSA gave the optimal solution early in the first iterations, which shows the strong capability of the LSA in addressing complex realworld problems, especially, in solving the Pressure vessel design problem. 
