# Molecular Sciences In Vitro and Vivo Identification, Metabolism and Action of Xenoestrogens: An Overview

CorpusID: 233397048 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dfc1561847cbd61164f780ca26ddd411a676107f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dfc1561847cbd61164f780ca26ddd411a676107f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s3) Ligand-Binding
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) In 1998, Randall Bolger et al. reported a novel technique for detecting XEs named the fluorescence polarization (FP) method. Under room air, the method could measure the capacity of XEs to displace a high-affinity fluorescent ligand from purified, recombinant human ERα. The ERs in mice have two subtypes, including ERα and ERβ, which are different in the structures of the C-terminal ligand-binding domain and N-terminal transactivation domain. In the mouse model, Kuiper et al. observed ERα-and ERβ-mediated messenger RNA expression via ligand binding and compared the specificity and affinity of ligand binding to ERα and ERβ via RT-PCR. They also found differences in the distribution and expression of ERα and ERβ in tissues and organs of mice. There were more distribution and expression of ERα in the uterus, testis, pituitary, ovary, kidney, epididymis, and adrenal, while there were more distribution and expression of ERβ in the prostate, lung, bladder, and brain [36,37].
## (s4) ER-Binding to ERE
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) Nikov et al. observed differences in affinity of phytoestrogens when combined with ERα or ERβ, respectively. They also mentioned the combinations and interactions of ligand-ER complexes and estrogen response element (ERE) sequences. In their experiments, the FP methods were employed to measure binding affinities of various phytoestrogens, such as genistein, coumestrol, daidzein, glyceollin, and zearalenone to human cells. This article revealed a higher affinity of the phytoestrogens for ERβ than for ERα. The effect of these phytoestrogens on the ability of ERα and ERβ to associate with specific DNA sequences (EREs) was also investigated. In 2000, Boyer et al. performed a similar method on human ERα for probe of its molecular way on functional specificity. The implemented binding assays to study the interaction of the receptor with a palindromic estrogen response element derived from the vitellogenin ERE [38,39].
## (s5) Mammalian Two-Hybrid Assays
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) DES is a well-known carcinogen [37]. As a mixture of indenestrol A (IA) S and R enantiomers [39], IA is a metabolic derivative of DES and has a high affinity to bind ER but a weaker biological activity [38]. Mueller et al. found that the estrogenic properties of the S and R enantiomers of IA, IA-S, and IA-R, respectively, had different affinities with ERα and ERβ in cells. Using human endometrial (Ishikawa) and breast MDA cell lines, which stably express either ERα or ERβ, IA-S was found more potent to activate cell transcription through ERα compared to IA-R. However, IA-R had more potency to stimulate ERβ rather than ERα in MDA cells, but this was not the case in endometrial cells. Although IA-R could effectively activate ERβ in vivo, it had a low affinity to bind both ERα and ERβ in vitro. These results showed that IA-R was cell-selective when bound to ERβ. In addition, there existed a single residue within the ligand-binding domains to determine the stereoselectivity of both ERα and ERβ [40][41][42].
## (s6) Analysis of Gene Expression
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Jorgensen et al. demonstrated that estrogenic activity could be evaluated by assaying induction or repression of endogenous estrogen-regulated "marker genes" in human breast cancer MCF-7 cells. The authors mentioned that a cell-based endogenous gene expression assay is very sensitive to what could be used to assay the estrogenicity of different putative estrogenic chemicals. They performed an assay in human MCF-7 that was estrogen-dependent and used a method of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to observe the changes in gene expression. After differential display using reverse-transcribed (DDRT) PCR technology, the levels of expression could be quantified by phosphor-imaging [43,44].
## (s7) Analysis of Enzyme Activity
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) Holinka et al. [46] described alkaline phosphatase as a convenient endpoint to examine mechanisms of hormonal actions. Alkaline phosphatase activity in human endometrial cancer cells of the estrogen-responsive Ishikawa line was markedly stimulated by estrogens, 5a-dihydrotestosterone (DHT), and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). In the previous report, E2 and several other estrogens were noticed to greatly enhance the activity of alkaline phosphatase, an enzyme known to be regulated by ovarian hormones in the nonpregnant and pregnant rodent and monkey uterus. The results suggested that estrogen and androgen receptors mediate the stimulation of alkaline phosphatase by the C19 steroids [45,46].
## (s8) Analysis of Steroido-Genesis
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) In H295R cells, various pesticides that had been suspected of interfering with the functions of steroid hormones were examined for their effects on the mRNA expression and catalytic activity of aromatase. Sanderson et al. focused mainly on interactions of XEs with sex hormone receptors, particularly the estrogen receptor. After a period of time, other mechanisms of interference with endocrine functions have gained attention, including the effects of pesticides on the enzymes that are involved in the synthesis and metabolism of steroid hormones. As a key role in producing many endogenous steroid hormones of high potency, the enzymes cytochrome P450 (CYP) that are responsible for the reactions in the biosynthetic pathways of steroids is a research focus [47]. H295R cell line was used to screen several pesticides known or suspected to interfere with steroid hormone function for potential effects on the catalytic activity and mRNA expression of aromatase [47,48].
## (s9) The Fluorescence-Based Multi-Analyte Chip Platform
Number of References: 6

(p9.0) Using a parallel-proliferation measurement, the fluorescence-based multiplexed protein microarray ( Figure 2) presents the bidirectional estrogenic and anti-estrogenic actions of XEs in human MCF-7 cells [52][53][54][55]. As a new in vitro tool for screening environmental samples, the fluorescence-based chip platform can analyze multiple targets to detect the estrogenic and anti-estrogenic actions of XEs by observing the expression of proteins. It can quantify 10 proteins secreted by MCF-7 cells, which represent different physiological and pathological endpoints of endocrine actions. Its potential is demonstrated by distinct protein secretion patterns of the cancer cell line after exposure to known ER agonists ß-estradiol, BPA, genistein, and nonylphenol as well as antagonists fulvestrant and tamoxifen. In parallel, the proliferating effect of endocrine-disrupting substances in MCF-7 cells can be assessed in a proliferation assay based on resazurin. Unlike the detection tools developed earlier, the chip has two advantages, including high-output screening for the endocrine effects of environmental disruptors on human cells and providing messages of the complicated cellular effects on a molecular level. Compared with single marker detection, this multiplexed protein microarray in the chip is more convenient and arrives at better accuracy [52]. cells, which are exposed to estrogen receptor agonists and antagonists. Using a resazurin assay, the proliferative effect in hormone-sensitive cancer cell line MCF-7 can be measured. Using a multiplexed protein microarray with fluorescence detection, biomarkers can be quantified in the supernatant. By employing immobilized antibodies, the on-chip sandwich immunoassay captures the biomarker and a fluorescently labeled detection antibody for confirmation [52].
## (s14) Estrogen Receptor Recombinant Yeast Screening (YES) Assay
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) Described by Professor Sumpter, this estrogen receptor recombinant yeast screening (YES) assay can be used to assess the estrogenic activity of chemicals or their metabolites, such as the surfactants and their major degradation products. In principle, the DNA sequence of the human estrogen receptor (hER) is integrated into the yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) genome, which also contains expression plasmids carrying estrogen-responsive sequences (ERE) that control the expression of the reporter gene lac-Z (encoding the enzyme β-galactosidase). Thus, in the presence of estrogens, β-galactosidase is subsequently synthesized via the formation of ER-ligand and secreted into the medium, where it causes a colorful change from yellow to red [58]. This recombinant yeast is used to determine whether chemicals or their metabolites, such as the surfactants and their principal degradation products, possess estrogenic activity. The results are compared to the effects of the main natural estrogen 17β-estradiol [58]. Using the YES assay, the study revealed none of the parent surfactants tested possessed estrogenic activity. However, one class of surfactants, the alkylphenol polyethoxylates, degrade to persistent metabolites that were weakly estrogenic. Another group of degradation products, the sulfophenyl carboxylates, which were derived from the biodegradation of linear alkylbenzene sulfonates, did not appear to possess estrogenic activity [58]. Hence, the estrogen receptor recombinant YES assay can evaluate the estrogenic stimulation provided by estrogens, XEs and other endocrinal disruptors.
## (s19) Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs)
Number of References: 4

(p19.0) Some XEs are combined with sex hormone-binding globulin, which decreases E2 plasma transport in the cell. An example is an interaction between polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and ERE-dependent E2-target gene transcription. PAHs are a collective term for more than a hundred different chemical substances, which are formed when coal, fuel oil, gas, trash, or other organic substances are incompletely burnt, and some PAHs are artificially manufactured. PAHs are found in coal tar, crude oil, and a few are applied in medicines or manufacturing dyes, plastics, and pesticides [105][106][107]. On the other hand, some metabolites of PAHs could be combined with ERs to recruit other coregulators, and the enhancing performance of E2 target genes could be achieved. Dioxin is one of the metabolites of PAHs. In the case of dioxin, it could be bound with aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) that leads to heterodimerization along with aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (Arnt). If so, the interaction between ER and ERE could facilitate the expression of the E2 target gene through such a complex [94].
## (s21) Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs)
Number of References: 7

(p21.0) Although Wolff et al. in 1993 reported that breast cancer was less associated with PCBs level in serum, other studies have suggested that PCBs work the same way in humans as scientists have long observed the effects of PCBs on other organisms. Bergeron noted the relationship between turtle sex determination and environmental contamination and the EDCs, such as PCB isomers, can alter sex ratios in turtles [12,111].

(p21.1) In the early 1970s, the findings in the experiments regarding PCBs in mice showed that exposure at birth reduced the reproductive ability of male rats [112] because of the alternation of steroid hormone-metabolizing enzymes [113]. Although Wolff et al. concluded that breast cancer was not associated with PCBs in serum in the early days, there have been many reports about PCBs and breast cancer progression in the future. Exposure to PCB174 has been confirmed to be associated with an increase in breast cancer mortality, and it is still positively related to breast cancer-specific mortality after 5 or even 15 years of follow-up after being diagnosed. Moreover, there are various reports, which made similar conclusions [93,114].
## (s22) The Relationship between EDCs and Diseases
Number of References: 11

(p22.0) It has been realized that estrogenic or antiestrogenic effects of different EDCs involve environmental pollution and affect human hormonal discrepancies. According to the historical data, breast cancer incidence and prevalence have been increasing since the 1940s [12,[115][116][117]. The risk of breast cancer accelerates with increased cumulative estrogen exposure or the rise of XEs in the environment. Many researchers are dedicated to identifying related risk factors, DDT and its metabolite (metabolite) DDE [110]. As PAHs, dioxin, PCBs and DES were mentioned earlier, and all have been reviewed in the literature for the associated carcinogenic effects (carcinogenic effects, carcinogenic elements) or toxicity to the mammary gland (toxicant). 2,3,7,8-chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin has been proved to be toxic to the mammary glands of mice. Dioxin delays the proliferation and differentiation of the mammary glands of breast development. This finding has an identical conclusion obtained in the human body [118]. Another study reported that 200 young Belgian girls had delayed pubertal development related to their blood doubling of serum dioxin levels [119]. Similarly, PAHs have also affected a significant increase in postmenopausal women's breast cancer development. Additionally, DES exposure during human pregnancy can trigger oncogenesis in the vagina and breast [120][121][122]. Moreover, Hoover proposed in 2011 that mothers who have been exposed to diethylstilbestrol will influence their next generation in utero, with the incidence and progress of future breast cancer development. In fact, the growth may become more significant due to the age of these DES daughters [123].
## (s24) Heavy Metals: Cadmium (Cd) and Arsenic (As)
Number of References: 2

(p24.0) Heavy metals can act as XEs and influence female reproduction systems. One example is the chemical Cd, which can be found in cigarettes, paints, plastics, batteries, and foods. As toxins to humans, inorganic Cd and As are cytotoxic at a high concentration level [4]; however, they can simulate estrogen and exert XEs-like actions at a low concentration level. Although the literature has confirmed the estrogenicity of inorganic Cd in tumor cell lines, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear and need more research. Both inorganic Cd and As stimulate cell proliferation in the pituitary gland and uterus by increasing the expression of proliferation markers, thus affecting hormone-dependent tumor progression. The anterior pituitary gland is responsible for hormone synthesis and secretion (such as prolactin and luteinizing hormone). Both inorganic Cd and As can increase prolactin synthesis. In 2016, Ronchetti et al. found that low doses of Cd can exert strong xenoestrogenic effects on the anterior pituitary gland [161].
## (s26) Discussion
Number of References: 3

(p26.0) On the molecular level, many XEs are known to be structurally related to the steroid hormones produced by the human body (structural similarity to the natural estrogens). Therefore, they have estrogenicity or antiestroginecity and can be bound with the receptors of the organism, manipulating differentiation and modulation of cell proliferation, apoptosis, cytokine production, and cell cycle progression, which should have been controlled over by the endogenous 17β-estradiol [3,6]. On the other hand, some substances, such as Cd, PCB and dioxin, can function as potential endocrine disruptors despite no structural similarity to the natural estrogens. However, the exact mechanism by which this metal Cd may interfere with the reproductive system has not been fully elucidated. The interruption in the steroidogenic pathway by Cd toxic action may be explained in a few different ways [175]. The changes in E2 and progesterone levels may result from the impairment of steroidogenic enzymatic activities by Cd. Under the actions of Cd, conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone is supposed to be the cause of abnormalities in the metabolism of sex hormones. Thus, endocrine disruptors, including Cd, PCB and dioxin, can exert effects via various pathways other than classical ER-signaling.
