# animals Recent Advances on Early Detection of Heat Strain in Dairy Cows Using Animal-Based Indicators: A Review

CorpusID: 233388460 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8dc6a6305ce4bbf039455d20331debc0a824df4a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8dc6a6305ce4bbf039455d20331debc0a824df4a)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 9

(p0.0) Thermoregulation is of importance for homeotherms to maintain homeothermy and homeostasis by keeping the balance between the production and loss of body heat [1]. Heat production in dairy cows mainly comes from basal metabolism, rumen fermentation, nutrient absorption, growth, lactation, gestation, immunization, and exercise [2]. Heat loss is mainly through heat transfer mechanisms: Conduction, convection, radiation, and evaporation [1,2].

(p0.1) Cows can maintain a balance of heat production and heat dissipation in the thermoneutral zone (TNZ), in which cows perform the lowest physiological and immune costs, and the highest productivity [1]. When the thermal environment exceeds TNZ and suppresses the efficiency of non-evaporative heat loss, evaporative heat loss, or both [3,4], various mechanisms are activated in dairy cows to dissipate excess heat and maintain homeothermy [5]. In the present review, "heat stress" represents the sum of external stressors, forcing the animal to exceed its TNZ. Environmental thermal stressors consist of ambient temperature (AT), relative humidity (RH), wind speed, and radiation, where AT plays the leading role [6]. "Heat strain" is used to represent the overall response resulting from heat stress. These two terms are separated since many internal animal factors can alter dairy cows' sensitivity to heat exposure.
## (s3) Vaginal Temperature
Number of References: 8

(p3.0) Vaginal temperature (VT) is another representative CBT. The traditional measurement of VT is very similar to that of RT and many efforts have been made to achieve automated measurements. Various temperature data loggers used in conjunction with support devices have been fixed into cows' vaginas. A plastic anchor was first introduced as a support device by Hillman et al. [65] and further validated by Lee et al. [31]. It is demonstrated that long-finger plastic anchors were superior due to better stability when inserted in the vagina [31]. However, the application of these anchors may be difficult due to inaccessibility [35]. The most popular way is to use a modified vaginal controlled internal drug release insert, in which various data loggers are placed [32,33,35]. The prices of data loggers vary distinctly. When considering elevated VT thresholds, inexpensive data loggers failed to correctly classify animals compared with an expensive and high-accurate data logger [36].
## (s6) Subcutaneous Temperature
Number of References: 10

(p6.0) Subcutaneous temperature (ST) is also a candidate to represent CBT since heat-stressed cows would drive more blood from the core to the peripheral body parts [1,41]. In general, measuring temperatures subcutaneously requires the use of implantable sensors and wireless transmission. The ST can vary among different implantation locations and many efforts have been made to determine the best locations for measuring accurate CBT in cattle [40,90,91]. Reid et al. [91] used implantable radiofrequency identification (RFID) microchips measuring temperature in three sites, subcutaneously at the base of the ear, posterior to the poll, and beneath the umbilical fold. They demonstrated that the temperatures at the base of the ear correlated most with RT with coefficients of 0.30 during heat stress and 0.20 during TNZ. Similarly, Chung et al. [41] designed a real-time measurement for ear base temperature by using implantable sensors and wearable RFID scanners in conjunction. In addition, they utilized RFID technology, long-range wireless technology, and Wi-Fi technology to develop a wireless communication network aiming to increase efficiency and lower human involvement. Furthermore, a long short-term memory network was applied to predict VT by using THI and ST. Their results show that the correlation coefficients between temperatures recorded under the ear base and in the vagina of three dairy cows ranged from 0.58 to 0.85. The selected machine learning algorithm could predict CBT better than linear regression with a lower root mean square error (0.081 • C versus 0.137 • C).

(p6.1) Lee et al. [90] measured ST in seven Holstein steers using button-shaped data loggers (iButton DS1922L, Maxim Integrated, San Jose, CA, USA) in three sites (lateral neck, upper, and lower scapula). Due to the lack of wireless transmission, temperatures recorded were not available until recovered from an explant surgery. Their long-term results (during a whole summer and winter) show that STs were 1.39 to 1.65 • C lower than the RT and might have been influenced by AT and animal stillness; among three test locations, the ST recorded near the upper scapula had the smallest mean difference from RT. In a recent study of dairy calves [44], temperatures recorded subcutaneously in three sites (the ear scutulum, the upper scapula, and intramuscularly in the trapezius muscle of the neck) were found very different from RT. Iwasaki et al. [40] implanted wireless thermistor sensors based on Bluetooth TM 4.0 in more locations to find the best location for measuring CBT. Specifically, three endoceliac and seven subcutaneous locations were selected, and machine learning was further applied to predict CBT from STs. The results show that ST under the tail base was a good indicator due to its high correlation with RT (r = 0.62) and the correlation coefficient could be further increased to 0.93 by introducing a back-propagation type neural network with the input of seven STs and AT.
## (s10) Respiration Rate
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) The traditional method to measure RR is to count the movements of the flank manually and convert it into breaths per minute (BPM). Obviously, such a visual observation is both time-and labor-consuming [118]. In addition, the interaction between people and cows when measuring may bias the result [116]. Many efforts have been made recently with the hope to design automatic measurement methods for RR. Generally, these new methods can be categorized into wearable and non-wearable devices.
## (s11) Panting Score
Number of References: 15

(p11.0) Panting-as an important physiological pathway of evaporative heat loss-has long been proposed to describe heat strain in dairy cows [132]. The main panting characteristics include increased RR, chest movement, drooling, mouth opened, tongue protruding, and neck extended [123]. With the accumulation of heat load in dairy cattle (manifested as a rising RR), cows first exhibited drooling, following by open mouth and protruding tongue [131]. PS has been developed and refined as a numerical scale to grade the obvious respiratory dynamics and behaviors [59,88,123,124]. A recent study utilized a score consisting of RR and various panting characteristics to assess heat strain in grazing dairy cows [133]. This score is very similar to PS, using a 0 to 4 scale, where 0 represents that the cow is under no heat strain and 4 represents that the cow is moribund. The PS per se, as a scoring system, has a good ability to assess heat strain in cattle. Existing panting scoring systems often provide corresponding RR thresholds, e.g., PS 1 (slight panting) corresponding to a RR of 60 BPM [123]. Thermal indices (heat load index (HLI) and dairy heat load index (DHLI)) have been developed based on PS due to its high association with the thermal environment [88,123].

(p11.1) To measure PS, trained observers would rate a cow's respiratory dynamics according to the numerical scale, and the process would take about 10 s per observation per cow. Although measuring PS is relatively easier than RR, the inter-observer difference can be an important source of error. Accelerometer-based ear tags and neck collars have been designed to measure a series of behaviors including "heavy breathing". The capacity of a commercially available collar has been validated to accurately reflect heat strain in dairy cows [8]. "Heavy breathing" detected by this tag is defined by characteristic movements (e.g., forward-backward heaving, increased RR, increased chest movement). Their results show that the proportion of cows breathing heavily was consistent with the change of mean CBT in both dry and lactating cows. An accelerometer-based ear tag from the same manufacturer was also validated in steers [124]. The visual measurement of PS and sensor-recorded "heavy breathing" were compared. The sensor was designed to give a single output within seven behaviors for every single minute, probably leading to a high false-negative rate by rating breathing heavily cows as other more prominent behaviors. Although data processing was conducted to mitigate this systematic underestimation, low sensitivities were still yielded for all PS data, PS1, and PS2 (59%, 54%, and 82%, respectively). The higher sensitivity for PS2 indicates that mild symptoms were hard to detect. In fact, the determination of "heavy breathing" in these devices is most likely to be based on a default threshold of the frequency of respiratory movements. Therefore, the original output of these devices is probably much closer to RR, and "heavy breathing" can be seen as the extended results of RR. As proposed by both Bar et al. [8] and Islam et al. [124], these accelerometer-based sensors have difficulties in detecting slight panting (PS1) and only give a binary result. Although the detection of panting or not is enough for the start of heat abatement protocol, more sophisticated classification would be more informative for customized interventions. Further studies can therefore focus on increasing the sensitivity and classification of the sensor.
