# Development and Application of Sen-timent Analysis Tools in Software Engineering: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 233864821 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4d3f9a314cdba9aec33a18ea4ccd53fbf635a860](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4d3f9a314cdba9aec33a18ea4ccd53fbf635a860)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s5) Selection of databases.
Number of References: 8

(p5.0) While some papers are available via several scientific databases, others are not. Therefore, we included a total of five databases in our search to reduce the risk of missing papers which are only available in one database. Our selection comprises databases that are often used in SLRs in the SE domain [18,36,37,64,66,77,78]: Science Direct 7 , IEEE Xplore 8 , ACM Digital Library 9 , Springer Link 10 , and Google Scholar 11 . We conducted a comprehensive search as proposed by Petersen et al. [62] in each of these databases in order to reduce biases.
## (s13) Approaches for developing or using sentiment analysis
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) In line with the results presented in subsection 4.2, we again distinguish between development and application of the tools when looking at the algorithms the sentiment analysis is based on. For example, when a paper is about the development of a sentiment analysis tool, we listed which machine learning approach this tool uses, such as SVM or Bayes. If an existing tool like SentiStrength [68,69] is used, we listed this specific tool. Some papers did both developing and comparing their tool with other existing tools. An overview of approaches being used during developing can be seen in Table 4. Because only existing tools were compared in the "comparison" category, we did not list the respective papers.
