# A review of FinTech research

CorpusID: 235814699 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6560cdd3d3f8bb0ae739381f56d4e3ecd13fa191](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6560cdd3d3f8bb0ae739381f56d4e3ecd13fa191)

Fields: Economics, Business, Computer Science

## (s5) Research on society's acceptance of new value-added
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Some academic studies explore from the user's perspective whether society can accept new FinTech technologies and the value-added they offer. Stewart and Jürjens (2018) use a technology acceptance model (TAM) to perform a factor analysis of factors that increase customer satisfaction toward FinTech services. They show that acceptance of FinTech services remains low because people who are strongly interested in controlling their own data feel uneasy about protection of personal information when using FinTech technologies. On the other hand, Duma and Gligor (2018) surveyed the 'digital native' generation (Generation Z) regarding online transactions and acceptance of virtual currencies/blockchains, and found that this generation, regardless of the complex technology underlying FinTech services, enjoys the freedom, mobility, coolness, and nimbleness that FinTech brings, and accepts innovation and continuous technological development very naturally. Pousttchi and Dehnert (2018) used a grounded theory approach to investigate the impact of digitisation on consumer decision-making in retail banking; they argue that, in order to compete with FinTech companies, existing financial institutions must use a data-driven approach that enables them to provide services to the right customers in the right way and at the right time.
## (s16) Type C
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) Studies on the provision of new value-added by new entrants (Type C) show that new entrants utilise FinTech technologies to develop solutions to social issues or to build new financial ecosystems. This category contained the largest number of papers, accounting for over half of all papers reviewed. This is likely due to the large number of Type C examples from the business world and the fact that new entrants are cooperative in providing information to researchers. In the area of solutions to social issues, numerous studies concerned financial inclusion. As Iman (2018) shows, FinTech innovation has helped impoverished nations. Accordingly, in light of their social significance and the large number of studies (16 of the 88 papers reviewed are related to financial inclusion), financial inclusion can be said to be one of the most important topics in FinTech research. At the same time, as noted by Lee and Shin (2018), FinTech companies play an important role in the development of new financial ecosystems incorporating engineers, government agencies, financial customers, and existing financial institutions that aim to improve customer satisfaction and advance the financial industry. In these ways, new entrants are developing and employing FinTech innovations to create solutions that address current social and industry issues in various regions of the world.
