# Unlocking the potential of deep learning for marine ecology: overview, applications, and outlook *

CorpusID: 238226987 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81cbc4a42e2d1296a33311bca0f578d685a2fe2a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81cbc4a42e2d1296a33311bca0f578d685a2fe2a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 5

(p0.0) Marine ecosystems are complex, highly diverse, and productive, providing renewable resources to a growing human population. At the same time, the oceans are particularly sensitive to and impacted by anthropogenic stressors [Antão et al., 2020]. As such, the scientific community strives to deliver up-to-date information about the state of marine ecosystems so that management decisions are well-informed. Ideally, such decisions use ecosystem-based management (EBM) approaches to preserve ecosystem health and productivity while allowing appropriate human use. EBM is especially relevant in densely populated coastal areas. During this period of rapid environmental change, EBM requires researchers to track ecological change and critical events when, and not well after, they occur. Fortunately, technological developments in observation methods have provided ecologists with a range of new tools for obtaining vast amounts of data from marine ecosystems over the last couple of decades. These include high-end cameras, echo sounders, and hydrophones, combined with various sensors to measure environmental parameters. Researchers can attach such technologies to cabled observatories or static rigs to assess temporal dynamics, or remotely or autonomously operated vehicles to evaluate spatial variability. However, because these technologies can produce an unprecedented amount of data, which has traditionally required manual processing, ecologists may be reluctant to adopt them as an alternative or supplement to traditional sampling techniques. For example, using traditional gear (e.g., nets and traps) to assess the abundance of fish has been an established sampling technique for centuries and is still used today. These methods are efficient for manual data handling and straightforward: as soon as the fish are caught, counted, and the data punched, it can be analyzed by the researchers. On the other hand, detecting and counting fish with cameras is less destructive to animals and habitat, provides a temporal dimension to the collected data, allows researchers to observe behaviour of animals and habitat use, and often provides a more representative estimate of species diversity and relative abundance [Bacheler et al., 2017]. However, extracting all of this information from videos manually is a laborious task. Thus, automating this step would undoubtedly encourage more fish biologists to use cameras for data collection.

(p0.1) Many diverse fields of research are undergoing rapid change due to advances in the use of artificial intelligence (AI) for data interpretation. AI offers fast and accurate analysis of the large volumes of data collected by sensors, cameras, and other observation technologies. Off-the-shelf algorithms can now, with high precision, find, count, and classify organisms from digital images and real-time video, [Knausgård et al., 2021, Lopez-Guede et al., 2020 and detect cryptic patterns in noisy images or acoustic data [Weinstein, 2018]. An increasing number of marine ecologists embrace this opportunity, yet initiating collaborations across ecological and data science disciplines can be challenging for several reasons. First, transferring the necessary information to start a project between an ecologist and a computer scientist can be a steep learning curve because knowledge barriers and field-specific jargon can cloud otherwise fruitful discussions and halt progression. Secondly, ecologists unfamiliar with AI may not be aware of the opportunities available to address a particular problem. Before an ecologist approaches an AI expert, they may need to know about the possibilities and limitations of AI for the task at hand, how to prepare and annotate data sets, and what information to provide the computer scientist to enable identification of the best AI method for the task at hand. Meanwhile, before advising on the possibilities, the computer scientist may find it challenging to understand the underlying ecological question, the data and its inherent variability/noisiness, how it is categorized, and what level of accuracy is needed. Thus, substantial investment in the interdisciplinary partnership is required in order to achieve a common understanding.
## (s35) Emerging cases
Number of References: 2

(p35.0) A common theme of the established cases mentioned above is that they replace tasks currently conducted by humans -where using DL can reduce costs, labour, and sometimes improved accuracy compared to human analysts. However, DL has the capacity to be applied to solve more complex tasks, detecting patterns in visual and acoustic data that are difficult for humans to reliably detect or discriminate. In this section, we illustrate novel research avenues in which we predict DL will be successfully applied in the near future. Methods for individual identification are needed to answer many questions in animal behavior and ecology, such as growth, movement, and survival inferred from capturerecapture studies [Clutton-Brock and Sheldon, 2010]. Currently, the most common approach is to mark animals with various physical identifiers to recognise individuals upon re-sight or re-capture, such as leg rings on birds, number scratching or paint on reptiles, or lip tattoos on larger carnivores. In marine and freshwater systems, capture-recapture studies on fish are most often performed using external number tags or radio-frequency identification (RFID) tags [Pine et al., 2003]. However, trapping and tagging surveys are often costly, logistically challenging to conduct, and are intrusive to the animals.
