# Internet of Everything (IoE) Taxonomies: A Survey and a Novel Knowledge-Based Taxonomy

CorpusID: 231649179 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/534fbbc3598e8ca4f922fd23d251d523eafafa67](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/534fbbc3598e8ca4f922fd23d251d523eafafa67)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s3) Management and Security
Number of References: 15

(p3.0) Management solutions must show grounds for efficient control of IoT systems. Sinche et al. [30] proposed a taxonomy related to IoT device management, and Perera et al. [36] surveyed a wide selection of techniques, methods, models, and solutions related to context awareness in IoT. Some authors have proposed taxonomies for security approaches in the adoption of IoT technologies and applications [46]. Using autonomic terminology, Ashraf and Habaebi [53] proposed a taxonomy that aims to group IoT security vulnerabilities and their mitigation solutions. Haron et al. [37] proposed a taxonomy of trustworthiness for IoT sensor data. Based on the notion of trust, semantics, Kotis et al. [54] presented an effective modeling approach towards supporting IoT entities' selection and deployment. Alsamani and Lahza [55] studied the relationship between object characteristics, security, and privacy, and they proposed a taxonomy to categorize potential security threats in IoT. In Zhang et al. [56], the authors presented an extensive analysis of data security and privacy threats, protection technologies, and security solutions for edge computing. Oteafy and Hassanein [57] proposed a taxonomy of edge-IoT systems designed for rapid data acquisition.

(p3.1) Other studies have focused on network architecture for IoT and IoE. Thota et al. [58] studied the emerging communication techniques for the implementation of IoE applications. Gluhak et al. [38] provided a taxonomy for the scope and architecture of testbeds in the IoT. Naha et al. [59] proposed a taxonomy considering the requirements of the fog computing paradigm. In Hassan et al. [60], a taxonomy of edge computing classifies and categorizes existing edge computing paradigms for IoT. Ahad et al. [61] provided a state-of-art review of 5G-and IoT-enabled smart healthcare. Bellavista and Berrocal [39] presented a unified architectural model and proposed a new taxonomy after comparing solutions that had emerged for supporting the requirements of IoT applications. However, these works ignored the critical role of data flow throughout sensors and actuators of different types, how they collaborate to create value in cyberspace, and the context of observations.
## (s5) Data Analysis
Number of References: 7

(p5.0) Many studies have focused on information flow, ranking information, and quality of data for the data-driven perspective and analytics applications. Bisdikian et al. [68] presented a framework for categorizing information products based on their value of information attributes. Different works have paved the way for effective utilization of the available opportunities in big data analytics and IoT. Shah et al. [69] created a thematic taxonomy for deploying these solutions collaboratively to provide guidelines for harvesting, transmitting, managing, and analyzing disaster data from diverse data sources in order to deliver valuable information to assist disaster management environments.

(p5.1) Focusing on successfully understanding and extracting value and insights from data analysis, [70,71], and [72] proposed semantic web techniques for better representation and exploration of sensor data. Qanbari et al. [71] incorporated semantic and linked data technologies to increase data quality. In [72], Rozsa et al. presented a taxonomy that identifies and categorizes sensors as the source devices to support publishing, discovery, sharing, reuse, and integration of sensed data.
## (s16) Outcome
Number of References: 6

(p16.0) The IoE paradigm impacts human interaction with everyday objects. Considering the type of information exchanged between humans and the system [84], the expected outcomes from IoE applications provide multiple tiers of cognition with the fine-tuning sensory acquisition from heterogeneous contexts [57]. Distinct levels of collaboration between IoE resources require efficient solutions. Human sensors peculiarities contemplated by collaboration theory and technical aspects of user interaction are challenges in computer network theory [28]. It is imperative to provide awareness of collective intelligence and where the intelligence is [113], representing the outcomes expected in designing the IoE solutions, based on the application domain [28,104].
## (s28) Reach
Number of References: 11

(p28.0) Reach classification distinguishes between individual and collective knowledge. It refers to an environment of sensing interest [71]. Sensors are becoming more sophisticated in technology advances, cheaper in price, and smaller in size. This evolution stimulates large-scale deployments [36], and dense geographical distribution [60].

(p28.1) The domain of interest represents the applicative domain in which the device is operative [79,81] and ensures that IoT services are accessible or reached only by authorized access [113,124].

(p28.2) The prevalence of mobile devices, such as smartphones, has triggered challenges for mobile networks worldwide [125], as well as novel classifications, such as collective knowledge classified into individual or group, internal or external, full or partial domains. For example, a conglomeration of sensor data stored on cloud infrastructure can be designed as big data sensing, and based on the reach of its sensing requests and requirements [74], it can be referred to as a) private, b) public, c) community, or d) hybrid big data sensing.

(p28.3) In crowdsourcing, regarding the boundaries of the individual scope in which crowds collaborators are immersed, the reach can be classified as ranging from small to large-scale (from a person to a group, community, city, and so forth) [28,65].
## (s34) Mode
Number of References: 6

(p34.0) The combination of sensors serving different purposes and data generated in IoE applications implies the need to classify data sources and information in the IoT context [72]. During real-time data harvesting, it can be challenging to determine the possible relationships among heterogeneous knowledge sources [69]. Smart device sensors are either active or passive sensors, depending on their usage and functionalities. If the sensor data collected are reflected in the same way as designed, this is called active functionality. However, sensors operate passively when collected data are interpreted or processed in new ways [17,65].

(p34.1) Eris et al. [28] defined how much interaction is required within the network in three levels of collaboration interdependence [28]:
## (s38) Processing
Number of References: 3

(p38.0) The sensors and devices used for data collection also vary in their processing capabilities [130]. The study of Mon et al. [127] classifies sensors as high-end or low-end devices, depending on resources and computational capabilities. Low-end devices are resource-constrained with regard to energy, processing power, and communication capacities. The processing capability refers to the sensors' ability to process aggregated data locally [55].
