# ASSESSING OF SOIL EROSION RISK THROUGH GEOINFORMATION SCIENCES AND REMOTE SENSING -A REVIEW

CorpusID: 238924506 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d1f341c8d795c488bc6b12ddcde9ef59f4da11da](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d1f341c8d795c488bc6b12ddcde9ef59f4da11da)

Fields: Environmental Science, Geography, Computer Science, Physics

## (s19) G2 Model
Number of References: 3

(p19.0) G2 is a soil erosion model for developing monthly erosion maps at regional scale was introduced by a team from Aristotle University of Thessaloniki and DG JRC within GEOLAND 2 project is included in JRC (G2, 2020). The G2 model proposes innovative techniques for the estimation of vegetation and protection factors. It is a complete, an empirical model for soil erosion rates and has evolved with time into a quantitative model mapping soil loss and sediment yield on month-time intervals, designed to run in a GIS environment. A detailed description in (Karydas and Panagos, 2018) is presented where the model adopts fundamental equations from RUSLE and the Erosion Potential Method (EPM). It aimed at developing an equation to estimate the water erosion and to put up a service for regional soil erosion monitoring across Europe (Karydas et al. 2012;Panagos et al., 2015). The G2 model clearly shows the critical seasons, hotspots and land uses which are more susceptible to erosion as the model is described by the following formula :
## (s30) EPIC (Erosion Productivity Impact Calculator) Model
Number of References: 3

(p30.0) The EPIC model (Sharply and Williams, 1990;Williams et al. 1984;Williams, 1990) was originally developed to determine the relationship between soil erosion and soil productivity throughout the U.S. The EPIC is a physically based model which components include weather simulation, hydrology, erosion-sedimentation, nutrient cycling, plant growth, tillage, soil temperature, economics, and plant environment control. The EPIC model is operational and has produced reasonable results under a variety of climatic conditions, soil characteristics, and management practices. It has also demonstrated sensitivity to erosion in terms of reduced crop production. It was used for that purpose as part of the 1985 RCA (1977 Soil and Water Resources Conservation Act of USA) analysis. To simulate rainfall/runoff erosion, EPIC contains six equations -the USLE, the Onstad-Foster modification of the USLE, the MUSLE, two recently developed variations of MUSLE, and a MUSLE structure that accepts input coefficients. The approach in EPIC estimates potential wind erosion for a smooth bare soil by integrating the erosion equation through a day using the wind speed distribution.
## (s33) • Hydrologic
Number of References: 2

(p33.0) The elemental size is defined such that the pertinent hydrologic and erosional variables can be assumed to be uniform within the watershed element where conditions may vary greatly from one element to the next. A typical cross-sectional view of a small area or element within a watershed is depicted in Fig.2.   Fig.2 Profile of a watershed element (Beasley et al., 1980) • Erosion Soil detachment, transport, and deposition are closely related to the concurrent hydrologic processes occurring in a watershed. Detachment and transport can be accomplished by either raindrop impact or overland flow. However, the small amount of sediment transported from a field by raindrop impact was neglected. The processes described in the erosion model are shown in Fig. 3. (Beasley et al., 1980) The ANSWERS program is a comprehensive model intended to be used in quantitatively evaluating nonpoint source pollution in an ungaged watershed and in determining the relative effectiveness of alternative corrective plans. The distributed analysis also provides a characterization of the hydrologic response as well as erosion and deposition occurring throughout the watershed during a storm event. The disadvantage of the model is that it requirements for large amount of input data and analyze of results.
## (s38) WEPP (Water Erosion Prediction Project) Model
Number of References: 2

(p38.0) It is a process-based, spatially-distributed model. Compared with the USLE method (Flanagan et al., 2007) which was used extensively to predict long-term average annual soil loss, it was a mature technology was only applicable to detaching regions of a hillslope, and could not estimate sediment deposition or sediment delivery from fields to off-site channels or streams. Also USLE method no capabilities to estimate runoff, spatial locations of soil loss on a hillslope profile or within a small watershed, channel erosion, effects of impoundments, recurrence probabilities of erosion events, or watershed sediment yield. Developed to address all of these needs leads to the WEPP (Nearing et al., 1989) as serve empirically based erosion prediction technologies like USLE as well as software development including GUI and integration of WEPP with GIS software. It is a physically based model with distributed parameters that can be used in either a single event or continuous time scale and calculates erosion from rills and inter-rills, assuming that detachment and deposition rates in rills are a function of the transport capacity.
## (s43) WSRF (Weighted Subspace Random Forest)
Number of References: 4

(p43.0) In (Xu et al., 2012) is suggested a new random forest, namely, the WSRF model, which involves weighting the input variables and afterward opting for the variables that ensure each subspace always includes informative attributes. The WSRF model is implemented as multi-thread processes. This algorithm categorizes very high-dimensional data and sparse data with random forests made using small subspaces. A new variable weighting manner is applied for the variable subspace choice rather than the traditional random variable sampling in the random forest model (Zhao et al., 2017). More details of the WSRF model are presented in (Xu et al., 2012;Zhao et al., 2017) 
