# PAIN MANAGEMENT WITH PENTHROX INHALER IN PREHOSPITAL CARE:LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 234029162 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6387b1d7dbfc0b7a5eee7b2eb35475eb1224932f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6387b1d7dbfc0b7a5eee7b2eb35475eb1224932f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) Side effect of Penthrox Inhaler
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) The side effects of using gas drugs are generally seen, whether it causes neprotoxicity and the level of tolerability by the patient himself. Neprotoxicity occurs, depending on how long the drug is given and at what dose. The safe dose for using Pentrox inhaler is 3 ml, and can be repeated for 0.3 hours, the results show that the fluoride level in the serum is 4.7 micro mol/l, while the blood level is between 0.006-0.026 micro mol/l (Porter et al., 2018). The maximum point for safe use of Penthrox inhaler is a maximum of 2 hours (serum level 50 micro mol/l), if given between 2.5 -3 hours will cause sub-clinical symptoms of toxicity, and toxic levels occur when given more than 5 hours (serum level 90 micro mol/l) (Porter et al., 2018).The level of tolerability of drug use can be expressed by patients in the form of side effects. Side effects occurred when 3 ml of Penthrox inhaler was given with oxygen saturation less than 90%, some patients complained of mild headache and mild somnolence. Some patients complain of the smell of rotten fruit (Porter et al., 2018). 18.1% complained of nausea, euphoria, lightheadedness, hallucinations, dry throat, and paresthesia on the lips. Complaints in children after being given Penthrox inhaler, 25.7% experienced drowsiness and 6.7% experienced mild hallucinations (Porter et al., 2018).It can be concluded that giving Methoxyflurane to patients, must ensure the oxygen saturation level is above 90%, the maximum dose is 6 ml, can be given for 2 hours to reduce side effects.
