# Isometric Mid-Thigh Pull Performance in Rugby Players: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 230572535 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a824a45038c2eb61199a7923df357d6ff9be0e82](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a824a45038c2eb61199a7923df357d6ff9be0e82)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Psychology

## (s3) Results
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) The search strategy identified 24 research publications: 20 peer-reviewed journal articles, three dissertations/theses, and one conference poster. Two pairs of journal articles reported data on the same sample [18,25], but because they reported different outcomes, all studies were kept and used for data extraction. Eleven studies were in professional-or Olympic-level rugby players (or a mix of professional and academy players from the same club), two studies in exclusively academy players, four in university players, four in amateur players, and three in adolescent players. Over half the studies (n = 13) were conducted on players in the United Kingdom; four studies were conducted in the United States of America, three in New Zealand, and one each in Australia, France, and Portugal (Table 3).   Twenty-three of the 24 studies reported peak force, but only eight reported rate of force development and only one reported impulse. One study [29] did not provide any of the force production variables of interest for data extraction; however, upon enquiry, the authors provided peak force and rate of force production means and standard deviations from that research. Additionally, upon enquiry, Dos'Santos et al. [30] (reference reflects amended manuscript) indicated that the results they originally reported needed to be amended, and they sent updated data for use in this review. Reported mean peak force from the IMTP can be seen in Figure 3. While most studies reported force in N, some reported it in kg. Note that for Figure 3, any peak force results reported in anything besides N were converted to make comparable data in the graph; for example, if the article reported peak force in kg, then it was multiplied by 9.81. Additionally, there was a lot of variance in reporting if peak force was inclusive of body weight or not, and it could not always be determined which was the case-ambiguous peak forces in the figure are reported without distinction of if they were gross or net force. Across studies, only 12 reports of force normalized for athletes' body mass were given, and they are summarized in Figure 4. Means and 95% confidence intervals of reported instantaneous force and mean rate of force development at standard time points was summarized in forest plots (Figures 5 and 6).
