# A Survey on Modern Cloud Computing Security over Smart City Networks: Threats, Vulnerabilities, Consequences, Countermeasures, and Challenges

CorpusID: 237706261 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/660c2cf3e8700c8dcd02e8e39db8e2a078db7f2a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/660c2cf3e8700c8dcd02e8e39db8e2a078db7f2a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) With the introduction of the IoT, every object is connected to the Internet to provide diverse types of services, like resource management, scalability, elasticity, power management, data storage, etc. Concepts of CC have been proposed to provide these services. CC provides many facilities, such as remotely accessing data, cost reduction, bandwidth, storage, and ease of access [1]. Its services can run over distributed networks without any interface, as shown in Figure 1. Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) require their software and hardware, while users have to install CC-based web applications [2]. Clouds provide us with interoperability and control sharing managed by different authorities, which is why trust matters for sharing sensitive data. Clouds have many types, like the public, private, community, and hybrid [3,4].
## (s11) Why Is Security & Privacy a concern in CC-Based Smart City?
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) The question of privacy concerns in the smart city has come into the picture since information and communication technology (ICT) developments have drastically increased. An integrative framework has been proposed in Reference [84] by Chourabi et al. to understand a smart city. The authors discuss eight factors that characterize a smart city. One of these factors is built infrastructure. In this domain, one of the technological barriers in e-government is privacy and security. The challenges in this dimension are threats from intruders, hackers, worms, Trojans, personal data privacy, and the cost of the solutions to provide security against all these. With the expansion of ICT, information flows have drastically increased, and, with this expansion in information flows, threats to information privacy have become a point of concern. In Reference [91], the author argues on the three potential threats to personal privacy that have been posed by smart cities: IoT, big data, and cloud.
## (s13) Attacks, Threats, and Vulnerabilities in CC-Based Smart City Network
Number of References: 7

(p13.0) Smart city network generates huge amounts of data and involved devices and processes are spread over a larger geographic area. Extraction, filtering, serialization, mining, and analysis of smart city huge data is challenging and requires a lot of human and material resources [34]. It is challenging to establish proper convergence and mapping of networking parameters among different layers of OSI model network stack over various data generation peers, like servers, gateways, workstations, sensors, accumulators, smart devices, and routers [71].

(p13.1) In smart city networks, the data transmission is susceptible to confront several attacks, such as cross-site scripting and side-channels, and its multi-latency can cause data leakage [22]. In smart city networks, due to the involvement of the smart grid over sensitive data, there is a dire need for high level security in all over the infrastructure. Security is the major challenge in achieving the accountable, reliable and consistent communication over the smart city networks [36,50].

(p13.2) Likewise, Robust network management in the cloud computing for smart city networks is the major challenge to tackle services delays, data loss during mining, lack of communication links with every node in centralized and distributive cloud computing, transmission delays, lost packets, and unstable connections, localized transmission, low latency, and low mobility services. Fog computing is introduced to overcome issues in cloud computing but there are still issues, like demand for robust and efficient communication links, exclusive and specialized network planning and management, and network security support and its integration, till each tier [24,33].
