# The Effects of Diosgenin on Hypolipidemia and Its Underlying Mechanism: A Review

CorpusID: 237592386 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cfaf66e4a4534184f4d62b7c8fdf4837076e9023](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cfaf66e4a4534184f4d62b7c8fdf4837076e9023)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Regulation of Cholesterol Transport
Number of References: 8

(p6.0) In addition to blood cholesterol and triglycerides, lipoproteins, such as HDL and LDL, also have important roles in lipid metabolism, as they function to transport lipids and cholesterol that are generally insoluble in blood. Kuang et al 42 applied diosgenin to the lipogenic normal human liver (L02) cell model, and the results showed that diosgenin could up-regulate expression of Caveolin-1 protein, which is closely related to cholesterol transport, and reduce intracellular cholesterol levels. Protodioscin has potent HDL and LDL (especially LDL) lowering effects. 37 Numerous studies have shown that HDL-C concentration is inversely correlated with CVD risk; hence, raising plasma HDL-C levels may protect against CVD. 43 In rats fed a high-cholesterol diet (HCD), supplementation with 0.5/100 g diosgenin for 4 weeks led to a slight increase in serum HDL-C and fecal bile acid levels, and a decrease in lipid droplet size. 44 Sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs) regulate the balance of LDL, HDL, and triglyceride levels in vivo. In human THP-1 macrophages, methyl protodioscin (MPD) inhibits SREBP1c and SREBP2 transcription and decreases levels of microRNA 33a/b, which is encoded in SREBP gene introns, leading to a corresponding increase in ATP binding cassette A1 (ABCA1) levels. 45 Since ABCA1 is a key protein in HDL biogenesis, low miR-33a/b levels result in high HDL-C. Further, MPD also decreases expression of the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase (HMGCR), fatty acid synthase (FAS), and acyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) genes, which are involved in cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis. Therefore, MPD may increase HDL-C levels, and decrease LDL-C and triglyceride levels. Scavenger receptor class B type I (SRB1) is a receptor physiologically related to HDL, which participates in reverse transport of cholesterol (RCT) and helps to transport excess cholesterol to the liver in the form of cholesterol ester (CE), and then excrete it into bile and feces. 46 Carboxylesterase 1 (CES-1) exhibits cholesteryl ester hydrolase activity, and contributes to hydrolyzation of HDL-CE to free cholesterol (FC), which is available for bile acid synthesis. 47 Cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) is the initial and rate-limiting enzyme in the classical BA synthetic pathway, which regulates the total rate of BA generation. Farnesol X receptor (FXR) is a nuclear receptor with fundamental roles in maintaining BA homeostasis and in maintaining the balance between cholesterol and BA. BAs, specifically hydrophobic BAs, act as ligands for FXR and utilize it in their negative feedback loop. 48 In an in vivo experiment, Yu et al 49 demonstrated that diosgenin (150 or 300 mg/kg/d) can 
## (s11) Oxidative Stress and Anti-Oxidant Properties
Number of References: 7

(p11.0) Oxidation-reduction equilibrium is essential to maintain the normal operation of vital cell functions. Oxidative stress is common in some diseases, including cancer, CVD, atherosclerosis, and diabetes. 65 Endogenous markers of oxidative stress include superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), and reduced glutathione (GSH). During oxidative stress, phospholipids in cell membranes are oxidized by thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS), which hinder their biological functions. Diosgenin has potent in vitro anti-oxidative and in vivo anti-inflammatory activities 66 and participates in glucose metabolism, reduces oxidative stress, increases cell viability, and decreases reactive oxygen species levels. 67 Sangeetha et al 68 assessed the antioxidant status of experimental rat liver and heart tissue samples treated with and without diosgenin. The rats were fed with an HFD for 8 weeks and then received streptozotocin (STZ) injection to induce a type 2 diabetes model. GSH levels were higher in animals treated with diosgenin (40 mg/kg, 80 mg/kg), although they did not reach the range of those in normal rats. Diosgenin can also maintain SOD and GPX activities and control TBARS production. Rats with chronic renal failure (CRF) were administered diosgenin orally (40 mg/kg/day), and subsequent results demonstrated that diosgenin increased GSH levels and restored endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) mRNA expression. Further, diosgenin inhibits dyslipidemia and angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) activity caused by CRF. Overall, data published to date show that diosgenin has potential to protect blood vessels from oxidative stress and dyslipidemia. 69 Xu et al 70 found that dioscin significantly attenuated the increase in malondialdehyde levels caused by ethanol and significantly elevated SOD, GSH, GSH-Px, and GSR levels. These data indicate that dioscin has an excellent protective effect against ethanolinduced liver injury by reducing oxidative stress, inflammatory cytokine production, apoptosis, and liver steatosis. Further, diosgenin acts as an antioxidant in cell membranes, which may provide protection against oxidative damage of polyunsaturated fatty acids. 71 Fenugreek, which contains diosgenin, can improve glucose metabolism disorder caused by HFD by promoting adipocyte differentiation, inhibiting inflammation of white adipose tissue, and miniaturizing adipocytes. 72 Numerous studies have demonstrated that diosgenin can regulate blood lipids by removing excessive free radicals and reducing physiological lipid deposition.
## (s12) Regulating Lipase Activity
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) Hepatic lipoprotein lipase (LPL) and hepatic lipase (HL) are important in the process of lipoprotein hydrolysis. Once lipoproteins are transported to the circulation, specific lipases can help to release their lipid components. The secretory dimer lipases, LPL and HL, hydrolyze triglycerides in lipoproteins and provide FFA for tissues. LPL is secreted from the parenchyma of adipose and muscle to the capillary lumen and acts on VLDL and chylous particles. HL is secreted by hepatocytes and acts on residual lipoprotein and HDL rich in cholesterol. 73 Diosgenin increases LPL and HL activity in a dose-dependent manner. Compared with an HFD rat model group, rats treated with diosgenin (132.8 mg/kg) had significantly increased activities of LPL and HL. 74 Pancreatic lipase (PL) is a dietary lipid digestive enzyme, inhibition of which reduces triglyceride digestion and lipid absorption. 75 Kwon et al 76 demonstrated that dioscin and diosgenin have strong inhibitory effects on PL activity. After treatment with dioscin (100 mg/kg) or diosgenin (100 mg/kg), the elevation of plasma triacylglycerol concentration was significantly reduced in mice orally injected with corn oil. Further, in an 8-week experiment, rats fed with a HFD containing 2% or 5% Dioscorea nipponica powder exhibited significantly suppressed weight gain and prevented dietary fat absorption relative to controls fed the HFD alone. The cholesterol-lowering effect of saponins and sapogenins has been widely described in literature regarding the treatment of hyperlipidemia. Navarro Del Hierro et al 77  quinoa can inhibit PL activity. Although the exact role of sapogenins contained in the hydrolyzed extracts in lipase inhibition remains unclear, the study provided a potential baseline for the development of multi-bioactive products that act against pancreatic lipase and cholesterol absorption simultaneously. In summary, diosgenin reduced dietary fat decomposition and absorption in the digestive organs by reducing the hydrolytic activity of these key enzymes, thus alleviating the symptoms of metabolic diseases, such as hyperlipidemia. In future, the regulation of lipase activity by diosgenin warrants further research.
## (s13) Regulating Transcription Factors Related to Lipid Metabolism
Number of References: 11

(p13.0) The metabolic enzymes and receptors involved in lipid metabolism are regulated by various transcription factors. Molecules established as involved in lipid metabolism include SREBPs, 78,79 LXRs, 80,81 and peroxisome proliferator activated receptors (PPAR). 82,83 SREBPs directly activate the expression of more than 30 genes, which contribute to the synthesis and uptake of cholesterol, fatty acids, triglycerides, and phospholipids, as well as nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate cofactors required for the synthesis of these molecules. 84 SREBP-1c preferentially enhances the transcription of genes required for fatty acid synthesis, which is a key regulator of lipid synthesis and accumulation. 85 Diosgenin can inhibit the increased expression of the sterol regulatory element-binding protein, SREBP-1, and that of its target genes, including FAS, SCD-1, and ACC. 86 Mechanistic studies demonstrated that dioscin can regulate the expression levels of downstream proteins, including SREBP-1c, carnitine palmitoyl transferase, FAS, SCD, forkhead box O1, and adipose triglyceride lipase, by regulating the Silent information regulator of transcription 1 (SIRT1)/AMPK signaling pathway, thus significantly reducing lipid metabolism. 87 One study reported significant down-regulation of ACC and FAS, alongside upregulation of PPARγ and LDL receptor (LDLR), genes at the mRNA level in SW480 cell lines treated with 6.21 µg/ mL diosgenin. 88 These findings indicate that SREBP is a key hub in diosgenin regulation of abnormal lipid metabolism.
