# R-170 [1-6] Vitex agnus castus and Some Female Disorders: A Review

CorpusID: 234298851 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/479316ce2dc6b2c9061506a5865afa4279d96434](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/479316ce2dc6b2c9061506a5865afa4279d96434)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Characteristics of plants
Number of References: 11

(p0.0) Vitex agnus-castus is a small tree that included in the family of Verbenaceae (Ono et al., 2011;Rani and Sharma., 2013;Rashed., 2013). The plant Vitex agnus castus is a deciduous shrub that reaches a height of up to 5 m (Berrani et al., 2018). The leaves appear like fingers with 5-7 finger-like leaflets and 7.5-10 cm in diameter (Fig 1) (Niroumand et al., 2018). The leaves are arranged in opposite, with a lengthened petiole. The green leaflets are linear, lanceolate, toothed and dark on the top and grey below (Ono et al., 2011). The flowers are fragrant with lilac, blue, pink, or white color (Berrani et al., 2018). Fruits are berries which contains four seeds resemble to black pepper (Niroumand et al., 2018). The skin of the fruits is hard and has a purple to a black color, yellowish inside and half covered by their green sage-calyces. It has aromatic and spicy scent and the flavor is warm and singular after maturation (Berrani et al., 2018). This plant is viewed as one of a medicinal herbs because both the fruit berry and the dried leaves have been utilized in many therapeutic issues (Mancho and Edwards., 2005;Niroumand et al., 2018).
## (s1) Botany and Natural Occurrence
Number of References: 9

(p1.0) Vitex agnus castus is affiliated to Verbenaceae family, commonly known as chaste tree and monk's pepper (Ono et al., 2011;Rani and Sharma., 2013). This tree grows in all Mediterranean regions, in tropical and subtropical regions (Rashed, 2013) and in temperate zone (Duymuş et al, 2014). VAC distributed not only the Mediterranean Region and Central Asia, but it also can be found in Southern Europe and cultivated in the various regions including the United States (Ono et al., 2011;Li et al., 2013;Rani and Sharma., 2013).

(p1.1) The plant often found growing next to streams and it loves water, but it could be seen growing in dry, rocky spots on the Greek islands. (Hobbs., 1991). VAC is growing in areas where the Mediterranean climate is dominant, rather rocky places, wetlands such as stream banks and valleys. VAC can also be found on limestone slopes, in sunny and warm areas (Rajić et al., 2016).
## (s2) Phytochemical compounds
Number of References: 13

(p2.0) There are different reports on the Phytochemical continents of VAC. Fruits, flowers and leaves of VAC are reported to contain different bioactive compounds (Rajić et al., 2016). It includes Vitexlactam C, Vitexlactam B (Li et al., 2013), essential fatty acids, volatile oil, alkaloid, progestins, flavonoids, iridoid glycosides (Arokiyaraj et al, 2009), iridoids (Rajić et al., 2016), two simple phenols (Li et al., 2013), diterpenoids and phytosterodids which have antihistaminic, antioxidant anti-inflammatory, hepato-protective properties (El-Nawasany., 2019).

(p2.1) Iridoid glycosides are mainly two (agnuside, aucubin) (Li et al., 2013;Rajić et al., 2016). Flavonoids named as Casticin, luteolin7-methyl ether and luteolin 7-Oglucopyranoside (Aissaoui et al., 2016), vitexin, kaempferol, quercetagetin (Rajić et al., 2016), 5-hydroxy-3,6,7,42tetramethoxyflavone and artemetin (Li et al., 2013). Progestins includes progesterone, hydroxy progesterone and androstenedione (Rajić et al., 2016). Alkaloids such as viticin; volatile oil includes 1,8-cineol, limes, α-pinenes, βpinenes. Essential fatty acids such as palmitic acid, oleic acid and stearic acid (Rajić et al., 2016). The two simple phenolic are p-hydroxybenzoic acid and p-hydroxybenzoic acid glucose ester (Li et al., 2013).
