# Persuasive Natural Language Generation -A Literature Review

CorpusID: 231603122 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e9ac35f68ef4290d74551bafdfb09a4ea0983940](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e9ac35f68ef4290d74551bafdfb09a4ea0983940)

Fields: Linguistics, Business, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) The movie 'The Social Dilemma' by Jeff Orlowski (2020) explores the rise of social media and the damage it has caused to society. With a rather negative connotation, the directors address the topic of digital platforms and how their users are influenced and persuaded in surveillance capitalism (Economist 2019). Persuasion is an activity that involves one party, the persuader , trying to induce another party, the persuadee , to believe or disbelieve something or to do something (Iyer & Sycara 2019). The Economist (2019) claims that as a central tenet of surveillance capitalism, and persuasion is, furthermore, important in many aspects of daily life. Consider, for example, an employee demanding an increase in compensation, a physician trying to get a patient to enter a slimming programme, a charity volunteer trying to raise funds for a school project (Hunter et al. 2019), or a government advisor trying to get people to take a vaccination in the midst of a pandemic for the greater good.
## (s12) Conclusion
Number of References: 3

(p12.0) This literature review synthesized the existing research on persuasive NLG in four categories for a persuasive NLG artificial intelligence by considering seventy-seven sources and integrating their results in forty-nine determinants. We concluded our identified categories and determinants (cf.  on from a strong persuasion identification focus, which supports our framework for generation. Identified articles were consistent but lacked sophisticated integration, therefore we see them in a rather fragmented stage. Additionally, we identified technical resources (tools & datasets) critical to AI success. This literature review regarding persuasive NLG research faces some limitations itself. First, this literature review mainly covers the years 2000-2020. Undeniably, additional articles were published before, and in the meantime, which should be included in a future version. Secondly, this review concentrated only on a selection of top journals, but as we were not fully satisfied with our results we were using backward and forward search (Webster & Watson 2002), which may lead to less sophisticated sources. Moreover, it cannot be guaranteed that the framework will succeed or that it is complete. The presented approach identifies a vast amount of relevant aspects and should be used as a starting point for actions and for further research. Therefore, it needs to be emphasized that no individual determinant suffices on its own. Rather multiple interactions in a given context will ensure a ' persuadee to be persuaded' by a persuasive NLG that is built on the findings of this literature review. Unfortunately, some variables that influence a generated persuasive response cannot be deduced from text processing alone (e.g. current mental state, well-being, or the environment in which the persuadee receives the response), but should also be taken into consideration for persuasive acts (Hunter et al. 2019). In general, we do not see a 'one size fits all' approach (Duerr et al. 2016). Some linguistic determinants or persuasion techniques may work better than others in certain settings, but different in others. Pulse checks, data inputs, and reiterating the model, data and tools in the AI continuously, to learn from behaviors, attitudes, circumstances and usage will help. However, the identified articles, the detailed and transparent documentation of the literature search process, the proposed categorization of the aspects in each of the research fields, and the proposed research agenda can serve as a good starting point for further literature reviews and future research in the persuasive NLG research field. To conclude, this paper has acknowledged that persuasive NLG builds on psychological, linguistic, and technical concepts. Despite the advantages of automated persuasion as presented in our introduction (e.g., entering a slimming programme, raising funds, taking vaccinations) with the help of AI, there is concern as to how such technologies can be misappropriated (cf. 'The Social Dilemma'). Ultimately, it is the academic community combined with advances of technological capabilities that will improve persuasion for good and release its great potential. Our research agenda suggests combining the right determinants in specific contexts and the usage of tools for training deep neural networks with relevant datasets. Thus, we have proposed a research direction to use the power of AI in this promising field for social good. Economist: https://www.economist.com/science-and-technology/2020/08/06/a-new-ai-language-model-generates-poetry-and-prose ; retrieved 26.12.2020.
