# Laser ablation of hepatocellular carcinoma-A review Series Editor

CorpusID: 23486930 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67abb7758b589dd96ec634e037cdee8cce1e4787](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67abb7758b589dd96ec634e037cdee8cce1e4787)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) COMBINATION WITH TACE
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) The rationale of combining LA with TACE is attractive, particularly for large lesions. Pacella et al [19] described the use of LA followed by TACE in the treatment of 30 large (3.5-9.6 cm) HCCs. They achieved 90% ablation rate with survival rates of 92%, 68% and 40% at 1, 2, and 3 years, respectively. No significant complications were reported, leading the authors to conclude that combination therapy was a safe and effective palliative therapy in the treatment of large HCCs [19] . Ferrari et al [32] supported this suggestion demonstrating improved ablation rates and survival in patients with HCCs > 5 cm given combination treatment over LA alone.
## (s7) COMPLICATIONS
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Reported complication rates for laser ablation compare favourably to surgical rates. Arienti et al [33] reported complication rates for 520 patients, with 647 presumed HCCs treated with 1004 laser sessions (local anaesthetic, US guided). They report 0.8% deaths and 1.5% major complication rate. An earlier report by Vogl et al [34] included 899 patients (of which 42 had HCC), with 2520 lesions treated with 2132 laser sessions (local anaesthetic, CT/MRI guided) and reported 0.1% mortality and 1.8% major complication rate. Included in the major complications were liver failure/ segmental infarction, hepatic abscess/cholangitis, bile duct injury, and haemorrhage (intrahepatic/peritoneal/ gastrointestinal). Both groups reported common side effects of asymptomatic pleural effusion (7.3% & 6.9%), post procedural fever (33.3% & 12.3%) and severe pain (7.5% & 11.5%). While tumor seeding after percutaneous biopsy and ablative therapies is well recognized, it has rarely been reported after laser ablation and neither of the above groups reported this complication.
