# Prognostic factors for patients with metastatic breast cancer: a literature review

CorpusID: 234246455 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c3d62672f1c29ca61f152b1b2acc3f623a3f5e6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c3d62672f1c29ca61f152b1b2acc3f623a3f5e6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 10

(p0.0) Breast cancer (BC) is one of the most common malignant tumors and the leading cause of cancer death among women (1,2). Metastasis is the main reason causing death in patients with BC (3). Metastasis would occur in approximately 5% to 10% of patients with BC. Besides, about 30% of women will finally develop relapsed BC after the initial diagnosis at early stages (4,5). Despite of medical advances, the 5-year survival rate of patients with metastatic breast cancer (MBC) is still less than 30% (6).

(p0.1) In order to treat MBC more precisely, many efforts have been made to identify prognostic factors of MBC in many studies. It has been found in some studies that patient characteristics such as age and performance status are associated with the prognosis of patients with MBC (1,7). Moreover, it has been found in other studies that characteristics of tumors such as molecular type and histological grade are related to the survival of these patients (8,9). According to molecular type and other prognostic factors, specific treatment strategies, such as anti-HER2 therapy and endocrine therapy, could be adopted to improve the outcome of patients.
## (s8) Patients with PMBC
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Ren et al. (23) identified 194 patients with distant metastasis at the time of diagnosis in the United States. They found race and HR status could exert impact on OS. In another study from the United States (24), researchers aimed to identify clinical characteristics related to distant metastasis by age groups in a large population. They found that age, HR and other factors such as T stage and the site of metastasis, could affect OS and BCSS of these patients. In a study from Japan, Kawano et al. (22) conducted an analysis of 69 HR positive PMBC patients. They found that progesterone receptor status and clinical benefit rate from the first-line endocrine therapy were independent prognostic factors of OS.
## (s10) Prognostic factors of MBC with positive HER2
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) Qin et al. (11) assessed 243 MBC patients with HER2 positive in southern China. They found that anti-HER2 therapy (trastuzumab or lapatinib), endocrine therapy and surgical intervention were favorable independent prognostic factors for OS in these patients, while poor PS and brain metastasis were unfavorable factors. In another study, Bringolf et al. (14) identified 81 patients with HER2 positive, among whom there were 25 receiving HER2targeted therapy in Switzerland. They found that only primary brain metastasis was an unfavorable prognostic factor, while other factors were not significantly associated with the prognosis of these patients. Median OS of patients with primary brain metastasis was 1.9 years (95% CI, 1.7-2.2 years), while median OS of all patients with brain metastasis was 26 months (95% CI, 19.9-32.0 months).
