# Genetic Identification: A Review on Autosomal Single Nucleotide Polymorphism's as Diagnostic Tool for Identifying Human

CorpusID: 234039669 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a681aaae08c9e4fa912883e9fff6516fb0d49040](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a681aaae08c9e4fa912883e9fff6516fb0d49040)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s5) PREDICTION OF EYE COLOR
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Another limitation with the applicability of DNA for the prediction of various traits that particularly includes the color of eye is dependent on the conceptual understanding of the individuals. For example, there could be assigning of same eye to the categories of different eye color. This could mislead the investigators during the investigation as they could begin searching for the wrong person based on this misleading categorization of the eye color. In order to overcome this issue a study has investigated the quantitative variations in the color of eye that are based on genetics. This study has observed that the there are three eye color genes which are new and the quantitative variation in about 50% of the genes can also be demonstrated through the use data provide by the SNPs [11]. The development of color charts from these data can be of significant value for avoiding the uncertainties that are caused in the prediction of eye color [12].
## (s6) PREDICTION OF HAIR COLOR
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Single Nucleotide polymorphism have also been used for the prediction of hair color with particular emphasis on the prediction of red hair color. This hair color is strongly determined by a single gene which provides significant information regarding red hair color when determined through SNPs. The studies that investigated the application of these types of the predictions in forensics have been performed several years ago. In the investigation of 45 SNPs which were obtained from 12 genes has observed an accuracy of 0.87, 0.93, 0.81, and 0.82 for the prediction of black, red, blond, and brown hairs respectively. It has also enabled to distinguish between the categories of the same hair colors. The dependency of age related to the hair color change might be responsible for the lowest accuracy of prediction of the SNPs for blond hair color [13]. The complete variation in the melanin of hair has been observed to be governed by three SNPs. These SNPs were responsible for 76% of these variations. Recently, two of these SNPs have been confirmed to be highly predictive of the hair color. The third gene, among these observed genes, has been recently examined to be related with the biogeoraphical ancestry instead to be responsible for the prediction of hair color [13].
## (s7) PREDICTION OF SKIN COLOR
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) There is limited availability of the GWA studies for the investigation of the color of human skin. Several genes have been highlighted by these studies but the information related to the determination of skin color based on genes is limited so far. It has been demonstrated by a study performed recently that three SNPs obtained from three genes which are responsible for pigmentation, are accountable for 46% of the variations that are related to color of skin. There is a significant difference in the level of variation caused by the SNPs for the hair color and color of eye with that of the skin color [14]. This is related with a lowered level of variation of the color of skin in the same individuals. It is not possible to recover the variations of full traits by utilizing the GWA studies for the mapping of genes responsible for imparting skin color to the individuals. This limitation can be determined through GWA studies which utilize the samples from the entire world including various continents to predict the variations in the color of skin based on the differences in the SNPs with regards to different continents [15]. Another study has observed 82% variation in the color of skin by identifying five SNPs responsible for the variation in skin color among the population of the world. It has been considered that these markers would be useful for the prediction of skin colors of various individuals [16].
