# Software Engineering for Blockchain Based Software Systems: Foundations, Survey, and Future Directions

CorpusID: 233739792 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a0aa95edeeb2d8f836f1e92150dec5fab60788d8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a0aa95edeeb2d8f836f1e92150dec5fab60788d8)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s4) Surveys on Engineering Internet-Based Computing Systems
Number of References: 7

(p4.0) Broadly-related surveys focus on intersections and synergies between Internet-based computing technologies such as blockchain, service computing, cloud computing, and IoTs. They are theoretically grounded on distributed architecture engineering that provides a backbone and virtually unlimited computational resources on-demand services to develop and deploy software systems. Surveys of Fahmideh et al., [9], [10], Lane et al., [28], and Razavian and Lago [29] are categorized under the broadly-related surveys. For example, cloud computing empowers the scalability and performance of blockchain platforms by providing service delivery models such as Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Software as a Service (SaaS), or Platform as a Service (PaaS). Fahmideh et al. in their initial work [30] that is later elaborated in [9] compare the characteristics of 43 reengineering approaches, published between 2007 and 2015, to make legacy software systems as cloud-enabled. Their survey synopsizes the status quo and presents a rich set of development tasks and recommendations commonly incorporated into typical migration processes to cloud platforms upon service delivery models such as IaaS, SaaS, or PaaS. Blockchain is used as an enabling technology for IoT-based applications as it provides a secured decentralized network for data management and communication of sensors and devices. Fahmideh and Zowghi [10] present a generic development process lifecycle for IoT-based applications by mapping 63 approaches, published between 2008 and 2019. They conclude that development roles, requirements analysis, modelling, testing, and tailorability of development processes are not addressed in the existing approaches to engineer IoT-based applications.
## (s5) Surveys on Blockchain-based Systems Engineering
Number of References: 7

(p5.0) Scant work is available as being exclusively devoted to a review of existing proposals on the engineering of BBS. To support in-depth technical analysis, we discard introductory surveys that aimed at demystifying the notion of the blockchain and discussing prevailing challenges in adopting this technology in software applications and organizations. The reason is that they do not concentrate on the aspect of the development lifecycle and despite their usefulness in crafting our research objective, they fall outside the scope and focus of this survey. Some example surveys in this genre are the taxonomy-based surveys on the blockchain usage trend in the IoT context [34], consensus algorithms and application domains of blockchain [17], security concerns in blockchain adoption [35], [36], and business applications of blockchain [37]. The most extensive work is provided by Yli-Huumo et al., [38] with a research objective to understand the current research topics, challenges, and future directions regarding blockchain technology from the technical perspective, (page.1). By analyzing 41 primary studies, published between 2012 and 2015, where 80% of the papers focus on Bitcoin systems and less than 20% deal with other application domains, Yli-Huumo et al. highlight that the lack of concrete evaluation metrics and techniques to measure scalability efficiency in terms of throughput and latency is left unaddressed in the literature. The goal of the survey by Liu et al., [39] is to investigate the design of smart contracts, implementing trusted transactions among parties without mediators. They selected 53 papers to show the state-of-the-art of this topic, developed a taxonomy towards the security verification of blockchain smart contracts, and discussed the pros and cons of each category of the related studies.
## (s15) Ontology-based BBS development
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) Ontologies help reduce conceptual ambiguities and inconsistencies in a particular domain while enabling value-creation capabilities [60]. The application of ontologies becomes important to facilitate knowledge interoperability among stakeholders. Ontology-based system development is initiated by identifying concepts/classes in a domain, and followed by assigning properties for each concept and defining domain constraints and relationships among these concepts that need to be verified if constraints are violated by these properties [61]. In view of the identified studies, the purpose of ontology-based BBS development is for training [S41], identification, design, and test of smart contracts [S42],[S43], and improving discoverability of smart contract services at the run-time [S44]. Kruijff and Weigand [S41] discuss the support of ontologies for BBS development by providing essential concepts related to an operational BBS. Their proposed ontology can be viewed as a training material for software teams who might not be familiar with the key concepts of blockchain. This pioneering effort, in turn, has motivated others to explore alternative applications of ontologies to support the development activities of BBS, in particular the design phase, as will be delineated in Section 5.2.
