# Detecting Fall Risk and Frailty in Elders with Inertial Motion Sensors: A Survey of Significant Gait Parameters

CorpusID: 239485947 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb8aac53d08e71b7ddab1156cddfda41a22a2e42](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb8aac53d08e71b7ddab1156cddfda41a22a2e42)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s1) Conditions
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) Definition Value Traditionally, frailty has been diagnosed using the Fried criteria or other frailty scales or functional tests performed in the doctor's office, such as gait speed test, the Timed Up and Go test (TUG) [4], or the Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) [5]. Currently, technological advances are providing more accurate gait analysis methods to detect frailty and fall risk in elderly people. Moreover, these methods allow more unbiased and realistic tests to be carried out (in the presence of a doctor, the patients tend to outperform) [6]. These advanced methods for gait analysis can be divided into wearable and nonwearable systems, and an overview of them is carried out in [7]. Nonwearable systems are based on image processing or floor sensors. Image processing systems are usually formed by an array of cameras that capture human movements; however, these systems can be made up of other types of optical sensors such as laser range scanners or infrared sensors. Floor sensors consist of a set of pressure sensors located on force platforms, which capture the human gait by measuring the force exerted by the subject's feet during the gait. Alternatively, wearable systems are sensors located on different parts of the body, such as the feet, legs, back, or chest. There are several sensors: force sensors, which are located under the foot and measure the ground reaction force; electromyography, measuring the electric signal caused by contracting muscles with surface electrodes; inertial sensors or Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs), able to capture the acceleration and angular rate and from them estimate velocities, angles, or gait cycle ratios.
## (s3) Frailty Definition and Scoring Tests
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) Frailty is a syndrome (set of symptoms) associated with aging and represent a decline in different functional abilities [22]. According to Fried et al. [3], a frailty condition is met when three (or more) out of five energy-related criteria are satisfied, as shown in Table 1. Alternatively, frailty has been determined as a risk index by counting the number of deficits accumulated over time (termed "Frailty Index (FI)") [22] including disability, diseases, physical and cognitive impairments, and geriatric syndromes (e.g., falls). However, the fivecomponent phenotype proposed by Fried et al. [3] is easier to use and more practical in a clinical setting, compared to the FI that typically contains thirty to seventy items.

(p3.1) It is commonly accepted that there exist three frailty-related states: robust, prefrail (when one or two above-cited criteria are present), and frail (three or more conditions). Several studies for long periods (about 5 y) [22] showed that more than 50% of the elderly population in nursing homes had at least one transition between any two of the three frailty states. According to Fried et al. [3], in a study for 65+ y persons, 46% did not present any conditions, 32% 1 condition, 15% 2 conditions, and only 6%, 1%, and 0.2% for 3, 4, and 5 conditions simultaneously. The most frequent condition were, in order, low activity (22% of the cases), slow walk and grip strength (20% both), exhaustion (17%), and weight loss (6%).
