# metals A Review of the Boiling Curve with Reference to Steel Quenching

CorpusID: 237927816 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4ead16395ae757d2261c778d1ac8ec77890d7cb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4ead16395ae757d2261c778d1ac8ec77890d7cb)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering

## (s4) Boiling Curve Determination
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) Boiling curves are obtained from thermal analysis. This is an experimental technique which uses embedded sub-superficial thermocouples within the workpiece, as it is shown in Figure 1. A typical distance from wall surface to thermocouple tip is 1 to 3 mm. The temperature-time data recorded during quenching are used to solve the so-called Inverse Heat Conduction Problem (IHCP) [10]. This method solves iteratively the heat conduction differential equation to find the proper boundary condition consisting in the heat flux evolution function q(t) that minimizes the sum of absolute differences between the measured, Tm, and computed, Tc, temperatures, ∑ | − | =1 , where N is the number of data points collected during the quenching test. The computed temperatures correspond to the thermocouple tip position at the recorded times during cooling. The final solution of the heat conduction equation also provides the temperature evolution at any location within the solid, in particular it provides the temperature at the wall surface, Tw. Therefore, the solution of the IHCP leads to the q vs. Tw plot. Sometimes, the wall temperature is replaced by the wall superheat defined by the difference Tw − Tsat, where Tsat is the saturation temperature of the liquid, i.e., its boiling temperature. The boiling curve would be the same, except for the shift of the temperature scale. Figure 1 shows a graphic summary of the boiling curve determination from thermal analysis using the solution of the IHCP.  Figure 2a shows typical boiling curves when quenching metallic workpieces from several initial temperatures, T1, T2, …, and T6. As it was mentioned previously, reference [9] presents an example using several initial temperatures between 400 to 1000 °C and  Figure 2a shows typical boiling curves when quenching metallic workpieces from several initial temperatures, T 1 , T 2 , . . . , and T 6 . As it was mentioned previously, reference [9] presents an example using several initial temperatures between 400 to 1000 • C and quenching stainless-steel plates using a water spray. At any initial temperature, the heat flux is low but increases as the surface temperature decreases until reaching a maximum value, so called critical heat flux (CHF). Thereafter, heat flux keeps decreasing during cooling.
## (s6) Effect of Initial Temperature of the Solid Workpiece
Number of References: 4

(p6.0) At this point, it is convenient to say that Babu et al. [11] proposed a normalized boiling curve to represent all curves for different soaking temperatures into a single curve. In spite of its usefulness, this method has not gained further visibility in the research community. Figure 2b shows schematically the boiling phenomena occurring on the surface of a workpiece during its quenching by immersion. They are described as follows: At higher initial temperatures, a continuous vapor film forms on the solid surface, which acts as a thermal resistance for heat flow. The presence of this vapor blanket explains the quasi-plateaus observed in the curves corresponding to initial temperatures, T w ≥ T 3 . Heat flux is kept at a relatively low value; however, when the temperature drops, the vapor film collapses under the liquid pressure, and heat flux increases as a result of a direct contact between the solid surface and the liquid. However, for the curves with T w < T 3 the plateau does not appear, suggesting the absence of an initial stable vapor film. Leidenfrost temperature, T L , is defined as the minimum wall temperature where the stable vapor film regime prevails. Below this temperature, nucleate boiling regime appears, in which swarms of bubbles continuously form and detach from the wall surface. This process is maintained until wall temperature is too low to promote boiling. This is the onset of nucleate boiling temperature, T ONB , and is where single phase convection regime appears. The above explanation does not clarify why heat flux is very low at the starting high temperature. This initial low heat flux has mainly attributed to the measurement delay from the thermocouple (time constant). This is a characteristic delay that depends on the wire diameter, the thinner the wire the shorter the delay. Rabin and Rittel [12] showed that the time response of a solid-embedded thermocouple is far from being similar to the corresponding response of a fluid-immersed thermocouple. The authors found that the solid-embedded thermocouple has a significantly faster time response at the initiation of the process, but it requires a much longer time to reach a steady state temperature. They also claim that the thermal diffusivity of the thermocouple should be at least one order of magnitude higher than that of the measured domain in order to obtain meaningful results in transient measurements. This is difficult to obtain for quenching metals, since both, thermocouple and workpiece have mutually similar thermal diffusivity values. quenching stainless-steel plates using a water spray. At any initial temperature, the heat flux is low but increases as the surface temperature decreases until reaching a maximum value, so called critical heat flux (CHF). Thereafter, heat flux keeps decreasing during cooling. At this point, it is convenient to say that Babu et al. [11] proposed a normalized boiling curve to represent all curves for different soaking temperatures into a single curve. In spite of its usefulness, this method has not gained further visibility in the research community. Figure  2b shows schematically the boiling phenomena occurring on the surface of a workpiece during its quenching by immersion. They are described as follows: At higher initial temperatures, a continuous vapor film forms on the solid surface, which acts as a thermal resistance for heat flow. The presence of this vapor blanket explains the quasi-plateaus observed in the curves corresponding to initial temperatures, Tw ≥ T3. Heat flux is kept at a relatively low value; however, when the temperature drops, the vapor film collapses under the liquid pressure, and heat flux increases as a result of a direct contact between the solid surface and the liquid. However, for the curves with Tw < T3 the plateau does not appear, suggesting the absence of an initial stable vapor film. Leidenfrost temperature, TL, is defined as the minimum wall temperature where the stable vapor film regime prevails. Below this temperature, nucleate boiling regime appears, in which swarms of bubbles continuously form and detach from the wall surface. This process is maintained until wall temperature is too low to promote boiling. This is the onset of nucleate boiling temperature, TONB, and is where single phase convection regime appears. The above explanation does not clarify why heat flux is very low at the starting high temperature. This initial low heat flux has mainly attributed to the measurement delay from the thermocouple (time constant). This is a characteristic delay that depends on the wire diameter, the thinner the wire the shorter the delay. Rabin and Rittel [12] showed that the time response of a solid-embedded thermocouple is far from being similar to the corresponding response of a fluid-immersed thermocouple. The authors found that the solid-embedded thermocouple has a significantly faster time response at the initiation of the process, but it requires a much longer time to reach a steady state temperature. They also claim that the thermal diffusivity of the thermocouple should be at least one order of magnitude higher than that of the measured domain in order to obtain meaningful results in transient measurements. This is difficult to obtain for quenching metals, since both, thermocouple and workpiece have mutually similar thermal diffusivity values.  
