# Nanoemulsions for health, food, and cosmetics: a review

CorpusID: 232224991 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/85bcee5007a7eb6071e5d58b7e6f3fe5f45d2604](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/85bcee5007a7eb6071e5d58b7e6f3fe5f45d2604)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s2) Emulsifiers and nanoemulsifiers for nanoemulsions
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) Emulsifiers are surface-active molecules widely applied in the breakage of droplets into tiny and very small droplets. Emulsifiers concentration must reach the right amounts Fig. 1 Oil-in-water and waterin-oil emulsions. Nanoemulsions are disequilibrated systems of water-in-oil (W/O) or oil-in-water (O/W) emulsions. They are immiscible liquids consisting of oil and water forming a single phase by an emulsifier such as the surfactants and co-surfactants, the combination of which confers high thermodynamics, stability and other physicochemical properties on the emulsion so as to overcome the interfacial forces, and to ensure that the coating rate is rapid (Artiga-Artigas et al., 2018). This phenomenon prevents the particles from aggregating whilst enabling longer storage time and better stability. Fabricating nanoemulsions implies that the emulsifiers are well absorbed at the oil-water interface and subsequently reduce the interfacial tension in order to loosen up the particles and easily disrupt the droplets. The emulsifiers then protectively coat the oil droplets to prevent aggregation and coagulation (Dasgupta et al. 2019a).
## (s5) Drugs
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) Nanoemulsions have the ability to dissolve nonpolar active compounds, a characteristic paramount to being choice of use as drug and bioactive compounds delivery systems. Both oral and parenteral delivery routes are employable, as the  latter has been utilized in supplying required nutrients, controlled drug release, and vaccine delivery. Systemic antibacterial, antifungal, antiparasitic and antimicrobial activities of nanoemulsions have been reported on E. coli, S. aureus, Candida spp., Dermatophytes spp., Plasmodium bergheii, among others (Singh and Vingkar 2008;Mansour et al. 2009). Nanoemulsions are more advantageous than the conventional emulsions and other systems since their droplet sizes are below the micrometers range, and thus they easily pass the stringency of intravenous administration of drugs. The parenteral administration of nanoemulsions employed in nutrition of vitamins and other bioactive substances, attest to the merits they possess over other systems as their transit time, absorption, and efficacy are highly improved, while drug toxicity is reduced. Therefore, they are perfect drug delivery systems for antimicrobials, diuretics, steroids, and hormones (Sonneville-Aubrun et al. 2004;Singh and Vingkar 2008;Quintão et al. 2013).
## (s7) Inflammation
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) Nanoemulsions could also be employed in anti-inflammatory functions. Free radicals are released by enzymes, toxic metabolites of pathogens, and inflammation mediators such as polymorphonuclear lymphocytes, leading to chronic inflammation. These same enzymes and metabolites deprive host cells of their required nutrients for growth. However, the mix of emulsifiers and oils was reportedly significant in phytochemicals absorption and treatment of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), i.e., Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis (Yen et al. 2018) and periodontitis, a chronic inflammatory disease that erodes teeth's supporting structures (Aithal et al. 2018).

(p7.1) Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is often characterized with inflamed intestinal wall where the colonic and rectal mucosa are impacted. This is continuous for ulcerative colitis while it may be transmural and discontinuous in Crohn's disease. Host's lifestyle, genetic make-up, oxidative stress, pathogenic attack, immune responses, and drastic changes of inflammatory mediator levels are factors associated with IBD (Head and Jurenka 2003). Meanwhile, some studies have shown the usefulness of phytochemicals in treating periodontitis and IBD, including diterpenoid and quercetin, respectively (Geoghegan et al. 2010). Due to their low water solubility, they are less bio-available and are poorly absorbed orally. To increase their absorbability, both phytochemicals were improved with emulsions (Azuma et al. 2002).
## (s8) Cancer
Number of References: 6

(p8.0) Abnormal cell proliferation due to genetic coding errors generate cancer cells. Active angiogenesis and vascular density occur in order to utilize the blood supply for tumor tissues growth, and is supported by a microenvironment of the extracellular matrix, adipocytes, pericytes, immune cells, and others (Ganta et al. 2014). The use of anticancer drugs may result in inadequate solubility, toxicity to noncancer cells, and poor selectivity of target cancer cells, while chemotherapy drugs may not be ideal in the long run due to their action on every form of proliferative cells, including hair follicles, bone marrow, red blood cells, gut epithelial cells, and lymphatic cells (Qiao et al. 2010;Mahato 2017).

(p8.1) Poor solubility and hydrophobicity of most anticancer drugs connote their inability to reach or effect their action on cancer cells (Sareen et al. 2012). This is where nanoemulsions are essential, as they proffer solubility to hydrophobic drugs and their stability. The resultant effect is that cancerous cells are selectively targeted earlier, leading to a high rate of successful cancer treatment. For instance, nanoemulsions could be engineered using specific ligands to target cells, tissues, or organs, all to improve the status quo in cancer therapy (Mahato 2017). Nanoparticles easily conjugate with multifunctional moieties, as found in nanoemulsions, aimed at drug delivery for cancer therapy via diagnostic means and imaging. Indeed, Tiwari et al. (2006) studied and used lipid-rich nanoemulsions containing fatty 1 3 acids (omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids, linoleic acid), nonglucose-based calories, and vitamins E and K as colloidal carriers for chemotherapeutic drugs, whilst using diagnostic and imaging techniques. Although the in vitro study was promising, the need for a validation and safety studies cannot be undermined. Table 2 offers more examples of nanoemulsion applications in healthcare delivery.
## (s9) Cosmetics and others
Number of References: 17

(p9.0) Nanoemulsions could be traced to other applications such as complex matter developments and cosmetics, based on their liquid-liquid affinity to macromolecular moieties, minute size and large surface area. As building blocks of polymers, nanoemulsions could use their hydrophobic monomeric units in the droplets to generate polymers, with vast examples demonstrated in the studies of Asua (2002), Landfester (2006) and Gupta et al. (2016). Interestingly, from the development of varying protein shell structures with silicone oil-based nanoemulsions (Chang et al. 2008), amphiphilic photoreactive surfactants (de Oliveira et al. 2011), silica nanospheres (Wu et al. 2013), photoinduced and thermoreactive polymers or organogels (Helgeson et al. 2012), essential oils-based products (Barradas and e Silva 2020), suspended magnetic nanoparticles (Primo et al. 2007), to erythrocytelike composite hydrogels , nanoemulsions have been studied or applied.

(p9.1) Moreover, nanoemulsions could be used in composite and crystal formulations on the premise of size specificity and accuracy of active pharmaceutical ingredients and other products, involving a low energy-requiring process (Eral et al. 2014). Indeed, nanosized oil-loaded droplets ensure penetration of the stratum corneum, making them highly useful in alcohol-free perfume formulations (Rai et al. 2018;Barradas and e Silva 2020). Noteworthy to mention is that some oils used in nanoemulsions proffer some benefits that should not be undermined, and could be useful in the encapsulation of volatile components like aromatic compounds and essential oils.

(p9.2) On another note, the surface area and small size of nanoemulsion droplets increase their propensity to lesser viscousness, making them utilizable in the cosmetics sector as they could more efficiently deliver active substances to the skin. They are no flocculants, coalescing or creaming agents, and demonstrate little or no sediments, making their applications far more important than conventional emulsions in cosmetology. In this regard, Vellozia squamata and Opuntia ficusindica (L.) Mill hydroglycolic extracts were studied and applied to fabricate nanoemulsion-based moisturizers, creams, anti-ageing agents (Quintão et al. 2013;Ribeiro et al. 2015). Similarly, oils like coconut, polyethylene glycol octyl phenyl ether and polyethylene glycol hydrogenated castor oil were included in nanoemulsions for cosmeceutical applications (Pengon et al. 2018).

(p9.3) Furthermore, the use of nano-gel technique for transepidermal water loss minimization, dermal protection, and efficacious active ingredients penetration has been suggested for inclusion in moisteners, anti-ageing creams and various sun care formulations (Mansour et al. 2009). For instance, Kemira nano-gel is a nanoemulsion-based patented cosmetics system meant to attain skin smoothness by enhancing high penetrative capacity of active ingredients and dermal cells production (Guglielmini 2008). Another patented example is that of L'Oreal (Paris, France), using nanoemulsion-based phosphoric acid fatty acid esters in cosmetics and pharmaceutical products, among others (Shah et al. 2010). Table 2 presents more on the overview of use of nanoemulsions in cosmetics and other non-food applications.
## (s10) Food
Number of References: 13

(p10.0) Nanoemulsions have proven quite useful in bioavailability, bioactivity, digestibility, stability, safety, quality, and sensory enhancements of food components and natural extracts, such as lycopene-solubilized and β-carotene-based nanoemulsions (Nedovic et al. 2011;Bakshi et al. 2018), based on their wide surface area and small droplets. To remain stable, formulation of nanoemulsions requires the presence of an emulsifier, often acting as not only an additive but a preservative of the food products and/or the active components. As an example, surface-active molecules were introduced during the fabrication of basil oil nanoemulsions, and were found to exert antimicrobial activity against certain food spoiling fungi, including Aspergillus flavus and Penicillium chrysogenum (Gundewadi et al. 2018). A similar study was carried out on avocado oil-based nanoemulsions stabilized with Quillaja saponins (QS) where thermal stability was reportedly increased as QS was incorporated in the emulsions, a merit in the cause of safe and sterile emulsion-based food products development (Teo et al. 2017;Riquelme et al. 2019).

(p10.1) The use of nanoemulsions to stabilize essential oils in foods also assist with overcoming their high volatility, hydrophobicity, and reactivity with other food components, which could reduce their applications in the food sector. The stabilized oils or nanoemulsions thus improve the antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of the processed essential oils, enhancing their compatibility, solubility, stability, physicochemical equilibrium, and behaviors (Lawrence and Rees 2000;Bai et al. 2016;Ghasemi et al. 2018;Prakash et al. 2019). Other studies that have applied nanoemulsions in foods include corn oil-based β-carotene nanoemulsions at 300 nm (Borba et al. 2019), sensory efficient nanoemulsions constituted with Brazilian propolis extracts (Seibert et al. 2019), improved digestible curcumin nanoemulsions, and nanoemulsion-based fortified beverages with vitamin D3 (Golfomitsou et al. 2018;Maurya and Aggarwal 2019). The possibilities of nanoemulsions in foods and food products seem limitless. More examples are presented in Table 3.
