# A Review of Gear Fault Diagnosis of Planetary Gearboxes Using Acoustic Emissions

CorpusID: 233960099 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf992a88adf13f228248e79042ffb9abeda3124f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf992a88adf13f228248e79042ffb9abeda3124f)

Fields: Materials Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s4) Sources of AE in Gear Transmissions
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) In the case of gear transmissions experimental observations have shown that under non-faulty conditions the waveforms of AE signals contain multiple bursts over a continuous AE. Tan and Mba [24,26,27] investigated the sources of AE on parallel-shaft gearboxes that produce such waveforms. They measured the AE with a sensor located directly on the pinion and the signals were transmitted using a slip ring. Three possible sources of AE were analyzed: tooth resonance, secondary pressure peak in the lubricant and asperity contacts between the meshing surfaces. After having discarded the first two hypotheses, they reached to the conclusion that the main source of AE in gear transmissions was asperity contacts during sliding and rolling of the meshing teeth. They also suggested that the rolling was responsible for the generation of AE bursts, while the sliding was responsible for the generation of continuous AE. This affirmation was initially based on the observation that the bursts were approximately separated at the gear mesh period. In additional tests without lubrication, they compared the AE waveforms generated by gears in a good condition and gears with loss of involute profile due to surface damage. The results showed that the bursts were more visible for gears in a good condition than for those with surface damage, which helps to validate their hypothesis.
