# Propofol detection for monitoring of intravenous anaesthesia: a review

CorpusID: 235701641 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dee140b6b2fc20f4f0a4cd35507660792ed5494b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dee140b6b2fc20f4f0a4cd35507660792ed5494b)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Chromatography
Number of References: 23

(p2.0) High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is perhaps the most commonly reported method for the detection and quantification of propofol, and considered by many to be the 'gold standard' for validation purposes. HPLC may be used in conjunction with a variety of measurement techniques, with the most common being fluorometric detection. When using fluorometric detection, the most common excitation and emission wavelengths are 276 nm and 310 nm respectively [16][17][18][19], however, the use of other wavelengths has been reported [20]. Typically, the mobile phases consist of mixtures of either methanol [16] or acetonitrile [17,18] with water. Nishio et al. have demonstrated propofol detection using fluorometric-HPLC using only water as a mobile phase by utilising a temperature-responsive polymer as a stationary phase [19]. Fluorometric-HPLC has been demonstrated for the detection of propofol from serum and whole blood samples, with the samples being pre-treated either by precipitation of proteins using acetonitrile [16][17][18] or by solid phase extraction [19]. Reported limits of quantification range between 3 and 400 ng/ml [17,18], with linear ranges typically extending up to the order of 10 μg/ml.

(p2.1) Another common measurement technique used in conjunction with HPLC is UV photometry. Absorbance is measured at wavelengths ranging from 210 to 280 nm [21,22] and the mobile phases typically consist of acetonitrile mixed with either an acidic buffer [21,23] or ammonium [22]. Reported linear regions range from the order of 10 to 100 μg/ml and limits of quantification as low as 20 ng/ml have been reported [23].

(p2.2) The use of electrochemical measurement in conjunction with HPLC has also been reported, although this approach appears less common. Dowrie et al. have reported electrochemical detection of propofol from human serum and plasma using a mixture of methanol and an acidic buffer for the mobile phase and a measurement potential of + 0.8 V [24]. This group reports a linear range of 0.01 to 1 μg/ml. Pissinis et al. have utilised a highly alkaline mobile phase as at a higher pH propofol will be ionised and therefore oxidation can be carried out at a lower potential (ca. + 0.1 V), resulting in reduced interference [25]. Using this method, they report a limit of detection of 5 ng/ml. A summary of HPLC-based propofol detection techniques is presented in Table 1.
## (s3) Optical techniques
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) To achieve the spectrophotometric detection of propofol, many groups have taken advantage of the Gibbs reaction. This is the name given to the process wherein 2,6-dichloroquinone-4-chlorimide (DCQ), also known as Gibbs' reagent, reacts with phenolic compounds in alkaline conditions to produce an indophenol ( Fig. 1) [34,35]. This indophenol will be a blue-to-violet coloured species with an absorption maximum of approximately 600 nm. Gad-Kariem and Abounassif have exploited this reaction to demonstrate the detection of propofol in biological fluids by mixing samples with DCQ solution, dimethyl sulfoxide and a buffer (pH 9.6), allowing the mixture to react for 15 min and then measuring the absorbance at 635 nm [36]. By this method this group were able to demonstrate the detection of propofol in spiked plasma and urine with a linear range of 1-5 μg/ml and a detection limit in plasma of 0.28 μg/ml.
## (s5) Challenges and future prospects
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) The aim of delivering real-time monitoring of blood propofol concentration during general anaesthesia places a number of requirements on any potential propofol sensing technique. For instance, any method must be capable of returning results within a sufficiently narrow window of time to provide information that is of practical use to anaesthetists or other healthcare professionals. This is a major reason why approaches such as HPLC and mass spectrometry, which have a time-to-results of the order of several tens of minutes at best [28], are of limited utility for this application. Methods that require non-trivial sample pre-treatment will likely not be suitable for this same reason, and as such, sensors capable of functioning at physiological conditions will likely be more suitable than those that are not (for instance optical techniques based on the Gibbs reaction, which requires alkaline conditions [36][37][38]).

(p5.1) There are examples of groups who have reported the detection of propofol in urine as well as blood [28,36]. However, due to the significant time-lag between administering a drug and it or its metabolites presenting in a patient's urine, this approach will not be applicable to real-time propofol monitoring during general anaesthesia. Whole blood, serum or plasma represent the most practical biological fluids for this application.
