# Neuron-level Interpretation of Deep NLP Models: A Survey

CorpusID: 237353268 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff56dfdbc8b86decbc6119d96c1097c0fef56ecd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff56dfdbc8b86decbc6119d96c1097c0fef56ecd)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s7) Linear Classifiers
Number of References: 4

(p7.0) The idea is to train a linear classifier towards the concept of interest, using the activation vectors generated by the model being analyzed. The weights assigned to neurons (features to the classifier) serve as their importance score with respect to the concept. The regularization of the classifier directly effects the weights and therefore the ranking of neurons. Radford et al. (2019) used L1 regularization which forces the classifier to learn spiky weights, indicating the selection of very few specialized neurons learning a concept, while setting the majority of neurons' weights to zero. Lakretz et al. (2019) on the other hand used L2 regularization to encourage grouping of features. This translates to discovering group neurons that are jointly responsible for a concept. Dalvi et al. (2019) used ElasticNet regularization which combines the benefits of L1 and L2, accounting for both highly correlated group neurons and specific focused neurons with respect to a concept.

(p7.1) Limitation A pitfall to probing classifiers is whether a probe faithfully reflects the concept learned within the representation or just memorizes the task (Hewitt and Liang, 2019;Zhang and Bowman, 2018). Researchers have mitigated this pitfall for some analyses by using random initialization of neurons (Dalvi et al., 2019) and control tasks  to demonstrate that the knowledge is possessed within the neurons and not due to the probe's capacity for memorization. Another discrepancy in the neuron probing framework, that especially affects the linear classifiers, is that variance patterns in neurons differ strikingly across the layers.  suggested to apply z-normalization as a pre-processing step to any neuron probing method to alleviate this issue.
