# environmental engineering Humic substances and significance of their application -a review

CorpusID: 237204868 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9015012640937723bba910c607b1a55b3d1bf75b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9015012640937723bba910c607b1a55b3d1bf75b)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s7) Remediation of soils contaminated with heavy metals -cadmium and arsenic
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Due to the high content of functional groups containing oxygen, HSs are an effective material used for the remediation of soils contaminated with heavy metals. Examples of such metals are Cd and As, the difficulty of their simultaneous removal is caused by the opposite chemical behaviours of these elements. It is important to adjust the washing conditions to the soil properties. Important factors are the pH value, the duration and cycles of washing and the HSs concentration (Bi, Yuan, Wei, Xiao, Feng, Meng and Wang, 2019). The content of Cd and As in soil can be a serious problem in specific places, as is the case in China. A national survey showed that the national standards were exceeded in 7% and 2.7% of the sampling sites for Cd and As, respectively. Cd and As are toxic and carcinogenic elements -their presence in soil poses a threat to the quality of the environment and human health and has a negative effect on food. Therefore, it is so important to minimise the risk by removing these elements from the soil (Bi et. al., 2019).
## (s10) Application of humic acids in agriculture
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) One of the technologies of organic waste management is composting, which promotes humification and the creation of forms that are more stable than raw waste. Compost can be used as a soil amendment. In agricultural and horticultural production, compost can be a high-quality substitute for peat, which is used for container-grown plants. Municipal solid waste can also be composted -composting reduces the volume and weight of waste by half, and the resulting product can be beneficial for agriculture use. In the tested compost made of municipal solid waste, the maturity of the compost was assessed. It was observed that after 112 days, the HA content of the compost increased to a maximum plateau. Moreover, the cucumber bioassay of compost maturity showed that the highest dry weight of the plants was obtained in the mentioned time (Olk, Bloom, Perdue, McKnight, Chen, Farenhorst, Senesi, Chin, Schmitt-Kopplin, Hertkorn and Harir, 2019;Chefetz, Hatcher, Hadar and Chen, 1996). Lignite is a low-rank coal, and instead of being used for energy purposes, it can be implemented in agriculture. Lignite is a source of HSs and may therefore be used as an indirect component of fertilisers. Research was performed in which the properties of HAs obtained from lignite were assessed. The obtained HAs have a high number of aliphatic connections (58-78%) and a low aromatic polycondensation. Aromatic and aliphatic groups are an important element of the ion exchange capacity, mineral-organic connections with commercial humic products are possible thanks to these groups. Moreover, aromatic structures stabilise organic substances and constitute a source of energy and matter for microorganisms .
