# polymers Chitosan: An Overview of Its Properties and Applications

CorpusID: 238746265 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/61af8226a37b2bd2efbb50070afe82c46295f168](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/61af8226a37b2bd2efbb50070afe82c46295f168)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s2) Solubility
Number of References: 4

(p2.0) Chitosan is produced by deacetylation of chitin; in this process, some N-acetylglucosamine moieties are converted into glucosamine units. The presence of large amounts of protonated -NH 2 groups on the chitosan structure accounts for its solubility in acid aqueous media since its pKa value is approximately 6.5 [16]. When around 50% of all amino groups are protonated, chitosan becomes soluble [17].

(p2.1) Chitosan solubility depends on different factors such as polymer molecular weight, degree of acetylation, pH, temperature, and polymer crystallinity. Homogeneous deacetylation (alkali treatment, 0 • C) of chitin permits the production of polymers soluble in aqueous acetic acid solutions with DD as low as 28%, with this value never being reached under heterogeneous deacetylation (alkali treatment, high temperatures). Moreover, with a DD of 49%, the samples are soluble in water. This behaviour is explained by the fact that homogeneous deacetylation leads to an increase in the number of glucosamine units and a modification in the crystalline structure of the polymer. Depending on polymer DD, these modifications range from a reduction in crystal size and crystal perfection to the presence of a new crystal structure close to β-chitin [18]. Sogias et al. [19] studied the role of crystallinity and inter-or intramolecular forces on chitosan solubility; in this work, a parent chitosan sample was half re-acetylated with anhydride acetic or fully N-deacetylated under homogeneous conditions. After reacetylation, the solubility of the polymer was expanded until pH 7.4, while a slight reduction in the solubility range of the fully deacetylated chitosan was determined. The lower solubility was explained due to the increase in the polymer crystallinity after deacetylation, which offsets the effect of the increase in glucosamine moieties. On the contrary, a reduction in the crystallinity was observed in the half-acetylated sample. The use of hydrogen bond disruptors such as urea or guanidine hydrochloride also alters the solubility window of chitosan. In fact, by a combination of chemical and physical disruption of the hydrogen bonds, broad solubility is achieved.
## (s7) Antimicrobial Activity
Number of References: 9

(p7.0) Bacterial resistance to antibiotics is a critical public health concern and, therefore, there is an urgency to find alternatives to antibiotics. Chitosan, chitosan derivatives and chitooligosaccharides exert antimicrobial activity against different microorganisms, including bacteria, filamentous fungi, and yeast [48]; some examples of the different microorganisms sensible to chitosan are shown in Table 3. Chitosan seems to have a growth-inhibitory activity since bacteria is able to grow after the polymer is removed from the media. This is of importance since resistant populations might emerge if the cells adapt to chitosan [49]. Strong effect [60][61][62] Due to chitosan's poor solubility above pH 6.5, the use of chitooligosaccharides is under consideration as polycationic biocides since they are soluble in water. Chitosan soluble derivatives such as sulphated chitosan, N-trimethyl chitosan, N-diethylmethyl chitosan or 2,6-diamino chitosan also avoid the use of acidic environments and exert antimicrobial activity [63][64][65]. This antimicrobial activity has applications in different fields such as the food, textile, or cosmetic industry, among others. Thus, due to the ability of chitosan to form shift bases, some new chitosan derivatives based on heterocyclic moieties have been developed, including pyrazole ring and furanyl, pyridyl, or thiophenyl moieties. Although these derivatives do not show higher solubility in aqueous media, their performance against gram-positive microorganism was improved when compared with the parent chitosan [66].
## (s13) Chitosan in Drug Delivery
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) Since the introduction of the first polymers in drug delivery, chitosan has shown superior biological and physiochemical properties for a wide variety of biomedical and industrial applications. The main feature of this biopolymer is its cationic character due to amino groups. These amino groups are also responsible for properties such as controlled drug release, mucoadhesion, in situ gelation, transfection, permeation enhancement, and efflux pump inhibitory properties [166]. Moreover, interest in this biomaterial due to its central nervous system (CNS) bio-medical implementation has increased because of its ability to cross the blood brain barrier (BBB) [167]. Synthesis of different natural and non-natural nucleosides using a recombinant nucleoside 2deoxyribosyltransferase from Lactobacillus reuteri (LrNDT) immobilized on cross-linked magnetic chitosan beads [165]. Commission on Biochemical Nomenclature: adenine (Ade), uracil (Ura), cytosine (Cyt), thymine (Thy), 2,6-diaminopurine (2,6-DAP), 5-trifluorothymine (5-tFThy), 2 -deoxyuridine (dUrd), 2 -deoxyadenosine (dAdo), 2 -deoxycytidine (dCyd), thymidine (dThd), 2,6-diaminopurine-2 -deoxyriboside (2,6-DAPdRib), 5-trifluorothymidine (5-tFdThd), 2 -fluoro-20deoxyuridine (2 -FdUrd), 2 -fluoro-2 -deoxycitydine (2 -FdCyd), ara-uracil (ara-U), ara-adenine (ara-A).
