# Molecular Sciences Inherited Platelet Disorders: An Updated Overview

CorpusID: 233461385 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48a68a5b7e21df902ff5009b8ab638b5cddd4edf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48a68a5b7e21df902ff5009b8ab638b5cddd4edf)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) GNAS GNAQ GNAZ GNAI1
Number of References: 8

(p3.0) Normal platelet count and morphology. Gs hyperfunction may be associated with discrete macrothrombocytopenia and neurological disorders. Reduced LTA and secretion in response to multiple soluble agonists. Moderate hemorrhagic symptoms; mainly associated with hemostatic challenges. [8,111,112] CalDAG-GEF1 defect (615888) AR RASGRP2

(p3.1) Normal platelet count and morphology. LTA and secretion defects with weak agonists. αIIbβ3 integrin activation defects with weak agonists (fibrinogen binding deficit, PAC-1). Normal or moderately reduced response to PMA. [113][114][115] LAD-III Syndrome (Kindlin-3 deficiency) (612840) AR FERMT3

(p3.2) Leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome type 3 (LADIII): infections, poor healing, osteopetrosis. Severe bleeding tendency, even more severe than Glanzmann thrombasthenia. [116,117] Procoagulant Activity
## (s16) Glanzmann Thrombasthenia
Number of References: 4

(p16.0) In the hemostatic response, platelets adhered to the vascular wound recruit other circulating platelets to form the thrombus [162]. This platelet aggregation is achieved by means of fibrinogen bridges between αIIbβ3 integrins of nearby platelets. Molecular defects of the ITGA2B and ITGB3 genes, that encode for the αIIbβ3 complex, cause GT. Some 200 different mutations (deletions, insertions, point mutations, etc.) have been reported in approximately 200 families, and these numbers are growing constantly [91,92,163].
