# A systematic literature review of prognostic factors in patients with HR+/HER2− advanced breast cancer in Japan

CorpusID: 237254844 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/584400b31442eb954bc76681c093b227641f341d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/584400b31442eb954bc76681c093b227641f341d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s15) PgR status Five studies assessed PgR status. Two studies used
Number of References: 17

(p15.0) 1% as a cut-off for PgR positivity (9,18). One study used 20% (23), whereas two studies did not report the cut-off (14,27). Three studies (9,18,27)  Tumour grade Six studies assessed the tumour grade.

(p15.1) Four (10,14,23,27)  ALDH1 expression Two studies evaluated the ALDH1 expression. In one study (23), the authors found an association between the expression of ALDH1 and worse survival, but only in UV analysis (UV: HR 1.552, 95% CI 1.057-2.218, P = 0.025; MV: 1.451, 95% CI 0.985-2.085, P = 0.059). The other study (28) failed to obtain significant results between the ALDH1 expression and survival, leading to an inconclusive association.

(p15.2) Visceral metastases Three studies (16,21,24) evaluated the presence of visceral metastases. No association between the presence of visceral metastases and OS was found in UV analysis. One of these studies (21) found a weak association in MV analysis, HR 0.20 (95% CI 0.04-0.82, P = 0.025). However, this study had a high RoB and a low sample size (n = 32).
## (s18) Type of A/MBC Two studies evaluated the type of A/MBC
Number of References: 6

(p18.0) (de novo vs recurrent). One study (24) found that patients with the novo A/MBC had better OS than patients with recurrent A/MBC in UV analysis; HR 0.63 (95% CI 0.40-0.99, P = 0.047), although failed to find this association in MV analysis. The other study (13) did not detect an association.

(p18.1) Progression pattern Two studies evaluated the progression pattern. One study (13) found that patients with progression due to new metastases had better OS than those with progression due to pre-existing lesions in UV analysis; HR NR (P = 0.017), whereas the other study (21) failed to find an association.

(p18.2) ER status Four studies evaluated the ER status. Only one study (9) obtained an association between ER+ and improved survival in UV analysis; HR 0.54 (95% CI 0.34-0.85, P = 0.008), but not in MV analysis. However, one study (21) with non-significant results in UV analysis did report a significant association in MV analysis; HR 0.13 (95% CI 0.03-0.53, P = 0.004).
