# Data-Driven Decision Making in COVID-19 Response: A Survey

CorpusID: 236521932 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92d044230c5ea2fdc87acac0f68cad1d22ae8e65](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92d044230c5ea2fdc87acac0f68cad1d22ae8e65)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s7) PSYCHOLOGICAL COUNSELLING
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) The outbreak of COVID-19 has made people face many changes in lifestyle and environment [45]. Many places have adopted mandatory isolation measures to prevent the further spread of the virus. Isolation increases the possibility of depression and even makes people "desperate" [42]. Moreover, the negative reports about COVID-19 illnesses are constantly updated every day. The number of dead cases is increasing, and the number of confirmed cases is increasing daily, resulting in incalculable loss. These series of problems increase people's mental stress and negative psychological states. The large-scale pandemic disease causes panic in people, worrying about the possibility of becoming sick, and meanwhile increasing the fear of death, helplessness, irrespective of being a patient [69]. These cases involve the pain of treatment, the risk of relapse of mental diseases, and several uncontrollable behaviours.
## (s9) Enterprise Policies
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) Significantly, most psychological intervention guiding measures have been taken up by hospitals and psychological counselling agencies. The decreed isolation policies also prevent enterprises from resuming work. Whether it is a private enterprise or a state-owned enterprise, employees are also isolated to their homes like most people. Due to the isolation policies, face-to-face communication is not possible, so hospitals and consulting agencies have jointly built many online consultation platforms [59]. Zhang et al. [99] proposed a mental health intervention model, which uses an Internet technology platform to provide timely psychological counselling to patients and their families. Doctors need the courage to overcome disease meanwhile, they need to deal with certain extreme emotions of patients due to illness, who can be physically and mentally exhausted. Therefore, their psychological guidance is also a top priority. Chen et al. [25] detailed the psychological guide measures for medical staff, including the establishment of a psychological intervention medical team, the establishment of a psychological assistance hotline team and psychological skills training.
## (s18) Online Education
Number of References: 4

(p18.0) A large number of schools have used the Internet for remote learning to ensure the continuity of teaching during the epidemic. In related research in educational psychology, multitasking has a negative impact on students' academic performance. This theory has been effectively proven by investigating the self-efficacy of self-regulated learning (SESRL) [102]. But in online education, SESRL eases the contradictory relationship between multitasking and academic performance [4]. The moderated mediation effect of self-efficacy is only found in online classrooms. Based on the above findings, research in [4] shows that when students with high SESRL levels study online, the negative impact of multitasking on the score is reduced. As for the public acceptance of online education, Samad and Khalid [74] survey 125 elementary school science teachers using a 10-item questionnaire and analyse the questionnaire data obtained. Their research results
