# The Impact of Covid-19 on the Livestock Industry and the Way Forward: A Review

CorpusID: 236820200 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5715827ea6e49fa4d267c7ac767fc930e33bfe7c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5715827ea6e49fa4d267c7ac767fc930e33bfe7c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Business

## (s8) Advances in Animal and Veterinary Sciences
Number of References: 6

(p8.0) June 2021 | Volume 9 | Issue 6 | Page 944 (aerosols). It was reported that the infectious droplets or aerosols can gain access to human lungs through natural orifices such as the nose or mouth (Phan et al., 2020;Riou et al., 2020;Parry, 2020;Li et al., 2020a). The infectious droplets (aerosols) of SARS-CoV-2 can maintain its infectiousness for hours and survive on hard surfaces for a few days (Chauhan, 2020). In the aerosols of SARS-CoV-2, the median half-life is approximately 1.1 hours. Its survival on stainless steel is 5.6 hours and 6.8 hours on plastic (Van Doremalen et al., 2020). The virus could not be isolated from cardboard after 24 hours exposure with infectious droplets, while no virus was found on plastics and stainless steel after 72 hours exposure with infectious droplets (depending on the inoculum shed). This confirms the fact that fomite transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is possible since the virus can survive and remain infectious for hours and days on surfaces Van Doremalen et al., 2020). Apart from the fomite transmission of SARS-CoV-2, the mode of transmission of the virus is significant for human contamination to dogs and cats (EC, 2020). Even though the contamination routes are not clear, the main route of the virus transmission is mainly through droplets emitted during coughing, sneezing, talking or breathing. It has been established that transmission can occur through fomites by hand-to-mouth, conjunctiva or by touching the nose with hands contaminated with infectious droplets or saliva (Chen, 2020; . However, it is important to note that most of the common habits such as licking and kissing increases or facilitates the transmission of the virus between sick people and their pets. Public health officials now recognize that people may spread the disease before they become symptomatic. The newly revised estimates from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggested that 40 % of Covid-19 cases are asymptomatic, and half of all the current cases are transmitted by incubatory carrier (Groth, 2020).
