# Computer vision-based wood identification and its expansion and contribution potentials in wood science: A review

CorpusID: 233433541 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92a9827a923979bc724e929ddaac76e1aab4d31e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92a9827a923979bc724e929ddaac76e1aab4d31e)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) Background
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) Every tree has clues that can help with its identification. Leaves, needles, barks, fruits, flowers, and twigs are important features for tree identification. However, most of these features are lost in harvested logs and processed lumber, so anatomical features are used as clues for wood identification. Fortunately, the International Association of Wood Anatomists (IAWA) has published lists of microscopic features for wood identification [1,2]. These lists are the fruits of the work of wood anatomists and are well established, so they can be used with confidence to identify wood.
## (s3) Image acquisition
Number of References: 72

(p3.0) CV-based wood identification starts with image acquisition. It takes a considerable amount of time and effort to get enough wood samples to build a new dataset. For this reason, most studies have used Xylarium collections [26,[47][48][49][50][51][52]. Most studies only captured cross-sectional images of wood blocks except for a few studies using lumber surface [53] or three orthogonal sections [54,55]. The surfaces of the blocks are cut with a knife or sanded with sandpapers to clearly reveal the anatomical characteristics. Macroscale images can be captured directly from the wood blocks using a digital camera or stereo microscope. To capture microscale images, meanwhile, microscope slides of wood samples must be prepared through standard procedures leading to softening, cutting, staining, dehydration, and mounting [56].

(p3.1) In image capturing, the quality of the obtained images can vary depending on lighting conditions. Imaging modules equipped with optical systems have been used to control the lighting uniformly [21,51,57], and image processing techniques such as filtering were applied to normalize the brightness of the captured images [58][59][60][61]. Digital image processing is to be covered in section preprocessing.

(p3.2) CV-based wood identification starts with image acquisition. It takes a considerable amount of time and effort to get enough wood samples to build a new dataset. For this reason, most studies have used Xylarium collections [26,[47][48][49][50][51][52]. Most studies only captured cross-sectional images of wood blocks except for a few studies using lumber surface [53] or three orthogonal sections [54,55]. The surfaces of the blocks are cut with a knife or sanded with sandpapers to clearly reveal the anatomical characteristics. Macroscale images can be captured directly from the wood blocks using a digital camera or stereo microscope. To capture microscale images, meanwhile, microscope slides of wood samples must be prepared through standard procedures leading to softening, cutting, staining, dehydration, and mounting [56].

(p3.3) In image capturing, the quality of the obtained images can vary depending on lighting conditions. Imaging modules equipped with optical systems have been used to control the lighting uniformly [21,51,57], and image processing techniques such as filtering were applied to normalize the brightness of the captured images [58][59][60][61]. Digital image processing is to be covered in section preprocessing.
## (s19) Field-deployable wood identification systems
Number of References: 60

(p19.0) Many studies have aimed to develop CV-based automated wood identification systems, and some have been realized as field-deployable systems [21,49,51,69]. Xylo-Tron, developed by the Forest Products Laboratory, US Department of Agriculture, is a CNN-based wood identification system using ResNet34 backbone [21]. This is the only system to report actual field use in real-time and showed higher species and genus identification performance for the family Meliaceae than the mass spectrometry-based model [21].

(p19.1) Recently, smartphone-based systems have been developed that require minimal components. MyWood-ID can identify 100 Malaysian woods [49], and another smartphone-based system, AIKO, can identify major Indonesian commercial woods [83]. XyloPhone, a smartphone-based imaging platform, has been introduced as a field-use identification tool that is more affordable and scalable than other commercial products [57]. All the field-deployable systems are based on stereogram datasets [21,49,51,57,69,83].

(p19.2) Many studies have aimed to develop CV-based automated wood identification systems, and some have been realized as field-deployable systems [21,49,51,69]. Xylo-Tron, developed by the Forest Products Laboratory, US Department of Agriculture, is a CNN-based wood identification system using ResNet34 backbone [21]. This is the only system to report actual field use in real-time and showed higher species and genus identification performance for the family Meliaceae than the mass spectrometry-based model [21].

(p19.3) Recently, smartphone-based systems have been developed that require minimal components. MyWood-ID can identify 100 Malaysian woods [49], and another smartphone-based system, AIKO, can identify major Indonesian commercial woods [83]. XyloPhone, a smartphone-based imaging platform, has been introduced as a field-use identification tool that is more affordable and scalable than other commercial products [57]. All the field-deployable systems are based on stereogram datasets [21,49,51,57,69,83].
## (s21) Feature-based anatomical approaches
Number of References: 20

(p21.0) Kobayashi et al. [99] conducted PCA on GLCM features extracted from hardwood stereograms to investigate the relationship between anatomical structures and texture features. From principal component loadings and analysis of macroscopic patterns of wood they found that each Haralick texture feature correlated with different anatomical structures such as vessel population, ray-to-ray spacing, and tylosis abundance.

(p21.1) A k-means clustering [167] analysis of local features extracted from micrographs suggested the possibility of matching feature clusters with anatomical elements [73]. This idea was extended to quantify anatomical elements by encoding local features into codewords. The BOF framework effectively visualized and assigned local feature-based codewords to anatomical elements of wood, and codeword histograms provided an indirect means of quantitative wood anatomy [74]. The finding that local features are the vehicles for access to CV from an anatomical point of view is the main reason that much attention is being paid to the applications of informatics in the wood science field.

(p21.2) Hierarchical clustering of a Fagaceae micrograph dataset with SIFT features confirmed that the clustering basically coincided with wood porosity. Moreover, the relationship of species groups that contradicted wood porosity was consistent with evolution based on molecular phylogeny [48]. An unexpected finding was that the subgenera Cerris (ring porous wood) and Ilex (diffuse porous wood) had common characteristics in the arrangement of the latewood vessels as predicted by a CV-based analysis (Fig. 6). 

(p21.3) Kobayashi et al. [99] conducted PCA on GLCM features extracted from hardwood stereograms to investigate the relationship between anatomical structures and texture features. From principal component loadings and analysis of macroscopic patterns of wood they found that each Haralick texture feature correlated with different anatomical structures such as vessel population, ray-to-ray spacing, and tylosis abundance.

(p21.4) A k-means clustering [167] analysis of local features extracted from micrographs suggested the possibility of matching feature clusters with anatomical elements [73]. This idea was extended to quantify anatomical elements by encoding local features into codewords. The BOF framework effectively visualized and assigned local feature-based codewords to anatomical elements of wood, and codeword histograms provided an indirect means of quantitative wood anatomy [74]. The finding that local features are the vehicles for access to CV from an anatomical point of view is the main reason that much attention is being paid to the applications of informatics in the wood science field.

(p21.5) Hierarchical clustering of a Fagaceae micrograph dataset with SIFT features confirmed that the clustering basically coincided with wood porosity. Moreover, the relationship of species groups that contradicted wood porosity was consistent with evolution based on molecular phylogeny [48]. An unexpected finding was that the subgenera Cerris (ring porous wood) and Ilex (diffuse porous wood) had common characteristics in the arrangement of the latewood vessels as predicted by a CV-based analysis (Fig. 6). 
## (s37) Background
Number of References: 4

(p37.0) Every tree has clues that can help with its identification. Leaves, needles, barks, fruits, flowers, and twigs are important features for tree identification. However, most of these features are lost in harvested logs and processed lumber, so anatomical features are used as clues for wood identification. Fortunately, the International Association of Wood Anatomists (IAWA) has published lists of microscopic features for wood identification [1,2]. These lists are the fruits of the work of wood anatomists and are well established, so they can be used with confidence to identify wood.
## (s40) Image acquisition
Number of References: 72

(p40.0) CV-based wood identification starts with image acquisition. It takes a considerable amount of time and effort to get enough wood samples to build a new dataset. For this reason, most studies have used Xylarium collections [26,[47][48][49][50][51][52]. Most studies only captured cross-sectional images of wood blocks except for a few studies using lumber surface [53] or three orthogonal sections [54,55]. The surfaces of the blocks are cut with a knife or sanded with sandpapers to clearly reveal the anatomical characteristics. Macroscale images can be captured directly from the wood blocks using a digital camera or stereo microscope. To capture microscale images, meanwhile, microscope slides of wood samples must be prepared through standard procedures leading to softening, cutting, staining, dehydration, and mounting [56].

(p40.1) In image capturing, the quality of the obtained images can vary depending on lighting conditions. Imaging modules equipped with optical systems have been used to control the lighting uniformly [21,51,57], and image processing techniques such as filtering were applied to normalize the brightness of the captured images [58][59][60][61]. Digital image processing is to be covered in section preprocessing.

(p40.2) CV-based wood identification starts with image acquisition. It takes a considerable amount of time and effort to get enough wood samples to build a new dataset. For this reason, most studies have used Xylarium collections [26,[47][48][49][50][51][52]. Most studies only captured cross-sectional images of wood blocks except for a few studies using lumber surface [53] or three orthogonal sections [54,55]. The surfaces of the blocks are cut with a knife or sanded with sandpapers to clearly reveal the anatomical characteristics. Macroscale images can be captured directly from the wood blocks using a digital camera or stereo microscope. To capture microscale images, meanwhile, microscope slides of wood samples must be prepared through standard procedures leading to softening, cutting, staining, dehydration, and mounting [56].

(p40.3) In image capturing, the quality of the obtained images can vary depending on lighting conditions. Imaging modules equipped with optical systems have been used to control the lighting uniformly [21,51,57], and image processing techniques such as filtering were applied to normalize the brightness of the captured images [58][59][60][61]. Digital image processing is to be covered in section preprocessing.
## (s56) Field-deployable wood identification systems
Number of References: 60

(p56.0) Many studies have aimed to develop CV-based automated wood identification systems, and some have been realized as field-deployable systems [21,49,51,69]. Xylo-Tron, developed by the Forest Products Laboratory, US Department of Agriculture, is a CNN-based wood identification system using ResNet34 backbone [21]. This is the only system to report actual field use in real-time and showed higher species and genus identification performance for the family Meliaceae than the mass spectrometry-based model [21].

(p56.1) Recently, smartphone-based systems have been developed that require minimal components. MyWood-ID can identify 100 Malaysian woods [49], and another smartphone-based system, AIKO, can identify major Indonesian commercial woods [83]. XyloPhone, a smartphone-based imaging platform, has been introduced as a field-use identification tool that is more affordable and scalable than other commercial products [57]. All the field-deployable systems are based on stereogram datasets [21,49,51,57,69,83].

(p56.2) Many studies have aimed to develop CV-based automated wood identification systems, and some have been realized as field-deployable systems [21,49,51,69]. Xylo-Tron, developed by the Forest Products Laboratory, US Department of Agriculture, is a CNN-based wood identification system using ResNet34 backbone [21]. This is the only system to report actual field use in real-time and showed higher species and genus identification performance for the family Meliaceae than the mass spectrometry-based model [21].

(p56.3) Recently, smartphone-based systems have been developed that require minimal components. MyWood-ID can identify 100 Malaysian woods [49], and another smartphone-based system, AIKO, can identify major Indonesian commercial woods [83]. XyloPhone, a smartphone-based imaging platform, has been introduced as a field-use identification tool that is more affordable and scalable than other commercial products [57]. All the field-deployable systems are based on stereogram datasets [21,49,51,57,69,83].
## (s58) Feature-based anatomical approaches
Number of References: 20

(p58.0) Kobayashi et al. [99] conducted PCA on GLCM features extracted from hardwood stereograms to investigate the relationship between anatomical structures and texture features. From principal component loadings and analysis of macroscopic patterns of wood they found that each Haralick texture feature correlated with different anatomical structures such as vessel population, ray-to-ray spacing, and tylosis abundance.

(p58.1) A k-means clustering [167] analysis of local features extracted from micrographs suggested the possibility of matching feature clusters with anatomical elements [73]. This idea was extended to quantify anatomical elements by encoding local features into codewords. The BOF framework effectively visualized and assigned local feature-based codewords to anatomical elements of wood, and codeword histograms provided an indirect means of quantitative wood anatomy [74]. The finding that local features are the vehicles for access to CV from an anatomical point of view is the main reason that much attention is being paid to the applications of informatics in the wood science field.

(p58.2) Hierarchical clustering of a Fagaceae micrograph dataset with SIFT features confirmed that the clustering basically coincided with wood porosity. Moreover, the relationship of species groups that contradicted wood porosity was consistent with evolution based on molecular phylogeny [48]. An unexpected finding was that the subgenera Cerris (ring porous wood) and Ilex (diffuse porous wood) had common characteristics in the arrangement of the latewood vessels as predicted by a CV-based analysis (Fig. 6). 

(p58.3) Kobayashi et al. [99] conducted PCA on GLCM features extracted from hardwood stereograms to investigate the relationship between anatomical structures and texture features. From principal component loadings and analysis of macroscopic patterns of wood they found that each Haralick texture feature correlated with different anatomical structures such as vessel population, ray-to-ray spacing, and tylosis abundance.

(p58.4) A k-means clustering [167] analysis of local features extracted from micrographs suggested the possibility of matching feature clusters with anatomical elements [73]. This idea was extended to quantify anatomical elements by encoding local features into codewords. The BOF framework effectively visualized and assigned local feature-based codewords to anatomical elements of wood, and codeword histograms provided an indirect means of quantitative wood anatomy [74]. The finding that local features are the vehicles for access to CV from an anatomical point of view is the main reason that much attention is being paid to the applications of informatics in the wood science field.

(p58.5) Hierarchical clustering of a Fagaceae micrograph dataset with SIFT features confirmed that the clustering basically coincided with wood porosity. Moreover, the relationship of species groups that contradicted wood porosity was consistent with evolution based on molecular phylogeny [48]. An unexpected finding was that the subgenera Cerris (ring porous wood) and Ilex (diffuse porous wood) had common characteristics in the arrangement of the latewood vessels as predicted by a CV-based analysis (Fig. 6). 
