# Deep learning and machine vision for food processing: A survey

CorpusID: 232417802 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/59ee991e56a1894c2f50b2428ba92d4748e06a49](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/59ee991e56a1894c2f50b2428ba92d4748e06a49)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s2) Stereo systems
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) Stereo systems refer to a set of cameras that can measure the distance (depth) from an object to the camera. Compared with the traditional 2dimensional (2D) camera, the stereo system increases the depth of one dimension, with the goal of improving its representation of the real world (Sing Bing Kang et al., 1995). With the increasingly widespread use of machine vision, it has become more common to use stereo systems to collect depth information of the environment and then perform object recognition and environment modelling. A stereo camera prototype is used to capture a pair of images, which are utilized to estimate the dimensions of the target food (Subhi et al., 2018). Other grading techniques based on depth images have also been proposed (Su et al., 2018). For instance, a depth camera was used to obtain 3D features of potatoes such as bumps, divots, and bent shapes. The length, width, and thickness information were processed to calculate the volume and the mass of the potatoes, based on which the grading task according to mass was achieved. Subsequently, the 2D and 3D surface data were integrated to detect the irregular shape, hump, and hollow defect of potatoes. The grading accuracy of the potatoes' appearance was 88%. The acquired information was also used to rebuild a virtual reality potato model, which may be useful for food packaging research.
## (s5) X-ray
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) X-ray equipment generates X-rays and uses them to detect either metal foreign objects in food products or non-metallic foreign objects with higher density than the surrounding matrix. Therefore, X-ray technology offers a tool to detect contaminants in food. It can identify foreign objects such as metal, glass, calcified bone, stone, and highdensity plastic, thereby ensuring food safety. Grating-based X-ray imaging was used to acquire images of food products and detect foreign objects in food products (Einarsd ottir et al., 2016). Purohit et al. adopted X-ray diffraction to analyze the quality of certain food such as grains, pulses, oilseeds, and derived products (Purohit et al., 2019).
## (s12) Low level processing
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) Low level processing is used to pre-process images (Senni et al., 2014). When imaging objects, different imaging and sensing devices can be simultaneously used to acquire images of samples and convert them into digital forms, which can be read by a computer. The images acquired can be imperfect because of diverse reasons, including insufficient lighting, long-distance or low resolution of the imaging device, unstable viewfinder, and other interferences. Therefore, it is usually necessary to pre-process the original image to improve the final image analysis. Common image pre-processing methods include image enhancement, such as adjusting the brightness or colours of the images, cropping the images to focus on the ROI, and removing noise or digital artifacts from low light levels. Senni (2014) proposed an on-line Thermography Non-Destructive Testing method to detect whether biscuits were contaminated with foreign objects. An off-line step was designed to analyze the decay curves of foreign objects and biscuits with an infrared camera positioned at the exit of the oven when the biscuits were cooling down. Later an online system was installed with the Thermo camera located at a 75 cm distance above the conveyor belt, which had a 3m distance from the oven exit. During the image pre-processing step, the authors applied a 2D low pass-filter, a focusing filter, and a 2D Wiener filter in the frequency domain to reduce the Additive White Gaussian Noise, image blurring, and drag effects problems in the raw images.
## (s14) High level processing
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) High level processing includes image recognition and image interpretation. In this step, statistical methods or deep learning methods are commonly used to classify the target, based on the application of interest. The results of the analysis determine the processing required in the subsequent steps. Algorithms such as K-nearest neighbour (KNN), Fig. 2. Different levels in image processing process. Support Vector Machine (SVM), neural network, fuzzy logic, and a genetic algorithm can help interpret the information obtained from the image. Neural networks and fuzzy logic methods have been successfully applied to MVS in the food industry. Kashyapa (2016) proposed a machine vision-based system to remove the calyx from strawberries. All strawberries on the conveyor were first photographed and then were oriented and positioned correctly, enabling calyx removal using waterjets, before strawberries were either further processed or packaged. Misimi (2016) developed a robot called "GRIBBOT" to move chicken fillets. The robot was equipped with a gripper resembling the curved beak of vultures, called "gribb" in Northern Europe (hence the robot's name). A robot with a multi-functional gripper tool was developed to realize the objective. An image processing algorithm was designed to locate the chicken fillets and the robot provided the 3D coordinates to its gripper. The average accuracy in pixels of the camera calibration was 0.2468 (root mean squared error, RMSE). Siswantoro (2013) predicted the volume of an irregular shape food product, by extracting the silhouettes of the targets from five different aspects and utilizing the Monte Carlo method to compute the volume of the target. The author used a bounding box with a real-world coordinate system to cover the object, and subsequently generated 3D random points in the bounding box. The Monte Carlo method was used to calculate the volume via the coordinates of those 3D points.
## (s18) Foreign object detection
Number of References: 5

(p18.0) Foreign objects contamination is one of the main reasons for food recalls and rejection by consumers (Soon et al., 2020) This type of contamination harms customers and leads to loss of brand loyalty, in addition to causing large recall costs. Examples of foreign objects are insects, glass, metal, or rubber. These objects may inadvertently enter the food or package during any step of food processing. For example, small gravel or stone, insects, and twigs may enter at any step of harvesting, processing, handling, or preparation. Although the degree of danger of foreign objects depends on the size, type, hardness and clarity of the object, the ingestion of food containing foreign objects can cause choking or other diseases (Mohd Khairi et al., 2018).

(p18.1) As the food industry continues to improve the safety and quality of food products, the frequency of foreign objects in food is decreasing. At the same time, consumers are less accustomed to carefully checking for the presence of foreign objects in food and less prone to tolerating them. Detection of foreign objects with the naked eye is difficult. In contrast, emerging technologies and recognition methods can now easily detect foreign objects. Examples of such technologies include X-ray, ultrasound, thermal imaging (Mohd Khairi et al., 2018). For example, the acoustic impedance difference between meat and foreign objects enables foreign  Siswantoro et al. (2013) object detection in meat using ultrasound imaging (Xiong et al., 2017). This technique is precise and non-destructive, rendering its use promising in the food industry.
## (s27) Deep learning in food safety and quality evaluation
Number of References: 3

(p27.0) Pan (2016) utilized a technique based on the hyperspectral imaging method to detect cold injury of peach, and utilized ANN to predict quality parameters. Poonnoy (2014) adopted ANN to classify the shapes of boiled shrimps based on the Relative Internal Distance (RID) values. The four shapes considered included 'regular', 'no tails', 'one tail', and 'broken body', and the RIDs were calculated by segmenting the shrimp images and drawing the co-related lines on the segmented contour. The overall prediction accuracy of the ANN classifier was 99.80%. Shafiee (2014) used MVS to capture and perform the colour transformation of the images of honey, while they used the ANN to predict key quality indices of honey (ash content, AC, antioxidant activity, AA, and total phenolic content, TPC). Zareiforoush (2015) proposed a computer vision and metaheuristic techniques to classify milled rice grains. Their method extracted the shape and size features, texture features, and colour features to build a primary feature vector, and selected the most important features based on the "greedy hill-climbing" and backtracking algorithm. The final feature vector was then used to train the ANN, SVM, Decision Trees (DT), and BN independently. The results indicated that the deep learning architecture -ANN was the best classifier. Wan (2018) designed an MVS to acquire tomato images, and the ROIs were segmented from the whole images. Finally, a Back-Propagation Neural Network (BPNN) was used to classify the maturity level of Roma tomato and pear tomato. Huang (2016) used computer vision and NIR spectroscopy methods to obtain information about the organoleptic and structural changes of fish based on fish images. The PCA was employed to extract the most critical features from the data set, and a BackPropagation Artificial Neural Network (BP-ANN) was built to predict the fish freshness by training the algorithm to assess the extracted features.
