# A review on role of nitrous oxide nanoparticles, potential vaccine targets, drug, health care and artificial intelligence to combat COVID-19

CorpusID: 235442463 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ac01a702c725997a20f206ebab82a4b5e5b01258](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ac01a702c725997a20f206ebab82a4b5e5b01258)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) Nature of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19)
Number of References: 5

(p1.0) Corona Viruses include a large family of Viruses found in nature. They belong to the Family Coronaviridae and order Nidovirales possessing single stranded, positive sense RNA genome. The technical name of corona virus is SARS-CoV-2. Corona Viruses are named for their crown like spikes protruding from their surfaces. The most common symptoms are fever, dry cough, tiredness, difficulty in breathing and chest pain. Based on the study by UK Kings College London, there is a possibility of six different types of strains cause's different type's symptoms such as Flu (with and without fever), fatigue, and gastrointestinal, abdominal and respiratory issues. The common things between all strains are breathing difficulties. Incubation period refers to the time between being exposed to the disease and when the actual symptoms start to show up. Knowing the incubation period of the disease is really helpful to take the necessary steps such as, active monitoring, surveillance, control and modeling (Wu 2020). This time is critical for the prevention of the diseases and allows the health officials to take decisions regarding quarantine or observation of people who may have been exposed to the virus. The novel coronavirus has an incubation period of 2 to 14 days, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), with symptoms appearing about 5 days after infection in most cases (Ma 2020). Fatality rate refers to the proportion of deaths due to the disease as compared to the people who have been  (Manigandan, 2020;Manigandan et al. 2021). The fatality rate shows the severity of the disease. The WHO estimates the fatality rate of novel corona virus to be about 3%. Figure 1 shows the possible transmission modes of the infection. R-Naught is a mathematical value, which refers to the reproduction rate of the disease. R 0 conveys in average how many persons will get infected because of one infected person, as long as no one has been vaccinated against it or is already immune to the disease (Ceylan 2020).
## (s9) Role of nitrous oxide (NO) nanoparticles to combat against COVID-19
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Virus usually constitutes variable size ranges from 10 to 850 nm. NO is known to combat various fungi, bacteria, virus and tumor cells. Nitrous oxide combined with nanoparticles can be used for various applications. NO can act as an antimicrobial agent because of its anti fungal and antibacterial properties. In addition to those properties, it can able to modulate foreign agents. NO had considered to be a vital agent to treat corona virus and other lung-related ailments. NO can be administered with some other medicines can be effectively used to cure MERS-CoV affected patients and showed positive impacts with very less side effects (Pieretti et al. 2021;Akaike and Maeda 2000). Inhalation of NO treatment has been assessed for COVID patients in two nations, United States of America and China. Previously, NO was effectively used to treat lung-related ailments caused by certain virus. The studies found that NO compounds have potential to combat SARS-CoV replication. Nitrous oxide donor S-nitroso-N-acetyl penicillamine was effective in inhibition of SRS-CoV replication mechanism. Several researchers tried to assess the effects of NO against SARS-CoV-2 and NO donors were considered to important medical treatment. NO can be used as an alternative to tackle the current pandemic. Ultraviolet radiation promotes the NO generation and it is stored in skin and releases into blood, thereby reducing the blood pressure. 
