# Application of Polymer Based Nanocomposites for Water Shutoff-A Review

CorpusID: 238670751 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b535e5ecd26bd7874d279ba852d04bf25fb011ea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b535e5ecd26bd7874d279ba852d04bf25fb011ea)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Engineering

## (s3) Challenge 1-Aggregation
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) It is expected that the viscosity of a polymer solution will increase with increase in polymer concentration because of presence of more polymer chains that self-associate to form larger aggregates. While higher viscosity is required to reduce water mobility and curb issues like fingering; very high polymer concentrations can lead to formation of aggregates that may block the pores and effectively reduce the permeability. The Critical Association Concentration (CAC) of the polymer plays a significant role in the rheology of the polymer hybrid as it is the concentration at which the polymer starts interacting with other substances such as surfactants and nanoparticles [33]. In Haruna et al.'s study [34], at 0.06 wt.% concentration of HPAM the gradient of the viscosity plot drastically changed with a sharp increase in viscosity observed when the polymer concentration exceeded this threshold value. At concentrations above CAC, there is increased molecular count of polymer in the solution which results in a more pronounced frictional interaction between the polymer chains which can cause instability. Therefore, in nanocomposite analysis, a polymer concentration below CAC is used to avoid the unfavourable polymer intermolecular associations.
## (s7) Metal and Metal Oxide-Based Nanoparticles
Number of References: 13

(p7.0) The use of metal-based nanoparticles for EOR has been extensively studied but their incorporation in polymer gels is still relatively unexplored. Several studies have reported enhanced oil recovery by using oxides of aluminium, titanium, zinc, and magnesium at nanoscale [51,52]. They are particularly effective for production of heavy oil by reducing its viscosity, reducing interfacial tension (IFT) and changing the reservoir wettability to water wet due to their hydrophilic nature [53]. Even though their adsorption tendency is a mechanism for enhancing oil recovery, most of the nanofluid injected could be wasted if adsorbed onto untargeted zones of the formation. By incorporating these nanoparticles in polymer gels, such a challenge can be addressed. Metal-based NPs act as a crosslinker for polymer gels to create stable matrices [54]. Xu et al. [55] used TiO 2 NPs in co-polymerized acrylic acid (PAA) & N,N-dimethylacrylamide (DMAA) hydrogel to improve the tensile and compressive strength of the polymer. They recorded significant improvement which was attributed to the ester and hydrogen bonds between TiO 2 NPs and the free carboxyl groups of PAA chains. This improved toughness was believed to activate a shape memory effect where the polymer nanocomposite recalled and regained their previous shapes when responding to various stimuli. It is desired that an appropriate balance between strength (as Fuels 2021, 2 309 characterized by elastic moduli such as Young's Modulus) and toughness of the resulting nanocomposite gel be maintained [56]. This will ensure that the gel formed downhole will appropriately absorb impact energy without fracturing, hence guaranteeing the integrity of water shut off attained, particularly for long term. Similar improvements were reported by Huerta-Angeles et al. [57] who applied titanium dioxide (TiO 2 ) NPs in Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) hydrogel through freezing polymerization to control salinity and temperature sensitivity of the polymer. TiO 2 NPs were observed to mechanically strengthen the polymer and increase the swelling by stabilizing the composite's pore structure. In another study [22], the effect of TiO 2 NPs on HPAM for the production of heavy oil (1320 cP) is presented. Through core flooding experiments in sandstone formation, it was shown that TiO 2 NPs improves the viscosity of HPAM gel thus enhancing sweeping of the oil. A 4% increase in oil recovery was recorded at a threshold NP concentration of 2.3 wt%.

(p7.1) Zirconium hydroxide (Zr(OH) 4 ) is also a good candidate for crosslinking polymer nanocomposites because it has several hydroxyl groups useful for hydrogen bonding [58]. Jiang et al. [59] used (Zr(OH) 4 ) NPs to crosslink copolymerized acrylamide (PAM) and 2-acrylamido-2-methyl propane sulfonic acid (AMPS) in the presence of N,N,N ,N -Tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED). They observed a strong hydrogenbonding network between the amide group of PAM and sulfonic acid group of AMPS which exhibited a high mechanical strength and increased self-healing efficiency. In a later study [36], (Zr(OH) 4 ) NPs were used to enhance thermal and viscoelastic properties of PAM organically crosslinked with hydroquinone (HQ) and HMTA. Incorporation of 0.2-0.8 wt% of the (Zr (OH) 4 ) NPs was seen to increase thermal stability by 3 to 5 • C. The hydroxyl groups of the organic crosslinkers are believed to have improved PAM-(Zr (OH) 4 ) interactions by attaching to amide (-CONH 2 ) group of PAM by covalent bonds (via -CH 2 OH) and hydrogen bonds (via -OH). These interactions resulted in a strongly linked polymer gel with limited chain mobility that required higher endothermic energy to break hence the improved stability observed. Moreover, being hydrophilic in nature, PAM-(Zr (OH) 4 ) nanocomposite formed hydrogen bonds with water (making it bound water) improving the gel's water retention capacity.

(p7.2) Consistent with Jiang et al.'s study, the hydrogen bonds formed between the polymer nanocomposite and bound water were reversible allowing a self-healing phenomenon for (Zr (OH) 4 )-polymer nanocomposites. This behaviour improved the elasticity of the polymer nanocomposite.The idea of self-healing hydrogels has gained importance recently as a solution for extending the life of hydrogels and reducing cost. Self-healing gels automatically repair themselves through spontaneous response to various stimuli including light, heat, force, pH, or salinity [60,61].
## (s14) Cantarell Field, Mexico
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) Cantarell field is the largest oil field in Mexico that started production from a highly cavernous carbonate reservoir in 1976 [98]. A combination of organically crosslinked polymer (OCP) consisting of acrylamide, t-butyl acrylate (PAtBA) covalently crosslinked with PEI and a rigid setting metal oxychloride material (RSM) were used to seal high permeability streaks in the reservoir. OCP was reported to be very convenient for field application and effective in water shut-off. With a design viscosity of less than 30 cP, it was easy to inject the polymer solution to the target zone before the onset of crosslinking. Because of the presence of PEI, OCP offered longer gelation periods and thermal stability up-to 191 • C [40,47]. OCP proved more effective in controlling the vuggy porosity of the carbonate reservoir as compared to RSM which only had a near wellbore effect. In the four test wells observed, the water cut was significantly reduced thus prolonging the life of the already mature field. A water-cut log for test Well 4 showed a drastic drop in water production from 14% at start of polymer flooding to less than 2% over a period of three years.
