# agronomy Crop Management with the IoT: An Interdisciplinary Survey

CorpusID: 234205981 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50a18c2abe8be05f1332c938e7fcd18f39857782](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50a18c2abe8be05f1332c938e7fcd18f39857782)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s4) Network Layer
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) The network layer is responsible for the transmission of data through the IoT system; it routes raw data from/to the perception layer to/from the service layer. This layer moves data using communication technologies and protocols from the internet, which can connect any thing at any time from any place [34]. While the internet involves a plethora of protocols, we only mention those involved in IoT systems. According to AlFuqaha et al. [35], IoT protocols can be categorized into application, service discovery, and infrastructure.
## (s5) •
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) Infrastructure protocols The radio networks mentioned above, besides an electric interface, also have a logic interface corresponding to the code of signal transmitted/received. Their standards, namely, IEEE 802.15.4 (WiFi), BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy), LTE-A, Z-Wave, etc. [35], include details about frequency range and modulation, the coding of data (packets, frames, datagrams), and features affecting the velocity of a network (see Table 2). The greatest difference in such sense is the connection procedure: in a traditional mobile network (such as GSM-Global System for Mobile communication) the device could take a (relatively) long time to access a radio network, and usually send long data packets (expensive handshakes, headers, etc.). LoRa, and especially Sigfox, on the other hand, allow Low-Power devices to wake-up, send a message, and sleep again in less than 1 s. • Application protocols-They allow the exchange of chunks of data [35,36]. The most known of them is the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), a foundation of communication for the World Wide Web. Though not specific for IoT applications, it is still used for traditional approaches. On the other hand, one of the most popular IoT protocols is represented by Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT). The Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) is a web-based protocol that is used in constrained nodes and constrained networks. Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP) is based on exchanges of XML (eXtensible Markup Language) messages in real-time that are defined to connect devices to servers. Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) is a queuing system designed to connect servers. Data Distribution Service (DDS) is a fast data bus for integrating devices and systems optimized for direct device communication (noncentralized). The main differences between them can be identified on the basis of publish and subscribe mechanisms, request/response interaction, security level, supported quality of services (QoS) mechanisms, and payload size [35].

(p5.1) Other characteristics of network transport protocols are reported in Table 3. Other popular protocols oriented to low-power devices as LoRa (Long Range) and Sigfox, are optimized for specific connection requirements (e.g., uni-directional) and topologies and (e.g., decentralized). • Service discovery-This class of protocols is used to detect devices and services offered through a network, reducing the effort to manage dynamic IoT systems without the need for human intervention. A well-known discovery architecture is the Domain Name System (DNS, which maps an IP address to a human-friendly name), which is extended by multicast DNS (mDNS) and DNS Service Directory (DNS-SD) to discover services by type and properties [37] in zero-configuration networks. In mDNS, resolution information is stored locally on each device, and each device directly answers incoming name resolution queries (each device acts both as a server and a client). DNS-SD defines how a client queries DNS servers to discover services within a domain using the service type as a selection criterion; a client gathers the descriptions of all services and selects the most appropriate. This reduces the scalability of the protocol in large networks [38].
