# A Survey of Technologies and Recent Developments for Sustainable Smart Cycling

CorpusID: 233658093 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6e3903edff551a59825659c9e99d2d30d56b516c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6e3903edff551a59825659c9e99d2d30d56b516c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s2) Bikes in the Age of Apps
Number of References: 10

(p2.0) The use of smartphones has become essential in modern life. Among other reasons, this is due to the ease of communication that this type of device provides, in addition to the availability of an immensity of smartphone-based applications with different purposes [34]. With the development of more powerful devices at affordable prices, the number of active smartphones has even surpassed the number of traditional computers, signaling an important transformation on the way information has been consumed. Supported by this propitious scenario, it is estimated that over three billion people were using smartphones by the end of 2020, but it is still an actively growing number [35].

(p2.1) This large number of users has been boosted by popular virtual markets for mobile applications, which provide millions of apps for different purposes [34]. For this huge amount of applications, or simply "apps", a particular group has been dedicated to facilitate the use of services related to daily activities, supporting users according to their needs, habits or interests [35]. When coming to the use of bikes in modern cities, such apps have been an important breakthrough for the adoption of sustainable transportation.

(p2.2) Among smartphone apps that seek to facilitate the people's lives, there are applications that can affect the daily mobility in certain spaces. In this context, one of the main purposes of some apps is to solve problems related to urban mobility. Actually, such applications have allowed smartphones to use mobile data (mostly supported by 4G/5G technologies and Wi-Fi networks) and location-based services (GPS) in order to provide real-time information about public transportation systems. In short, such apps have supported route planning according to the user's current position, as well as allowing the identification of more efficient public services and even the indication of nearby rental spots for shared bicycles [16]. In fact, these have been very important transformations in the way people interact with the urban environment.
## (s4) Route Planning
Number of References: 10

(p4.0) Despite the use of bikes for daily transportation has been much discussed in recent years, most cities around the world do not have adequate infrastructure for efficient cycling [38]. Given the aforementioned circumstances, it is very important to provide valuable information for cyclists concerning available paths, potentially alleviating the already known mobility problems [39].

(p4.1) The issue of routing planning is not new, with many research works proposing efficient solutions to improve mobility efficiency [40,41]. In general, the main research effort has been to find the fastest route from the origin to the destination, taking into account the costs of each available path. Among such costs, distance, traffic, accidents rate and tolls are some common parameters that have been processed as cost weights. And this same principle can be leveraged when processing bike paths.

(p4.2) One of the most important information provided by smartphones is the current GPS (Global Positioning System) coordinates of the device. This information has been exploited by different applications, which have used spatial data to provide some important expected services for bike users. Actually, GPS coordinates can also be exploited along with data provided by embedded sensors, enlarging the perception of the users within the modeled system. In practical means, smartphones are able to send and receive spatial information about bike paths to take, guiding cyclists in urban areas [42].
## (s5) Delivery Services
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) With the unforeseen events of the COVID-19 Pandemic beginning in 2020, important transformations took place in the society. In a very short period of time, social distancing measures were required, impacting different elements of the routine of billions of people. In this new social setting, the use of delivery services, especially for food, has become essential in the lives of many citizens around the world. Smartphone apps aimed at this purpose became even more popular, and new solutions were created. Actually, when bikes were employed to reinforce smartphone-based delivery services, such apps started to be used more often by cyclists [49]. However, the cities are still not adapted to higher demands of delivery services, especially when bikes are being used as a working tool.

(p5.1) Given this particular scenario, there was a significant increase in the demand for companies working in the domestic delivery sector. As an example, the app "Rappi" declared a growth of 30% in deliveries in the Latin America region due to the COVID-19 Pandemic [50]. In parallel to such growth, there was also an increase in the number of registered worker deliverers, who mostly use their own bikes to work. When we associate the inherent risks of cycling in most cities with the delivery demands of this service, it is easy to see how problematic this working configuration can be. Therefore, finding new solutions for this complex scenario should be a major concern of the governments when defining public policies.
## (s15) Things
Number of References: 20

(p15.0) B2S communication is a specific class of BANETs that consists of the exchange of information between a bike and any electronic device that may be embedded in the bike itself. The main focus is related to development of basic instrumentation and communication interfaces (wireless and wired) [121,122]. Lastly, B2X encompasses a communication scenario of the "bike to everything". It is a futurist scenario where all things and smart objects have ubiquitous communication with bikes [104]. Emerging communication protocols such as 5G, LoRa, and LoRaWAN arises with candidates to be adopted as de facto solutions [123]. Challenges and opportunities are related to interoperability between different protocols and new applications, which data stream is a new trend as is the case of multimedia stream applications [124]. Table 5 summarizes the main discussion and challenges related to BANETs, enumerating communication technologies and related topics. 

(p15.1) B2S communication is a specific class of BANETs that consists of the exchange of information between a bike and any electronic device that may be embedded in the bike itself. The main focus is related to development of basic instrumentation and communication interfaces (wireless and wired) [121,122]. Lastly, B2X encompasses a communication scenario of the "bike to everything". It is a futurist scenario where all things and smart objects have ubiquitous communication with bikes [104]. Emerging communication protocols such as 5G, LoRa, and LoRaWAN arises with candidates to be adopted as de facto solutions [123]. Challenges and opportunities are related to interoperability between different protocols and new applications, which data stream is a new trend as is the case of multimedia stream applications [124]. Table 5 summarizes the main discussion and challenges related to BANETs, enumerating communication technologies and related topics. 
## (s37) Bikes in the Age of Apps
Number of References: 10

(p37.0) The use of smartphones has become essential in modern life. Among other reasons, this is due to the ease of communication that this type of device provides, in addition to the availability of an immensity of smartphone-based applications with different purposes [34]. With the development of more powerful devices at affordable prices, the number of active smartphones has even surpassed the number of traditional computers, signaling an important transformation on the way information has been consumed. Supported by this propitious scenario, it is estimated that over three billion people were using smartphones by the end of 2020, but it is still an actively growing number [35].

(p37.1) This large number of users has been boosted by popular virtual markets for mobile applications, which provide millions of apps for different purposes [34]. For this huge amount of applications, or simply "apps", a particular group has been dedicated to facilitate the use of services related to daily activities, supporting users according to their needs, habits or interests [35]. When coming to the use of bikes in modern cities, such apps have been an important breakthrough for the adoption of sustainable transportation.

(p37.2) Among smartphone apps that seek to facilitate the people's lives, there are applications that can affect the daily mobility in certain spaces. In this context, one of the main purposes of some apps is to solve problems related to urban mobility. Actually, such applications have allowed smartphones to use mobile data (mostly supported by 4G/5G technologies and Wi-Fi networks) and location-based services (GPS) in order to provide real-time information about public transportation systems. In short, such apps have supported route planning according to the user's current position, as well as allowing the identification of more efficient public services and even the indication of nearby rental spots for shared bicycles [16]. In fact, these have been very important transformations in the way people interact with the urban environment.
## (s39) Route Planning
Number of References: 10

(p39.0) Despite the use of bikes for daily transportation has been much discussed in recent years, most cities around the world do not have adequate infrastructure for efficient cycling [38]. Given the aforementioned circumstances, it is very important to provide valuable information for cyclists concerning available paths, potentially alleviating the already known mobility problems [39].

(p39.1) The issue of routing planning is not new, with many research works proposing efficient solutions to improve mobility efficiency [40,41]. In general, the main research effort has been to find the fastest route from the origin to the destination, taking into account the costs of each available path. Among such costs, distance, traffic, accidents rate and tolls are some common parameters that have been processed as cost weights. And this same principle can be leveraged when processing bike paths.

(p39.2) One of the most important information provided by smartphones is the current GPS (Global Positioning System) coordinates of the device. This information has been exploited by different applications, which have used spatial data to provide some important expected services for bike users. Actually, GPS coordinates can also be exploited along with data provided by embedded sensors, enlarging the perception of the users within the modeled system. In practical means, smartphones are able to send and receive spatial information about bike paths to take, guiding cyclists in urban areas [42].
## (s40) Delivery Services
Number of References: 4

(p40.0) With the unforeseen events of the COVID-19 Pandemic beginning in 2020, important transformations took place in the society. In a very short period of time, social distancing measures were required, impacting different elements of the routine of billions of people. In this new social setting, the use of delivery services, especially for food, has become essential in the lives of many citizens around the world. Smartphone apps aimed at this purpose became even more popular, and new solutions were created. Actually, when bikes were employed to reinforce smartphone-based delivery services, such apps started to be used more often by cyclists [49]. However, the cities are still not adapted to higher demands of delivery services, especially when bikes are being used as a working tool.

(p40.1) Given this particular scenario, there was a significant increase in the demand for companies working in the domestic delivery sector. As an example, the app "Rappi" declared a growth of 30% in deliveries in the Latin America region due to the COVID-19 Pandemic [50]. In parallel to such growth, there was also an increase in the number of registered worker deliverers, who mostly use their own bikes to work. When we associate the inherent risks of cycling in most cities with the delivery demands of this service, it is easy to see how problematic this working configuration can be. Therefore, finding new solutions for this complex scenario should be a major concern of the governments when defining public policies.
## (s50) Things
Number of References: 20

(p50.0) B2S communication is a specific class of BANETs that consists of the exchange of information between a bike and any electronic device that may be embedded in the bike itself. The main focus is related to development of basic instrumentation and communication interfaces (wireless and wired) [121,122]. Lastly, B2X encompasses a communication scenario of the "bike to everything". It is a futurist scenario where all things and smart objects have ubiquitous communication with bikes [104]. Emerging communication protocols such as 5G, LoRa, and LoRaWAN arises with candidates to be adopted as de facto solutions [123]. Challenges and opportunities are related to interoperability between different protocols and new applications, which data stream is a new trend as is the case of multimedia stream applications [124]. Table 5 summarizes the main discussion and challenges related to BANETs, enumerating communication technologies and related topics. 

(p50.1) B2S communication is a specific class of BANETs that consists of the exchange of information between a bike and any electronic device that may be embedded in the bike itself. The main focus is related to development of basic instrumentation and communication interfaces (wireless and wired) [121,122]. Lastly, B2X encompasses a communication scenario of the "bike to everything". It is a futurist scenario where all things and smart objects have ubiquitous communication with bikes [104]. Emerging communication protocols such as 5G, LoRa, and LoRaWAN arises with candidates to be adopted as de facto solutions [123]. Challenges and opportunities are related to interoperability between different protocols and new applications, which data stream is a new trend as is the case of multimedia stream applications [124]. Table 5 summarizes the main discussion and challenges related to BANETs, enumerating communication technologies and related topics. 
