# materials Polymer Geogrids: A Review of Material, Design and Structure Relationships

CorpusID: 237323649 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b88c043d69b473660f1f5572059cc8a3aadac52](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b88c043d69b473660f1f5572059cc8a3aadac52)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s3) Effect of Loading Direction
Number of References: 8

(p3.0) Biaxial geogrids are typically characterized by machine and cross-machine directional properties since the ribs are orientated perpendicular to each other. In practical applications, such as parking lots and traffics on construction sites, the externally applied stresses are multidirectional. The principal stresses do not line up with the orientation of the biaxial ribs as designed. Consequently, it is crucial to look at the biaxial geogrid response when subjected to tensile loads applied in ribs orientation in both orthogonal directions as well as tensile loads applied in directions not following the ribs orientation [31]. A comparison was made by the authors to investigate the geogrid products of a given high volume manufacturer of geogrids that produces different products to the different market segments. Table 2 shows the range of properties and characteristics of uniaxial, biaxial and triaxial geogrids from this one vendor. The values reported concur with a numerical study conducted to study the behavior of biaxial geogrids subjected to tensile loads oriented in different directions [31]. The geogrid was observed to exhibit both the least tensile strength and stiffness when loaded at a 45 degree angle to the machine direction, as shown in Figure 2 [31]. Triaxial geogrids are discussed later in this chapter and show a more quasi-isotropic response.

(p3.1) response when subjected to tensile loads applied in ribs orientation in both orthogonal directions as well as tensile loads applied in directions not following the ribs orientation [31]. A comparison was made by the authors to investigate the geogrid products of a given high volume manufacturer of geogrids that produces different products to the different market segments. Table 2 shows the range of properties and characteristics of uniaxial, biaxial and triaxial geogrids from this one vendor. The values reported concur with a numerical study conducted to study the behavior of biaxial geogrids subjected to tensile loads oriented in different directions [31]. The geogrid was observed to exhibit both the least tensile strength and stiffness when loaded at a 45 degree angle to the machine direction, as shown in Figure 2 [31]. Triaxial geogrids are discussed later in this chapter and show a more quasi-isotropic response. Numerical investigations conducted using finite element analysis on three-dimensional biaxial geogrids in a piled embankment using truss element, orthotropic, and isotropic approaches show the same strength and stiffness properties in all directions using an isotropic model [32]. In contrast, the orthogonal membrane model exhibits the same strength and stiffness only in two orthogonal directions. In the truss element model, the biaxial geogrid is modeled using truss elements. No significant variation was noticed between the three modeling approaches on SCR (stress concentration ratio) and subsoil settlement. The orthotropic approach results were similar to the truss element approach, while the isotropic approach results were higher for maximum tensile strength. Moreover, increasing the pile spacing, embankment height, and compression index of the soil, improved the apparent geogrid tensile strength [32]. The pile spacing was observed to exhibit the most significant effect. It results in maximum geogrid tension occurring in the pile edge rather than in the middle of pile spacing.
## (s4) Oxidation, Temperature, and Pressure Effects
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) Geogrids are exposed to various swings in temperature when at storage facilities, at the site pending installation, or in place. These temperature swings may include sun 90-degree 0-degree Poor properties at off-axis direction Numerical investigations conducted using finite element analysis on three-dimensional biaxial geogrids in a piled embankment using truss element, orthotropic, and isotropic approaches show the same strength and stiffness properties in all directions using an isotropic model [32]. In contrast, the orthogonal membrane model exhibits the same strength and stiffness only in two orthogonal directions. In the truss element model, the biaxial geogrid is modeled using truss elements. No significant variation was noticed between the three modeling approaches on SCR (stress concentration ratio) and subsoil settlement. The orthotropic approach results were similar to the truss element approach, while the isotropic approach results were higher for maximum tensile strength. Moreover, increasing the pile spacing, embankment height, and compression index of the soil, improved the apparent geogrid tensile strength [32]. The pile spacing was observed to exhibit the most significant effect. It results in maximum geogrid tension occurring in the pile edge rather than in the middle of pile spacing.
## (s10) In Situ Behavior and Durability of Geogrid Reinforcement
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) In the previous section, we reviewed the behavior of geogrids in lab size specimens in environments that are not always representative of the field conditions. Numerous studies have been conducted to study the in situ behavior of geogrids. An experimental study using plate load tests was conducted on sand reinforced with geogrids [69]. When considering the effect of geogrid reinforcement in the soil, an increase in stiffness and plate load-carrying capacity was observed at low displacements. Also, the ratio of the top layer spacing to the plate width was studied, and results showed that decreasing this ratio will enhance the load-carrying capacity of the soil due to the increase in bearing capacity ratio (BCR) [69]. BCR is defined as the ratio of the ultimate bearing capacity of reinforced soil to the ultimate bearing capacity of unreinforced soil.
## (s12) Reinforcement in Asphalt, Concrete, and Retaining Wall Applications
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) The loss of functional and structural properties of pavements nowadays is prevalent due to the high traffic volumes on road infrastructures. Geogrid reinforcement can be introduced in pavements to improve their mechanical performance. In some other applications, geogrids can reinforce thin concrete sections such as Portland Cement Concrete (PCC) pavement overlays [89] to provide post-cracking ductility and higher load-bearing capacity of concrete. This section of the paper reviews the work done on studying the behavior of geogrids as reinforcement material for asphalt and concrete applications. Experiments were conducted to assess the mechanical behavior of fiberglass geogrids covered with thermosetting resin (vinyl-ester) in flexible pavements considering four-point bending with repeated loading cycles and interlayer shear [90]. Results showed that the shear is a crucial factor to consider. The interlayer shear behavior in the geogrid caused a reduction in the interlayer resistance due to the debonding effect between the contact layers [91,92]. The geogrid provided enhanced resistance for the repeated loading cycles as observed in the four-point bending test. It was concluded that fiberglass geogrids embedded in double-layered asphalt concrete pavements enhance the mechanical performance of the system with regards to resistance to repeated loading resulting in longer service life, despite creating debonding at the interface.
## (s14) Non-Contact Imaging Methods
Number of References: 4

(p14.0) A novel technique was developed to measure deformations and local strains for geogrids subjected to tensile loading at various strain rates [100]. Biaxial propylene geogrids, knitted polyester geogrids, and uniaxially extruded HDPE geogrids were studied. Displacements were measured using a video extensometer. Results confirmed the reliability of using such a tool to measure local strains at high resolutions and point out the non-uniform axial and lateral strains distribution of the tested geogrid. Studies on mechanical properties of hexagonal (triaxial) geogrids made of polypropylene [101] using digital image correlation (DIC) were applied in measuring deformations in geogrids subjected to wide-width tensile loading. The ability of DIC to measure deformations at any point in any direction to obtain the principal strains along with their principal directions was presented in their study and proved to be more reliable than standard methods. DIC gives more accurate strain values in comparison with extensometer methods especially when the specimen breaks. The maximum principal strains were observed to occur on node or junction edges, as shown in Figure 6 [101], which justifies the crack propagation type of failure in the specimens [101].  
