# Finding Critical Scenarios for Automated Driving Systems: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 239016131 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7eac16f6e5c63fd983155947b18f1721af87beaf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7eac16f6e5c63fd983155947b18f1721af87beaf)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s22) Literature search and selection
Number of References: 2

(p22.0) The primary studies for this literature review are collected through an iterative process with automatic search and snowballing as shown in Fig. 8. This section describes the details of how we conducted each stage. Stage 1: A comprehensive initial search string can reduce the number of iterations to determine the final search string as described in Stage 3. To better define the initial search strings, an initial set of relevant studies was gathered from two sources. The first source was publications from recent relevant research projects including AutoDrive, Prystine, Pegasus, Enable-S3 and AdaptIVe. The second source are the relevant papers included in the two relevant survey papers  Fig. 8. The stages to collect the primary studies. The numbers on the arrows indicate the numbers of studies given to the next stage [32], [33] introduced in Section 2.6. The initial set contains 151 potentially relevant studies. After being filtered by the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 49 studies remained.
## (s39) Requirement Analysis:
Number of References: 5

(p39.0) This phase analyzes functional requirements or safety requirements at the vehicle level. In ISO 26262, Hazard Analysis and Risk Assessment (HARA) is an essential step to identify all the potential hazardous events. As depicted in Fig. 3, each hazardous event is a combination of a hazard and an operational condition. With the methods proposed in [30], [61], [62], [63], the identified pre-crash functional scenarios can be used as the set of all the operational conditions for HARA as described in [64].
## (s44) Targeted ODD
Number of References: 6

(p44.0) As shown in Fig. 4, a clear ODD definition is necessary for the reasoning of critical functional scenarios, and the formulation (together with improvisation) of a functional scenario to a logical scenario. As discussed in Section 3.1, improvisation and formulation are out of the scope of this literature review. Therefore this section only focuses on how ODD supports the reasoning of critical functional scenarios. A clear ODD definition is essential to derive a complete set of critical concrete scenarios. However, none of the primary studies provide an explicit ODD definition. Some of the primary studies explicitly or implicitly provide the scope of the ODD, e.g., driving on a highway [30], [61] and driving on a structured road [62], [63], [73], [74]. Methods in these studies make assumptions about the environment (e.g., the behavior of other vehicles) within the ODD, and propose systematics to reason about critical functional scenarios based on these assumptions.
## (s51) Criticality Assessment Methods
Number of References: 4

(p51.0) After attaining concrete scenarios from the CSI methods mentioned above, most of the primary studies adopt testingbased approaches to verify the criticality of derived scenarios, as shown in Fig. 19. Different definitions of criticality are discussed in Section 5.3. This section discusses how to assess the criticality of a concrete scenario under different criticality definitions. In the criticality assessment phase, most of the studies utilize an X-in-the-loop simulation to estimate the criticality of a concrete scenario, where X represents the model, software, or hardware of the SoI as a black-box. Criticalities are assessed on the simulation results based on the predefined surrogate measures summarized in Table 6. Nevertheless, the criticality can also be assessed without X-in-the-loop simulations. Validation can be realized through real-world testing to analyze the performance of the proposed exploration method [81], [86].

(p51.1) As discussed before, criticality assessment is a function whose input is a concrete scenario, and whose output is a quantified criticality index. Most of the studied CSI methods in this cluster implement this function deductively with analytical approaches, while the others implement it inductively with machine learning approaches [77], [78].
## (s61) Required information
Number of References: 3

(p61.0) All the studies analyzed in the section require a simulator. Some studies require access to the internal state of the simulator, as in [58], while others treat them as a blackbox as in [60]. In [46], as mentioned before, a backward search is performed, where their method tries to get to a safe state from a future unsafe state. Due to the impossibility of computing the inverse of the ACC control law, the authors generate random inputs for the ACC vehicle to try to get the vehicle in the previous state. Then they simulate forward to ensure getting into an unsafe state again.
## (s65) Reasoning methods:
Number of References: 5

(p65.0) The main reasoning methods identified in this section are safety analysis, Virtual Assessment of Automation in Field Operation (VAAFO), simulation and others. Safety analysis was used as a method for scenario analysis and simplification for reducing the number of test scenarios for HAV test and evaluation [101]. First, the concrete scenarios set are analyzed. Second, by analyzing concrete scenarios through the traversal of trajectories, trajectories that lead to collisions or test tasks uncompleted are obtained. By analyzing these trajectories, the SCPs (scenario characteristic parameters) of the corresponding scenario are obtained using functional decomposition [15], combined with fault tree analysis (FTA). By analyzing the overlap or relationship among the SCPs, the inclusion relationship among scenarios is obtained according to the SCPs included in different scenarios. By searching for the combination that contains the fewest scenarios but still covers all the SCPs, and using this set of scenarios to replace the original combination of test scenarios, the redundant evaluation scenarios were deleted. Using simulation as the method, the authors in [74] used public traffic data to calibrate SUMO (simulation tool, Simulation of Urban MObility) to perform traffic simulation. Based on the simulation results, the data is post-processed to extract concrete crash scenarios.

(p65.1) VAAFO [94] is used as a method in parallel with human driving for critical scenario identification. In VAAFO (Virtual Assessment of Automation in Field Operation), the vehicle is driven by a human. It receives information from all sensors, but is not connected to the actuators and instead operates in parallel while the human driver drives the vehicle. AD functions are running (simulating) within the perceived world. The trajectory planned by the AD function is compared with the human driving trajectory. The AD function may take a different decision than the human driver. This difference may consequently affect the behavior of other vehicles. The authors in [94] state that accident scenarios made by human drivers will be recorded by the police. Potential critical scenarios are filtered further to identify real critical scenarios after correction of the world model and criticality metrics. The VAAFO method will identify scenarios that are risky for the AD but not for human drivers.
## (s81) Scenario-based Function Assessment
Number of References: 16

(p81.0) Function assessment is one of the main reasons for using scenarios in the development, verification and validation of ADSs. It is also one of the primary reasons for finding critical scenarios as discussed throughout this paper. Here we can consider both broad descriptions of scenarios, e.g., [36], [159], used for functional assessment, as well as different ways to achieve coverage of the scenario space in general, e.g., through Monte-Carlo (MC) simulations. Furthermore, [87] suggests a method using a heuristic search and a fitness function to ensure that the scenarios specified are actually tested. It is also possible to do functional assessment using MC simulations of agent and simulation models [160]. In [160] these models are parameterized with different data sources to reflect actual driving scenarios.

(p81.1) Relation: As mentioned, function assessment is a common vein across many of the papers considered in this review, and one of the primary purposes for using scenarios in general is to achieve some kind of assessment of the function. This paper primarily focuses on the assessment of critical scenarios whereas [36], [87], [159], [160] consider scenarios in a broader sense of AD function assessment. Having a "driver's license test" for ADSs would perhaps also be considered a function assessment. This aspect is however not considered in this review nor further in this section.

(p81.2) Differences: The primary difference to the approaches of this section is the lack of explicit discussion about how to find or identify critical scenarios. In [36], [159] scenarios are used as important descriptors to achieve function assessment, but there are no discussions about how to identify critical ones. Ensuring that specified scenarios are indeed tested, as described in [87], is surely relevant, but again outside of the scope of this review as [87] disclose no details with respect to finding critical scenarios. One could however note that the described methods could be used to ensure that critical as well as non-critical scenarios that are specified are executed. Monte-Carlo simulation, in general, is not covered in this review as MC only provides a brute force methodology for covering scenario space. However, importance sampling, as suggested in [161], is covered since it can be used to find the scenarios that are more critical to the system. The authors of [161] have also considered using subset simulation for accelerated testing of ADSs [162]. Similar to importance sampling, subset simulation guides the MC search for relevant scenarios using a KPI. If this KPI is chosen to capture a safety-critical aspect, this approach would also yield critical scenarios.
