# machines Possible Applications of Additive Manufacturing Technologies in Shipbuilding: A Review

CorpusID: 230572342 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37e5ae2f1d78f8d61f2624b90ea1c9d47d1021a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37e5ae2f1d78f8d61f2624b90ea1c9d47d1021a3)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering

## (s13) The Demand for 3D Printing in Shipbuilding
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) The marine industry is a specific area that generates huge demand for products and services from many other industries, such as carpentry; metallurgy; machinery and electromechanical industries; industrial automation; heating, ventilation air conditioning (HVAC); energy recovery systems; exhaust after treatment systems; corrosion protection systems; fire protection systems and petrochemicals. The supply demand forecast for years 2016-2025 is presented on the Figure 3. structures to α and β microstructure by adding solute, which can refine prior-β grains in Ti alloys. They considered many elements, including silicon, molybdenum, beryllium, chromium, boron, tungsten, iron and rare-earth elements. The result of the research proves the addition of Fe combined with post-processing heat treatment can decompose as-built microstructure of Ti-6Al-4V-3Fe to fully laminar α + β microstructure. Ultrafine eutectic Ti-Fe alloys can gain strength above 2.5 GPa in room temperature and compressive ductility above 10% [24]. In these alloys, grain sizes commonly decrease with increasing growth velocity or cooling rate. This allows significant size-hardening effects and opens a gateway to materials design by rapid solidification techniques. The study presented by Gussone et al. [24] provides the first demonstration of the feasibility of producing eutectic and near-eutectic Ti-Fe alloys by LAM with ultrafine microstructures and mechanical strength as well as compressive ductility attractive for structural applications.
