# Citation: Interactions Between Microplastics and Heavy Metals in Aquatic Environments: A Review

CorpusID: 233329917 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/edc9d3f98232a394a57c29b0049c0ca9bffe8df3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/edc9d3f98232a394a57c29b0049c0ca9bffe8df3)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 17

(p0.0) Microplastics (MPs) have received global attention due to their ubiquitous presence in the environment and unknown hazards to organisms. Compared with the traditional plastic waste, the distinct character of MPs is their small size, which is precisely defined as plastic fragments and particles with a diameter of less than 5 mm (Thompson et al., 2004). There are two types of MPs: primary and secondary. Primary MPs may be intensively produced for various purposes, such as microbeads in commercial facial cleansers and resin particles (Bayo et al., 2017;So et al., 2018). Secondary MPs are decomposed from large pieces of plastic waste during environmental processes such as aging, weathering, and biodegradation (Gouin et al., 2011).

(p0.1) MPs can be accumulated in the environment due to their inert nature (Wang et al., 2021a). They have been proven to be widely distributed in our environment. For example, the abundance of MPs in the sediments of tropical Atlantic Ocean is 684.8 particles/m 2 , and most of them are round particles and fragments with different shapes (Benson and Fred-Ahmadu, 2020). MPs have also been found in the sediments of China's three largest lakes . Alarmingly, in Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, which has low plastic consumption and population density, high abundance of MPs was detected, which illustrates the wide distribution of MPs. In addition, as an emerging complex pollutant, MPs can produce various toxic effects on organisms. The exposure of aquatic organisms to MPs has been associated with short-and long-term adverse effects on organism's health, including biological feeding, reproduction, antioxidant defense and innate immunity (Murphy and Quinn, 2018;Wen et al., 2018a;Banaee et al., 2019;Oliviero et al., 2019).

(p0.2) Heavy metals are present in the environment from both naturally occurring and anthropogenic sources. As a contaminant that is widespread in the environment, heavy metals can enter water bodies continuously due to their non-degradable nature and are recycled and enriched in the aqueous environment. MPs and heavy metals are not only acting as persistent pollutants, their combined pollution poses a new threat to the world. Due to the large surface area, MPs can act like magnets for toxic pollutants and concentrate them to a very high level. Heavy metals had been found on the MPs from North Atlantic subtropical gyre (Prunier et al., 2019), São Paulo State in southeastern Brazil (Vedolin et al., 2018), beaches in southwest England (Massos and Turner, 2017), and western Europe (Turner et al., 2019).

(p0.3) Aquatic ecosystems contain a great diversity of microorganisms, which play critical roles in many biogeochemical processes. Their existence makes the interaction between MPs and heavy metals more complicated. Firstly, MPs can provide emergent ecological niche for microorganisms by formation of microbial biofilms, named plastisphere (Mincer et al., 2016;Yang et al., 2020). In the plastisphere, MPs can offer firm support for microbial colonization and even be served as carbon sources for microbial growth. Studies have shown that MP-associated biofilms could affect the physical and chemical properties of MPs and further affect the adsorption of chemical pollutants including heavy metals (Tu et al., 2020). Secondly, exposure to heavy metals can impact biofilm formation and bring structural changes to the biofilm matrix, which further impact the adsorption behavior of heavy metals (de Araújo and de Oliveira, 2020). Although the role played by biofilms has become a hot spot in the MP studies, their influence on the fate of MPs and heavy metals is still not well understood.
## (s4) Adsorption Kinetics and Isotherms of Heavy Metals on MPs
Number of References: 13

(p4.0) The kinetic study of the adsorption process can describe the rate of heavy metal adsorption by MPs, and the fitting of the kinetic model allows further analysis of the adsorption mechanism. Commonly used adsorption models include pseudofirst-order kinetic model, pseudo-second-order kinetic model, Elovich kinetic model, Boyd model, Weber-Morris Model, and Bangham channel diffusion model. The adsorption process was usually fitted with a pseudo first-order kinetic model (Zhang et al., 2018;Zon et al., 2018); however, some researchers also reported that the pseudo-second-level kinetic model can yield a better fit (Nethaji et al., 2013;Taha et al., 2016;Oz et al., 2019;Guo et al., 2020;Tang et al., 2020). This model assumes that the adsorption of heavy metals by MPs is mainly controlled by the chemisorption mechanism, involving the sharing or transfer of electron pairs, and is not controlled by the material transport step. The Weber-Morris model was used to describe the multistage nature of the adsorption process (Nethaji et al., 2013;Taha et al., 2016;Zon et al., 2018;Oz et al., 2019). In this model, adsorption may occur in multiple steps. Guo et al. (2015Guo et al. ( , 2020 divided the adsorption process into three steps. The first step is the rapid combination of heavy metal ions with active sites on MP surface, FIGURE 3 | Co-occurrence analysis of keywords with a word frequency of more than five times. The data come from a literature search with MPs, heavy metals, and microbes as the subject terms. Each node is represented as a keyword, edges represent the link between keywords, the color of the node is rendered in degrees, and the color of the edge is rendered in the weight of the edge.
## (s5) Temperature
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) The temperature range is 288K-318K; the higher the temperature, the greater the adsorption capacity. Loncarski et al., 2020). Guo et al. (2020) studied the adsorption of cadmium ions by four types of MPs (PP, PE, PS, and PVC) and found that the order of adsorption capacity was PVC > PS > PP > PE. Llorca et al. (2020) also reported that PET and PS had higher affinity for pollutants than PE. As simple non-polar crystalline polymers, PE and PP have no functional groups and can only adsorb contaminants in a single layer with van der Waals forces, so the adsorption capacity is relatively small (Chen et al., 2019). For PS and PET, the polarity is increased due to the presence of phenyl and ester groups, and the adsorption capacity can be increased through the interaction of π-π bonds with pollutants (Llorca et al., 2020;Loncarski et al., 2020). PVC, because it contains polar atomic chlorine, is a strong polar polymer, so it has very large adsorption capacity (Brennecke et al., 2016).
## (s6) Role of Microbes on the Interactions Between MPs and Heavy Metals
Number of References: 13

(p6.0) The aquatic environment is a highly complex ecosystem, and there are dynamic interactions between biotic and abiotic components (de Araújo and de Oliveira, 2020). In addition to physical and chemical environmental factors, biological factors can affect the adsorption of heavy metals by MPs. The influence of microbial biofilm is one of the most concerned biological factors and it plays an important role in determining the MP surface properties. Tu et al. (2020) found that biofilm formation reduced the hydrophobicity of the PE MP surface and increased the abundance of carboxyl and ketone groups on the MP surface, which then increased the adsorption capacity for metal ions. Some studies revealed that the growth of biofilms can positively affect the adsorption of heavy metals and concentration of heavy metals on MPs will increase as the biofilm matures (Richard et al., 2019;Qi et al., 2021). It must be noted, however, that the long-term dynamic change of heavy metal loads on MPs during the whole biofilm development remains largely unknown.

(p6.1) Sinking of floating MPs caused by biofilm development further complicates the problem (Rummel et al., 2017). Much more work need to be done to quantitatively determine the influence of biofilm on heavy metal adsorption for a better understanding of their interactions in the aquatic environment. In addition, Jin et al. (2020) reported how biofilm on MPs affects the uptake and fate of hydrophobic organic compounds. They found that the high temperature in the summer was more favorable for the colonization of highly active bacteria on the MP surface, and interactions between pollutants and attached microorganisms in the biofilm essentially depend on pollutant features and microbial activity.

(p6.2) In the meantime, environmental factors may indirectly exert influence on MPs by changing biofilm structures on the MP surface. Wang L. et al. (2020) found that nutrient salts, total nitrogen, total phosphorus, and pH have a greater influence on colony structure, while MP physical and chemical properties such as particle size and contact angle have less influence. Other reports (Di Pippo et al., 2020;Feng et al., 2020;Li et al., 2020) also confirmed that bacterial composition varies significantly based on marine habitat and exposure time, rather than polymer type. In the presence of heavy metals, microbial cells in biofilms can produce more extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) to protect themselves from the harsh environment (Sheng et al., 2010). EPS have been confirmed to play a very important role in biosorption of heavy metals. The biomacromolecules in EPS contain large amount of ionizable functional groups, such as hydroxyl, phosphoric, carboxyl, and amine groups, which enable EPS to absorb heavy metals. Figure 4 shows the proposed mechanisms of biofilm involved in the interactions between MPs and heavy metals. EPS can also inhibit diffusion of heavy metals in the matrix and decreases the concentration of heavy metals to sublethal concentrations. The survival of exposed microbes thus develops the ability of tolerance or resistance to heavy metals (Flemming et al., 2016). How these selection processes influence the fate of MPs and heavy metals is still unknown, and there is an urgent need to better understand these interactions (Kirstein et al., 2016;Rummel et al., 2017).
