# Vortex Shedding Suppression: A Review on Modified Bluff Bodies

CorpusID: 237686394 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7f75b2600d37162d77ca8092cbb5e36aea15a1e0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7f75b2600d37162d77ca8092cbb5e36aea15a1e0)

Fields: Geology, Physics, Engineering

## (s2) Permeable and Porous Mesh
Number of References: 26

(p2.0) Employing permeable mesh is classified as the passive wake control method to suppress the vortex shedding in the wake region. Several researchers investigated the effect of porosity on the wake region for various flow conditions. Gözmen, Akilli [26], Ozkan and Oruc [27] experimentally investigated suppression of vortex shedding in the wake of a circular cylinder by employing a permeable outer cylinder.

(p2.1) Gözmen and Akilli [26] employed various values of porosity to demonstrate its effect on flow control in the wake of the circular cylinder with the outer permeable cylinder. It was observed that vortex shedding has been suppressed significantly downstream the cylinder as porosity increases. In order to control the vortex shedding in the wake, the report suggested the optimum value of porosity as a value of 0.7. While the previous study of Gözmen and Akilli [26] conducted the experiments for a single value of the ratio of the outer cylinder diameter to the inner cylinder diameter (D/d), Ozkan and Oruc [27] investigated the effects of the variation of both the outer cylinder diameter and porosity. It was reported that both parameters have considerable effects on the wake flow behind the circular cylinder. A significant reduction of turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses was observed as a result of employing the outer cylinder. The results demonstrated that a value of 0.4 ≤ D/d ≤ 0.6 and 1.6 ≤ D/d ≤ 2.0 would achieve a better flow control in the near wake with a remarkable reduction in the turbulent kinetic energy peak value. Cicolin and Freire [28] investigated a circular cylinder with three different types of permeable meshes on the suppression of vortex-induced vibrations by means of PIV. It was observed that the vortex shedding in the wake region has been disrupted and formation length has been increased. Durhasan and Pinar [29] studied the gap between a circular cylinder and a shroud to investigate the effect of shroud porosity and diameter. Therefore, the experiment was conducted for various porosity and diameter ratios at a Reynolds number of Re = 5000. Durhasan and Pinar [29] divided the field of view into four flow regions as demonstrated in Figure 2. These regions are upstream region I (UR I), upstream region II (UR II), downstream region I (DR I) and downstream region II (DR II). Therefore, it was possible to have a closer look at the effects of shroud on these four flow regions.

(p2.2) Eng 2021, 2, FOR PEER REVIEW 6 (UR II), downstream region I (DR I) and downstream region II (DR II). Therefore, it was possible to have a closer look at the effects of shroud on these four flow regions.  Figure 3 demonstrates the time-averaged streamline topology for various porosities at different diameter ratios. In comparison to the bare cylinder, the recirculation zone of the cylinder and location of the foci and saddle points are significantly affected for the case of the perforated cylinders. It was observed at porosity values of β ≤ 0.5, the vortex formation of the cylinder occurs only in the gap between the cylinder and the shroud. For β ≥ 0.6 it was observed that in DR I and DR II the formation of the wake flow structures is affected dominantly by the diameter rather than the porosity. It was also revealed that the flow structure in the outer region of the shroud exhibited a similar pattern to the wake region of a single perforated cylinder. In addition, it was reported that employing the shroud will lead to a significant drag reduction between 21% and 87% depending on the values of the porosity and the diameter ratio.  [29] Copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier. Figure 3 demonstrates the time-averaged streamline topology for various porosities at different diameter ratios. In comparison to the bare cylinder, the recirculation zone of the cylinder and location of the foci and saddle points are significantly affected for the case of the perforated cylinders. It was observed at porosity values of β ≤ 0.5, the vortex formation of the cylinder occurs only in the gap between the cylinder and the shroud. For β ≥ 0.6 it was observed that in DR I and DR II the formation of the wake flow structures is affected dominantly by the diameter rather than the porosity. It was also revealed that the flow structure in the outer region of the shroud exhibited a similar pattern to the wake region of a single perforated cylinder. In addition, it was reported that employing the shroud will lead to a significant drag reduction between 21% and 87% depending on the values of the porosity and the diameter ratio.

(p2.3) On the other hand, some researchers investigated the wake flow control numerically. Mimeau and Cottet [30] investigated flow control around a semicircular cylinder by employing porous coatings numerically. The simulation is performed by using direct numerical simulations and employing the vortex penalization method. The numerical results demonstrated that the relevant control performances can be achieved by introducing porous layers only at the top and bottom of the solid body permits. Moreover, a significant drag reduction was observed by introducing a thin layer with intermediate permeability in both edges of the back wall. Liu and Wei [31] studied numerically the circular cylinder with a porous materials coating to investigate the effects of surface permeability on the flow control. The three-dimensional simulation demonstrated the underlying physical mechanisms of flow control. It was observed that vorticity in the spanwise direction has been affected more than other directions. In addition, vortex shedding suppression is achieved partly due to a favorable pressure gradient around the porous surface.

(p2.4) The literature suggested that porosity and the permeable cylinder diameter have a substantial effect on the flow characteristics and results in significant reduction in turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses. In addition, such methodology also is very effective for drag reduction of the cylinder. However, the drag coefficient of the cylinder together with the shroud is higher than the bare cylinder. Table 2 presents the experimental and numerical research on flow control and suppression of vortex shedding by employing a permeable wall on bluff bodies. On the other hand, some researchers investigated the wake flow control numerically. Mimeau and Cottet [30] investigated flow control around a semicircular cylinder by employing porous coatings numerically. The simulation is performed by using direct numerical simulations and employing the vortex penalization method. The numerical results demonstrated that the relevant control performances can be achieved by introducing porous layers only at the top and bottom of the solid body permits. Moreover, a significant drag reduction was observed by introducing a thin layer with intermediate permeability in both edges of the back wall. Liu and Wei [31] studied numerically the circular cylinder with a porous materials coating to investigate the effects of surface permeability on the flow control. The three-dimensional simulation demonstrated the underlying physical mechanisms of flow control. It was observed that vorticity in the spanwise direction has been affected more than other directions. In addition, vortex shedding suppression is achieved partly due to a favorable pressure gradient around the porous surface.
## (s3) Corner Modification
Number of References: 8

(p3.0) Several researchers studied the features of the wake flow for square cylinders with modified corners and suggested a possible aerodynamic forces reduction as a result. In one of the early attempts to understand the effects of coroner modification on the flow structure, Kwok and Wilhelm [32] investigated experimentally the effect of edge configuration on the Eng 2021, 2 332 wind induced response of tall buildings with the rectangular cross section. The experiment demonstrated that slotted corners and chamfered corners reduce both the along-wind and cross-wind responses significantly. Further investigation on the wake energy spectra and wind force spectra characteristics demonstrated that the excitation processes were altered for a chamfered corner. Tamura and Miyagi [33] and Tamura and Miyagi [34] elaborated the effect of corner modification of the square cylinder on the wake flow structures and aerodynamics forces. Tamura and Miyagi [33] observed that a slight corner modification alters the flow structure and result in considerable variation of the aerodynamic characteristics up to approximately 60% of the original value. The report suggested corner modification as a promising passive technique for aerodynamic forces reduction.
## (s25) Permeable and Porous Mesh
Number of References: 26

(p25.0) Employing permeable mesh is classified as the passive wake control method to suppress the vortex shedding in the wake region. Several researchers investigated the effect of porosity on the wake region for various flow conditions. Gözmen, Akilli [26], Ozkan and Oruc [27] experimentally investigated suppression of vortex shedding in the wake of a circular cylinder by employing a permeable outer cylinder.

(p25.1) Gözmen and Akilli [26] employed various values of porosity to demonstrate its effect on flow control in the wake of the circular cylinder with the outer permeable cylinder. It was observed that vortex shedding has been suppressed significantly downstream the cylinder as porosity increases. In order to control the vortex shedding in the wake, the report suggested the optimum value of porosity as a value of 0.7. While the previous study of Gözmen and Akilli [26] conducted the experiments for a single value of the ratio of the outer cylinder diameter to the inner cylinder diameter (D/d), Ozkan and Oruc [27] investigated the effects of the variation of both the outer cylinder diameter and porosity. It was reported that both parameters have considerable effects on the wake flow behind the circular cylinder. A significant reduction of turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses was observed as a result of employing the outer cylinder. The results demonstrated that a value of 0.4 ≤ D/d ≤ 0.6 and 1.6 ≤ D/d ≤ 2.0 would achieve a better flow control in the near wake with a remarkable reduction in the turbulent kinetic energy peak value. Cicolin and Freire [28] investigated a circular cylinder with three different types of permeable meshes on the suppression of vortex-induced vibrations by means of PIV. It was observed that the vortex shedding in the wake region has been disrupted and formation length has been increased. Durhasan and Pinar [29] studied the gap between a circular cylinder and a shroud to investigate the effect of shroud porosity and diameter. Therefore, the experiment was conducted for various porosity and diameter ratios at a Reynolds number of Re = 5000. Durhasan and Pinar [29] divided the field of view into four flow regions as demonstrated in Figure 2. These regions are upstream region I (UR I), upstream region II (UR II), downstream region I (DR I) and downstream region II (DR II). Therefore, it was possible to have a closer look at the effects of shroud on these four flow regions.

(p25.2) Eng 2021, 2, FOR PEER REVIEW 6 (UR II), downstream region I (DR I) and downstream region II (DR II). Therefore, it was possible to have a closer look at the effects of shroud on these four flow regions.  Figure 3 demonstrates the time-averaged streamline topology for various porosities at different diameter ratios. In comparison to the bare cylinder, the recirculation zone of the cylinder and location of the foci and saddle points are significantly affected for the case of the perforated cylinders. It was observed at porosity values of β ≤ 0.5, the vortex formation of the cylinder occurs only in the gap between the cylinder and the shroud. For β ≥ 0.6 it was observed that in DR I and DR II the formation of the wake flow structures is affected dominantly by the diameter rather than the porosity. It was also revealed that the flow structure in the outer region of the shroud exhibited a similar pattern to the wake region of a single perforated cylinder. In addition, it was reported that employing the shroud will lead to a significant drag reduction between 21% and 87% depending on the values of the porosity and the diameter ratio.  [29] Copyright (2019), with permission from Elsevier. Figure 3 demonstrates the time-averaged streamline topology for various porosities at different diameter ratios. In comparison to the bare cylinder, the recirculation zone of the cylinder and location of the foci and saddle points are significantly affected for the case of the perforated cylinders. It was observed at porosity values of β ≤ 0.5, the vortex formation of the cylinder occurs only in the gap between the cylinder and the shroud. For β ≥ 0.6 it was observed that in DR I and DR II the formation of the wake flow structures is affected dominantly by the diameter rather than the porosity. It was also revealed that the flow structure in the outer region of the shroud exhibited a similar pattern to the wake region of a single perforated cylinder. In addition, it was reported that employing the shroud will lead to a significant drag reduction between 21% and 87% depending on the values of the porosity and the diameter ratio.

(p25.3) On the other hand, some researchers investigated the wake flow control numerically. Mimeau and Cottet [30] investigated flow control around a semicircular cylinder by employing porous coatings numerically. The simulation is performed by using direct numerical simulations and employing the vortex penalization method. The numerical results demonstrated that the relevant control performances can be achieved by introducing porous layers only at the top and bottom of the solid body permits. Moreover, a significant drag reduction was observed by introducing a thin layer with intermediate permeability in both edges of the back wall. Liu and Wei [31] studied numerically the circular cylinder with a porous materials coating to investigate the effects of surface permeability on the flow control. The three-dimensional simulation demonstrated the underlying physical mechanisms of flow control. It was observed that vorticity in the spanwise direction has been affected more than other directions. In addition, vortex shedding suppression is achieved partly due to a favorable pressure gradient around the porous surface.

(p25.4) The literature suggested that porosity and the permeable cylinder diameter have a substantial effect on the flow characteristics and results in significant reduction in turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stresses. In addition, such methodology also is very effective for drag reduction of the cylinder. However, the drag coefficient of the cylinder together with the shroud is higher than the bare cylinder. Table 2 presents the experimental and numerical research on flow control and suppression of vortex shedding by employing a permeable wall on bluff bodies. On the other hand, some researchers investigated the wake flow control numerically. Mimeau and Cottet [30] investigated flow control around a semicircular cylinder by employing porous coatings numerically. The simulation is performed by using direct numerical simulations and employing the vortex penalization method. The numerical results demonstrated that the relevant control performances can be achieved by introducing porous layers only at the top and bottom of the solid body permits. Moreover, a significant drag reduction was observed by introducing a thin layer with intermediate permeability in both edges of the back wall. Liu and Wei [31] studied numerically the circular cylinder with a porous materials coating to investigate the effects of surface permeability on the flow control. The three-dimensional simulation demonstrated the underlying physical mechanisms of flow control. It was observed that vorticity in the spanwise direction has been affected more than other directions. In addition, vortex shedding suppression is achieved partly due to a favorable pressure gradient around the porous surface.
## (s26) Corner Modification
Number of References: 8

(p26.0) Several researchers studied the features of the wake flow for square cylinders with modified corners and suggested a possible aerodynamic forces reduction as a result. In one of the early attempts to understand the effects of coroner modification on the flow structure, Kwok and Wilhelm [32] investigated experimentally the effect of edge configuration on the Eng 2021, 2 332 wind induced response of tall buildings with the rectangular cross section. The experiment demonstrated that slotted corners and chamfered corners reduce both the along-wind and cross-wind responses significantly. Further investigation on the wake energy spectra and wind force spectra characteristics demonstrated that the excitation processes were altered for a chamfered corner. Tamura and Miyagi [33] and Tamura and Miyagi [34] elaborated the effect of corner modification of the square cylinder on the wake flow structures and aerodynamics forces. Tamura and Miyagi [33] observed that a slight corner modification alters the flow structure and result in considerable variation of the aerodynamic characteristics up to approximately 60% of the original value. The report suggested corner modification as a promising passive technique for aerodynamic forces reduction.
