# A Review on Deep Learning in UAV Remote Sensing

CorpusID: 231709807 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6a78801c67313c67e20c76375d6a704964f50abb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6a78801c67313c67e20c76375d6a704964f50abb)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s14) Dimensionality Reduction
Number of References: 5

(p14.0) Due to recent advances in capture devices, hyperspectral images can be acquired even in UAVs. These images consist of tens to hundreds of spectral bands that can assist in the classification of objects in a given application. However, two main issues arise from the high dimensionality: i) the bands can be highly correlated, and ii) the excessive increase in the computational cost of DL models. High-dimensionality could invoke a problem known as the Hughes phenomenon, which is also known as the curse of dimensionality, i.e., when the accuracy of a classification is reduced due to the introduction of noise and other implications encountered in hyperspectral or high-dimensional data [77]. Regardless, hyperspectral data may pose an hindrance for the DL-based approaches accuracies, thus being an important issue to be considered in remote sensing practices. The classic approach to address high dimensionality is by applying a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [120]. Despite several proposals, PCA is generally not applied in conjunction with DL, but as a pre-processing step. Although this method may be one of the most known approaches to reduce dimensionality when dealing with hyperspectral data, different intakes were already presented in the literature. A novel DL approach, implemented with UAV-based imagery, was demonstrated by Miyoshi et al. [134]. There, the authors proposed a one-step approach, conducted within the networks' architecture, to consider a combination of bands of a hyperspectral sensor that were highly related to the labeled example provided in the input layer at the initial stage of the network. Another investigation [189] combines a band selection approach, spatial filtering, and CNN to simultaneously extract the spectral and spatial features. Still, the future perspective to solve this issue appears to be a combination of spectral band selection and DL methods in an end-to-end approach. Thus, both selection and DL methods can exchange information and improve results. This can also contribute to understanding how DL operates with these images, which was slightly accomplished at Miyoshi et al. [134].
## (s17) Few-Shot Learning
Number of References: 2

(p17.0) Although recent materials demonstrated the feasibility of DLbased methods for multiple tasks, they still are considered limited in terms of high generalization. This occurs when dealing with the same objects in different geographical areas or when new object classes are considered. Traditional solutions require retraining the model with a robust labeled dataset for the new area or object. Few-shot learning aims to cope with situations in which few labeled datasets are available. A recent study [119], in the context of scene classification, pointed out that few-shot methods in remote sensing are based on transfer learning and meta-learning. Meta-learning can be more flexible than transfer learning, and when applied in the training set to extract metaknowledge, contributes significantly to few-shot learning in the test set. An interesting strategy to cope with large intraclass variation and interclass similarity is the implementation of the attention mechanism in the feature learning step, as previously described. The datasets used in the [119] study were not UAVbased; however, the strategy can be explored in UAV imagery.
## (s18) Semi-Supervised Learning and Unsupervised Learning
Number of References: 2

(p18.0) With the increasing availability of remote sensing images, the labeling task for supervised training of DL models is expensive and time-consuming. Thus, the performance of DL models is impacted due to the lack of large amount of labeled training images. Efforts have been made to consider unlabeled images in training through unsupervised (unlabeled images only) and semi-supervised (labeled and unlabeled images) learning. In remote sensing, most semi-supervised or unsupervised approaches are based on transfer learning, which usually requires a supervised pre-trained model [127]. In this regard, a recent study [99] proposed a promising approach for unlabeled remote sensing images that define spatial augmentation criteria for relating close sub-images. Regardless, this is still an underdeveloped practice with UAV-based data and should be investigated in novel approaches.
## (s20) Open-Set
Number of References: 3

(p20.0) The main idea of an open-set is to deal with unknown or unseen classes during the inference in the testing set [17]. As the authors mention, recognition in real-world scenarios is "open-set", different from neural networks' nature, which is in a "close-set". Consequently, the testing set is classified considering only the classes used during the training. Therefore, unknown or unseen classes are not rejected during the test. There are few studies regarding open-set in the context of remote sensing. Regarding semantic segmentation of aerial imagery, a study by [173] presented an approach considering the open-set context. There, an adaptation of a close-set semantic segmentation method, adding a probability threshold after the softmax, was conducted. Later, a post-processing step based on morphological filters was applied to the pixels classified as unknown to verify if they are inside pixels or from borders. Another interesting approach is to combine open-set and domain adaptation methods, as proposed by [2] in the remote sensing context.
