# Avian Eggshell Membrane as a Novel Biomaterial: A Review

CorpusID: 237938241 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e46d89902b4bc5023b229c22d515dc5b04316b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e46d89902b4bc5023b229c22d515dc5b04316b1)

Fields: Materials Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s3) ESM for Joint Health
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most prevalent chronic joint disease, affecting significantly the patients' ability to function and quality of life. Very often, patients rely on dietary supplements for pain relief. The eggshell membrane has been tested as a natural therapeutic for joint and connective tissue disorders and was reported to exert some beneficial effects on joint pain, stiffness, and cartilage turnover induced by overexercise [69]. In a randomized study, postmenopausal women were assigned to a placebo and intervention group, with thirty women taking orally a commercial product, Natural Eggshell Membrane (NEM ® ), 500 mg once per day for 2 weeks while conducting regular exercise on alternate days. The results showed that the cartilage turnover was significantly reduced in the intervention group. The consumption of the eggshell membrane product rapidly improved the recovery from exercise-induced joint pain and stiffness as well as reduced the discomfort immediately after exercise [69].
## (s6) ESM for Anti-Inflammatory and Antioxidant Activity
Number of References: 5

(p6.0) The anti-inflammatory effects of ESM have been also investigated in several studies. After being processed by cryo-grinding and homogenization into particles approaching submicron dimensions, ESM powder exerted some anti-inflammatory activity, while its antimicrobial activity against skin-associated pathogens was also enhanced [84]. The aqueous extract of ESM can also affect signaling events during responses to the T cell-specific mitogen phytohemagglutinin and pokeweed mitogen. This influence may be mediated through a decrease in the level of the pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α, providing some insights into the use of ESM as an anti-inflammatory product [85]. Vuong et al. also confirmed that both processed ESM power and EMS-derived soluble fractions demonstrated antiinflammation and immunomodulation properties in lipopolysaccharide-triggered human monocytes and macrophage-like cells through the intervention of NF-κB [86]. Yoo et al. treated ESM with acetic acid and divided hydrolysate into fractions of different molecular weights. They found that the whole ESM hydrolysate and the fractions with more than 10 kDa presented some anti-lipopolysaccharide and anti-IFN-γ-induced inflammation activities as well as an outstanding effect on suppressing skin inflammation [87]. Ovocalyxin-36 is a protein from ESM with immuno-modulating effects. In vivo, peptides derived from ovocalyxin-36 are more effective at reducing LPS-induced inflammatory symptoms and inhibiting the local production of pro-inflammatory mediators in the small intestine [42]. Hence, ESM hydrolysates offer some promising leads as an oral anti-inflammatory product.
## (s8) ESM for Biomineralization
Number of References: 8

(p8.0) Biomineralization is a process in which specialized cells secrete and deliver inorganic ions into confined spaces within organic matrices or scaffolds. Calcitic biomineralization is essential in humans for the formation of otoconia, which is required to perceive linear acceleration and the effects of gravity. ESM can be applied as a biomineralization substitution of CaCO 3 nano-crystals [95], with extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins from the ESM influencing the process of biomineralization. There are 46 proteins associated with the membrane fibers, and most of them are candidates for regulating calcitic biomineralization [26]. As a major component of the non-mineralized ESM, type X collagen has a controversial role in the biomineralization process. Some scientists reported that type X collagen suppresses cellular mineralization and limits the deposition of minerals [19], while others considered that it facilitates the regulation of calcification [96].

(p8.1) Recently, more studies focused on modifying ESM to serve as a biotemplate for crystal growth or as a biomineralization model. For example, ESM was a suitable biotemplate allowing hydroxyapatite crystals to form flower-like agglomerates [97]. ESM can also influence the type of CaCO 3 polymorph during the initial stages of the repair process of the shell of the land snail Helix aspersa after an injury [98]. After treatment with sodium trimetaphosphate, phosphate groups were introduced onto the surface of type I collagen and strengthen the mineralization of ESM by forming calcium phosphate crystals [99]. In addition, it was shown that polycarboxylated ESM contained more surface nucleation sites for CaCO 3 mineralization [100].
## (s11) ESM for Food Packaging
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) The edible films are safe and eco-friendly packaging materials to protect foods against oxygen, carbon dioxide, lipids, aroma, flavors, and moisture [108]. ESM as a food byproduct contains abundant proteins, which has huge potential to be used in food packaging. The ESM-derived gelatin has been applied to produce edible films with chitosan. The addition of ESM in edible films showed that it could be an excellent material to improve the mechanical and barrier properties of films [109]. The SEP has been proved to interact with soybean protein isolate due to the hydrogen bonds. The protein-based composite film containing SEP, soy protein isolate, and eugenol showed the satisfying mechanical, barrier, water resistance, and hydrophobic features [110].
