# Overview on urinary tract infection, bacterial agents, and antibiotic resistance pattern in renal transplant recipients

CorpusID: 234211171 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/599b4f3f043a3007f093480efb98cc804be6bae7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/599b4f3f043a3007f093480efb98cc804be6bae7)

Fields: Medicine

## (s14) ed by E. c
Number of References: 10

(p14.0) i were reported imipenem and nitrofurantoin with resistance rates of 13.2% and 19%, respectively.


DISCUSSION

In total, UTI is considered as the most common infection and the most possible site of infection that leads to hospitalization of patients with kidney transplantation. [20]The prevalence of UTI in kidney transplant recipients is similar in both developed and developing countries. [5]The prevalence of posttransplant UTI in the kidney transplant recipients varies between 12% and 75%. [21]Of course, in developing countries, this rate may be higher due to epidemiological exposure and lower standards of hygiene. [22]A meta-analysis conducted in 2016 showed that the USA had a significantly higher prevalence of UTIs than European countries (41% vs. 33%). [9] the present systematic review and meta-analysis, the combined prevalence of UTI in renal transplant recipients was reported by 31.1%.The combined prevalence of Gram-negative bacteria was 69%.The most common pathogens among Gram negatives were E. coli followed by K. pneumoniae with frequency 43.4% and 13%, respectively.Furthermore, the least rate belonged to A. baumannii with prevalence of 3%.Furthermore, subgroup analysis for Gram-positive bacteria showed the combined prevalence of 31%.The highest predominant microorgani
## (s38) ed by E. c
Number of References: 10

(p38.0) i were reported imipenem and nitrofurantoin with resistance rates of 13.2% and 19%, respectively.


DISCUSSION

In total, UTI is considered as the most common infection and the most possible site of infection that leads to hospitalization of patients with kidney transplantation. [20]The prevalence of UTI in kidney transplant recipients is similar in both developed and developing countries. [5]The prevalence of posttransplant UTI in the kidney transplant recipients varies between 12% and 75%. [21]Of course, in developing countries, this rate may be higher due to epidemiological exposure and lower standards of hygiene. [22]A meta-analysis conducted in 2016 showed that the USA had a significantly higher prevalence of UTIs than European countries (41% vs. 33%). [9] the present systematic review and meta-analysis, the combined prevalence of UTI in renal transplant recipients was reported by 31.1%.The combined prevalence of Gram-negative bacteria was 69%.The most common pathogens among Gram negatives were E. coli followed by K. pneumoniae with frequency 43.4% and 13%, respectively.Furthermore, the least rate belonged to A. baumannii with prevalence of 3%.Furthermore, subgroup analysis for Gram-positive bacteria showed the combined prevalence of 31%.The highest predominant microorgani
