# Variable Speed Limit and Ramp Metering for Mixed Traffic Flows: A Review and Open Questions

CorpusID: 233652955 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ed73f71e9c2d976159a06f79b534e9add6257fe](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ed73f71e9c2d976159a06f79b534e9add6257fe)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s1) Application of VSL and RM Control in HDV Traffic Flows
Number of References: 8

(p1.0) The VSL control system application with timely and appropriate speed limits can control the incoming flow of the vehicles approaching the bottleneck by adjusting it to a lower level, i.e., to the amount of capacity of the bottleneck [6]. This prevents the capacity from dropping further and allows the congestion to be resolved more quickly and achieve traffic flow values less than or equal to the maximum capacity in the bottleneck area. The preventive effect of VSL is manifested in delaying the occurrence of the capacity drop, which prevents the activation of bottlenecks by timely control of the incoming traffic flow. The application of VSL leads to smaller speed deviations between vehicles and lanes, thus reducing the risk of accidents [27][28][29][30].

(p1.1) RM systems control the inflow of on-ramp motorway vehicles. For this purpose, the feedback system detectors required for operation are usually placed downstream of the on-ramp where vehicle merging takes place [31]. The most common RM algorithm, ALINEA [32], uses the output of the previous control step interval as input for the current iteration. Thus, the ALINEA inputs used are the previous control step interval metering rate and downstream occupancy. Some of the extensions to ALINEA that have been developed to improve performance are FL-ALINEA, UP-ALINEA, UF-ALINEA, AD-ALINEA, X-ALINEA/Q, and PI-ALINEA [19].
## (s3) Rule-Based Reactive VSL
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) This category of VSL systems bases its logic for calculating speed limits on predefined thresholds for a given traffic flow state. Based on the measured values of traffic parameters (flow q expressed in veh/h, density ρ expressed in veh/km, or mean speed v expressed in km/h) on a given motorway segment, a predefined speed limit is activated, as shown in Figure 1 [33][34][35][36]. VSL activation can be based on measured flow rate or standard deviations of density, as analyzed in [37]. Another approach is a reactive VSL system with the aim of informing the drivers about a possible disruption in the traffic flow (traffic accident, congestion). As a result, the speed of the incoming vehicle flow is gradually reduced and adapted to the new traffic situation. Such VSL systems can also have a weather-based activation logic (related to fog, ice, strong wind, etc.) [38]. The final decision on the speed limit output is made by the operations staff of the traffic control center based on the proposed speed limit and the assessment of the traffic situation gained from experience. 
## (s4) Open-Loop Based VSL
Number of References: 5

(p4.0) This category includes VSL controllers whose logic is based on the open-loop optimization process [7,[39][40][41]. A non-feedback control system requires an accurate traffic model with the ability to predict the movement of traffic flow parameters on a given motorway segment. Such a predictive model is difficult to achieve due to the stochastic traffic behavior. Most often, predictive models are based on a general macroscopic model of traffic flow. Other approaches, such as the Kalman filter [41], are used for better prediction of traffic flow to improve the optimization process.
## (s5) VSL Based on Negative Feedback Loop
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) The strategy of feedback VSL controllers is also based on collecting current traffic data on the congested motorway segment as shown in Figure 1, but with the objective of maintaining the controlled motorway segment at a defined set point such as the critical density ρ c . Such strategies do not require predictive traffic flow models. In [42], a simple VSL with integration action (so-called I-controller) for VSL control was proposed. It controls the flow of vehicles on the motorway segment before the problematic bottleneck occurence area. The working principle of the controller is based on the ALINEA algorithm [32]. Instead of a traffic light at the on-ramp controlling the flow of vehicles entering the urban motorway, VSL reduces the mainline speed limit. Similar to RM, VSL also controls the flow of vehicles by reducing the mainline speed. This achieves the effect of a "virtual ramp" on the motorway segment under VSL, which controls the output flow of the controlled segment or the inflow to the next adjacent problematic segment of the urban motorway. In [43], a distributed VSL controller based on control feedback adapted to eliminate shock waves was tested. The VSL on each controlled segment is operated by a separate controller (cumulatively 10 controllers). Such a VSL control system has proven to be successful in preventing the generation of shock waves, which cause minor disruptions to traffic flow. By applying VSL, TTS was reduced by 20% compared to the uncontrolled case in [43]. In [44], a comprehensive feedback control strategy was proposed for mainline traffic flow control enabled via VSLs, considering multiple bottleneck locations. The feedback control results were compared with the optimal control results to evaluate the performance of the proposed strategy, and it was able to come close to the optimal control results.
## (s6) RL-Based VSL
Number of References: 4

(p6.0) In [45], the Q-Learning (QL) algorithm was applied to VSL to optimize traffic flow on motorways taking traffic predictions into account. The environment was described by a vector of six normalized variables representing the current and previous posted speed limit, speed, and density on the controlled urban motorway. The reward function was modeled as the proportional negative TTS measured between the two control time steps. Oscillations between consecutive speed limit changes were prevented by restricting them to 20 km/h. A QL-based VSL (QL-VSL) control approach was also proposed in [46] to reduce TTT at motorway bottlenecks. The QL-VSL approach significantly outperformed the feedback-based VSL strategy based on the obtained results. In [47], the Reinforcement-Markov Average Reward Technique (R-MART) approach was proposed for VSL. The longterm middle rewards are utilized in the R-MART algorithm opposed to QL algorithm deferred rewards. The application of the R-MART VSL controller was able to reduce TTS by 18% and almost 20% less CO 2 emissions compared to the case without VSL. In our previous study [48], we proposed a deep QL-based VSL algorithm including a customized learning process and a complex reward function consisting of three separate objectives. The proposed algorithm aims to increase the throughput of the motorway by increasing the average mainline speed, increase safety by decreasing the difference between measured speed and posted speed limit, and minimize speed limit fluctuations in successive control step intervals. The proposed algorithm managed to increase the average mainline speed and reduce traffic density. The oscillations between the posted speed limits and the measured speeds were prevented.
## (s19) Rule-Based VSL
Number of References: 2

(p19.0) In [89], a comprehensive evaluation of the potential impacts of AVs on an existing motorway system was analyzed in various motorway operational scenarios, including heavily congested traffic (>95% of motorway capacity), lightly congested traffic (≈70% of motorway capacity), free-flow traffic (≈50% of motorway capacity), and future traffic (three times more than heavily congested traffic volume) conditions. A number of MoEs were measured to reflect the changes in mobility, safety, fuel consumption and emissions caused by the deployment of AVs [89]. The rule-based VSL approach was modified to mixed traffic flow conditions and also tested in different AV penetration rates. These conditions were classified as either free-flow, light congestion, or heavy congestion. The VSL control step time was set to 5 min. The minimum time-gap was set to 0.5 s for AVs and 1.1 s for HDVs. The driver imperfection was set to 0% and 50% for AVs and HDVs, respectively. The acceptance factor for speed limits was set at 1% for AVs and 15% for HDVs. For all traffic congestion scenarios, AVs showed improvements for all MoEs, as did VSL in mixed traffic flow scenarios. For heavy traffic congestion scenario, VSL improved MTT by 14% to 26% at AV penetration rates ranging from 0% to 70%. AVs improved MTT by 43% at AV penetration rates from 0% to 100% in the no control scenario. Fuel consumption was improved by 5% to 44% in the no control scenario at AV penetration rates from 0% to 100%. The case with VSL improved fuel consumption by 10% to 31% at AV penetration rates from 0% to 70%.
## (s27) Other Merging Control Approaches
Number of References: 2

(p27.0) In [98], the motorway on-ramp merging control system was proposed to take advantage of V2X communication. CAVs share information in a vehicular ad-hoc network through dedicated short-range communication. It is assumed that all vehicles are CAVs. The vehicle sequencing protocol is designed to arrange vehicles in a predefined sequence to cooperate with each other before merging, thus avoiding high collision risks and excessive energy consumption and pollutant emissions when reaching the merging area [98]. The merging control approach was divided into three procedures. The first procedure calculated the maximum possible speed of on-ramp vehicles, the second procedure calculated the estimated arrival time, and the third procedure assigned vehicle sequence identification. The proposed protocol improved the ATT and average speed by 5.3% and 3.4%, respectively, compared to the no control scenario.
