# Scalenus Syndrome: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 234187450 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ad66128e43c5e0164ebeda97aa1ede843fe6d76](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ad66128e43c5e0164ebeda97aa1ede843fe6d76)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Clinical Presentation
Number of References: 22

(p5.0) In scalenus syndrome, the compression occurs in a scalenus triangle, which bordered anteriorly by anterior scalenus muscle, posteriorly by scalenus medius, and the first rib inferiorly. The neurovascular structures passing through this triangle are the brachial plexus and the subclavian artery [3], [17]. In the literature, the manifestation of scalenus syndrome is identical to nTOS or aTOS because of the compression of these structures. Based on this, scalenus syndrome is also considered as mixed nTOS and aTOS.

(p5.1) The symptoms of scalenus syndrome can be divided into two types, which are neurologic and vascular symptoms. The neurologic manifestation can originate from the somatic and sympathetic nervous system. Symptoms involving somatic nervous system includes pain in the shoulder, arm, forearm, or extending into the hand; atrophy of intrinsic muscles of the hand; and muscular twitching [3], [23]. Paresthesia following ulnar nerve distribution, median nerve distribution, or both is also reported as a scalenus syndrome symptom. These neurological symptoms can be classified further as upper and lower plexus compression. Lower plexus represents a compression  [7] of C8 and T1, which manifests in the area of the ulnar forearm, axillary, and anterior shoulder region. Upper plexus compression involves C5-C7 manifest in the supraclavicular region [24].

(p5.2) The sympathetic nerve rami run surrounding the subclavian artery [17], which we hypothesize the sympathetic hypertonic occurrence in this syndrome. Tension on the first thoracic nerve may be transmitted to several sympathetic rami and nerves of Kuntz, which is perhaps responsible for vascular changes [7]. The sympathetic nervous system's involvement exhibits vasomotor spasm, lack of capillary refill in fingers, and reduction of temperature [3], [23]. In addition to the symptoms above, Raynaud phenomenon may also present because of overactive sympathetic activity since these fibers run in proximity to the roots of the lower brachial plexus [25].

(p5.3) The subclavian vein is passed posterior to the clavicula, which explains the uncommon occurrence of venous distention in this syndrome [3], [17]. The vascular compression manifestations are occurred because of subclavian artery compression. It exhibits partial or complete pulse reduction when the head is turned ipsilaterally, and a deep inspiration is taken [3], [23], [24]. However, Winsor et al. did a research to determine the occurrence of scalenus syndrome during the physical examination and confirmed a reduction of blood flow on the distal extremity with Doppler. They reported that the distal extremity's blood flow was lower when the subject turned their head contralateral to the affected side [17].

(p5.4) Scalenus tenderness is a constant finding of scalenus syndrome [3], [24]. The pain is radiating in ulnar distribution when the scalenus muscle above the clavicle is compressed [3]. Extension and abduction of the arm increased the pain [24]. Nishijima et al. reported that vertigo could be happened in scalenus anterior syndrome due to subclavian artery compression by anterior scalenus muscle [26].
