# An Overview on the Histogenesis and Morphogenesis of Salivary Gland Neoplasms and Evolving Diagnostic Approaches

CorpusID: 236943744 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/996443a73600fdb89fcaf5c7590545204fbf28a0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/996443a73600fdb89fcaf5c7590545204fbf28a0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Morphogenic Concepts
Number of References: 5

(p2.0) Apart from the cell of origin, a pathologist typically considers the differentiation process and arrangement of tumor cells as crucial when classifying the neoplasm. In order to overcome challenges in determining the cell of origin, the morphogenic approach of cellular differentiation facilitates immunohistochemical and ultrastructural analyses, leading to a more accurate diagnosis. The bicellular differentiation in the development of salivary glands can be revisited in the pathogenesis of SGN, along the ducto-acinar complex. At each level of the salivary gland, cellular differentiation may result in different models of tumor cell subtypes, as shown in Figure 2B. The synthesis of extracellular matrix (ECM) by the basal lamina and its position between the cellular compartments affects the histomorphology and eventually the classification and diagnosis of the neoplasm. This highlights the need for the morphogenic theory [1,2,[11][12][13]. Former concepts of pathogenesis of SGN were focused on the histologic cell of origin. The adult salivary glands consist of reserve cells that are believed to replicate pathologically to form SGN. The four commonly hypothesized histogenetic theories, as depicted in Figure 2A, are as follows:
## (s4) Morphogenic Concepts
Number of References: 5

(p4.0) Apart from the cell of origin, a pathologist typically considers the differentiation process and arrangement of tumor cells as crucial when classifying the neoplasm. In order to overcome challenges in determining the cell of origin, the morphogenic approach of cellular differentiation facilitates immunohistochemical and ultrastructural analyses, leading to a more accurate diagnosis. The bicellular differentiation in the development of salivary glands can be revisited in the pathogenesis of SGN, along the ducto-acinar complex. At each level of the salivary gland, cellular differentiation may result in different models of tumor cell subtypes, as shown in Figure 2B. The synthesis of extracellular matrix (ECM) by the basal lamina and its position between the cellular compartments affects the histomorphology and eventually the classification and diagnosis of the neoplasm. This highlights the need for the morphogenic theory [1,2,[11][12][13].
## (s6) Classification of SGN
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) The classification of SGN is an ever-evolving process, given their varied histomorphological appearances, lack of uniformity, overlapping features, and diverse nature of individual entities. The transitional nature of SGN thus contributes to this diagnostic dilemma. The most recent and widely accepted classification of SGN is featured in the fourth edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of head and neck tumors, as elaborated in Table 1 [15]. The current classification has a modified list, with inclusion and exclusion of several histopathological entities, as compared to the third WHO edition [16,17]. As the understanding of the biological behavior of lesions progresses both on a genetic and molecular level, newer variants of pre-existing neoplasms continue to emerge. Evolving immunohistochemical markers and innovative diagnostic approaches may result in a more accurate identification, thus offering effective treatments of SGN. 
## (s7) Diagnostic Workup and Recent Advances in Diagnosis
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) SGN often present with an enlarged mass, requiring further investigation for proper diagnosis. Fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) has been commonly used to diagnose SGN [18]. However, due to the heterogeneity of the neoplasms, imaging procedures such as ultrasound (US), computerized tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are commonly used to evaluate the structure and assess the staging of SGN [18,19]. While CT and MRI visualize structural changes, positron emission tomography (PET) visualizes any molecular changes [20,21]. Despite the variety of techniques involved in the evaluation of SGN, different cases may require specific imaging techniques for accurate diagnosis. Additionally, oncogenes are an innovative technique that can improve tumor classification.
## (s9) Fine-Needle Aspiration Biopsy (FNAB)
Number of References: 7

(p9.0) FNAB is one of the first line procedures used to diagnose SGN on account of its easy, inexpensive, highly accurate, quick, and minimally invasive nature [27]. This technique entails using a fine gauge needle to collect cells. After alcohol fixation and drying, the cellular aspirate is stained with Papanicolaou stain and can be immediately evaluated and diagnosed [27]. FNAB results are universally reported using the Milan's system, as seen in Table 2 [28]. Edizer et al. (2016), evaluated the ability of FNAB to differentially diagnose salivary gland masses by comparing the preoperative FNAB results with the postoperative definitive histopathological results of 285 patients. Their FNAB results were 92.6% accurate compared to the definitive histopathological results. This demonstrated that FNAB is useful in benign and malignant tumor differentiation. However, they do have some limitations, which involve relatively high non-diagnostic results, possibly due to bleeding, low cellularity, necrosis, or erroneous technique [27]. In addition, some potential outcomes in the final histopathological examination include squamous metaplasia and fibrosis. However, these do not interfere with the definitive diagnosis [27]. Table 2. Milan's system of FNAB reporting for SGN [28]. 
## (s14) Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
Number of References: 8

(p14.0) PET is a non-invasive imaging technology that uses radioactive tracers to visualize and evaluate tissues and organs for the presence of diseases, including cancer [42]. Once these tracers are intravenously injected, they gather in areas of higher chemical activity, often indicating areas of disease [42]. These tracers emit radiation that can be detected by the PET scanner, which generates an image map for assessment [42]. Roh et al. (2007), evaluated the role of PET, using 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) as tracers among patients with salivary gland cancers (Table 3) [43]. They were able to detect 91.2% of primary tumors in patients and concluded that 18FDG-PET is clinically useful in histologic grading and initial staging of salivary gland malignancies. However, the technology does have some limitations. Occasionally, normal physiologic uptake of radioactive tracers occurs, which often mimics or hides existing neoplasms [43]. Additionally, low-grade malignancies frequently have lower tracer uptake than high-grade malignancies [43]. Therefore, these limitations may lead to undetected SGN [43]. 
## (s15) Biopsy and Histopathological Diagnosis
Number of References: 5

(p15.0) Following the procurement of cells through biopsy, histopathological diagnosis assesses the SGN morphologically [44]. Different types of SGN can be identified based on their location and cell composition. For instance, acinic cell carcinoma is usually present in the parotid gland with its cells composed of acinar and intercalated types [44]. Meanwhile, mucoepidermoid carcinoma is found in major or minor salivary glands. These tumors are composed of squamoid, mucous, and intermediate cells, and may also contain solid or cystic regions [44]. Salivary duct carcinoma is mainly found de novo, or derived malignantly from carcinoma-ex-pleomorphic adenoma in the parotid gland. These neoplasms are characterized by locoregional metastasis [44]. Moreover, the most common benign and malignant SGN found at the parotid and submandibular glands were pleomorphic adenoma and adenoid cystic carcinoma, respectively [45]. Thus, accounting for these histopathological features can assist in the diagnosis of SGN.
## (s16) Oncogenes as a Novel Diagnostic Tool
Number of References: 5

(p16.0) Although SGN can be diagnosed with a variety of the aforementioned methods, given their transient nature, they may still pose as a diagnostic challenge for clinicians. The characteristics of many SGN tend to overlap, particularly histopathologically. Recent progress has been made with novel diagnostic tools to identify the genetic changes that occur in SGN. This has led to a more accurate diagnosis, resulting in more effective treatments and, therefore, better prognosis [9,46]. All SGN have certain genetic alterations that can be categorized, as in Table 4, according to their role in diagnosis, prediction, and prognosis. [47]. While traditional diagnostic methods have been successful, a clearer understanding in the cellular and molecular mechanisms of SGN is necessary. The three novel diagnostic tools that have revolutionized the characterization of SGN are immunohistochemistry (IHC), fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), and next-generation sequencing (NGS) [9,48]. The discovery of the genetic alterations, their significance in oncogenesis of common SGN and the usage of these novel diagnostic tools are further analyzed in the following sections.
## (s19) Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma
Number of References: 16

(p19.0) Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is another common malignant tumor of the salivary glands. It is slow-growing and composed of epithelial and myoepithelial cells of different origins [9]. Given its high recurrence, it has a very poor prognosis due to its metastatic capability and associated perineural invasion. Current treatment protocols involve surgery, followed by post-operative radiotherapy (PORT), which have been fairly successful [63]. PORT has shown to be an effective adjuvant to surgery and to minimize the incidence of recurrence [64]. However, studies have shown that it does not really affect the overall survival rates of patients, therefore questioning its effectiveness [65]. For more effective diagnosis and management strategies, it is necessary to understand the underlying genome alterations when studying recurrent ACC tumors [47].

(p19.1) Studies found that recurrent ACC showed alterations in the NOTCH pathway when compared to primary ACC cases. These mutations in the NOTCH pathway are significant as they could lead to potential therapeutic targets [66]. Ferraroto et al. (2017) concluded that the NOTCH mutations were indicative of a more distinct form of ACC, exhibiting metastasis in bone and liver; however, this was minimized by NOTCH inhibitors [67].

(p19.2) The main genomic alteration that characterizes ACC is the MYB-NFIB gene fusion. Overexpression of MYB is a diagnostic characteristic feature of ACC. It is located on chromosome 6q and it encodes for a transcription factor that regulates cell proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic, colonic, and neural progenitor cells [47]. NFIB is located on chromosome 9q and is also a key regulator for hematopoietic and epithelial cells. A study by Rettig et al. (2016) presented an overexpression of NFIB in ACC, suggestive of an alternative oncogenetic pathway [68]. Whole genome sequencing has also revealed enhanced translocation, leading to the overexpression of MYB. This provided another insight into the downstream process of MYB in different ACC lineages [69].

(p19.3) Overexpression of MYB is thought to impact DNA repair, apoptosis, cell migration, and cell signaling for cell cycle control [47]. Xu et al. (2019) inferred that salivary ACC tissue samples displayed a higher expression of MYB when compared to normal salivary tissue and was associated with metastatic potential [70]. Detecting MYB-NFIB fusion can be difficult using IHC since MYB overexpression is also seen in other SGN. Thus, this MYB-NFIB fusion is detected using FISH [44]. NGS has also been proven useful in diagnosing ACC. In a recent case study, the presence of a MYB-NFIB fusion was detected by NGS in a suspected case of ameloblastoma with histopathological variations [61]. This emphasizes the significance of introducing these novel diagnostic tools for a more accurate diagnosis.
## (s20) Acinic Cell Carcinoma
Number of References: 9

(p20.0) Acinic cell carcinoma (AciCC) is a low-grade malignancy consisting of both ductal and acinar cells with the presence of basophilic cytoplasm. It is the third most common malignancy of the salivary glands and is slow progressing but can metastasize to local and distant sites [9]. Though the knowledge of its molecular aberrations remains limited, it is commonly characterized by the expression of DOG1 (a membrane channel protein), while the prominent genetic aberration is the translocation of SCPP-NR4A3 [47].

(p20.1) SCPP is a secretory phosphoprotein that contains several genes responsible for producing salivary contents, bone, dentin, and enamel. It is located on chromosome 4q13 [36]. NR4A3 is an important nuclear receptor that is located on chromosome 9q31 and it encodes for the steroid-thyroid hormone-retinoid receptor [47,71]. The upregulation of NR4A3 increases the expression of target genes and influences cell proliferation. Another rare genetic fusion that can be seen is MSANTD3-HTN3 translocation, which is characteristic in variants with a more serous nature [72]. MSANTD3 encodes for a poorly characterized protein, whereas HTN3 is exclusively present in the saliva and functions as an antimicrobial peptide [71].

(p20.2) Diagnosis is straightforward as the SCPP-NR4A3 is exclusive to AciCC. Moreover, the immunoexpression of DOG1 is also a characteristic finding for AciCC [47]. IHC has proven to be more specific than FISH for the expression of NR4A3 and has been found to be a specific and sensitive novel marker [71]. IHC has also shown relatively high specificity for the expression of MSANTD3. However, further studies are required to validate its role as a diagnostic marker in AciCC.
## (s21) Polymorphous Adenocarcinoma
Number of References: 9

(p21.0) Polymorphous Adenocarcinoma (PAC) is an epithelial tumor most commonly found in the minor salivary glands. It is a relatively rare tumor and is usually associated with a favorable prognosis [9]. It was previously named "polymorphous low-grade carcinoma," and was renamed by the WHO (2017) due to its aggressive nature [47]. While cribriform adenocarcinoma has recently been incorporated into the PAC group of SGN due to their similar characteristics, it remains highly controversial whether they should be referred to as separate entities [73].

(p21.1) PAC is characterized by the mutation of PRKD1, a protein-kinase gene located on chromosome 14. It encodes a protein kinase that is involved in cellular processes including migration and differentiation, due to the signaling of the MAP kinase, RAS, and other cell survival and adhesion pathways [47]. The PRKD1 E710D hot spot mutation is a useful ancillary diagnostic marker along with the PRKD1 mutations to differentiate between other SGN [73]. Although diagnosis is most likely done by visualizing the morphology, IHC can play a small role in certain instances [44]. Sebastiao et al. (2019) used FISH to demonstrate the genetic alterations of PRKD1 as a diagnostic marker with reasonable success, particularly to identify nodal metastasis [74]. While PRKD1 E710D mutations as a prognostic marker has yet to be thoroughly researched, studies have observed its correlation with a metastasis-free tumor [73].
## (s22) Clear Cell Carcinoma
Number of References: 8

(p22.0) Clear cell carcinoma (CCC) is a low-grade salivary tumor found in minor salivary glands and is characterized by the presence of clear cells [47]. It is identified by the appearance of EWSR1-ATF1 fusion, which is a major genetic aberration [47]. EWSR1 is an "Ewing's sarcoma" gene and is a member of the TET family protein group, located on chromosome 22q12. It encodes an RNA-binding protein, which is involved in gene expression, cell signaling as well as RNA processing, transport, and function [75]. ATF1 is a transcription factor located on chromosome 12 and is an element of the CREB family of proteins. Studies have shown that tumorigenesis could occur due to the aberrant activation of ATF1 upon fusion with EWSR1 [75].

(p22.1) FISH is a very useful tool for diagnosing CCC as it can detect the EWSR1-ATF1 fusion. An early study by Shah et al. (2013) demonstrated that FISH had higher sensitivity in detecting rearrangements of EWSR1 in hyalinizing CCC [76]. At times, it can be difficult to differentiate between hyalinizing and odontogenic forms of CCC, as well as minor forms of MEC since they all exhibit translocations involving EWSR1 [44]. NGS may be an even more accurate tool to differentiate and specify the genetic alterations between forms of CCC [44].
## (s23) Salivary Duct Carcinoma
Number of References: 9

(p23.0) Salivary duct carcinoma (SDC) is a high-grade malignant neoplasm that usually arises from the parotid gland and is one of the most aggressive SGN. It is usually associated with a poor prognosis and frequent metastasis [9,47]. It is normally characterized by the expression of AR, an androgen receptor, located on chromosome Xq11-12 [47]. Studies have shown that treatment with androgen deprivation therapy may be effective with SDC since the expression of AR is equally seen in tumors of the prostate gland and breasts [77].

(p23.1) However, SDCs are also associated with somatic mutations of many other genes, including TP53, ERBB2, HRAS, and PTEN. This could be beneficial for more therapeutic targets of the associated downstream signaling pathways, such as mTOR, PI3K, Akt, and MAP kinase, which are major oncogenic drivers [78]. Multiple mutations have also shown to interfere with androgen response therapy, further necessitating the development of treatment strategies [79].

(p23.2) IHC and FISH have been useful in the detection of AR expression. AR immunoexpression has proven effective as a diagnostic and predictive biomarker which can further be treated with androgen deprivation therapies [77]. IHC detection of TP53 and ERBB2 mutations has been associated with a poor prognosis due to the activation of signaling pathways [47]. NGS has established insights on new fusions involving ETV6-NTRK3 which allows for the possibility of new variants of SDC with different therapeutic targets [61].
## (s24) Myoepithelial Carcinoma
Number of References: 4

(p24.0) Myoepithelial carcinoma is a rare SGN, consisting mainly of myoepithelial cells. It is characterized by EWSR1 gene aberrations, making it difficult to distinguish from CCC [47]. However, FISH has helped with this distinction by demonstrating no evidence of fusion involving EWSR1, as seen in the case of CCC [47]. While it is considered to be chemoresistant, a study by Shenoy (2020) demonstrated that there is evidence of fusion between EWSR1 and POU5F1, a feature in tumors arising from visceral organs [80]. He stated that it can be treated with combination chemotherapy in the treatment of Ewing's sarcoma [80].
## (s25) Epithelial-Myoepithelial Carcinoma
Number of References: 2

(p25.0) Epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma is a rare, bi-phasic tumor with a very low malignant potential and mainly characterized by HRAS mutations. However, other mutations involving PIK3CA, CTNNB1, and AKT1 have also been reported to occur alongside HRAS mutations [47]. There is no concrete information regarding the molecular profile of this condition, and the extent to which these mutations can be used as diagnostic, prognostic, or predictive markers is unknown. However, in some studies, HRAS mutations have been seen as a diagnostic feature to differentiate it from other SGN mimickers. Further research is required due to the varied histology [81].
## (s28) Radiotherapy
Number of References: 10

(p28.0) While surgical intervention with negative margins alone may be sufficient to terminate benign or small low-grade salivary gland tumors, malignant neoplasms would require adjuvant radiotherapy postoperatively. The application of adjuvant radiotherapy is often prescribed to patients in the advanced or recurrent stages, with lymph node metastasis, tissue infiltration, and undetermined margins [83,87,88]. Several studies have demonstrated that adjuvant radiotherapy post-surgery would lead to a more effective outcome of locoregional and systemic tumor control, optimizing the survival rate of cancer patients [89][90][91]. In severe unresectable tumors, definite radiotherapy is often prescribed. Spratt et al. (2014) reported that the five-year locoregional control rate of definite radiation comprises 57-70% of cases [92]. Another study found that the use of fast neutron radiotherapy may result in more control over the unresectable tumor than the conventional electron or photon-based therapy. However, the neutron-based method may cause more side effects and toxicity for the patients; therefore, this therapeutic intervention remains controversial [89]. Alternative therapies include carbon ion therapy, altered fractionation schedule, brachytherapy, and hyperthermia [83].
## (s29) Chemotherapy
Number of References: 5

(p29.0) The application of systemic chemotherapy has been occasionally seen in severe stages of tumors with distant metastasis. A wide range of mono and polychemotherapy is used as a palliative treatment among patients for whom local therapy, such as surgery or radiation, is no longer feasible [93]. A study by Hsieh et al. (2016) reported that postoperative chemotherapy improved locoregional tumor control more than radiation [94]. However, other studies have not found any significant differences in local control and overall survival rates of chemotherapy versus radiotherapy [95,96]. Due to the absence of consistent evidence-based data, implementing chemotherapy in the treatment of salivary gland cancers adjunctively or as a palliative agent should be evaluated cautiously on a case-by-case basis.
## (s30) Other Therapeutic Interventions
Number of References: 5

(p30.0) The profound comprehension of molecular behaviors in salivary gland cancers has led to the invention of other potential therapies, such as targeted therapy and hormone therapy. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors, monoclonal antibodies, and proteasome inhibitors are some of the agents used in targeted therapy [93]. Regarding hormone therapy, it has been reported that some salivary gland cancers responded well with hormonal receptors such as estrogen, progesterone, and androgen. These findings have led hormonal agents to be applied in several trial cases such as AciCC treated with tamoxifen, and both SDC and adenocarcinoma treated with antiandrogen agents [93,97,98]. Several trials in phase II are in progress to examine these new techniques; however, further investigation is needed prior to implementing this technique in cancer patients [93].
## (s31) Relative Problems of SGN Therapy
Number of References: 11

(p31.0) There are risks of morbidity in all therapeutic interventions of SGNs. First of all, the complications after surgical therapy may include total or partial nerve damage, facial numbness, loss of lingual sensation, sialoceles, and salivary fistula [99]. In some cases, patients experience Frey's syndrome or gustatory sweating, which is sweating in the facial area while chewing. These complications usually take months to heal; however, in rare cases, they can be permanent [99]. Regarding the application of radiotherapy in treating SGNs, this method would also leave multiple complications to the patients. The most commonly observed consequences are dry mouth (xerostomia) and salivary gland hypofunction [100]. Multiple strategies have been proposed to lessen these manifestations and improve the patient's quality of life such as radioprotectors, preservation of salivary stem cells, or acupuncture [100]. Other surrounding structures may also be damaged by the radiotherapy, which would cause other morbidities for the cancer patients such as pharyngitis, dysphagia, dysgeusia, and trismus. These issues are usually short-term and will disappear over time [100]. However, mandibular osteoradionecrosis is a lifetime sequelae, which is often induced by prolonged and severe doses of radiation, poor dental health, post-treatment extraction, and oral trauma [101][102][103]. Other interventions such as chemotherapy, targeted therapy and hormonal therapy have often been used for treating recurrent and metastatic SGNs. The application of these systemic interventions is meant to relieve the cancerous-related symptoms and slow down the disease progression rate; however, there is still insufficient documentation on whether these managements could minimize the mortality rate [104]. While chemotherapy has been well-documented to result in numerous side effects to the patients such as hair loss, nausea, diarrhea, easy bleeding, and a high chance of infections [105], the results from targeted and hormonal interventions are still too restricted to report any concomitant effects [106]. In conclusion, further clinical trials with a combination of different therapies are imperative in the search for optimum treatments of SGNs.
