# Risk and Financial Management Review Order Routing Decisions for a Fragmented Market: A Review

CorpusID: 244372299 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2de198a7c707df3bc30111a7155dec9aede62a42](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2de198a7c707df3bc30111a7155dec9aede62a42)

Fields: Economics, Business, Medicine

## (s3) The Conequences of the Market Fragmentation
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) The equilibrium in the early theoretical market microstructure studies does not incorporate the multiple venue consideration. Early theoretical studies, such as the multimarkets strategic trading model by Chowdhry and Nanda (1991) and the limit order auction markets model by Glosten (1994), assume that the liquidity supply is competitive. Therefore, combined with the order matching system and large tick size, these models imply that a fragmented market should not affect the quotes. However, many empirical studies in the same period disagreed with the theoretical suggestions. For instance, Easley et al. (1996) and Hasbrouck (1995) observe that different markets obtain significant differences in information contents of order flow, hence arguing that the market fragmentation impacts market quality. Still, the theoretical predictions and empirical findings on market fragmentation are mixed. The conclusions about fragmentation on market quality are diverse and differ according to the factors considered.
## (s4) The Conequences of the Market Fragmentation
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) The equilibrium in the early theoretical market microstructure studies does not incorporate the multiple venue consideration. Early theoretical studies, such as the multimarkets strategic trading model by Chowdhry and Nanda (1991) and the limit order auction markets model by Glosten (1994), assume that the liquidity supply is competitive. Therefore, combined with the order matching system and large tick size, these models imply that a fragmented market should not affect the quotes. However, many empirical studies in the same period disagreed with the theoretical suggestions. For instance, Easley et al. (1996) and Hasbrouck (1995) observe that different markets obtain significant differences in information contents of order flow, hence arguing that the market fragmentation impacts market quality. Still, the theoretical predictions and empirical findings on market fragmentation are mixed. The conclusions about fragmentation on market quality are diverse and differ according to the factors considered.
## (s24) Trading Technologies
Number of References: 4

(p24.0) The technology innovation on trading speed significantly reduces the latency of information transmission and execution. In this section, we will start with the literature on the fragmentation with trading technology innovation and briefly discuss the theoretical prediction and empirical studies about the impact of the technology on the exchanges 18 , namely speed competition and colocation, on the market quality. For a broad discussion on the impact of technology on the financial market, readers may refer to comprehensive reviews by McAleer et al. (2015) about econometrics with informatics and data mining and by Menkveld (2016) and Zaharudin et al. (2021) about HFT trading. Menkveld (2014) argues that both high-frequency trading (HFT) and market fragmentation resulted from technology innovation. With improved technology, search costs decrease, making the trading floor's operation more profitable, facilitating more venues to enter the market, thus increasing fragmentation. Technology innovation also lowers the information latency, along with the fragmented markets, makes HFT possible.
## (s26) Co-Location
Number of References: 4

(p26.0) With the development of technology and algorithm trading, introducing the colocation services by securities exchanges becomes necessary due to competition. Hau (2001) explains that traders located close to the financial center will have more information advantages than those who do not. The introduction of co-location allows an exchange to reduce latency further, attracts more algorithm trading volumes, and enhances liquidity (Aitken et al. 2017;Brogaard et al. 2015;Frino et al. 2014).
## (s29) Order Handling Rules in 1997
Number of References: 3

(p29.0) In order to promote the quote competition, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) implemented new order handling rules (OHRs) on NASDAQ's dealer market in 1997, requiring market makers to display customer limit orders in their quotes 19 . Barclay et al. (1999) and Weston (2000) show that implementing OHRs reduced spreads and dealers' rent, suggesting improved market quality. However, Rhee and Tang (2013) argue that, in the long-term, forcing quote competition by policy results in dealers altering their competition strategy from quote competition to payment for order flow competition. They observe a weaker correlation between the trading volume and quote competitiveness after the implementation of the OHRs.
