# Coupled nitrogen transformation and carbon sink in the karst aquatic system: a review

CorpusID: 244887740 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/75452c49e728adb6173ff9b92604171fce588507](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/75452c49e728adb6173ff9b92604171fce588507)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s3) Excessive input of nitrogen (N) in karst water
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) Intensive agriculture and urbanization have led to the excessive input of N into the soil and further increased the amount of nitrate (NO 3 À ) in water (Xin et al. 2019), as well as changed the N cycle process in the aquatic ecosystem. Human activities have delivered 64 Tg N/yr to rivers and streams in the 20th century, which doubled that in the 19th century (34 Tg N/yr) (Beusen et al. 2016). It has been shown that the cycling of C and N in karst aquatic systems is closely related to each other, as coupled C-N cycling is involved in the transformation of DIC into dissolved organic carbon (DOC) . The increasing anthropogenic atmospheric CO 2 emissions result in a progressive increase in N limitation in plants. C sequestration and increased atmospheric CO 2 concentrations would lower terrestrial N availability and lead to decreases in N flux to the atmosphere and N deposition to aquatic ecosystems. As industrial and agricultural discharge drives a sharp increase in anthropogenic N emissions, the magnitude of N from this anthropogenic input will likely become large enough to sustain similar conditions of ecosystem N availability (McLauchlan et al. 2013). The elevated DIC concentrations in karst water may also enhance the aquatic photosynthetic uptake of DIC (Liu et al. 2010b and then may promote N translation. However, the interactions between N translation and CO 2 absorption in karst aquatic ecosystems have not been well depicted.
## (s11) N cycle processes
Number of References: 5

(p11.0) In aquatic environments, N was composed by organic and inorganic N (Nie et al. 2018). The organic nitrogen is divided into dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) and particulate organic nitrogen (PON), depending on whether it can pass through a 0.2-μm filter ( Jørgensen 2009). DON includes a variety of organic molecules and compounds, ranging from small molecules like urea and amino acids, to peptides and proteins, while PON includes both dead OM and living organisms that are larger than 0.2 μm (Jørgensen 2009). The inorganic nitrogen in aquatic ecosystems includes dissolved N 2 gas, oxidized ions such as nitrate (NO 3 À ), nitrite (NO 2 À ), ammonium ion (NH 4 þ ), and ammonia gas (NH 3 ) (Howarth 2009). The most frequently detected mineral N fractions in water are NO 3 À and NH 4 þ , which are also the dominant components of N produced by human activities (Beusen et al. 2016).
## (s12) N cycle characteristics in karst area
Number of References: 3

(p12.0) Due to the unique hydrochemistry of karst water (such as high Ca 2þ content, high pH, and high DIC concentrations), the N cycle characteristics in karst areas are different from those in non-karst areas. In the perspective of the N cycle, the alkalinity and high DIC contents in karst areas can inhibit the heterotrophic denitrification and mineralization processes, which determine the karst aquatic environment as an N sink. During nitrification, the oxidation of every ammonium ion produces two protons worth of acidity and makes the environment more acidic (Howarth 2009). Therefore, the alkaline environment in karst water is beneficial to neutralizing the acid generated by nitrification and further promotes nitrification. However, the denitrification process is opposite to nitrification. Every nitrate ion consumed during denitrification consumes one proton of acidity, and thus, this process tends to raise the pH of the environment (Howarth 2009). Consequently, the inherent alkalinity of karst water will inhibit the denitrification reaction. Furthermore, the high DIC/N ratios in karst water can inhibit the gross mineralization because microbes immobilize rather than mineralize N to maintain the stoichiometric ratio of DIC/N in their biomass (Xin et al. 2019).
## (s15) High carbon sink rate in carbonate area
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) As shown in Table 3, the range of carbon sink rate in carbonate area was 1.54-73 tC/km 2 /yr, while in silicate area the range of this value was 0.02-8.0 tC/km 2 /yr. The annual average C sequestration flux of limestone weathering in China was estimated to be 4.28-5.02 tC/km 2 /yr ). The C sinks produced by carbonate weathering and the 'biological C pump' in the Li River basin were 12.17 and 2.24 tC/km 2 /yr, respectively (Sun et al. 2021a(Sun et al. , 2021b. The average amount of CO 2 consumed by C sinks in karst basins around the world (8.5 tC/km 2 /yr) was about three times higher than that in non-karst basins (2.86 tC/km 2 /yr). In karst water, the C sink is enhanced by N translation, as the concentration of dissolved CO 2 was decreased dramatically (about 75%) due to the increase of NO 3 À in the Yangtze River . Therefore, in the karst basin, the transformation of C and N by aquatic phototrophs was coupled.
