# Updates on techniques and technology to optimize external ventricular drain placement: A review of the literature

CorpusID: 245856426 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5892b342da6e95bfb3d9c00af730611563f19d1a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5892b342da6e95bfb3d9c00af730611563f19d1a)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s2) Techniques
Number of References: 44

(p2.0) Given that EVDs are often placed under emergent conditions, and that incorrect catheter positioning is responsible for roughly two thirds of non-infectious complications [19], it is important to attain quick EVD placement without sacrificing accuracy and functionality. The most commonly used placement technique involves a twist-drill burr hole and EVD insertion at the Kocher's point, located 2.5 cm lateral from midline and 1 cm anterior to the coronal suture [20]. This point, which aims to avoid the primary motor cortex of the frontal lobe as well as the superior sagittal sinus, is selected on the right side to avoid dominant hemisphere language areas.

(p2.1) Reported accuracy of EVD placement has been found to range widely from 7% to 45.9% [4,[20][21][22][23], likely due to both inaccurate placement as a multitude of factors can influence accurate placement (such as catheter angle variation) and varying definitions of target EVD placement accuracy. Authors who define an accurate EVD as placed within the foramen of Monro, will likely report significantly lower accuracy than if target placement is defined as within a ventricle with adequate drainage of CSF. O'Leary and colleagues defined the foramen Monro as a point of accuracy and compared angular variation between freehand methods to a technique using the Ghajar Guide ( Fig. 1) [19]. The Ghajar Guide, invented in 1985, is a rigid tool that promotes a fast and perpendicular burr-hole entry into the frontal horn of the lateral ventricle [24]. In O'Leary's prospective study of 49 ventriculostomies for hydrocephalus, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and other causes of increased intracranial pressure, postoperative CT scans were used to compare EVD placement accuracy between Ghajar Guide and freehand technique groups [19]. While the Ghajar Guide technique was associated with fewer placement passes, on average, than freehand techniques, these results were not statistically significant. Furthermore, EVD placement utilizing the Ghajar Guide resulted in catheter tip placement significantly closer to the foramen of Monro than using the freehand technique, indicating an increase in accuracy. One drawback of the Ghajar guide is that it assumes normal anatomical position of the ventricular system; therefore, it is less accurate when pathology such as a neoplasm, hematoma, or cerebral edema causes a ventricular midline shift. However, a recent case series on the next-generation adjustable Ghajar guide claims the adjustable nature of the guide can accommodate midline shift if detected by neurologic imaging, however, this study excluded patients with midline shift [25]. These studies suggest that the Ghajar guide provides improved placement compared to freehand techniques, and that it could also assist neurosurgical trainees in learning proper EVD placement.

(p2.2) Given that EVDs are often placed under emergent conditions, and that incorrect catheter positioning is responsible for roughly two thirds of non-infectious complications [19], it is important to attain quick EVD placement without sacrificing accuracy and functionality. The most commonly used placement technique involves a twist-drill burr hole and EVD insertion at the Kocher's point, located 2.5 cm lateral from midline and 1 cm anterior to the coronal suture [20]. This point, which aims to avoid the primary motor cortex of the frontal lobe as well as the superior sagittal sinus, is selected on the right side to avoid dominant hemisphere language areas.

(p2.3) Reported accuracy of EVD placement has been found to range widely from 7% to 45.9% [4,[20][21][22][23], likely due to both inaccurate placement as a multitude of factors can influence accurate placement (such as catheter angle variation) and varying definitions of target EVD placement accuracy. Authors who define an accurate EVD as placed within the foramen of Monro, will likely report significantly lower accuracy than if target placement is defined as within a ventricle with adequate drainage of CSF. O'Leary and colleagues defined the foramen Monro as a point of accuracy and compared angular variation between freehand methods to a technique using the Ghajar Guide ( Fig. 1) [19]. The Ghajar Guide, invented in 1985, is a rigid tool that promotes a fast and perpendicular burr-hole entry into the frontal horn of the lateral ventricle [24]. In O'Leary's prospective study of 49 ventriculostomies for hydrocephalus, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and other causes of increased intracranial pressure, postoperative CT scans were used to compare EVD placement accuracy between Ghajar Guide and freehand technique groups [19]. While the Ghajar Guide technique was associated with fewer placement passes, on average, than freehand techniques, these results were not statistically significant. Furthermore, EVD placement utilizing the Ghajar Guide resulted in catheter tip placement significantly closer to the foramen of Monro than using the freehand technique, indicating an increase in accuracy. One drawback of the Ghajar guide is that it assumes normal anatomical position of the ventricular system; therefore, it is less accurate when pathology such as a neoplasm, hematoma, or cerebral edema causes a ventricular midline shift. However, a recent case series on the next-generation adjustable Ghajar guide claims the adjustable nature of the guide can accommodate midline shift if detected by neurologic imaging, however, this study excluded patients with midline shift [25]. These studies suggest that the Ghajar guide provides improved placement compared to freehand techniques, and that it could also assist neurosurgical trainees in learning proper EVD placement.
## (s4) Resident training and simulators
Number of References: 24

(p4.0) An alternative means of improving EVD placement is through early and widespread implementation of formal resident training and use of EVD simulators. EVD placement is a common procedure often learned by residents during the first two years of postgraduate training. Simulation based training, via virtual reality and physical models, has been shown to accelerate the learning curve and improve residents' skills in a realistic, yet safe environment [42]. There are several training tools that have been developed including ImmersiveTouch (ImmersiveTouch, Chicago, Illinois, USA), and other physical models. Since 2006, the American Association of Neurological Surgeons' annual simulation competition, "Top Gun," features various simulated procedures including EVD placement, while the competition provides neurosurgical trainees with an engaging training experience.

(p4.1) The ImmersiveTouch system is among the more popularly used tools to simulate EVD placement. This system is an augmented virtual reality system that combines real-time haptic feedback with a head-and-hand tracking system and a high-resolution stereoscopic display (Fig. 7) [43]. Yudkowsky et al. studied the impact of simulation-based practice using a library of virtual brains on residents' performance in simulated and live surgical ventriculostomies [44]. Using CT scans of actual patients with a range of anatomies (normal, shifted, and compressed ventricles), virtual brains were developed for the ImmersiveTouch system. Resident performance improved in ventriculostomy on the simulator and in live procedures after intervention. This system provides an accurate and beneficial training environment for EVD placement, as residents reported the simulations felt realistic. Notably, residents perceived improvements in directing the catheter, sensed pressure change upon entering the ventricle, and gauged how far to advance the catheter within the ventricle to reach the target [44]. ImmersiveTouch has been adapted for use in ventricles with midline shift as well [44][45][46]. Schirmer and colleagues designed a virtual reality trauma-based Reprinted by permission from BK medical and Journal of Neurosurgery [33]. simulation module to teach ventriculostomy placement in the management of traumatic brain injury [47]. They found improvements in anatomy knowledge (P < .04), burr hole placement (P < .03), final catheter location (P = .05), and procedure time (P < .004) following ventriculostomy simulation.

(p4.2) Physical models have been utilized for resident training, as virtual reality systems are expensive and not easily accessible. Using 3D printing and molding technologies, Tai et al. developed a physical model with realistic haptic and visual feedback to simulate EVD placement (Fig. 8) [48]. Their model was designed to be a comprehensive training tool that includes all of the steps involved in EVD placement, including identifying surface anatomy, marking the skin, drilling the burr-hole, opening dura, passing the catheter into the ventricle, closing skin, and tunneling and anchoring the catheter. The model provides immediate visual reinforcement of a successful ventriculostomy, as model ventricles are filled with fluid to simulate CSF. This feature allows trainees to troubleshoot complications which may occur, such as catheter misplacement or occlusion, air locks, a low-pressure system, or catheter strangulation while placing anchoring sutures. These authors are conducting refinements following feedback from 17 surgeons before incorporating this simulator into a comprehensive curriculum to train residents [48].  Permission from Simulation in Healthcare pending acceptance of article for publication [44].
## (s10) Data Availability
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) Not applicable. Fig. 8. Three-dimensional printed models for simulation of ventriculostomy. Permission from Journal of Neurosurgery pending acceptance of article for publication [45].

(p10.1) Not applicable. Fig. 8. Three-dimensional printed models for simulation of ventriculostomy. Permission from Journal of Neurosurgery pending acceptance of article for publication [45].
## (s20) Techniques
Number of References: 44

(p20.0) Given that EVDs are often placed under emergent conditions, and that incorrect catheter positioning is responsible for roughly two thirds of non-infectious complications [19], it is important to attain quick EVD placement without sacrificing accuracy and functionality. The most commonly used placement technique involves a twist-drill burr hole and EVD insertion at the Kocher's point, located 2.5 cm lateral from midline and 1 cm anterior to the coronal suture [20]. This point, which aims to avoid the primary motor cortex of the frontal lobe as well as the superior sagittal sinus, is selected on the right side to avoid dominant hemisphere language areas.

(p20.1) Reported accuracy of EVD placement has been found to range widely from 7% to 45.9% [4,[20][21][22][23], likely due to both inaccurate placement as a multitude of factors can influence accurate placement (such as catheter angle variation) and varying definitions of target EVD placement accuracy. Authors who define an accurate EVD as placed within the foramen of Monro, will likely report significantly lower accuracy than if target placement is defined as within a ventricle with adequate drainage of CSF. O'Leary and colleagues defined the foramen Monro as a point of accuracy and compared angular variation between freehand methods to a technique using the Ghajar Guide ( Fig. 1) [19]. The Ghajar Guide, invented in 1985, is a rigid tool that promotes a fast and perpendicular burr-hole entry into the frontal horn of the lateral ventricle [24]. In O'Leary's prospective study of 49 ventriculostomies for hydrocephalus, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and other causes of increased intracranial pressure, postoperative CT scans were used to compare EVD placement accuracy between Ghajar Guide and freehand technique groups [19]. While the Ghajar Guide technique was associated with fewer placement passes, on average, than freehand techniques, these results were not statistically significant. Furthermore, EVD placement utilizing the Ghajar Guide resulted in catheter tip placement significantly closer to the foramen of Monro than using the freehand technique, indicating an increase in accuracy. One drawback of the Ghajar guide is that it assumes normal anatomical position of the ventricular system; therefore, it is less accurate when pathology such as a neoplasm, hematoma, or cerebral edema causes a ventricular midline shift. However, a recent case series on the next-generation adjustable Ghajar guide claims the adjustable nature of the guide can accommodate midline shift if detected by neurologic imaging, however, this study excluded patients with midline shift [25]. These studies suggest that the Ghajar guide provides improved placement compared to freehand techniques, and that it could also assist neurosurgical trainees in learning proper EVD placement.

(p20.2) Given that EVDs are often placed under emergent conditions, and that incorrect catheter positioning is responsible for roughly two thirds of non-infectious complications [19], it is important to attain quick EVD placement without sacrificing accuracy and functionality. The most commonly used placement technique involves a twist-drill burr hole and EVD insertion at the Kocher's point, located 2.5 cm lateral from midline and 1 cm anterior to the coronal suture [20]. This point, which aims to avoid the primary motor cortex of the frontal lobe as well as the superior sagittal sinus, is selected on the right side to avoid dominant hemisphere language areas.

(p20.3) Reported accuracy of EVD placement has been found to range widely from 7% to 45.9% [4,[20][21][22][23], likely due to both inaccurate placement as a multitude of factors can influence accurate placement (such as catheter angle variation) and varying definitions of target EVD placement accuracy. Authors who define an accurate EVD as placed within the foramen of Monro, will likely report significantly lower accuracy than if target placement is defined as within a ventricle with adequate drainage of CSF. O'Leary and colleagues defined the foramen Monro as a point of accuracy and compared angular variation between freehand methods to a technique using the Ghajar Guide ( Fig. 1) [19]. The Ghajar Guide, invented in 1985, is a rigid tool that promotes a fast and perpendicular burr-hole entry into the frontal horn of the lateral ventricle [24]. In O'Leary's prospective study of 49 ventriculostomies for hydrocephalus, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and other causes of increased intracranial pressure, postoperative CT scans were used to compare EVD placement accuracy between Ghajar Guide and freehand technique groups [19]. While the Ghajar Guide technique was associated with fewer placement passes, on average, than freehand techniques, these results were not statistically significant. Furthermore, EVD placement utilizing the Ghajar Guide resulted in catheter tip placement significantly closer to the foramen of Monro than using the freehand technique, indicating an increase in accuracy. One drawback of the Ghajar guide is that it assumes normal anatomical position of the ventricular system; therefore, it is less accurate when pathology such as a neoplasm, hematoma, or cerebral edema causes a ventricular midline shift. However, a recent case series on the next-generation adjustable Ghajar guide claims the adjustable nature of the guide can accommodate midline shift if detected by neurologic imaging, however, this study excluded patients with midline shift [25]. These studies suggest that the Ghajar guide provides improved placement compared to freehand techniques, and that it could also assist neurosurgical trainees in learning proper EVD placement.
## (s22) Resident training and simulators
Number of References: 24

(p22.0) An alternative means of improving EVD placement is through early and widespread implementation of formal resident training and use of EVD simulators. EVD placement is a common procedure often learned by residents during the first two years of postgraduate training. Simulation based training, via virtual reality and physical models, has been shown to accelerate the learning curve and improve residents' skills in a realistic, yet safe environment [42]. There are several training tools that have been developed including ImmersiveTouch (ImmersiveTouch, Chicago, Illinois, USA), and other physical models. Since 2006, the American Association of Neurological Surgeons' annual simulation competition, "Top Gun," features various simulated procedures including EVD placement, while the competition provides neurosurgical trainees with an engaging training experience.

(p22.1) The ImmersiveTouch system is among the more popularly used tools to simulate EVD placement. This system is an augmented virtual reality system that combines real-time haptic feedback with a head-and-hand tracking system and a high-resolution stereoscopic display (Fig. 7) [43]. Yudkowsky et al. studied the impact of simulation-based practice using a library of virtual brains on residents' performance in simulated and live surgical ventriculostomies [44]. Using CT scans of actual patients with a range of anatomies (normal, shifted, and compressed ventricles), virtual brains were developed for the ImmersiveTouch system. Resident performance improved in ventriculostomy on the simulator and in live procedures after intervention. This system provides an accurate and beneficial training environment for EVD placement, as residents reported the simulations felt realistic. Notably, residents perceived improvements in directing the catheter, sensed pressure change upon entering the ventricle, and gauged how far to advance the catheter within the ventricle to reach the target [44]. ImmersiveTouch has been adapted for use in ventricles with midline shift as well [44][45][46]. Schirmer and colleagues designed a virtual reality trauma-based Reprinted by permission from BK medical and Journal of Neurosurgery [33]. simulation module to teach ventriculostomy placement in the management of traumatic brain injury [47]. They found improvements in anatomy knowledge (P < .04), burr hole placement (P < .03), final catheter location (P = .05), and procedure time (P < .004) following ventriculostomy simulation.

(p22.2) Physical models have been utilized for resident training, as virtual reality systems are expensive and not easily accessible. Using 3D printing and molding technologies, Tai et al. developed a physical model with realistic haptic and visual feedback to simulate EVD placement (Fig. 8) [48]. Their model was designed to be a comprehensive training tool that includes all of the steps involved in EVD placement, including identifying surface anatomy, marking the skin, drilling the burr-hole, opening dura, passing the catheter into the ventricle, closing skin, and tunneling and anchoring the catheter. The model provides immediate visual reinforcement of a successful ventriculostomy, as model ventricles are filled with fluid to simulate CSF. This feature allows trainees to troubleshoot complications which may occur, such as catheter misplacement or occlusion, air locks, a low-pressure system, or catheter strangulation while placing anchoring sutures. These authors are conducting refinements following feedback from 17 surgeons before incorporating this simulator into a comprehensive curriculum to train residents [48].  Permission from Simulation in Healthcare pending acceptance of article for publication [44].
## (s28) Data Availability
Number of References: 4

(p28.0) Not applicable. Fig. 8. Three-dimensional printed models for simulation of ventriculostomy. Permission from Journal of Neurosurgery pending acceptance of article for publication [45].

(p28.1) Not applicable. Fig. 8. Three-dimensional printed models for simulation of ventriculostomy. Permission from Journal of Neurosurgery pending acceptance of article for publication [45].
