# Effectiveness of Pharmacotherapy for Depression after Adult Traumatic Brain Injury: an Umbrella Review

CorpusID: 249644514 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dbfa60a2e3e4ac428735d9f5428585f74491c1d1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dbfa60a2e3e4ac428735d9f5428585f74491c1d1)

Fields: Medicine

## (s24) Primary Studies Included in Reviews
Number of References: 2

(p24.0) Twenty-one primary studies published between 1985 and 2017 were included across the systematic reviews (Table 2). We only extracted from primary studies that met our inclusion criteria, resulting in a total of between 1 to 15 primary studies per review (Mean = 6.41). The overlap between reviews, that is the extent to which primary studies in the reviews were the same, was determined by calculating the corrected covered area (CCA) (Pieper et al., 2014). The CCA was determined to be 0.27, corresponding to a "slight" overlap (Pieper et al., 2014). The overall sample size of TBI participants and healthy controls included in reviews was 30 to 650 participants (Mean = 214.80; Table 3).
## (s49) Pharmacotherapy -Multiple Drug Classes
Number of References: 3

(p49.0) Depression Three reviews with intermediate to low risk of bias provided five meta-analyses pooling across multiple drug classes to examine the effects of pharmacotherapy more broadly on post TBI depression (Beedham et al., 2020;Slowinski et al., 2019;Salter et al., 2016). The single control-comparison meta-analysis from a review with intermediate risk of bias was the only analysis to conclude not in favour of pharmacotherapy. The TBI severity in that meta-analysis was not reported. The four meta-analyses finding in favour of pharmacotherapy reported moderate to large effect sizes, were all pre-post analyses and were drawn from reviews with intermediate (n = 2) and low (n = 2) risk of bias. TBI severity was only provided for two of these meta-analyses, for which one was mild to moderate and the one was mild to severe.
## (s64) TBI Specific Outcome Measure
Number of References: 5

(p64.0) Use of TBI-appropriate measures is also critical. It is likely that the use of sub-optimal measures in the primary studies contributed to mixed findings. A clear impact of this was seen in the evidence for sertraline and methylphenidate, in which the measures used changed the meta-analyses conclusions (Peppel et al., 2020). As discussed above, measures which include TBI sequalae may overstate depression at baseline, and underestimate change over time, as the TBI related sequalae are unlikely to be impacted by the pharmacotherapy (Peppel et al., 2020). Measures such as the HADS, which purposefully omit items which are likely to overlap with symptoms of common medical disorders, are recommended as they may provide a more accurate means of detecting post TBI depression (Barker-Collo et al., 2015;Singh et al., 2018). Despite this, the HADS was not used in any primary study. Rather, the HAM-D was the most common measurement tool used within the primary studies, despite evidence suggesting it is not ideal for TBI samples and less responsive to treatment than other depression measures (Caplan et al., 2016).
## (s67) Placebo Effect
Number of References: 10

(p67.0) The non-significant results for the control-comparison meta-analyses may have been contributed to, in part, by a placebo effect in the control group. Such placebo effects have been seen in other recent TBI pharmacotherapy studies (Hammond et al., 2014(Hammond et al., , 2015(Hammond et al., , 2018 and are common in depression trials more broadly. Factors driving the placebo effect include therapeutic alliance, participation in a research study, anxiety reduction and hope, as well as placebo neurobiology including top-down cortical regulation, reward system activation and dopaminergic and serotoninergic neurotransmission (Polich et al., 2018).

(p67.1) It has been suggested that TBI survivors may be highly responsive to placebos, through both neurobiological pathways and psychosocial factors (Polich et al., 2018). Interpersonal factors and access to healthcare providers may be particularly salient for TBI survivors who may be experiencing social isolation particularly in the chronic post injury period where access to services may have reduced (Polich et al., 2018;Hammond et al., 2015;Lefkovits et al., 2020). From a neurobiological perspective, there is overlap in some of the dysregulated systems post TBI that are targeted in pharmacological treatment and those implicated in the placebo response, including the dopaminergic and serotonergic pathways (Polich et al., 2018). As a result, those taking a placebo may experience similar activation of these systems, while for those in the treatment group, placebo effects may either act alone to drive symptom improvement, or act synergistically with the active drug to promote an even greater effect (Polich et al., 2018).
## (s71) Recommendations for Systematic Reviews
Number of References: 11

(p71.0) Generalizability of results from reviews would be improved by including clear details of participant characteristics including age, gender, injury severity and time since injury. Analyses should be stratified by injury severity where possible. Although it is acknowledged that depressive disorders may occur after TBI of any severity, metabolism of medication may be impacted by injury severity (Levine, 2013;Lo et al., 2001).

(p71.1) It is of critical importance for primary studies to measure harms, and for systematic reviews to include these as part of their primary outcomes. Harms were not mentioned in half of the reviews, and only six commented on study-drop outs, which is an important indicator of drug acceptability. Although harms data from non-TBI populations can provide useful preliminary guidance, harms must be studied within TBI populations given the possible impact of abnormal brain function on the metabolism of drugs (Levine, 2013;Lo et al., 2001;Waldron-Perrine et al., 2008). Harms may also be more burdensome for TBI survivors, due to the overlap in TBI related sequalae and common side effects of anti-depressants such as sleep problems and sexual dysfunction (Castriotta et al., 2007;Mathias & Alvaro, 2012;Hibbard et al., 2000;Ponsford, 2003;Downing et al., 2013;Ferguson, 2001).
## (s73) Pharmacotherapy
Number of References: 6

(p73.0) Although the findings of this umbrella review do not provide support for any specific drug class, they do show that post TBI depression is a treatment responsive condition in at least some individuals. Lack of significant findings may have been contributed to by small pooled samples, the outcome measures used, short treatment duration, low methodological quality and low severity of depression at baseline. While the evidence base develops for specific drugs, this umbrella review suggests that a trial of anti-depressants may be sensible with careful monitoring of harms objective assessment of depressive symptoms, and discontinuation if no benefit is observed. The selection of which antidepressant to prescribe should be made considering the likelihood of responsiveness to the treatment and vulnerability to the adverse events associated with that drug for each individual (Carvalho et al., 2016). Once a patient has been started on an anti-depressant they may benefit from an alternative or adjunctive medication if the agent prescribed first does not achieve a depression remission (Silverberg & Panenka, 2019).

(p73.1) One final consideration is the length of treatment. Research in non-TBI populations has shown that ongoing anti-depressant use may only be appropriate for people with high risk of relapse, with the optimal treatment period not yet known for those deemed at low risk of relapse (Geddes et al., 2003). Treatment duration must also be balanced with the risk of adverse events, with non-TBI evidence suggesting that greater duration of treatment with anti-depressants is associated with longevity of adverse events (Carvalho et al., 2016). On the other hand, premature discontinuation of therapy may give the impression of less than optimal response to treatment in an individual who might otherwise show treatment gains. This may be particularly problematic in TBI samples who may require different medication management (i.e., different dosage, frequency) to achieve a treatment response as compared non-TBI samples (Morgan et al., 2012;Dinan & Mobayed, 1992). Adequate followup with symptom monitoring and drug augmentation as required is recommended.
