# CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND ITS IMPACT ON ORGANISATIONAL PERFORMANCE IN THE FOURTH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION: A SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 246696627 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/892d1d569e1b076432ca08e52a12f180767b0d51](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/892d1d569e1b076432ca08e52a12f180767b0d51)

Fields: Economics, Business

## (s5) Resource theories
Number of References: 16

(p5.0) The resource theories are namely the resource-based view theory and resource dependence theory. The resource dependence theory is based on the notion that board members whose role is vested in advising and counselling the company owners (Zahra & Pearce, 1989), provide experience and expertise, facilitate better access to resources outside the company, and influence strategic decisions (Hillman & Dalziel, 2003). Resource-based view theory posit that firms stand to benefit and sustain competitive advantages by constructing and employing valuable resources and capabilities which are outside the firm's environment (Collins, 2021;Zawawi et al., 2016). The two theories are discussed below.

(p5.1) The resource theories are namely the resource-based view theory and resource dependence theory. The resource dependence theory is based on the notion that board members whose role is vested in advising and counselling the company owners (Zahra & Pearce, 1989), provide experience and expertise, facilitate better access to resources outside the company, and influence strategic decisions (Hillman & Dalziel, 2003). Resource-based view theory posit that firms stand to benefit and sustain competitive advantages by constructing and employing valuable resources and capabilities which are outside the firm's environment (Collins, 2021;Zawawi et al., 2016). The two theories are discussed below.
## (s8) Legitimacy theory
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) Suchman (1995) defines legitimacy as "a generalized perception or assumption that the actions of an entity are desirable, proper, or appropriate within some socially constructed system of norms, values, beliefs, and definitions". Legitimacy theory proposes the concept of a "social contract" existing between organisations and society at large, which further helps in the environmental and social disclosures (Choi, Lee, & Psaros, 2013). Firms convince stakeholders that their activities are in line with stakeholders' expectations concerning carbon emissions to legitimise themselves and to keep the social contract (Kılıç & Kuzey, 2019; Yunus, Evangeline, & Abhayawansa, 2016). By doing so, the company asserts itself in the community as a responsible and legitimate company that is doing well for society.

(p8.1) Suchman (1995) defines legitimacy as "a generalized perception or assumption that the actions of an entity are desirable, proper, or appropriate within some socially constructed system of norms, values, beliefs, and definitions". Legitimacy theory proposes the concept of a "social contract" existing between organisations and society at large, which further helps in the environmental and social disclosures (Choi, Lee, & Psaros, 2013). Firms convince stakeholders that their activities are in line with stakeholders' expectations concerning carbon emissions to legitimise themselves and to keep the social contract (Kılıç & Kuzey, 2019; Yunus, Evangeline, & Abhayawansa, 2016). By doing so, the company asserts itself in the community as a responsible and legitimate company that is doing well for society.
## (s21) Topics discussed
Number of References: 4

(p21.0) Several topics are discussed in corporate governance and organisational performance. These range from internal corporate governance, which includes board activities, number of board members, gender diversity, racial diversity, CEO duality, board meetings, board committees, board compensation, board qualifications, board experience, board independence, and board leadership (Abdullah, 2004 Sengupta, Ruj, & Bit, 2020), however, beneficiaries are those that enjoy early adoption. They lead change and others follow. The Fourth Industrial Revolution promises fundamental changes in the economy and business with enormous profits to be made. Companies that adopt these gradual changes will become learning organisations of the future which will change the manner we see the world very shortly. It will change all aspects of life and how business is conducted. Firm performance and corporate governance must therefore evolve to accept these fundamental changes in the structure of the economy.

(p21.1) Several topics are discussed in corporate governance and organisational performance. These range from internal corporate governance, which includes board activities, number of board members, gender diversity, racial diversity, CEO duality, board meetings, board committees, board compensation, board qualifications, board experience, board independence, and board leadership (Abdullah, 2004 Sengupta, Ruj, & Bit, 2020), however, beneficiaries are those that enjoy early adoption. They lead change and others follow. The Fourth Industrial Revolution promises fundamental changes in the economy and business with enormous profits to be made. Companies that adopt these gradual changes will become learning organisations of the future which will change the manner we see the world very shortly. It will change all aspects of life and how business is conducted. Firm performance and corporate governance must therefore evolve to accept these fundamental changes in the structure of the economy.
## (s38) Resource theories
Number of References: 16

(p38.0) The resource theories are namely the resource-based view theory and resource dependence theory. The resource dependence theory is based on the notion that board members whose role is vested in advising and counselling the company owners (Zahra & Pearce, 1989), provide experience and expertise, facilitate better access to resources outside the company, and influence strategic decisions (Hillman & Dalziel, 2003). Resource-based view theory posit that firms stand to benefit and sustain competitive advantages by constructing and employing valuable resources and capabilities which are outside the firm's environment (Collins, 2021;Zawawi et al., 2016). The two theories are discussed below.

(p38.1) The resource theories are namely the resource-based view theory and resource dependence theory. The resource dependence theory is based on the notion that board members whose role is vested in advising and counselling the company owners (Zahra & Pearce, 1989), provide experience and expertise, facilitate better access to resources outside the company, and influence strategic decisions (Hillman & Dalziel, 2003). Resource-based view theory posit that firms stand to benefit and sustain competitive advantages by constructing and employing valuable resources and capabilities which are outside the firm's environment (Collins, 2021;Zawawi et al., 2016). The two theories are discussed below.
## (s41) Legitimacy theory
Number of References: 4

(p41.0) Suchman (1995) defines legitimacy as "a generalized perception or assumption that the actions of an entity are desirable, proper, or appropriate within some socially constructed system of norms, values, beliefs, and definitions". Legitimacy theory proposes the concept of a "social contract" existing between organisations and society at large, which further helps in the environmental and social disclosures (Choi, Lee, & Psaros, 2013). Firms convince stakeholders that their activities are in line with stakeholders' expectations concerning carbon emissions to legitimise themselves and to keep the social contract (Kılıç & Kuzey, 2019; Yunus, Evangeline, & Abhayawansa, 2016). By doing so, the company asserts itself in the community as a responsible and legitimate company that is doing well for society.

(p41.1) Suchman (1995) defines legitimacy as "a generalized perception or assumption that the actions of an entity are desirable, proper, or appropriate within some socially constructed system of norms, values, beliefs, and definitions". Legitimacy theory proposes the concept of a "social contract" existing between organisations and society at large, which further helps in the environmental and social disclosures (Choi, Lee, & Psaros, 2013). Firms convince stakeholders that their activities are in line with stakeholders' expectations concerning carbon emissions to legitimise themselves and to keep the social contract (Kılıç & Kuzey, 2019; Yunus, Evangeline, & Abhayawansa, 2016). By doing so, the company asserts itself in the community as a responsible and legitimate company that is doing well for society.
## (s54) Topics discussed
Number of References: 4

(p54.0) Several topics are discussed in corporate governance and organisational performance. These range from internal corporate governance, which includes board activities, number of board members, gender diversity, racial diversity, CEO duality, board meetings, board committees, board compensation, board qualifications, board experience, board independence, and board leadership (Abdullah, 2004 Sengupta, Ruj, & Bit, 2020), however, beneficiaries are those that enjoy early adoption. They lead change and others follow. The Fourth Industrial Revolution promises fundamental changes in the economy and business with enormous profits to be made. Companies that adopt these gradual changes will become learning organisations of the future which will change the manner we see the world very shortly. It will change all aspects of life and how business is conducted. Firm performance and corporate governance must therefore evolve to accept these fundamental changes in the structure of the economy.

(p54.1) Several topics are discussed in corporate governance and organisational performance. These range from internal corporate governance, which includes board activities, number of board members, gender diversity, racial diversity, CEO duality, board meetings, board committees, board compensation, board qualifications, board experience, board independence, and board leadership (Abdullah, 2004 Sengupta, Ruj, & Bit, 2020), however, beneficiaries are those that enjoy early adoption. They lead change and others follow. The Fourth Industrial Revolution promises fundamental changes in the economy and business with enormous profits to be made. Companies that adopt these gradual changes will become learning organisations of the future which will change the manner we see the world very shortly. It will change all aspects of life and how business is conducted. Firm performance and corporate governance must therefore evolve to accept these fundamental changes in the structure of the economy.
