# plants Influence of Drought and Salt Stress on Durum Wheat Grain Quality and Composition: A Review

CorpusID: 244824965 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3bcf97a73c77382e97373f9efafbfac9932ea3fd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3bcf97a73c77382e97373f9efafbfac9932ea3fd)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction Crop Relevance, Geographic Distribution and Main Quality Traits
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) Durum wheat (Triticum turgidum L. ssp. durum) is a tetraploid (AABB) cereal species mainly cultivated in North America, Mediterranean basin, and Australia. Worldwide production is generally comprised in the range of 35-40 million tons per year. The EU is the top producer in the world, whereas Italy is the leading European country in durum wheat production, followed by France and Turkey (International Grains Council, https://www. igc.int/en/default.aspx, accessed on 10 May 2021). Gluten obtained from durum wheat is generally strong, characterized by high tenacity and low extensibility, typical of semolina flour mainly used for the production of pasta and, in the Mediterranean area, for bread and couscous [1]. Durum wheat is one of the main sources of carbohydrates and proteins, in the Mediterranean diet, also containing dietary fiber and many bioactive components, which are beneficial for human health. The chemical composition of durum wheat kernel can influence both the technological and nutritional properties of the processed products. External pericarp (bran) mainly contains cellulose, minerals, vitamins, and fiber while germ represents 2-3% of seed; indeed, the main fraction is represented by endosperm, which is divided into aleuronic layer (monolayer of cells lost during milling) and amyloid endosperm which represents about 87-89% of the seed. Inside the latter there are mainly starch granules and storage proteins while in the aleuronic layer, proteins, fats, minerals, vitamins, sugars are contained [2]. Proteins are distributed in different percentages depending on the region of the grain, generally ranging from 8% to 20% of the entire grain. Wheat proteins have been classified according to their solubility in albumins (monomeric, soluble in water), globulins (monomeric, soluble in salt solution), gliadins (monomeric, soluble in alcohol), glutenins (soluble in dilute acid or alkali). Albumins and globulins have a structural/metabolic role; together gliadins and glutenins represent about 80% of total proteins in flour and they are the most important determinants of the functional properties of wheat flour. Dough properties depend on the balance between gliadin (contributing to dough viscosity) and glutenin (contributing to the strength and elasticity of dough). Gluten proteins are also known as prolamins for their high contents in proline and glutamine which together account for 30-50% of the total amino acids. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of individual prolamins has led to a classification based on primary-structure relationships. The three groups are: (a) high-molecular-weight (HMW) prolamins: the HMW glutenin subunits (HMW-GS); (b) sulfur-rich prolamins: the low-molecular-weight glutenin sub-units (LMWGS), α-gliadins, β-gliadins, and γ-gliadins; (c) sulfur-poor prolamins: ω-gliadins [3]. HMW-GS composition and LMW-GS (B-type) have a key role in determining technological performances on dough, especially in terms of tenacity for pasta-making [4].
