# micromachines An Overview of the Strategies for Tin Selenide Advancement in Thermoelectric Application

CorpusID: 245475343 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/75c6e060eaa79aff3e75b40bfc707509ab699356](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/75c6e060eaa79aff3e75b40bfc707509ab699356)

Fields: Materials Science, Physics, Medicine, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 9

(p0.0) Many vital concerns related to environmental degradation and depletion of energy resources provide renewable energy as the best approach to solve these problems. The approach reduces the use of fossil fuels that are responsible for the crisis. Given the demand for clean energy with high performance, there is a need to develop renewable green energy instruments to address the energy problems and prevent further environmental pollution [1,2]. Solar panels, fuel cells, thermal generators, and wind turbines have significantly been considered in the last several decades and have shown reliable power generation efficiency. Besides the aforementioned renewable energy technologies, TE is among current renewable energy technology that is quite attractive due to the technology's ability to directly convert between heat and electrical energy without moving components, fluids, or emitting greenhouse gases. As a result, it provides paths to silent, durable, clean, and green technology [3][4][5]. TE generators are environmentally stable and mechanically efficient electronic devices [6]. In addition, TE devices have high potential for energy conversion technologies in many fields, including aerospace, biomedical, air conditioning, power generators, and cooling devices [7]. However, thermoelectric generators (TEGs) are still immature, and many scientists are putting their efforts in enhancing efficiency through material modifications and/or device optimizations.

(p0.1) Many scientists have been working on the development of TE materials in recent years. For operating temperatures, TE materials are commonly divided into three groups [4,8], namely (a) low or near ambient TE materials (300 K-500 K), bismuth telluride (Bi 2 Te 3 ) and its
## (s5) Band Structure
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) SnSe studies on the optoelectronic properties and bandgap (Eg) show its applications in the optical field, i.e., as photovoltaic (PV) and photodetector [79]. Most IV-VI compounds have a narrow bandgap. Literatures disclosed that bulk SnSe has a direct Eg of 0.9 eV and indirect Eg of 1.30 eV, respectively. As a consequence of quantum confining, the direct bandgap of bulk is less than that of thin films [80,81]. Besides the Eg parameter, electronic structures, density of state (DOS) structure of the bands, and effective mass of SnSe-based materials, are strongly linked to their TE performance [82,83].
## (s6) Band Structure
Number of References: 5

(p6.0) SnSe studies on the optoelectronic properties and bandgap (Eg) show its applications in the optical field, i.e., as photovoltaic (PV) and photodetector [79]. Most IV-VI compounds have a narrow bandgap. Literatures disclosed that bulk SnSe has a direct Eg of 0.9 eV and indirect Eg of 1.30 eV, respectively. As a consequence of quantum confining, the direct bandgap of bulk is less than that of thin films [80,81]. Besides the Eg parameter, electronic structures, density of state (DOS) structure of the bands, and effective mass of SnSe-based materials, are strongly linked to their TE performance [82,83].
## (s14) Mechanical Alloying
Number of References: 4

(p14.0) Mechanical alloying, particularly in ball milling (BM), has received extensive interest in synthesizing nanoparticle powders [100] since it is simple. A homogenous SnSe product is produced by blending the SnSe powder precursors with a high-energy ball mill [82]. In BM, elemental powders or intermetallic compounds are placed into a container of balls made of stainless steel, tungsten carbides, or zirconia. During the process, powders are milled in the argon atmosphere to prevent oxidation. The powders would be subjected to various ball-to-ball and ball-to-wall collisions [101]. The powders are continuously cold-welded and shattered during ball milling, resulting in nanostructured domains [102]. Moreover, mechanical alloying has often been considered a process after melting.
## (s18) Advantages and Disadvantages of Synthesis and Post-treatment Synthesis Methods
Number of References: 8

(p18.0) From the literature discussed, many methods are used to fabricate SnSe crystals, including synthesis and sintering. Most of these methods require moderate and high temperatures to produce high-quality SnSe crystals for TE applications. However, each method has its pros and cons. Table 2 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of each method that was described in the literature. The details can be obtained from the cited references. • The lack of stoichiometry control [101]. • Materials can be hard to sinter [101,120]. [107][108][109] Hot pressing • Pressure increases density at a specific temperature and can be achieved in shorter periods and at lower temperatures than conventional sintering [125]. • Increase homogeneity in density, structure, and composition with increased processing stability [120].
## (s22) Strategies to Improve the Thermoelectric Performance of SnSe
Number of References: 11

(p22.0) The performance of a TE materials is dependent on the electrical conductivity, thermal conductivity, and Seebeck coefficient of the material. Enhanced zT values are generally the result of high power factor values combined with low thermal conductivity. Moreover, a high power factor comes from a high electrical conductivity and a high Seebeck coefficient. Furthermore, electrical conductivity is dependent on carrier mobility and carrier density, which is determined by the electronic structure. Meanwhile, the Seebeck coefficient depends on the gradient of DOS of the conduction band near the Fermi level [86]. The lattice thermal conductivity could be significantly suppressed through proper modulating of the material microstructure [133]. However, the electronic thermal conductivity still depends very much on the electronic structure [86]. Consequently, several methods were investigated and divided into three: increasing power factor, reducing thermal conductivity and retaining a high power factor, and reducing thermal conductivity to improve TE performance.

(p22.1) For TE materials, texturing and doping are two significant methods of enhancing the TE performance of polycrystalline SnSe [82]. Even though single crystals are thermally conductive than polycrystals [134], SnSe, in its single crystalline form, is not ideal for TE devices because of high production costs, poor cleaving properties, and special requirements of the crystal-growth process [135]. Thus, polycrystalline SnSe is a popular alternative candidate for practical applications because it is machinable and scalable [109]. The highest zT in pristine polycrystalline SnSe is considerably below its single crystalline counterpart. Polycrystalline samples have low carrier mobility, high anisotropic nature, and high thermal conductivity, due to the presence of Sn oxides [136,137]. Many researchers have concentrated on increasing the performance via form transitions, metal doping, and hole doping [138]. Doping is shown to be an efficient way to optimize the power factor by tuning the carrier concentration. Furthermore, doping can cause point defects and nano-precipitates to reduce lattice thermal conductivity [139].
## (s23) Enhancing the Power Factor
Number of References: 4

(p23.0) The undoped SnSe exhibits a carrier concentration of approximately 10 17 cm −3 [36], significantly lower than the optimum TE material (between 10 19 and 10 21 cm −3 ) [20,140]. Both intrinsic and extrinsic factors affect the TE materials' power factors. The intrinsic factors include doping elements solubility and band structure profiles near the Fermi stage. However, it is more apparent how power factors can also be improved via the extrinsic route by improving sample quality and optimizing the carrier concentration [2]. Then, chemical doping is used to increase carrier concentrations and boost SnSe TE performance.
## (s25) Reducing the Thermal Conductivity
Number of References: 16

(p25.0) TE performance can also be enhanced by reducing thermal conductivity. The intricate relation between TE parameters accentuates the lattice thermal conductivity as the only parameter independent of carrier concentration. Consequently, reducing lattice thermal conductivity is an effective strategy to gain high TE performance [92,141]. Table 4 summarizes the effect of thermal conductivity reductions and enhancement of zT for SnSe by dopants. Optimally, to minimize the lattice thermal conductivity that can be accomplished by combining many forms of scattering mechanism, a full-spectrum phonon scattering strategy for heat-carrying phonons across several frequencies is required [2]. One of the most effective lattice thermal conductivity reduction approaches is all-scale hierarchical architecture [141]. It is successfully implemented in many TE material systems with high lattice thermal conductivity, such as tin chalcogenides and lead chalcogenides. In the sample Cu 0.01 Sn 0.99 Se, the lattice thermal conductivity was 0.2 Wm −1 K −1 , and zT approximately 1.2 at 873 K [152]. The hydrothermal synthesis was used to prepare the polycrystalline SnSe samples. The behavior of mesoscale grains and nanoscale precipitates interpreted all-scale hierarchical architectures to scatter phonons. Furthermore, atomic point-defect scattering of copper (Cu) played a crucial part in minimizing the lattice thermal conductivity.

(p25.1) Besides that, efforts were made to minimize thermal conductivity by introducing phonon scattering by dislocation, point defects, boundaries/interfaces, and resonant rattlers. Point defect scattering is one of the most effective phonon scattering techniques for reducing the lattice thermal conductivity [2,153]. This is based on the fundamental argument of physics that phonons are more prone to be scattered by point defects than electrical carriers, reducing the effect on carrier mobility [2]. The mechanism for reducing thermal conductivity through point defects is due to large mass and significant strain variations between host and guest atoms. Such fluctuations can be enhanced by creating vacancies, using interstitial atoms, or substituting atoms in TE materials [153]. As a result of the mass and strain fluctuation of polycrystalline n-type SnSe with Ti and Pb co-doping, the lattice thermal conductivity was significantly reduced [76].

(p25.2) Besides, exploring crystals with low lattice thermal conductivity is another technique in achieving high zT materials like lattice with good anharmonicity, low-symmetry, complex structure, and liquid-like lattice [154]. Many TE materials, such as SnSe, are highly anharmonic and have extremely low thermal conductivity [2,155,156]. With layered structures characteristic of the van der Waals force, two-dimensional materials have also been used because of their high TE performance and low lattice thermal conductivity. Taking advantage of layered structures, SnSe is showing promising TE performance [2]. SnSe doped with 2 at.% of Cu had a zT of 0.7 at 773 K. Average zT could be due to the SnSe intrinsic nanostructure formation integrated with the presence of the second phase of Cu 2 Se and ultralow thermal conductivity [4]. Table 4. TE properties and synthesis of SnSe with reduction of thermal conductivity approaches.
## (s27) Important Correlation of Power Factor and Lattice Thermal Conductivity
Number of References: 2

(p27.0) The individual and synergetic methods are of great importance to boost the electrical and thermal properties of TE materials [160]. Table 5 summarizes the synthesis methods and approaches used to simultaneously increase power factors and reduce thermal conductivity in SnSe materials. New concepts like band-alignment and nanostructure with compositional alloys offer an intelligent way of reducing lattice thermal conductivity while retaining a high power factor. In 2019, the power factor of polycrystalline SnSe was strengthened by Ge alloying and Ag doping to 1 mWm −1 K −2 . Consequently, a peak zT value of approximately 1.5 was reached at 793 K. The carrier concentration was increased by Ag doping, while the Seebeck coefficient was increased by Ge alloying due to enhancing the effective band mass and reducing the bandgap. Furthermore, Ge alloying greatly decreased lattice thermal conductivity via scattering phonons due to point defects [98].
