# Artificial intelligence and data processing in injury diagnosis and prevention in competitive sports: A literature review Volume 13 Issue 2 -2021 Artificial intelligence and data processing in injury diagnosis and prevention in competitive sports: A literature review 35

CorpusID: 244916775 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6dcda3d4121ae5c92f4628ccde3f67e82bfd7914](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6dcda3d4121ae5c92f4628ccde3f67e82bfd7914)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s2) The use of fuzzy sets
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) Even from the previous decade researchers examined how fuzzy systems can help in the multifaceted decision-making process. Innocent et al. 1 reviewed the case of fuzzy systems for medical diagnosis. In their paper, the authors referred to the categorical consistency, which can help achieve repeatable classification performance. Categorical consistency is a requirement for consultation systems, where one should be able to classify the same situation in the same category in a repeated way. The creation of consistent groups for classification is based upon intelligent processing, which allows the re-consideration of the classification schemes, as in sports injuries and different patients' cases. In this complex situation, fuzzy neural networks can understand and facilitate the classification procedure. The system developed by Inoccent et al. 1 is based on the extraction of features from bone scan (radiographic) images that were later analysed through a clustering algorithm, within the framework of Adaptive Resonance Theory (ART). This resulted in the creation of the ART fuzzy neuro-clustering technique. The authors concluded that vague representation and the fuzzy neural clustering methods had improved the radiographic images' classification process, even though there is intrinsic vagueness. However, these two studies do not refer to sports medicine; hence, more research in the application of these techniques in the prevention and diagnosis of the sport-related injury is vital.
## (s4) The use of other models
Number of References: 8

(p4.0) The study of Whiteside et al. 19 examined the use of naïve Bayes and support vector machine to predict factors in ulnar collateral ligament reconstruction surgeries in the case of players in Major League Baseball. The model successfully classified 66.8% of patients and identified six primary elements. Overall, this study's results indicate that machine learning models can improve the prevention of UCL reconstruction surgery in baseball players. Bayesian regulated neural networks, along with Gaussian distributions, were used in the study of Ertelt, et al. 20 to examine ground reaction force patterns in a sample of male athletes from different sports. The model successfully classified 94.29% of cases, leading to a promising and adequate method for classifying forced patterns. Bayesian classification and Assistant algorithm for top-down induction of decision trees classifier as artificial intelligence tools were used from Zelic et al. 21 to diagnose sports injuries. The model was not successful initially, and for this reason, the authors added expert-defined diagnostic rules as preclassifiers. The authors proposed the final model that the Bayesian classifier with the fuzzy discretisation of numerical attributes was accurate, and for this reason, as a promising machine learning tool that can help physicians in their decision-making process. Lu et al. 22 used Bayesian theory, likelihood ratios, and predictive data mining to improve the precision in the diagnosis of rotator cuff tears. The authors concluded that this model could be a useful tool in classification and the diagnosis of rotator cuff tears.

(p4.1) The use of EMG vectors was examined in the study of Malfait et al. 23 in the case of jump landing activities, to identify potential associations between neuromuscular activation patterns and landing kinematics multidirectional sports (e.g. volleyball and handball), to determine possible risk injury. The results were promising for the use of EMG vectors. Various machine learning approaches were examined in the study of López-Valenciano et al. 24 to identify the best-performing injury risk factor model to identify athletes at risk for lower extremity muscle injuries case of professional handball and soccer players. The authors concluded that the best model was the model generated by the Smoote Boost technique. Rossi et al. 25 developed an artificial intelligence multi-dimensional model based on machine learning and GPS training data to forecast soccer players' injuries. The model proposed it was both interpretable and accurate, leading to promises in the field of injury prevention in soccer players and interpreting the relation between training and injury. The performance of various artificial intelligence tools, with an emphasis upon artificial neural networks, was examined in weight training from Novatchkov and Baca. 26 The study results indicated that artificial intelligence could assess and help in the classification in the case of weight training, which can help in the prevention of sports injuries.
