# Differences between hairdressers and consumers in skin exposure to hair cosmetic products: A review

CorpusID: 246361906 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb0dee76ac3710bd3b9117685ab9ae399199dc4d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb0dee76ac3710bd3b9117685ab9ae399199dc4d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s2) | Consumers' exposure
Number of References: 4

(p2.0) Typical use frequencies of hair cosmetics by consumers (when normally applied by professionals in a hairdressing salon) and self-users (when applying hair cosmetics at home) have been considered together. Some products are usually applied only in a hair salon (e.g., waving agents or hair relaxers), others frequently at home (e.g., shampoos and oxidative or nonoxidative hair colors). Data on consumers' exposure was obtained primarily from the NoG, as far as available, which refers back to Hall et al. (2007) as well as Hall et al. (2011),, 8,9 who suggest a framework for conducting population exposure assessments regarding European consumer exposure to cosmetic products.
## (s15) Dermal, respiratory
Number of References: 6

(p15.0) No Styling products (e.g., hair gels) are applied by the hairdresser without gloves, and the hands are usually not washed until the service is finished. In order not to get setting products (e.g., hairspray) into the customers' face, the hairdresser protects it using their own hand while spraying with the other, getting the hairspray on the protecting hand. Dermal and respiratory effects of hairsprays have already been reported. 46,47 Metal tools/objects (e.g., tweezers, crochet hooks)

(p15.1) Nickel and/or cobalt Dermal No Tweezers are used to pluck eyebrows and to remove undesired facial hair. A nickel and cobalt release (and also a co-release of both) from tweezers has already been reported. 26,27 Crochet hooks are used for highlighting/ lowlighting the hair using a cap. A nickel release from tweezers in the hairdressing trade has already been reported. 27,48 many working tasks, but also that a considerable amount of identified procedures are usually performed only by hairdressers, such as perming the hair using diverse types of perming solutions (Table 1).
