# Article 798078 (2022) Zinc Intakes and Health Outcomes: An Umbrella Review

CorpusID: 246635842 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d896ea270205bf633b590fee0b78edf83a53c388](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d896ea270205bf633b590fee0b78edf83a53c388)

Fields: Medicine

## (s11) Growth Outcomes
Number of References: 18

(p11.0) Zinc supplementations in children might be connected with a significant increase in height gain (15). This meta-analysis containing over 10,000 children in poverty-stricken countries from 19 RCTs manifested a gain of 0.43 (95% CI: 0.16, 0.70) cm in supplementary zinc group compared with no zinc intakes. At the same time, daily consumption of a low dose of zinc supplementations for children was also related to height (17), weight (17), weight gain (15), head circumference (15), weightfor-age z-scores (WAZ) (17), and weight-for-length z-scores (38). However, supplementary zinc intakes in low doses were not a strong indicator for the risk of stunting (RR: 1.00, 95% CI: 0.95, 1.06), underweight (RR: 1.08, 95% CI: 0.96, 1.21) and wasting (RR: 0.94, 95% CI: 0.82, 1.06) in children (15).

(p11.1) Compared with no zinc intakes, the effect from lower supplementary zinc intakes could consistently be applied to other physical development parameters, including head circumference change (15), height-for-age z-scores (HAZ) change (15), MUAC (16), MUAC change (15), WAZ change (15), HAZ (15,16), weight for height z-scores (16) and psycho-motor development (39) as well as adulthood body fat percentage (40), body mass index (BMI) change (40), hip circumference (40), waist circumference change (40) and waist-to-hip ratio (40).

(p11.2) Apart from the above-mentioned, a daily dosage of <20 mg of supplementary zinc intakes would not benefit childhood mental development executive function (7), intelligence (7), and mental development index (16).
## (s12) Metabolic Outcomes
Number of References: 6

(p12.0) Supplementary zinc intakes would significantly level up serum zinc concentration in the general population (41) and decrease the incidence of childhood zinc deficiency by 63% (RR: 0.37, 95% CI: 0.22, 0.62) (16). For adults specifically, the zinc supplemented group though did help improve serum zinc concentration by 0.43 µmol/L, the negative value of the lower limit of the effect size manifested that there is a chance that zinc supplementation had no effect (37).

(p12.1) In terms of dietary intake in adults, the highest dose compared with the lowest dose might be associated with a 13% lower risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) (OR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.78, 0.98) (42). Furthermore, daily supplementary zinc intake of more than 20 mg would relate to increasing total antioxidant capacity and glutathione, reducing malondialdehyde and serum inflammation factors including tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), C-reactive protein (CRP) levels, but not interleukin-6 (IL-6) or nitric oxide (NO) (43,44). In lipid metabolism among the general population, a high dosage of zinc supplementations would relate to a decrease of 10.92 mg/dl (95% CI: −18.56, −3.28), 6.87 mg/dl (95% CI: −11.16, −2.58) and 10.29 mg/dl (95% CI: −15.33, −6.52) for triglyceride, low density lipoprotein cholesterol and total cholesterol (TC) respectively, while an unobvious rise of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (MD: 2.12, 95% CI: −0.74, 4.98) was also identified (45).
## (s23) Strengths and Limitations
Number of References: 2

(p23.0) This umbrella review had systematically integrated the current evidence about the associations between zinc intakes and different health outcomes for the first time. We pioneered utilizing the AMSTAR2 (22) and GRADE classification systems (25) to evaluate the strength and quality of the evidence of all meta-analyses. Some possible limitations should be noted nevertheless. To begin with, a relatively large number of the metaanalyses were "Critically Low" in AMSTAR2 classification as well as "Very low" in GRADE categorizations. This phenomenon was largely caused by that many studies did not display the list of excluded articles, report the publication bias in the critical domain AMSTAR2. Studies failed to explain the selection of study type and provide the funding sources of included studies also lent themselves to rank higher in the AMSTAR2. For GARDE categorization, serious imprecision derived from limited studies numbers and population numbers as well as considerate confidence intervals and I 2 . The fact that few studies met the upgrading items including a relatively large magnitude of effect and beneficial plausible confounding factors also contributed to low evidence. Due to the different rating domains, there is no statistical correlation between AMSTAR2 and GRADE. Second, according to our selection criteria, some of the studies might be missed because they were less recent and contained a smaller number of participants compared with included meta-analyses. Of note, some subgroup analyses of included studies may also be missed due to incomplete details required by the umbrella review. Third, a proportion of the eligible meta-analyses included a small number of studies and populations, which probably cause publication bias. Forth, the period of receiving zinc may confound the related conclusion due to lack of consensual definition. Finally, zinc intakes are as described as before would be influenced by a great number of factors, therefore, there might be a disparity between oral zinc and absorbed zinc. Even so, most of the studies include generally healthy participants, which would minimize the possible bias, to a large extent.
