# How Can High-Frequency Sensors Capture Collaboration? A Review of the Empirical Links between Multimodal Metrics and Collaborative Constructs

CorpusID: 245103224 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ed51fcf15b155edd235c7d40c4066da7bed1eea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ed51fcf15b155edd235c7d40c4066da7bed1eea)

Fields: Medicine, Sociology, Computer Science

## (s16) Process: Affective State
Number of References: 11

(p16.0) An additional process measure integral to collaboration relates to the affective state of individual group members. Emotions play an important role in the interactions and performance of a collaborative team. Notably, individuals can perpetuate both positive and negative emotions to their team members [114], and the forms of non-verbal communication triggered by certain emotional states impact team decisions and interactions [115]. Within our sample, outcomes were mostly individual affective states similar to those found in the wider field, such as frustration, boredom, interest, and valence (from positive to negative).

(p16.1) Due to the biological responses connected with affective states, physiological metrics, and, in particular, physiological linkage were frequently studied in collaboration studies. The study by [60] found that the physiological linkage between participants during a gameplay scenario was correlated with feelings of empathy, suggesting support for "emotional contagion", which posits that individuals simulate similar biological responses in order to understand the other person. This may be irrespective of the type of emotion, since [66] found that physiological synchrony was not associated with emotional valence. Both [43] and [95] assessed feelings of frustration using body movement data during learning. While [43] found that students expressed a higher frustration after receiving help from a tutor, based on movement data, Ref. [95] showed that the transitional probability of working with an instructor, compared to working individually, was negatively associated with frustration. The study by [43] postulates that the increase in frustration could be due to a lingering misconception, while [95] interpret their data to mean that instructors are often effective in helping their students with problems. These discrepancies highlight a future direction for using movement data to understand emotion, using observable contextual information to form hypotheses that could then be verified in subsequent research. Finally, using a combination of speech, body movement and skin response metrics across time, Ref. [52] found that lower levels of team regularity corresponded to a more positive valence. The authors suggest that this indicates that teams with more repetitive patterns felt that the collaboration was more unpleasant.
## (s17) Process: Interpersonal Relationship/Perception
Number of References: 7

(p17.0) During group interactions, interpersonal relationships and perceptions can play a mediating role in the products of collaboration as well as other process measures. For example, rapport between individuals is linked with higher learning gains [116]. On the other hand, group conflict (both task-related and social) was shown to negatively affect group performance [117]. Understanding individual and interaction-level metrics that contribute to interpersonal perceptions can help researchers develop interventions to foster mutual rapport and support collaboration.

(p17.1) Examples of this outcome within our sample include group members' perceptions of the contributions and helpfulness of others, sense of rapport, and perceptions of group cohesion. Verbal metrics were studied in the majority of interpersonal perception papers. Verbal dominance and speech length was significantly correlated with perceived contribution [25]; however, individual features of speech such as speech rate and voice features were not significantly linked with interpersonal perception outcomes such as helpfulness and understanding [48,52]. It may be that verbal cues are too granular to impact high-level interpersonal relationships at the group level, or, as the authors of [52] propose, participants may rely more heavily on visual metrics, such as facial expressions, to inform interpersonal perceptions. In line with this conjecture, Ref. [48] found that facial expressions were correlated with perceptions of peer helpfulness, understanding and clarity.
## (s21) How Was Theory Used to Inform the Connections between Metrics and Outcomes (RQ4)?
Number of References: 2

(p21.0) Our final research question aims to understand the use of theory in past MMCA research. There is a growing consensus on the importance of theory in multiple stages of research for quantitative social sciences research (e.g., [17,121]). While this is often argued for, there is less empirical evidence on the ways or degree to which prior work has actually employed theory. We attempt to fill this gap by looking at how theory has so far been integrated into research. We then identify the references used repeatedly in MMCA research, presenting a list of key theories that can inform research for each of the collaborative sub-dimensions in our taxonomy.
## (s23) What Are the Core Theories for MMCA Research?
Number of References: 10

(p23.0) While collaboration is a multi-faceted construct, we expected a set of theories to be cross-referenced across MMCA papers. To test this assumption, we extracted 4278 references from the corpus, and found only ten references that were cited more than five times. Among these ten papers, four were empirical studies of joint visual attention using multiple eye-trackers [84,[127][128][129]; two papers were reviews (of the use of multimodal data in education [4] and non-verbal activity in small groups [11]); two papers were empirical studies of leadership [30,130]; one paper was a collaboration coding scheme [67]; and one empirical paper studied physiological synchrony [65]. In short, we did not find a core set of theoretical references collaboration in our corpus. This finding reflects the diversity, or, alternatively, the lack of cohesive theoretical perspectives used to study collaboration with sensor data.
