# royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsos Mesoporous silica nanocarriers as drug delivery systems for anti-tubercular agents: a review

CorpusID: 249435768 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ba3d56e3bf3138ac4797899133c9ca5384f278f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ba3d56e3bf3138ac4797899133c9ca5384f278f)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s6) Solvents
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Solvents also have essential roles to play in the synthesis of MSNs. The most efficient and typical examples of alcohol include ethanol, propanol, butanol and pentanol. Alcohols enhance pore formation and alter the sizes of mesopores. However, the morphology and shape of mesoporous materials are minimally affected by alcohols with low evaporation rates and high molecular weights [91]. The channel rotations of mesoporous materials are also modified by alcohols [92].
## (s12) Solvent extraction
Number of References: 6

(p12.0) Solvent extraction is a mild alternative for calcination, requiring high thermal treatment. Based on the type of surfactant and the experimental conditions, either acidic or basic, solvents can be used to extract the synthesized nanoparticles. Examples of solvents used include ammonium nitrate [105], water [106], ethanol [107], hydrochloric acids [108] and other alcohols [109]. Compared with calcination, solvent extraction has less impact on the porosity and structures of synthesized mesoporous materials. However, in most cases, complete surfactant removal cannot be achieved with solvent extraction, but it is possible to re-use recovered surfactants. This method is ideal when complete removal of surfactants is not required [110].
## (s17) Co-condensation method
Number of References: 4

(p17.0) Co-condensation involves the synthesis and functionalization of MSNs in a one-pot route synthesis. During mesoporous synthesis, organo-alkoxy silanes are introduced together with the silica source and surfactant at the condensation stage [103]. Surfactant is removed using ion-exchange with either an ethanolic solution of hydrochloric acid [108] or ammonium nitrate [105]. This method allows functional groups to be grafted to the outer and inner surfaces of the silica walls, as illustrated in figure 2 [134]. royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsos R. Soc. Open Sci. 9: 220013 2.6. Effect of synthesis parameters on the physico-chemical properties of mesoporous silica materials
## (s18) Particle morphology and surface charge
Number of References: 7

(p18.0) The particle size, shape and surface charge are essential factors determining mesoporous materials' in vitro and in vivo drug delivery. MSNs with a diameter of less than 1 µm are highly sought in drug delivery as they have fast mass transport and excellent dispersibility compared with their bulk counterparts [87,150,151]. The surface charge and topology of MSNs affects their pharmacokinetics and accumulation at their target sites [152]. The cellular uptake of MSNs, their cellular interactions, distribution and elimination, are controlled by the particle size of the nanocarriers [153]. The surface charge also affects the cellular uptake and the in vivo immune response to mesoporous materials [152,154].
