# Mental Pain Surrounding Suicidal Behaviour: A Review of What Has Been Described and Clinical Recommendations for Help

CorpusID: 246289257 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/11f5ad859b0f3991883a9fe319e8a2f80e2d70e6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/11f5ad859b0f3991883a9fe319e8a2f80e2d70e6)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s8) Troubled Interpersonal Relationships
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) Suicide attempters often have repeatedly experienced frustrated psychic needs in interpersonal interactions, with significantly increased victimisation in their historical contexts, including recurrent situations of physical and psychological abuse. These adverse events often interfere with the development of stable and harmonious interpersonal bonds, as the patients' processes of interpersonal trust, openness, and bonding in relationships have been traumatised (42). Depressive symptoms, such as psychache, thwarted belongingness, and perceived burdensomeness, are also related to suicidality through intrapersonal and interpersonal variables (43). Clinical work can be guided by stimulating the patient's abilities to understand the context of the emotions arising in relationships (both one's own and those of others); to direct his/her attention to what is relevant for problem-solving; to adopt different points of view and multiple perspectives on issues; to discriminate the importance of events; to make his/her expectations flexible; and to concede and ask for changes to find agreed solutions (44). This ability can be obtained through joint reflection on different points of view and expectations. In addition, what the patient expects to happen and reflections on what he/she imagines others expect allow for greater flexibility in those particularly rigid views the subject may have about himself and others.
## (s9) Impulsivity in Distorted Reasoning
Number of References: 8

(p9.0) Impulsivity has always been considered to play a major role in SB. However, it is difficult to determine its actual role in SB. A particularly complex task is to figure out its place within the sequence of events preceding suicide. For several authors, impulsivity is critical to explaining these actions. According to a recent study based on the Interpersonal Theory of suicide, "trait impulsivity is related to suicidal behaviour and the fluctuation of suicidal ideation, but not to suicidal ideation itself. Thus, trait impulsivity seems to act as a distal risk factor via capability for suicide and it seems to play a role for the dynamics of suicidal ideation" (45). However, impulsivity can manifest itself in different stages of behaviours leading to suicide, from the moment in which the agent evaluates his or her difficulties and considers the options to solve them until the moment in which he or she decides to act. As we said before, SB is the result of a behaviour marked by ambivalence in which an individual conceives of actions without knowing the true consequences they would have for him/herself as well as for others. Not having the possibility of assessing the consequences of one action on another, the agent, motivated by the need to end his/her anguish and overwhelmed by the hopelessness of not finding a way out of his/her difficulties, will try to end his/her life. The action will occur under the motivational pre-eminence of one or several factors. A decision with irreversible consequences supported by a narrow view of the circumstances and encouraged by a state of emotional restraint almost always originates in an impulsive thought or behaviour. SB can be understood as acts that occurin the presence of poor decision-making and impulsivity-when someone experiences unbearable suffering. This emotional state has been recognised as a condition that might stimulate someone to take their own life as a solution to the misery they are experiencing (46,47).

(p9.1) In the clinical evaluation of patients at risk of SB, clinicians should take into consideration the patient's overall situation, avoiding a judgement based solely on a single aspect of it (Figure 4). Impulsivity might be a trait in someone's personal history, and yet, they may not have a history of SB. On the other hand, some patients may not have the trait of impulsivity in their personal history, but they might be suffering from some clinical conditions, such as a mixed bipolar state or psychosis, which by themselves increase the risk of decisions based on the patient's acute emotional status at a particular moment. Highly lethal SB has been found in the presence of an overwhelming sense of entrapment with cognitive and emotional dysregulation (6). High-lethality suicide attempters, independent of depressive symptoms, may present executive function impairments, such as rigidity-shift setting and negative cognitive biases (48).

(p9.2) Suicidal individuals are more likely to inaccurately interpret stressors, use emotion-focused coping, and adopt an avoidant approach. In such cases, we must prioritise the application of techniques such as cognitive remediation and problemsolving (49,50). Problem-solving efforts are multifaceted (social, psychological) and encompass a wide range of cognitive and emotional functions, such as autonomy, mastery of the environment, and development of a meaningful purpose in life (51).
