# A scoping research literature review to explore bereavement humor

CorpusID: 247928625 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4627597f6ffa5945137c63e11c08f73375a4b18](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4627597f6ffa5945137c63e11c08f73375a4b18)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s0) Materials and Methods
Number of References: 6

(p0.0) After consultation with a university librarian, nine academic library databases were searched for published English-language research reports with abstracts using the keywords "grief or loss or mourning or bereavement" and "humor or humour or comedy or laughter or jokes," and "research." These nine databases were considered the most likely to contain relevant research articles for review: CINAHL, Directory of Open Access (online) Journals, Humanities Index, Journal Storage (JSTOR), Medline (Ovid), PsychInfo, Scopus, SocIndex, and Web of Science. Reports of all kinds of research investigations were sought, in keeping with the established methodology of scoping literature reviews (Arksey & O'Malley, 2005;Whittemore & Knafl, 2005). As this project involved a systematic search for and analysis of published literature, it did not require research ethics committee approval to proceed. Scoping reviews are a common type of literature review, although they are distinguished from other types as they gather and assess all types of research reports, and they typically focus on new topics or emerging questions of interest (Armstrong et al., 2011;Grant & Booth, 2009;Levac et al., 2010;Munn et al., 2018). Like other reviews, scoping reviews are done to assess how much research has already been done on a defined topic or question, and to determine what evidence and evidence gaps exist. However, scoping reviews do not include an assessment of the quality of the research articles that are identified for review, as all published research reports that are identified on a specific topic are considered likely to contain information of benefit. No efforts are made then to limit the review to only comprehensively-written reports of high-quality studies. Accordingly, this scoping review was carried out to identify all published English-language research reports that focused in whole or in part on bereavement humor, and explore and describe the findings to identify evidence and evidence gaps. No limit was placed on the year of publication, in keeping with our plan to scope the research conducted to date on bereavement humor. One final consideration is that this review only sought evidence on bereavement humor, as compared to humor associated with other challenging life events, such as divorce or retirement. It is possible that humor findings may be similar across them, but bereavement humor could be entirely distinct as humor is not generally associated with death, dying, or bereavement.
## (s4) Humanities Index
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) The Humanities Index database revealed 28 potential articles for review. None of these were research reports, but four papers had notable content. Willett and Willett's (2020) article explored the role of comedy in helping people make sense of their grief following a death, with death identified as a life tragedy. Sosa (2013) described humor as a means by which survivors in post-dictatorial Argentina gained an alternative source of remembrance of the dead, and with humor (including dark and bitter humor) having become a collective strategy in that country to cope with loss. Soares (2011) reviewed a book written by a woman who experienced the death of her mother as a child, with this book said to be "sprinkled" with humor, and with humor identified as one of many emotions co-mingled in that book. Macnab and Scherfig (2003) described a movie on death and bereavement that contained "unexpected" humor.
## (s13) Prevalence or Incidence Humor Findings
Number of References: 4

(p13.0) As illustrated in Table 1, humor was often identified as being commonly employed by bereaved people (Cadell, 2007). Lund et al.'s (2009) study of 292 recently-bereaved Americans aged 50 and older revealed a daily humor incidence of 75%. Similarly, Ong et al.'s (2004) American study showed daily positive emotions, including humor, were common among bereaved people in the first three months following the death of their spouse. A study conducted in Ireland also found bereaved Irish people commonly used humor after a death had occurred (Donnelly, 1999).
## (s14) Reasons for and Impact of Humor Findings
Number of References: 4

(p14.0) Yet, bereavement humor may be useful at times. One study found humor was used by bereaved people to avoid difficult topics or discussions with other people and to distance themselves from their own grief (Brewer & Sparkes, 2011). Humor was also deliberately used at times to keep a discussion from becoming too serious or hurtful (Brewer & Sparkes, 2011). Humor was thus identified as a technique that allowed bereaved people to temporarily avoid their grief and help them with the longer-term management of their grief (Brewer & Sparkes, 2011). Moreover, other people around them could use humor to avoid distressing the bereaved person (Brewer & Sparkes, 2011).
