# Past, Present and Future of Computational Storage: A Survey

CorpusID: 245334447 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/16298f9b7e4b510f0094720c4c65516922910313](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/16298f9b7e4b510f0094720c4c65516922910313)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s34) Programmable Flash
Number of References: 22

(p34.0) Storage. When looking at PFS research a much larger variety of works is identified. These are shown in table 7. Overall we see early works using SATA interfaces and Embedded CSEEs while later works mostly use PCIe (NVMe) and bitstreams, respectively. Another noteworthy observations is a steady decline in the dataflow programming model. We suspect the difficulties from attempting to offload the reduce stage of MapReduce could potentially be a cause for this decline. In terms of degree of programmability the distribution is more or less constant with the majority of works being event driven. Second most common is arbitrary code execution and least is query offloading. Operating system (Custom) Smart SSD [38] Event driven Dataflow (MapReduce) SATA Embedded Smart SSD [28] Event driven Shared memory SATA Embedded Intelligent SSD [6,20] Arbitrary code execution 7 Shared memory 7 N.A.

(p34.1) Operating system (Linux) 7 Ibex [97] Query offloading (MySQL) Declarative SATA Bitstream Willow [79] Arbitrary code execution Client / Server (RPC) PCIe (NVMe) Operating system (Custom) Biscuit [33] Event driven Dataflow PCIe Embedded Hadoop ISC* [62] Event driven Dataflow (MapReduce) SAS Embedded YourSQL [37] Query offloading (MySQL) Declarative PCIe (NVMe) Bitsream 8 Summarizer [41] Event driven Shared memory PCIe (NVMe) Embedded NDP RE2 regex* [13] Query offloading (Regex) N.A. N.A. Embedded Registor [64] Query offloading (Regex) Shared memory PCIe (NVMe) Bitsream Cognitive SSD [26] Arbitrary code execution Shared memory PCIe (NVMe, OpenSSD) Accelerators (Custom) INSIDER [71] Event driven Shared memory (VFS) PCIe Bitstream Catalina [90] Arbitrary code execution Client / Server (MPI) PCIe (NVMe) Operating system (Linux) THRIFTY [34] Event driven 9 Shared memory (VFS) 9 PCIe 9 Bitstream 9 POLARDB [18] Query offloading (POLARDB) Declarative PCIe Bitstream NGD newport [27] Arbitrary code execution Client / Server PCIe (NVMe) Operating system (Linux) blockNDP [9] Event driven Dataflow (streams) PCIe (NVMe, OpenSSD) Virtual Machine (QEMU) QEMU CSD* [96] Arbitrary code execution Shared memory PCIe (NVMe) N.A. (Simulated)
## (s35) Complexity and Challenges
Number of References: 2

(p35.0) Several key-challenges remain throughout the past decade of flash based CS. We see two fundamental works identifying these [10,11]. In addition we provide some of our own. Unfortunately, it is not possible to go in to depth identifying how each work of the previous section fairs regarding each challenge. This in depth analysis is left as future work.
## (s36) FUTURE PREDICTION
Number of References: 2

(p36.0) Full blown heterogeneous architectures will become the norm [58,81]. We already see this transition in devices such as iPhones. The use of neural accelerators is prevalent in modern mobile SoCs. More recently, we see a push for neural accelerators in datacentres as well. It is only a matter of time before we start seeing these appear in consumer desktop platforms as well.
