# A review for the noise source identification methods based microphone array

CorpusID: 248333129 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a7bba73bfdfc1daf72ef99d64d1cddf5cc07032e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a7bba73bfdfc1daf72ef99d64d1cddf5cc07032e)

Fields: Physics, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 28

(p0.0) Mechanical vibration of objects is one of the main sources of sound in industrial production, it is particularly important to identify the sound source accurately for noise analysis and control. As the convenience of calculating acoustic information and realizing the location of component sound source, the sound source identification technology is widely used in engineering, such as military, medicine, ocean exploration, electronic communication and so on [1][2][3][4][5]. At present, there are many methods for sound source identification, which can be divided into traditional identification method (such as sound intensity method, surface vibration method, etc.), sound field visualization technology, etc. [6][7][8]. The traditional identification methods mainly include subjective identification method, lead covering method, partial operation method and surface vibration velocity method. Subjective identification method is greatly affected by human factors, and it is difficult to give quantitative analysis when multiple sound sources exist simultaneously [9]. Lead covering method uses lead plate (sound absorbing material) to cover all sound sources, and then opens a small opening on the sound source to expose it to achieve the purpose of measuring specific sound sources. This method is only suitable for medium and high frequency sources [10]. The partial operation method firstly measures the overall noise condition under the condition that all the components are running at the same time, and then stops the operation of the components to be observed one by one, and calculates the noise contribution of each measured component through theoretical derivation. The operation process of this method is cumbersome, and part of the acoustic contribution may be caused by the noise generated by the consistent natural frequency between components, so the measurement results are unstable and it is easy to get conclusions contrary to the facts [11]. Surface vibration velocity method is to arrange acceleration sensors on the surface of the object that produces vibration, and determine the noise size by the normal vibration velocity and amplitude [12]. As the operation process of traditional identification method is cumbersome, and the measurement results are easy to be disturbed by external factors, additional processing such as sensor arrangement is needed to achieve better noise source identification effect [13,14], this method has been gradually phased out.
## (s7) HELS method
Number of References: 16

(p7.0) The implicit least square method (LSM) solves the problems of low efficiency of sound field reconstruction, non-unique equation solution and singular integral in the NAH method based on constant element and boundary element. LSM and wave superposition are numerical calculation methods developed from the idea of equivalent source, but their solutions are obviously different. HELS is a least square method based on Helmholtz equation. When this method was first proposed, it can only provide accurate solutions for the reconstruction points outside the smallest sphere covering irregular sound sources, but only approximate analysis for the inner region of the sphere. Subsequently, a large number of scholars have studied the orthogonal function adaptation approximation of HELS. Dastour [63] have given a general construction method of the fourthorder finite difference scheme for Helmholtz equation based on point weight strategy. Cao et al [64] have proposed the generalized eigenvalue method and standard eigenvalue method for function approximation based on Chebyshev polynomials to solve the eigenvalues of helmholtz equation. The expansion term of the basis function has a direct influence on the results of sound field reconstruction, so the reasonable selection of the number of measurement points and expansion terms is particularly critical. Dwarka [65] and Macklin [66] have combined geometric analysis from the perspective of scalability, analyzed the sound field in the smallest sphere covering irregular sound source with trigonometric function and spherical function as basis function, and obtained the scalable convergence of HELS.

(p7.1) The implicit least square method (LSM) solves the problems of low efficiency of sound field reconstruction, non-unique equation solution and singular integral in the NAH method based on constant element and boundary element. LSM and wave superposition are numerical calculation methods developed from the idea of equivalent source, but their solutions are obviously different. HELS is a least square method based on Helmholtz equation. When this method was first proposed, it can only provide accurate solutions for the reconstruction points outside the smallest sphere covering irregular sound sources, but only approximate analysis for the inner region of the sphere. Subsequently, a large number of scholars have studied the orthogonal function adaptation approximation of HELS. Dastour [63] have given a general construction method of the fourthorder finite difference scheme for Helmholtz equation based on point weight strategy. Cao et al [64] have proposed the generalized eigenvalue method and standard eigenvalue method for function approximation based on Chebyshev polynomials to solve the eigenvalues of helmholtz equation. The expansion term of the basis function has a direct influence on the results of sound field reconstruction, so the reasonable selection of the number of measurement points and expansion terms is particularly critical. Dwarka [65] and Macklin [66] have combined geometric analysis from the perspective of scalability, analyzed the sound field in the smallest sphere covering irregular sound source with trigonometric function and spherical function as basis function, and obtained the scalable convergence of HELS.
## (s8) Static sound source identification
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) Theoretically, far-field acoustic holography can calculate acoustic quantities at any position outside the radiation source, while its resolution is limited by half wavelength ( /2), it is only sensitive to the propagating wave components of low and medium frequency in space, and it is easy to ignore the evanescent wave components with high frequency information. Far field acoustic holography is often used to identify the sound source of large radiation sources such as trains or difficult to access sound generators. Some scholars have applied the method to calculate the distribution of noise sources. Aiming at the problem of low recognition accuracy due to aperture limitation of acoustic holography, an optimization scheme of microphone array and recognition algorithm has been proposed. Lu [67] has introduced grey relational clustering technology on the basis of traditional acoustic fault diagnosis to remove the extracted redundant sound source information. The optimized diagnosis technology has significantly improved the identification efficiency and algorithm robustness. On this basis, he has developed a high identification rate method for weak fault conditions of three-dimensional space sound field. After comparing the actual performance of several vehicle noise source identification methods, Zhao et al. [68] have optimized the algorithm according to the problems existing in the experimental data. The optimized experimental results have significantly improved the performance compared with the original reconstruction algorithm.
## (s22) Introduction
Number of References: 28

(p22.0) Mechanical vibration of objects is one of the main sources of sound in industrial production, it is particularly important to identify the sound source accurately for noise analysis and control. As the convenience of calculating acoustic information and realizing the location of component sound source, the sound source identification technology is widely used in engineering, such as military, medicine, ocean exploration, electronic communication and so on [1][2][3][4][5]. At present, there are many methods for sound source identification, which can be divided into traditional identification method (such as sound intensity method, surface vibration method, etc.), sound field visualization technology, etc. [6][7][8]. The traditional identification methods mainly include subjective identification method, lead covering method, partial operation method and surface vibration velocity method. Subjective identification method is greatly affected by human factors, and it is difficult to give quantitative analysis when multiple sound sources exist simultaneously [9]. Lead covering method uses lead plate (sound absorbing material) to cover all sound sources, and then opens a small opening on the sound source to expose it to achieve the purpose of measuring specific sound sources. This method is only suitable for medium and high frequency sources [10]. The partial operation method firstly measures the overall noise condition under the condition that all the components are running at the same time, and then stops the operation of the components to be observed one by one, and calculates the noise contribution of each measured component through theoretical derivation. The operation process of this method is cumbersome, and part of the acoustic contribution may be caused by the noise generated by the consistent natural frequency between components, so the measurement results are unstable and it is easy to get conclusions contrary to the facts [11]. Surface vibration velocity method is to arrange acceleration sensors on the surface of the object that produces vibration, and determine the noise size by the normal vibration velocity and amplitude [12]. As the operation process of traditional identification method is cumbersome, and the measurement results are easy to be disturbed by external factors, additional processing such as sensor arrangement is needed to achieve better noise source identification effect [13,14], this method has been gradually phased out.
## (s29) HELS method
Number of References: 16

(p29.0) The implicit least square method (LSM) solves the problems of low efficiency of sound field reconstruction, non-unique equation solution and singular integral in the NAH method based on constant element and boundary element. LSM and wave superposition are numerical calculation methods developed from the idea of equivalent source, but their solutions are obviously different. HELS is a least square method based on Helmholtz equation. When this method was first proposed, it can only provide accurate solutions for the reconstruction points outside the smallest sphere covering irregular sound sources, but only approximate analysis for the inner region of the sphere. Subsequently, a large number of scholars have studied the orthogonal function adaptation approximation of HELS. Dastour [63] have given a general construction method of the fourthorder finite difference scheme for Helmholtz equation based on point weight strategy. Cao et al [64] have proposed the generalized eigenvalue method and standard eigenvalue method for function approximation based on Chebyshev polynomials to solve the eigenvalues of helmholtz equation. The expansion term of the basis function has a direct influence on the results of sound field reconstruction, so the reasonable selection of the number of measurement points and expansion terms is particularly critical. Dwarka [65] and Macklin [66] have combined geometric analysis from the perspective of scalability, analyzed the sound field in the smallest sphere covering irregular sound source with trigonometric function and spherical function as basis function, and obtained the scalable convergence of HELS.

(p29.1) The implicit least square method (LSM) solves the problems of low efficiency of sound field reconstruction, non-unique equation solution and singular integral in the NAH method based on constant element and boundary element. LSM and wave superposition are numerical calculation methods developed from the idea of equivalent source, but their solutions are obviously different. HELS is a least square method based on Helmholtz equation. When this method was first proposed, it can only provide accurate solutions for the reconstruction points outside the smallest sphere covering irregular sound sources, but only approximate analysis for the inner region of the sphere. Subsequently, a large number of scholars have studied the orthogonal function adaptation approximation of HELS. Dastour [63] have given a general construction method of the fourthorder finite difference scheme for Helmholtz equation based on point weight strategy. Cao et al [64] have proposed the generalized eigenvalue method and standard eigenvalue method for function approximation based on Chebyshev polynomials to solve the eigenvalues of helmholtz equation. The expansion term of the basis function has a direct influence on the results of sound field reconstruction, so the reasonable selection of the number of measurement points and expansion terms is particularly critical. Dwarka [65] and Macklin [66] have combined geometric analysis from the perspective of scalability, analyzed the sound field in the smallest sphere covering irregular sound source with trigonometric function and spherical function as basis function, and obtained the scalable convergence of HELS.
## (s30) Static sound source identification
Number of References: 4

(p30.0) Theoretically, far-field acoustic holography can calculate acoustic quantities at any position outside the radiation source, while its resolution is limited by half wavelength ( /2), it is only sensitive to the propagating wave components of low and medium frequency in space, and it is easy to ignore the evanescent wave components with high frequency information. Far field acoustic holography is often used to identify the sound source of large radiation sources such as trains or difficult to access sound generators. Some scholars have applied the method to calculate the distribution of noise sources. Aiming at the problem of low recognition accuracy due to aperture limitation of acoustic holography, an optimization scheme of microphone array and recognition algorithm has been proposed. Lu [67] has introduced grey relational clustering technology on the basis of traditional acoustic fault diagnosis to remove the extracted redundant sound source information. The optimized diagnosis technology has significantly improved the identification efficiency and algorithm robustness. On this basis, he has developed a high identification rate method for weak fault conditions of three-dimensional space sound field. After comparing the actual performance of several vehicle noise source identification methods, Zhao et al. [68] have optimized the algorithm according to the problems existing in the experimental data. The optimized experimental results have significantly improved the performance compared with the original reconstruction algorithm.
