# STORAGE MEDIUM FOR AVULSED TEETH: A LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 240574717 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2032691a7b50529c73af64adea9738cd96afa6fd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2032691a7b50529c73af64adea9738cd96afa6fd)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s0) …………………………………………………………………………………………………….... Introduction:-
Number of References: 5

(p0.0) Dental trauma refers to injury to the teeth and periodontium (gums, periodontal ligament,alveolar bone), and nearby soft tissues such as the lips, tongue, etc .Dental trauma is accounting for a major part of dental problems in children and adolescents.Falling, fight, sports, accidents, and hittingobjects or people are among common etiologic factors. Traumatic dental injuries are neglected oral condition despite its relatively high prevalence. Among various types of dental injuries-Dental avulsion is an emergency in which prompt management (within 20-40 minutes of injury) results in favourable prognosis of the tooth. 1 Tooth avulsion (exarticulation) implies total displacement of the tooth out of its socket. This kind of dental trauma causes the periodontal ligaments to be severed with or without fracture of the alveolus. Reported incidence of dental avulsion is 0.5-3%of all dental injuries. The age group of 7-14 years appears to be most affected. 2 At this age, the loosely structured periodontal ligament and low mineralized bone surrounding erupting teeth provide only minimal resistance to an extrusive force. When a tooth is avulsed, attachment damage and pulp necrosis occurs. 2 Since most avulsions occur before the patient's facial growth is complete it is critical to maintain the integrity of the surrounding bone.The ideal treatment of avulsion injury is immediate replantation, but this can rarely be achieved. 3 In such conditions the avulsed tooth should be stored in appropriate storage media. Storage medium keeps the attached periodontal ligament cells in hydrated state and maintain their viability, allows healing with regenerated periodontal ligament cells when replanted. However, if excessive drying occurs before replantation , the damaged periodontal ligament cells will elicit an inflammatory response over a diffuse area on the root surface which will result in replacement resorption (ankylosis). 2 This literature review attempts to discuss various storage media in depth, including their advantages and disadvantages for maintaining viability of attached PDL cells and allows favourable prognosis following Replantation.
## (s18) Morusrubra(red mulberry)
Number of References: 2

(p18.0) It is a natural product usually availablein Southern Europe, Middle East,Northern Africa and Indian subcontinent which contains flavonoids, alkaloidsand polysaccharides. Ozan et al. (2008) reported that when teeth were stored in red mulberry for up to 12 h, its capacity to maintain the viability of PDL cells was better than that of HBSS; however, if a longer storage time is required, it is advisable to employ higher concentrations of the fruit juice. 17 There are very few studies evaluating the use of red mulberry juice as a transport medium for avulsed teeth and its biological properties have not been established yet. Further research is necessary before its use can be recommended.(figure:8)
