# Dioptric power and refractive behaviour: a review of methods and applications

CorpusID: 247867326 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03ea6242c2fac54c2919b3e17e52064d34f48388](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03ea6242c2fac54c2919b3e17e52064d34f48388)

Fields: Medicine

## (s10) Open access
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) If one instead uses power vectors (f or t) then one or more separate plots are required for coefficients, M, J 0 and J 45 , and this is commonly used in papers involving refractive state or coefficients are combined in a single plot, however such plots become quite cluttered as a result. Alternatively, we can use two pseudo-3D plots as in figure 1D to create a stereo-pair. Such plots can be rotated to view the antiscalar plane. So, stereo-pairs as in figure 1 provide a single stereoscopic plot once fusion occurs and this greatly simplifies analysis and interpretation of the data. The axes in such figures represent the scalar and antiscalar powers and readers can think of the three axes as MI, J 0 J and J 45 K or as we prefer F I I, F J J and F K K where M=F I , J 0 =F J and J 45 =F K . The crucial difference here is not what symbols are used to label the axes but rather that figure 1B, for example, is a representation of a small part of an infinite Euclidean 3-space where points each represent a unique 2×2 power matrix, F i (see equation 20). The axis labelled F I I (=MI) is the scalar axis and here we can see that the NETRA refractive states cluster near this axis, mostly ranging from I (the first tick on the positive part of the vertical axis) to approximately −10I D (the continuation of the axis in the negative power direction). That is, this sample contains refractive states that are mostly myopic with small amounts of astigmatism. The greater the cylinder (in clinical terms), the further away from the scalar axis is the point for that power matrix.
## (s28) Open access
Number of References: 2

(p28.0) If one instead uses power vectors (f or t) then one or more separate plots are required for coefficients, M, J 0 and J 45 , and this is commonly used in papers involving refractive state or coefficients are combined in a single plot, however such plots become quite cluttered as a result. Alternatively, we can use two pseudo-3D plots as in figure 1D to create a stereo-pair. Such plots can be rotated to view the antiscalar plane. So, stereo-pairs as in figure 1 provide a single stereoscopic plot once fusion occurs and this greatly simplifies analysis and interpretation of the data. The axes in such figures represent the scalar and antiscalar powers and readers can think of the three axes as MI, J 0 J and J 45 K or as we prefer F I I, F J J and F K K where M=F I , J 0 =F J and J 45 =F K . The crucial difference here is not what symbols are used to label the axes but rather that figure 1B, for example, is a representation of a small part of an infinite Euclidean 3-space where points each represent a unique 2×2 power matrix, F i (see equation 20). The axis labelled F I I (=MI) is the scalar axis and here we can see that the NETRA refractive states cluster near this axis, mostly ranging from I (the first tick on the positive part of the vertical axis) to approximately −10I D (the continuation of the axis in the negative power direction). That is, this sample contains refractive states that are mostly myopic with small amounts of astigmatism. The greater the cylinder (in clinical terms), the further away from the scalar axis is the point for that power matrix.
