# Using wearable cameras to investigate health-related daily life experiences: A literature review of precautions and risks in empirical studies

CorpusID: 240317464 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1211f590db7e7fb7650bc6d0593d694fec2a19b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1211f590db7e7fb7650bc6d0593d694fec2a19b)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Abstract Introduction
Number of References: 8

(p0.0) Automated, wearable cameras (henceforth, "wearable cameras") can be used to obtain more objective information about daily life experiences. Wearable cameras are programmed to take still photos automatically (i.e. without prompting by the wearer) at set intervals (e.g. every 2-20 seconds). These cameras are typically worn in the upper chest region (e.g. pinned to the shirt) (Wilson, 2017) and use a wide-angle lens designed to capture as much of the wearer's environment as possible. To maximize storage capacity, their photos are relatively low-resolution (Hodges et al., 2011). Examples of wearable cameras include the Microsoft SenseCam, one of the first to become popular among investigators , and the eButton, a more recent device designed specifically for research rather than commercial use (Sun et al., 2014). Studies across a range of fields (e.g. public health, psychology, human-computer interaction) have employed wearable cameras to supplement or replace traditional data collection methods (e.g. selfreport) (e.g. Chambers et al., 2018;Gemming et al., 2015b;Gouveia and Karapanos, 2013;Kerr et al., 2013;O'Loughlin et al., 2013).
## (s2) Risks of wearable cameras
Number of References: 5

(p2.0) The same aspects of wearable cameras that make them valuable as a tool for health-related research can also potentially increase risks to participants. Wearable cameras pose risks standard to all wearable technology, including physical discomfort (Cowburn et al., 2016) and noticeability of the technology (Kwok et al., 2015;Nebeker et al., 2016), as well as concerns about confidentiality of data during collection, transfer, and storage (Mok et al., 2015;Nebeker et al., 2017). However, the nature of the information captured in images increases some of those risks (e.g. confidentiality). Additionally, because wearable cameras capture not only the experiences being investigated but all events appearing in the photo frame, the resulting images may contain identifying or sensitive information. This introduces two types of privacy-related risks .
## (s4) Current review
Number of References: 7

(p4.0) Despite the existence of these guidelines and principles, information on the actual risks and benefits of studies employing wearable cameras remains limited, which poses a barrier for investigators and IRBs considering how to evaluate and mitigate potential harm. Without data on the precautions and risks common in research with wearable cameras, investigators face challenges in designing their studies to minimize camera-related risks. Similarly, IRBs struggle to conduct risk assessments of these protocols, which may lead to delays and additional burden on investigators to explain and anticipate potential risks (Nebeker et al., 2017). To better guide investigators' and IRBs' decisions, a comprehensive review of findings regarding camera-related risks (e.g. adverse events) and the precautions taken to reduce those risks is needed. Most existing reviews of wearable camera research have focused on specific areas of health research, such as memory (Allé et al., 2017;Chow and Rissman, 2017;Dubourg et al., 2016;Silva et al., 2018) or physical activity (Loveday et al., 2015). Only one review has examined ethical issues concerning the use of wearable cameras, aggregating literature across several fields, including market research (Mok et al., 2015). However, no existing reviews have comprehensively examined the precautions and risks relevant to using wearable cameras in studies investigating daily experiences.
