# Flow-controlled ventilation -a new and promising method of ventilation presented with a review of the literature

CorpusID: 246700770 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/abc35f5c73fe30d409893d0f8dfef7f455c5edc6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/abc35f5c73fe30d409893d0f8dfef7f455c5edc6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Linearised expiration flow
Number of References: 5

(p4.0) computer-controlled resistors decelerating and linearising expiratory flow assessed in animal models provided insights into the respiratory system mechanics [20]. the working principle of these systems is based on partial occlusion of the ventilator's expiratory outlet that decelerates initial high expiratory flow to moderate flow through the expiration phase. in a porcine model with artificially induced lung injury it was shown to improve lung function and mechanics with attenuated lung damage compared with standard volume-controlled ventilation (vcv) [21]. Furthermore, in healthy lungs expiration with decelerated and linearised flow has been shown to improve lung aeration [22]. Similar results were obtained in clinical trials, where lung healthy patients with a bandaged thorax simulating restrictive lung disease reported more comfortable breathing with restricted expiration flow compared to breathing through a mouthpiece connected to a ventilator with positive end-expiratory pressure (PeeP) [23]. Also, this module was proven to be a safe and viable method in patients undergoing neurosurgical procedures, improving ventilation in dorsal areas and thus leading to more homogeneous regional ventilation [23].
## (s7) Flow-controlled ventilation: ventilation through a thin endotracheal tube
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Fcv can be applied using a tritube , a thin cuffed endotracheal tube ( Figure 4). With an outer diameter of only 4.4 mm, it offers advantages during earnose-throat (eNt) surgery. the first series of patient cases was published by Kristensen et al. [14]. During laryngeal surgery, the use of a tritube in combination with ventrain resulted in "unprecedented visibility of the intubated airways during oral, pharyngeal, laryngeal or tracheal procedures". in this series they also described two awake intubations in highly complex patients, which were later also done, somewhat modified, by others [27].
## (s8) Flow-controlled ventilation: a more efficient ventilation
Number of References: 8

(p8.0) the effective cO 2 elimination, increased ventilation efficiency and improved lung recruitment of Fcv over vcv have been demonstrated in several randomised clinical trials. During laryngeal surgery, Fcv led to better lung aeration and lung compliance (61 ± 10 mL cmH 2 O -1 in Fcv group vs. 46 ± 5 mL cmH 2 O -1 in vcv group, P < 0.001) [28]. Also in (morbidly) obese patients Fcv showed improved lung recruitment compared to vcv (P < 0.001) [31]. in two studies in lung healthy patients, Fcv resulted in more efficient ventilation with better cO 2 removal and one also showed better oxygenation (+9%, P < 0.001) [32,33].

(p8.1) these results are in line with previously performed preclinical studies. in lung healthy pigs, Fcv improved arterial oxygenation (+9%, P = 0.002), requiring a lower minute volume (-21%, P = 0.02)  for normoventilation [34]. computed tomography (ct) analysis showed this to be related to improved lung recruitment. the results were even more striking when Fcv was applied in an acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) pig model (46% improved oxygenation, P = 0.035; 26% lower minute volume, P < 0.001) [35], or when Fcv was individually optimised and compared to Pcv (24% improved oxygenation, P = 0.0097, 53% lower minute volume, P < 0.001) [36]. Also in these animals Fcv prevented atelectasis and improved ventilation, especially in dorsal lung parts. in addition, significantly less lung damage was measured in the Fcv ventilated animals in the lung disease: the alveolar wall thickness was smaller (7.8 ± 0.2 m vs. 5.5 ± 0.1 m; P < 0.001) and there was less cell infiltrate (32 ± 2 vs. 20 ± 2/field; P < 0.001) [35].
## (s9) Flow-controlled ventilation -lung damage limitation
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) As shown in animal studies, linearisation of expiratory flow has lung protective effects [21,35]. the constant and continuous flow during Fcv results in less shear stress compared to vcv and Pcv, thereby greatly reducing the amount of energy dissipation. the amount of energy generated during Fcv per inhalation and exhalation is just sufficient for ventilation of the patient. in other words, little energy is absorbed in the lungs, which could cause damage to the lung tissue. ventilation is thus possible with a significantly reduced risk of lung damage.

(p9.1) Barnes et al. published theoretical physical evidence that to minimise energy dissipation gas flows should be constant and continuous with an i : e ratio close to one. they calculated that Fcv ventilation leads to less energy dissipation than Pcv (-52%) and vcv (-32%) [4]. the area of the pressure-volume loop (Pv loop) represents the amount of energy dissipated. Unlike conventional ventilators, which calculate intratracheal pressures based on pressures measured on the ventilator side, evone actually measures pressures intratracheally. this makes it possible to measure energy dissipation (area of Pv loop) reliably, as done by Barnes and enk [37] in a patient. the measured energy dissipation turned out to be remarkably low (0.17 J L -1 ) and even equal to values reported for spontaneous respiration (0.2-0.7 J L -1 ).
## (s14) LImItatIons
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) One of the shortcomings of a small lumen tube is the risk of obstruction with excessive airway secretions or blood from the operating field. Patients with a difficult airway, in whom the intubation procedure may be traumatic and extend beyond the standard period, are especially susceptible to this risk. Meulemans et al. [30] recommend preoperative administration of 0.2 milligrams of glycopyrronium to reduce the secretion of mucus and prevent ventilation disturbance. this long-acting anticholinergic drug should be used with caution in the presence of diseases such as cardiac disorders, renal dysfunction, glaucoma or urinary retention. When faced with excessive secretions in the airway it is not possible to use a traditional suction catheter; however, with a deflated cuff the ventilation lumen can be used for suctioning, equivalent to a 12 ch catheter [15].
