# Glaucoma and diabetes: A review

CorpusID: 240793192 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5c759885747583e5fbdc9139bebad1edf802d9b5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5c759885747583e5fbdc9139bebad1edf802d9b5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 32

(p0.0) Glaucoma is the second leading cause of irreversible blindness worldwide. 1 Worldwide more than 60 million people suffer from glaucomatous optic neuropathy with approximately 8.4 million people becoming blind due toglaucoma. 2 Primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) is the most common type of glaucoma. 3 Older age, 3,4 a family history of POAG, 5 myopia, 6 central corneal thickness, 7 and ocular hypertension 8,9 are relatively consistent risk factors for POAG.

(p0.1) Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a serious and increasingly prevalent medical health problem worldwide due to alterations in the living lifestyle and as age advances. DM is associated with severe acute and chronic complications, which negatively influence both the quality of life and the survival of the affected individuals i.e both morbidity as well as mortality. 10 Previous published reports suggest diabetes mellitus to be one of the most important risk factor for the development of glaucoma.

(p0.2) Glaucoma is the second leading cause of irreversible blindness worldwide. 1 Worldwide more than 60 million people suffer from glaucomatous optic neuropathy with approximately 8.4 million people becoming blind due toglaucoma. 2 Primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) is the most common type of glaucoma. 3 Older age, 3,4 a family history of POAG, 5 myopia, 6 central corneal thickness, 7 and ocular hypertension 8,9 are relatively consistent risk factors for POAG.

(p0.3) Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a serious and increasingly prevalent medical health problem worldwide due to alterations in the living lifestyle and as age advances. DM is associated with severe acute and chronic complications, which negatively influence both the quality of life and the survival of the affected individuals i.e both morbidity as well as mortality. 10 Previous published reports suggest diabetes mellitus to be one of the most important risk factor for the development of glaucoma.
## (s1) Epidemiology
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) Over the last decade the prevalence of glaucoma has been reported by different institutes. There have been some differences mainly as a result of different methodologies used by them. There are approximately 11.2 million individuals aged 40 years and above suffering from glaucoma in India. Primary open angle glaucoma is estimated to affect 6.48 million individuals. The estimated number with primary angleclosure glaucoma is 2.54 million. Those with any form of primary angle-closure disease could comprise 27.6 million in number. Majority of the individuals affected with the disease remain aymptomatic and pose great challenge not only in the diagnosis but also in the treatment. 11 Glaucoma leads to chronic optic neuropathy and is of progressive nature. It is characterized by typical changes in the optic disc and retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) with simultaneous defects in the entire visual field. In such cases the raised intraocular pressure (IOP) is a major risk factor. Glaucoma is ranked as the second major cause of blindness especially in India. About 50% of the glaucoma patients in the society remain asymptomatic. In India this figure is about 90%. On one hand nearly 50-90% of true glaucoma patients remain undiagnosed, while on the other hand, nearly half of the "glaucoma patients" using ocular hypotensive medication do not actually require medications or are over-treated. However, it can be easily emphasized that under-diagnosis and over-treatment are commonly reported in glaucoma especially in cases associated with diabetes mellitus. The reported cases may be much higher especially when non-compliant patients are included.
## (s4) Introduction
Number of References: 32

(p4.0) Glaucoma is the second leading cause of irreversible blindness worldwide. 1 Worldwide more than 60 million people suffer from glaucomatous optic neuropathy with approximately 8.4 million people becoming blind due toglaucoma. 2 Primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) is the most common type of glaucoma. 3 Older age, 3,4 a family history of POAG, 5 myopia, 6 central corneal thickness, 7 and ocular hypertension 8,9 are relatively consistent risk factors for POAG.

(p4.1) Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a serious and increasingly prevalent medical health problem worldwide due to alterations in the living lifestyle and as age advances. DM is associated with severe acute and chronic complications, which negatively influence both the quality of life and the survival of the affected individuals i.e both morbidity as well as mortality. 10 Previous published reports suggest diabetes mellitus to be one of the most important risk factor for the development of glaucoma.

(p4.2) Glaucoma is the second leading cause of irreversible blindness worldwide. 1 Worldwide more than 60 million people suffer from glaucomatous optic neuropathy with approximately 8.4 million people becoming blind due toglaucoma. 2 Primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) is the most common type of glaucoma. 3 Older age, 3,4 a family history of POAG, 5 myopia, 6 central corneal thickness, 7 and ocular hypertension 8,9 are relatively consistent risk factors for POAG.

(p4.3) Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a serious and increasingly prevalent medical health problem worldwide due to alterations in the living lifestyle and as age advances. DM is associated with severe acute and chronic complications, which negatively influence both the quality of life and the survival of the affected individuals i.e both morbidity as well as mortality. 10 Previous published reports suggest diabetes mellitus to be one of the most important risk factor for the development of glaucoma.
## (s5) Epidemiology
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Over the last decade the prevalence of glaucoma has been reported by different institutes. There have been some differences mainly as a result of different methodologies used by them. There are approximately 11.2 million individuals aged 40 years and above suffering from glaucoma in India. Primary open angle glaucoma is estimated to affect 6.48 million individuals. The estimated number with primary angleclosure glaucoma is 2.54 million. Those with any form of primary angle-closure disease could comprise 27.6 million in number. Majority of the individuals affected with the disease remain aymptomatic and pose great challenge not only in the diagnosis but also in the treatment. 11 Glaucoma leads to chronic optic neuropathy and is of progressive nature. It is characterized by typical changes in the optic disc and retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) with simultaneous defects in the entire visual field. In such cases the raised intraocular pressure (IOP) is a major risk factor. Glaucoma is ranked as the second major cause of blindness especially in India. About 50% of the glaucoma patients in the society remain asymptomatic. In India this figure is about 90%. On one hand nearly 50-90% of true glaucoma patients remain undiagnosed, while on the other hand, nearly half of the "glaucoma patients" using ocular hypotensive medication do not actually require medications or are over-treated. However, it can be easily emphasized that under-diagnosis and over-treatment are commonly reported in glaucoma especially in cases associated with diabetes mellitus. The reported cases may be much higher especially when non-compliant patients are included.
