# MINI REVIEW Obstetric Outcome After Surgical Treatment of Endometriosis: A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 245427357 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a473066f0050b69aba41cf12b8e8fabc958e2d7c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a473066f0050b69aba41cf12b8e8fabc958e2d7c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 18

(p0.0) Endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrial-like glands and stroma outside the uterine cavity (1). This oestrogen-dependent chronic condition affects 11.4% of reproductive age women (2) and is associated with pelvic pain and infertility (1).

(p0.1) In recent years, there has been an increasing focus on the association between endometriosis and pregnancy outcomes (3)(4)(5)(6). Endometriosis may be associated with poor pregnancy outcomes (7,8) including placenta praevia, preterm birth (PTB), premature prelabour rupture of membranes (PPROM), obstetric haemorrhage, gestational hypertensive disorders, foetal growth restriction (IUGR) and perinatal death (4). These associations are biologically plausible due to several factors: the inflammatory mileu and immune modifications established by endometriosis (9)(10)(11), the molecular, anatomical, and epigenetic abnormalities of eutopic endometrium noted in women with endometriosis (12)(13)(14), and the decidualisation of endometriosis lesions due to the hormonal changes of pregnancy (15). Several authors have attempted to demonstrate a causal relationship between endometriosis and obstetric complications (3). To date, studies are yet to explore the possibility of a common pathophysiology which predisposes to both endometriosis and adverse pregnancy outcomes. In addition, no specific management for endometriosis has been proposed to improve adverse obstetric outcomes. It is unknown whether prepregnancy surgery for endometriosis alters the risk of adverse obstetric outcomes or if there is a surgically untreatable factor influencing these outcomes. Moreover, the impact of assisted reproductive technologies (ART) on obstetric risk, as well as the influence of comorbid adenomyosis need exploration.
