# Transcranial photobiomodulation (laser) therapy for cognitive impairment: A review of molecular mechanisms and potential application to canine cognitive dysfunction (CCD)

CorpusID: 248499810 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f7d130205193a220d04480ca1580f75a8f984c0e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f7d130205193a220d04480ca1580f75a8f984c0e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects of tPBMT
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) Neuroinflammation and oxidative stress are prominent pathologic processes contributing to neuronal loss and cognitive decline in AD/CCD Hennessy and Hamblin, 2017;Chapagain et al., 2018;Dewey et al., 2019;Hamblin, 2019). There are numerous pro-inflammatory pathways responsible for these processes, some of which were previously described (e.g., Aβ-mediated inflammation, microglialmediated inflammation, etc.). In one study involving human gingival fibroblast cells, PBMT at 635 nm was shown to inhibit both cyclo-oxygenase 2 and the NF-kB (nuclear factor kappa light chain enhancer of activated B cells) transcription pathway, leading to an antiinflammatory effect (Lim et al., 2013). One mechanism of oxidative injury in AD is Aβ-induced activation of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase in brain astrocytes and microglia, leading to superoxide anion production; these anions subsequently cause damage to adjacent neurons. In addition to this direct damage, ROS like superoxide anion leads to activation of cytosolic phospholipase A 2 (cPLA 2 ). cPLA 2 activation leads to mitochondrial damage, with further production of damaging ROS molecules. In a study of cultured rat astrocytes exposed to Aβ, it was shown that stimulating the cells with PBMT at 632.8 nm light suppressed both superoxide anion production and activation of cPLA 2 (Yang et al., 2010).
## (s6) Effects of tPBMT on brain blood flow
Number of References: 10

(p6.0) Diminished cerebral blood flow is a key pathological feature of AD/CCD that begins early in the disease process (De la Torre Chapagain et al., 2018;Dewey et al., 2019). PBMT has been shown to improve blood flow via stimulating NO production, as well as by promoting angiogenesis (Chen et al., 2008;Hennessy and Hamblin, 2017;Hamblin, 2019;De la Torre et al., 2020). NO is an important vasodilator and PBMT can increase its production by both mitochondrial stimulation and stimulating nitric oxide synthase (NOS), the enzyme necessary for NO production in tissues (Chen et al., 2008;De la Torre et al., 2020). Transcranial PBMT at 808 nm wavelength was shown in a mouse model to increase cerebral blood flow by 30%, presumably via stimulating NOS and subsequent NO production (Uozumi et al., 2010). Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a peptide signaling molecule that has a central role in angiogenesis. Augmented VEGF expression and increased angiogenesis was demonstrated in a rat ischemic skin flap model in which the tissue was exposed to PBMT at wavelengths of 660 and 780 nm (Cury et al., 2013).
