# Critical Thinking Skills in Education: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 243867135 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff80f9ea8d315caff1db69da6deaeca24e3c36f1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff80f9ea8d315caff1db69da6deaeca24e3c36f1)

Fields: Education

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 9

(p0.0) Education is now widely regarded as a critical component in developing competent societies in the 21 st century. One of the most important goals in 21 st century education is to empower critical thinking skills. It is said that students not only need intellectual mastery to survive, but also the capability that allows them to think critically and develop life skills (Glaze, 2018;Lindsey et al., 2014). Therefore, educational development should be able to accommodate the empowerment of students' critical thinking skill (Strauss, 2016). The development is indistinguishable from a number of studies that have sparked significant debate about how to sustain quality improvement in the teaching procedures (Fauzi & Pradipta, 2018;Spencer-Rodgers & Cortijo-Ocaña, 2015). This paper discusses critical thinking in the context of teaching and learning. One of the desirable outcomes of education is the capability to think critically (Facione et al., 2000). "Employers require graduate workers who can transfer their critical thinking talents to the workplace" while entering the sphere of a global market (Tapper, 2004). A wide range of academic disciplines should incorporate critical thinking into their teaching and learning ( Halpern, 1998). In light of this, it is proposed that teachers encourage students to be successful in the workplace in the future. Students' critical thinking skills must be developed in order for them to be prepared to succeed in life. If students have these skills, they will be best prepared to work collaboratively, think critically and analytically, communicate effectively, and solve problems efficiently in the workplace. In order to participate in such activities, students must be engaged in active learning, have advanced problem-solving abilities, and be able to work in groups. As a result, by developing strong leadership, communication, and teamwork skills, as well as cross-cultural and cross-national knowledge, students' confidence in their ability to contribute to the community can be developed (Kalonji, 2005). Due to the increased interest in critical thinking in education research, there have been a few attempts to report on the literature trend, particularly those that used a systematic literature approach. Furthermore, bibliometrics is the statistical and quantitative analysis of journals. Therefore, the current state of critical thinking researches are reviewed in this paper and its future prospects are assessed. The purpose of this research is to present a systematic review on critical thinking in the classroom and compare them with the field's global development.
