# Review Article Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis in Alzheimer's Disease: An Overview of Human and Animal Studies with Implications for Therapeutic Perspectives Aimed at Memory Recovery

CorpusID: 245995397 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b43eb303b84c81f9c977bff664896d0b0799dbbc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b43eb303b84c81f9c977bff664896d0b0799dbbc)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 5

(p0.0) Human adult neurogenesis, the generation of new neurons from neural stem cells in specific areas of the adult brain, has been at the center of an intense scientific research over the past years. New neurons are continuously generated in the human hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG), a brain region involved in learning and memory. This ongoing generation peaks at a young age but declines in adulthood and drops in old age, when memory decline also commonly occurs. The temporal correlation between reduced adult hippocampal neurogenesis (AHN) and impaired memory has been the rationale for animal studies investigating whether and how hippocampal newborn neurons contribute to memory. The general view that emerged from these studies is that new neurons are involved in distinct mechanisms of memory [1,2].

(p0.1) The impact of ageing on altered AHN and the associated cognitive decline has encouraged researchers to investigate the possibility that deficits in AHN are a complicating factor in Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most frequent form of dementia and memory loss in ageing individuals. This possibility has been intensively debated, due to the lack of a clear and homogeneous methodology for the identification of new neurons in human hippocampal tissues. However, recent studies [3][4][5] provided convincing evidence for a massive decay in AHN in AD brains and shifted the focus of the debate towards new scientific questions concerning therapeutic approaches that can reinforce neurogenesis in AD patients.
## (s3) Evidence of Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis in
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) Humans. The presence of newly generated neurons in the human hippocampus has raised widely contrasting, sometimes antithetic, results from different research groups. The first report of human hippocampal neurogenesis has been documented in 1998 by Eriksson et al. In this study, BrdU (a dye that intercalates DNA during cell division) was administered to 5 terminal cancer patients and 1 subject control, and the presence of positive BrdU cells (BrdU + ) was found in the postmortem autoptic DG samples [11]. However, the small sample size and the unethical implications of the study raised both doubts and contradictions concerning these results. A couple of decades later, Spalding et al. [12] employed carbon-14 dating to estimate the age of neurons in postmortem tissues of 55 people aged 15-92. Based on this indirect procedure, the study assessed the production of about 700 new neurons every day in the hippocampus of middle-aged men. It was then suggested that about 35% of the hippocampal cells renew during a lifespan, with an estimated turnover of around 2% every year [12,13].

(p3.1) Over the last few years, three relevant publications reopened the debate about adult hippocampal neurogenesis. One of these studies [14], based on immunofluorescence examination of autoptic hippocampal samples, stated that there was no evidence of hippocampal neurogenesis from an adolescent stage onward. This "denial" study has raised a number of animated methodological criticisms concerning tissue selection and preservation, including (a) the scarcity of information about perimortem causes, which might affect tissue preservation; (b) the 48 hours postmortem delay (PMD), i.e., the time elapsed between death and brain fixation, which could be associated with protein rupture and the consequent disappearance of the antigenicity of several markers including DCX [15] the main neurogenic marker used in human studies; and (c) the morphometric analysis, which was run on a small number of samples randomly chosen and not taking into consideration that neurogenesis differs considerably between the dorsal and ventral region of the hippocampus.
## (s8) APP Proteolytic Products.
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Age and genetic factors, including Presenilin1 (PS1) mutations, are at the origin of APP processing into proteolytic products that gradually accumulate in amyloid plaques. One study directly addressing whether the presence of amyloid plaques alters hippocampal neurogenesis was conducted in the plaque-bearing Tg2576 mouse model. This study reported that a reduced number of BrdU + cells was already evident in the DG of mutant mice before plaque appearance, while pharmacological rescue of neurogenesis did not alter plaque load [43]. This evidence, which indicates that the production of new neurons is already impaired before plaque manifestation, has been confirmed by other studies on mouse models of AD-like progression (see Table 1). In apparent contrast, one study using the APP/PS1ΔΕ9 mouse model [44] found that treating mutant mice with metformin resulted in both reduced plaque load and enhanced neurogenesis. However, it is likely that these events are unrelated and are linked to a common third factor, i.e., the inhibition of reactive astrogliosis and microgliosis induced by metformin.
## (s10) TAU.
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) In physiological conditions, TAU phosphorylation facilitates migration of DCX + cells [66], but levels of hyperphosphorylated TAU have been shown to be extremely high in neurogenic microenvironments of APP/PS1ΔΕ9 mice [67]. In particular, TAU immunoreactivity colocalized with BrdU + , GFAP + , and DCX + , meaning that alterations of TAU phosphorylation may be detrimental to NSCs, NPCs, and neuroblasts. One mechanism through which phosphorylated TAU can impact on AHN has been recently described in an important paper [68]. This study reported that phosphorylated TAU accumulates in GABAergic interneurons of the DG in both AD patients and 3xTg mouse model. The consequent GABA reduction, local circuit disinhibition and astrogliosis in turn impair AHN. The evidence that these alterations are reported in mice mutant for APP suggests a role for APP products in triggering TAU phosphorylation that alters AHN. Consistent with this view, we recently reported that, at least in the subventricular zone of an AD mouse model, NSCs fail to terminally differentiate due to TAU-mediated microtubule alteration, while blocking the generation of Aβ oligomers rescues this effect [69]. Hence, the induction of TAU phosphorylation can be one other mechanism through which APP products alter AHN in AD brains.
## (s15) Neural Plasticity
Number of References: 10

(p15.0) Osthole [51,81] improved AHN and MWM performance in APP/PS1 mice. Similarly, administration of Prosaposin, a secreted protein that acts as trophic factor, rescued both loss of AHN and MWM impairment induced by intracranial Aβ1-42 injections in mice [45]. In a clinical trial performed in the 90s, neurotrophic factors were delivered by intracranial injection to the brains of a small group of AD patients. Despite modest cognitive improvement after short-term NGF infusion, this treatment was associated with severe side effects in the long term, making it not suitable for AD therapy [104][105][106].

(p15.1) Treatments that favor proliferation and differentiation of stem cells also ameliorate AHN and memory in AD mice. Fluoxetine, that increases progenitors' proliferation, restored memory in aged AD mice [43] while administration of phosphodiesterase inhibitors, which promotes cell differentiation, improved AHN and rescued object recognition, Y-maze and MWM in AD mouse models [57,77]. Furthermore, lithium, which favors proliferation and neuron fate specification of newborn cells, was sufficient to rescue MWM in TgCRND8 mice [74].
