# MAINTENANCE ANALYTICS FOR BUILDING DECISION- MAKING: A LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 248139104 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f74dfcd754f9688fe2a43625a55268f3928f0e36](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f74dfcd754f9688fe2a43625a55268f3928f0e36)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s5) Computerised Maintenance Management System (CMMS)
Number of References: 8

(p5.0) The CMMS was designed to assist in planning, management, and administrative functions needed for effective maintenance and repairs (Jamkhaneh et al., 2018). The software assesses a building to reduce maintenance problems (O'Donoghue & Prendergast, 2004). Lopes et al. (2016) listed the functions of CMMS to be facility management, work order management, inventory control, preventive maintenance, and report management. It covers a wide range of activities related to maintenance work order, work location, material, equipment needed, and intended date of completion (Hassanain, Froese & Vanier, 2003). Also, it supports the maintenance budget and financial management. The CMMS tool is not exclusively designed to control maintenance but to ensure high output by carrying out appropriate activities over time (Kumar et al., 2014).

(p5.1) Of the various maintenance systems, CMMS is the most practical for the facilitation of maintenance decision-making because it contains information on maintenance operations (Yousefli, Nasiri & Moselhi, 2020). Although it is impossible to be proactive in maintenance without computer-based support, the successful implementation of CMMS is still low (Wienker, Henderson & Volkerts, 2016). This is because organisations are reluctant to adopt the accompanying process for its implementation, their view of CMMS as a strategy rather than a maintenance tool, the lack of adequate IT infrastructure, failure to promote its importance to senior management, and insufficient resources for its implementation (Wienker et al., 2016).
