# A review of durian plant-bat pollinator interactions

CorpusID: 245618338 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cb0a462b6fe6a9610c2811fc8113020ef8bee666](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cb0a462b6fe6a9610c2811fc8113020ef8bee666)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Biology

## (s1) Assessment on durian plant-bat pollinator interactions
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) Recently, the contributions of vertebrate pollinators in wild and crop plant production have been highlighted globally. Ratto et al. (2018) concluded that their meta-analysis showed that chiropterophilous plants are more dependent on bats than any other vertebrate pollinators; chiropterophilous plants that are pollinated by other vertebrates showed an average of 83% reduction in fruit/seed production. Durian-bat interactions were not explored in detail previously, as most studies were either focused on the pollinator or the plant itself. The majority of past studies on this topic either focused on the foraging ecology, bat diet and bat pollination process or durian flowering, pollination (natural & artificial) and fruit production (Table 1). Pollination exclusion experiments provided the link to both durian and bat relationship, elucidating the significance of bat pollination in durian production, but there is the labor cost versus ecological benefit point debated upon as manual pollination seems to produce the highest fruit yield than open pollination (Bumrungsri et al. 2009;Chaiyarat et al. 2020).
## (s10) Nectar theft
Number of References: 10

(p10.0) Nectar theft is the act of flower visitors removing nectar forgoing the transfer of pollens (Maloof and Inouye 2000). Accounts from previous studies have shown that bees avoid stigmatic contact while extracting nectar from the calyx of the durian flower (Acharya 2014; Aziz et al. 2017a). According to Wayo et al. (2018), Apis cerana, the Asian honey bee occasionally visits durian flowers by landing in the corolla to extract nectar. This behavior might result from nocturnal anthesis as the bees visit the flowers during the late afternoon and early evening, gaining no pollen during foraging. Specialized floral traits of the durian make the nectar inaccessible to other pollinators may incentivize nectar theft as it is the only way to access floral nectar (Souza et al. 2016;Irwin et al. 2010). Even nocturnal bees are not exempt from nectar theft as Ptiloglossa latecalcarata exploit floral resources (nectar & pollen) from a bat-pollinated plant, Caryocar brasiliense but do not pollinate them, resulting in no fruit set (de Araujo et al. 2020). Another instance of nectar theft to durian flower comes from the bird group in which a crimson sunbird, Aethopyga siparaja visited closed flower buds and punctured the base with their beak to collect nectar (Sheherazade et al. 2019). Other flower visitors may opt to rob nectar due to floral nectar competition with one another (Irwin et al. 2010). The argument that nectar thieves may have a positive impact and not entirely negative was brought up by Maloof and Inouye (2000). The bees might have a more subtle effect on changing the behavior of bats by increasing flight distance, visiting more flowers and reducing time spent on a flower when faced with lesser amounts of nectar in robbed flowers. These behavioral changes will likely increase the pollen flow rate and distance (Maloof and Inouye 2000). Whether or not the insects that have been documented to visit durian flowers such as Apis dorsata, Apis cerana, stingless bees and pollen beetles exhibit clear nectar robbing behaviors and such behavior provide a subtle positive impact to durian and other chiropterophilous plants need further clarification.
## (s12) Co-evolutionary adaptations of nectarivorous bats and chiropterophilous durian
Number of References: 5

(p12.0) The interactions between bats and the durian tree are mutualistic in which each organism influences and adapts to one another to reap the benefits. Morphologically speaking, nectarivorous bats have evolved elongated, narrow rostrum and an elongated, protrusible, brush-like tongue with the lateral and tip areas covered with long tip filiform papillae which maximize the surface area of the tongue via capillarity to lap up nectar extensively (Howell and Hodgkin 1976;Hollar and Springer 1997). Frugi-nectarivorous bats have fewer tip filiform papillae on the surface area of the tongue as they only feed on nectar opportunistically, while in contrast, insectivorous bats have no tip filiform papillae and generally less filiform papillae around the tongue (Howell and Hodgkin 1976;Massoud and Abumandour 2020) (Figure 3). Nectarivorous bats also possess hairs with scales that project away from the shaft, collecting and retaining pollen grains. In comparison, insectivorous bats have hairs with smooth scaling (Howell and Hodgkin 1976).
