# Integrating Multiple Inputs Into an Artificial Pancreas System: Narrative Literature Review

CorpusID: 247083479 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d68eb2f2d0738233cff1fb95037447afdaa23f7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d68eb2f2d0738233cff1fb95037447afdaa23f7)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s1) Background
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) In health, pancreatic islet β-cells respond to metabolic and neurohormonal signals to secrete insulin into the portal vein at finely controlled variable rates to ensure that blood glucose level and overall metabolic homeostasis are maintained. Diabetes is a metabolic disease characterized by elevated blood glucose concentrations as a consequence of an absolute deficiency of insulin secretion or inadequate insulin secretion to compensate for ineffective insulin action. Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is caused by the autoimmune destruction of the islet β-cells and results in absolute insulin deficiency [1]. An inability to match insulin delivery with an individual's changing insulin requirements results in either hypoglycemia (low blood glucose level) or hyperglycemia (high blood glucose level). Hypoglycemia, if severe, may result in loss of consciousness, seizures, or even death. Long-term exposure to hyperglycemia results in complications such as blindness, limb amputations, and cardiovascular disease. Maintaining blood glucose levels in a healthy range is essential for the avoidance of severe shortand long-term complications of diabetes [1].
## (s15) MAPS Architectures
Number of References: 35

(p15.0) The additional inputs identified in the previous section have been integrated into different architectures to augment the controllers (   [47] MATLAB simulation Fuzzy fusion controller to fuse the additional input to prompt glucagon infusion (dual hormone) PID c controller ECG a , HR b , and skin resistance Khan et al [48] MATLAB simulation Fuzzy fusion controller to fuse the additional input to prompt glucagon infusion (dual hormone)

(p15.1) Neural network predictive controller ECG, HR, and skin resistance Qaisar et al [49] Simulator (not specified) Additional inputs used to switch between modes PLGS d algorithm HR and accelerometer Stenerson et al [50] Clinical study Additional inputs used to switch between modes (only basal rate is controlled) Control to range HR DeBoer et al [51] Simulation; clinical study Additional inputs used to switch the controller to a different mode (dual hormone) FMPD f controller EE e (HR and accelerometer used to calculate) Jacobs et al [42] Simulation Inputs used to calculate MET, which is directly used by the controller for decision-making; meal data also provided to the controller Stenerson et al [50], DeBoer et al [51], and Jacobs et al [42] focused on switching the mode of the controller based on detected activity. HR and accelerometer input were used in this approach, where the controller mode was changed through adjusting parameters and thresholds within the controller. Stenerson et al [50] suspended their predictive low-glucose suspend algorithm, and DeBoer et al [51] adjusted the hypoglycemia risk threshold in their control-to-range controller when exercise was detected. Jacobs et al [42] used a fading memory proportional derivative dual hormone controller that, upon the detection of exercise, carried out dosing of insulin and glucagon based on a set of static rules. This approach only focused on activity detection. However, the identified additional inputs may contain valuable information related to the glucose regulation process. Hence, studies have focused on direct integration of the additional inputs for decision-making.

(p15.2) Quiroz and Femat [46], Quiroz et al [47], Resalat et al [43], Turksoy et al [36,37], and Hajizadeh et al [38] focused on direct integration of additional inputs in the controller design. Quiroz and Femat [46] and Quiroz et al [47] directly integrated lactate and adrenaline input into their H ∞ control algorithm. Resalat et al [43] developed a run-to-run MPC that used continuous MET data for exercise detection. Turksoy et al [36]  GSR into a generalized predictive controller by developing time series models using autoregressive moving average with external input, recursive least squares, and constrained optimization techniques. They improved on their work by introducing a time-varying forgetting factor for the weighted recursive least squares algorithm and focusing on trajectory tracking [37]. Hajizadeh et al [38] used recursive subspace identification techniques to develop an adaptive MPC controller incorporating MET input. The continuously integrated inputs such as EE and GSR provided valuable and timely insights regarding the glucose regulatory process, which is valuable.

(p15.3) Designing submodules for the APS has also been widely explored, where the focus has been on using the input to enhance insulin and glucagon infusion and to design safety mechanisms for the APS. These submodules were mainly linked to identified limitations such as meal detection, activity detection, and hypoglycemia detection. Khan et al [48] and Qaisar et al [49] developed a hypoglycemia-detection module using HR, ECG (QT Interval), and skin resistance. In addition to the main controller focusing on insulin infusion, a fuzzy logic fusion controller was introduced to infuse glucagon based on the identified signals during a hypoglycemia event. Turksoy et al [41] performed a clinical trial where hypoglycemia early alarm [55], meal detection [56,64], hypoglycemia prediction, and carbohydrate recommendation [57] modules were integrated into the final APS design. Hajizadeh at al [38] focused on plasma insulin concentration estimation and meal effect estimation modules in their research. Resalat et al [43] proposed and evaluated an insulin sensitivity adaptation algorithm and an adaptive-learning postprandial hypoglycemia prevention algorithm. However, it is important to note that some of these submodules only used existing CGM measurements. Different safety modules have also been introduced, where Turksoy et al [36] and DeBoer et al [51] focused on hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia safety, respectively, through insulin-on-board estimates. The development of submodules enhances the interpretability of the APS operation, which is essential in safety-critical applications. Most of the studies have used submodules in their controllers, both with switching the controller mode through activity detection and when additional inputs are directly integrated. Hence, designing submodules using additional input targeting the identified limitations is beneficial in APS development.
## (s20) Conclusions and Comparison With Prior Work
Number of References: 6

(p20.0) Kudva et al [30] analyzed the clinical importance of incorporating additional signals, and Cinar [29] and Patek [31] analyzed the current limitations in APS design and the approach to MAPS development. In this survey, we analyzed existing APS designs to identify the types of input variables used, control techniques, architectures, and validation methodologies. This survey was restricted to studies that proposed APS. However, research studies exist that aim to identify relationships between various physiological signals and T1D. The identification of such relationships would be beneficial for the development of MAPS. Previous research has also focused on designing submodules such as meal detection [56], carbohydrate recommendation [57], and hypoglycemia prediction [55] modules for APS. Given the scope of this survey, such submodules were only identified and only the final integrated APS were evaluated. This survey mainly focused on the technical aspects of MAPS development. It is also important to explore and evaluate the corresponding practical aspects (eg, additional user burden, sensor failures, and psychosocial impact).
