# Generalized Modeling: A survey and guide

CorpusID: 244773321 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2903d69957a831ae2d47035f1304efc13afb8409](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2903d69957a831ae2d47035f1304efc13afb8409)

Fields: Biology, Physics

## (s2) Food Web Models
Number of References: 4

(p2.0) The first GM was a simple predator-prey model proposed by Wolfgang Ebenhöh in 2003. An analysis of this model was eventually published in . The predator-prey model was subsequently expanded into a general food-chain model. Analysis of this model revealed minor details in the shape of the functions used in conventional food-chain models can have a strong impact on stability properties , the same insight was discovered almost simultaneously in a different way in Fussmann and Blasius (2005). A similar GM setting, exploring the so-called paradox of enrichment, was recently studied in Awender et al. (2021).

(p2.1) While GM was initially viewed as a trick that worked in one particular model, the subsequent extensions implemented in Gross et al. (2005) made clear that the approach is generally applicable. This lead to an early paper that presented the GM as a general methodology (Gross and Feudel, 2006). This paper concluded by deriving a general food-web model, but did not analyze it in any detail.
## (s4) Other applications and similar approaches
Number of References: 5

(p4.0) In the medicine, GM were used to identify an early warning signal for critical transitions in systemic inflammation (Scheff et al., 2013) GMs were also applied to study questions in social dynamics and management. Gross and Feudel (2006)  A similar approach to GM is the analysis applied in Kisdi et al. (2013), that uses unspecified evolutionary trade-off curves to identify trade-off functions that lead to stable limit cycles in eco-evolutionary models. Another related method is the general structural sensitivity analysis proposed by Adamson and Morozov (2014b), that considers the infinite-dimensional neighborhood of model functions to determine the sensitivity with regards to the local stability of steady states. Thereby, they provide a method to conduct bifurcation analysis under uncertainty in model functions and to determine probabilities of certain bifurcations (Adamson and Morozov, 2014a). Their framework shares the use of unspecified functions, the steady-state treatment and the in-cooperation of the values of unknown functions as parameters in the Jacobian with the GM approach.
