# Playing it safe: A literature review and research agenda on motivational technologies in transportation safety

CorpusID: 247984643 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9be99d5a68b71792a180c00b280be8eb605c98a9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9be99d5a68b71792a180c00b280be8eb605c98a9)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s6) Future avenues
Number of References: 12

(p6.0) The reviewed studies indicate the motivational technologies potential for enhancing transportation safety by promoting psychological and behavioral change. However, there are limitations and shortcomings to overcome, many of which relate to the motivational technologies research legacy, such as the lack of comprehensive theory-driven designs and evaluation of the effects of individual affordances as well as the incomplete descriptions of interventions [14,28]. Additional thematic and methodological gaps and corresponding future research directions are further discussed below.

(p6.1) Future research should cover a broader scope of transportation modes. Literature predominantly examined roadway transportation, which is the most accident-prone mode [21], while 11 out of 62 studies targeted airway safety. Surprisingly only two non-empirical studies focused on waterway safety, whereas no studies related to railway safety were found. While accidents occurring in these modalities do not pose a prominent global problem similarly to roadway transportation, human behavior is still essential to ensure their safety. On the one hand, the risks of maritime accidents become prevalent especially under complex waterway traffic and environmental circumstances, and similarly to airway emergencies, appropriate passenger and crew behavior is crucial in maritime disasters, making it a prominent context for motivational technology interventions that aim to educate and bring about attitudinal change [117,118]. Additionally, maritime shipping is becoming increasingly autonomous, posing novel challenges, such as lack of training and experience of daily operations, which motivational technologies could tackle [110]. On the other hand, in the railroad safety domain, motivational technologies could support the sustained alertness of train operators who perform highly monotonous tasks in their daily work.
## (s28) Future avenues
Number of References: 12

(p28.0) The reviewed studies indicate the motivational technologies potential for enhancing transportation safety by promoting psychological and behavioral change. However, there are limitations and shortcomings to overcome, many of which relate to the motivational technologies research legacy, such as the lack of comprehensive theory-driven designs and evaluation of the effects of individual affordances as well as the incomplete descriptions of interventions [14,28]. Additional thematic and methodological gaps and corresponding future research directions are further discussed below.

(p28.1) Future research should cover a broader scope of transportation modes. Literature predominantly examined roadway transportation, which is the most accident-prone mode [21], while 11 out of 62 studies targeted airway safety. Surprisingly only two non-empirical studies focused on waterway safety, whereas no studies related to railway safety were found. While accidents occurring in these modalities do not pose a prominent global problem similarly to roadway transportation, human behavior is still essential to ensure their safety. On the one hand, the risks of maritime accidents become prevalent especially under complex waterway traffic and environmental circumstances, and similarly to airway emergencies, appropriate passenger and crew behavior is crucial in maritime disasters, making it a prominent context for motivational technology interventions that aim to educate and bring about attitudinal change [117,118]. Additionally, maritime shipping is becoming increasingly autonomous, posing novel challenges, such as lack of training and experience of daily operations, which motivational technologies could tackle [110]. On the other hand, in the railroad safety domain, motivational technologies could support the sustained alertness of train operators who perform highly monotonous tasks in their daily work.
