# Deep Personality Trait Recognition: A Survey

CorpusID: 248530069 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9f704ce3bcf044b06050ea966af67974cd6a41dc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9f704ce3bcf044b06050ea966af67974cd6a41dc)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Psychology

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 10

(p0.0) In (Vinciarelli and Mohammadi, 2014), the concept of personality can be defined as "personality is a psychological construct aimed at explaining the wide variety of human behaviors in terms of a few, stable and measurable individual characteristics. " In this case, personality can be characterized as a series of traits. The trait theory (Costa and McCrae, 1998) aims to predict relatively stable measurable aspects in the people's daily lives on the basis of traits. It is used to measure human personality traits, that is, customary patterns of human behaviors, ideas, and emotions which are relatively kept steady over time. Some previous works explored the interaction between personality and computing by means of measuring the connection between traits and the used techniques (Guadagno et al., 2008;Qiu et al., 2012;Quercia et al., 2012;Liu et al., 2016;Kim and Song, 2018;Masuyama et al., 2018;Goreis and Voracek, 2019;Li et al., 2020a). The central idea behind these works is that users aim to externalize their personality by the way of using techniques. Accordingly, personality traits can be identified as predictive for users' behaviors.
## (s5) ChaLearn First Impression V1-V2
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) The ChaLearn First Impression data set has been developed into two versions: the ChaLearn First Impression V1 (Ponce-López et al., 2016), and the ChaLearn First Impression V2 : The ChaLearn First Impression V1 contains 10,000 short video clips, collected from about 2,762 YouTube highdefinition videos of persons who are facing and speaking to the camera in English. Each video has a resolution of 1,280 × 720, and a length of 15 s. The involved persons have different genders, ages, nationalities, and races. In this case, the task of predicting apparent personality traits becomes more difficult and challenging. The ChaLearn First Impression V2  is an extension of the ChaLearn First Impression V1 (Ponce-López et al., 2016). In this data set, the new variable of "job interview" is added for prediction. The manual transcriptions associated with the corresponding audio in videos are also provided.
## (s10) Convolutional Neural Networks
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) were originally proposed by LeCun et al. (1998) in 1998, and initially developed as an advanced version of deep CNNs, such as AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) in 2012. The basic structure of CNNs comprises of convolutional layers, pooling layers, as well as fully connected (FC) layers. CNNs usually have multiple convolutional and pooling layers, in which pooling layers are frequently followed by convolutional layers. The convolutional layer adopts a number of learnable filters to perform convolution operation on the whole input image, thereby yielding the corresponding activation feature maps. The pooling layer is employed to reduce the spatial size of produced feature maps by using non-linear down-sampling methods for translation invariance. Two wellknown used pooling strategies are average pooling and max-pooling. The FC layer, in which all neurons are fully connected, is often placed at the end of the CNN network.
## (s26) Limitations of Deep Learning Techniques
Number of References: 2

(p26.0) So far, a variety of representative deep leaning methods have been successfully applied to learn high-level feature representations for automatic personality trait recognition. Moreover, these deep learning methods usually beat other methods adopting hand-crafted features. Nevertheless, these used deep learning techniques have a tremendous amount of network parameters, resulting in its large computation complexity. In this case, for real-time application sceneries it is often difficult to implement fast automatic personality trait prediction with these complicated deep models. To alleviate this issue, a deep model compression (Liang et al., 2021a;Tartaglione et al., 2021) may present a possible solution.
