# A Review of Evolutionary Multi-objective Clustering Approaches

CorpusID: 247922834 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38e32086eb4cf4ca169d72643a590d5fae55f39e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38e32086eb4cf4ca169d72643a590d5fae55f39e)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s11) Evaluation of the EMOC algorithms
Number of References: 6

(p11.0) In terms of evaluating clustering results, most EMOC approaches consider an external validity index, such as the adjusted Rand index (ARI) [90], to evaluate the set of final solutions. ARI is a corrected-for-chance version of the Rand index [47], computes the probability of two objects of two partitions belong to the same cluster or different clusters, as defined in Equation (4), where n i j is the number of common objects between the clusters c i in π a and c j in π b , n i is the number of objects in the cluster c i in p a , e n j is the number of objects in the cluster c j in π b , k a and k b are the number of clusters in the partitions π a and π b .

(p11.1) Besides that, the analysis of internal criteria can also be applied to investigate specific data structures. For example, in [92,93], H, S ep A L, Dunn, and Dev are evaluated to analyze the general behavior of the EMOC approaches regarding each criterion. In [21,22], they compare their approaches with other ones based on the DB, H, and S ep AL .
## (s20) Multi-k-clustering-based EMOC
Number of References: 5

(p20.0) Other approaches consider multi-k-clustering with the a posteriori method, where k is taken as an objective function, differing from the automatic data clustering methods, such as MOCK, that consider k an inner aspect of the decision variable, obtained by the optimization of clustering criteria. For that, Du et al. [19] introduced a specific solution representation, the linked-list based encoding. The authors used the fellowship between the objects instead of the label-based relationship to define the clusters, in which each cluster has all its elements linked, similar to the relationship of the nodes presented by Handl and Knowles [41]. This representation was applied in the MOGA-LL [19], an EMOC approach that optimizes the T WCV and k as objective functions in the NPGA, considering two particular operators: (i) an adapted one-point crossover, which allows different clusters to exchange partial contents and may split a cluster into two; (ii) link-replacement mutation, in which a sub-group of objects is associated with another cluster instead of just a different node.

(p20.1) Wang et al. [115] proposed the EMO-KC (Evolutionary Multi-objective k-clustering) to demonstrate the importance of the conflict between the objective functions to obtain a diverse set of final solutions with a different number of clusters. They showed evidence that Var and k are not always conflicting between two individuals and introduced a transformation of the variance (Var) formulation, (1 − exp −1.Var ) − k, to solve this problem. In [113], this same pair of objective functions was explored in a new MOEA that considers a constrained decomposition with grids (CCDG-K).
## (s21) Specific MOEA for EMOC
Number of References: 7

(p21.0) As previously presented, Dutta et al. [21,22] provided a specific MOEA, the Hybrid MOGA designed for categorical data. Besides that, another particular approach is the VRJGGA -Variable-length Real Jumping Genes Genetic Algorithm introduced by Ripon et al. [92]. The VRJGGA is an EMOC algorithm that extends the Jumping Genes Genetic Algorithm (JGGA) [67] and applies the survival selection of the NSGA-II. The JGGA considers jumping gene operations before evolutionary operators to improve the diversity of solutions. VRJGGA uses a centroid-based encoding associated with the modulo crossover [107] (an adapted one-point crossover, where each child is a set of completely specified sub-solutions) and the polynomial mutation, to optimize the Ent and S ep A L. In [93], the authors provided new features to VRJGGA, introducing two local search methods, probabilistic cluster merging, and splitting for clustering improvement. Ripon and Siddique [91] also applied the extended version of the JGGA to EMOC, introducing the EMCOC -Evolutionary Multi-objective Clustering for detecting overlapping clusters. EMCOC introduces a new chromosome representation and cluster-assignment method in which each data point is a candidate center and a binary encoding is applied to define whether a data point is a center or not.
## (s22) Other MOC approaches
Number of References: 4

(p22.0) Some works consider other objective functions and provide other features in the design of the EMOC approaches. Besides the above-mentioned works, we also found specific approaches, in which their main features consider some particular methods, as follows.Özyer and Alhaj [80] applied the divide and conquer approach in an iterative way to handle the clustering process and improve the performance of the evolutionary algorithm. Zheng et al. [127] extended algebraic operations of gene expression to propose a multi-objective gene expression programming for clustering. Garcia-Piquer [33], focused on reducing the impact of the volume of data in the EA by means of the stratification of the complete data set into disjoint strata and alternating them in each cycle of the GA. Liu et al. [61] improved the performance of multi-objective soft subspace clustering algorithms for clustering high-dimensional data by using a transfer learning-assisted multi-objective evolutionary clustering framework with MOEA/D.
## (s26) Document clustering
Number of References: 2

(p26.0) Document clustering is a data/text mining technique that makes use of text clustering to divide documents according to various topics. Lee et al. [54] proposed a method of enhancing multi-objective genetic algorithms for document clustering with parallel programming. Wahid et al. [112] presented a new approach for document clustering based on SPEA-II, that explores the concept of multiple views to generate multiple clustering solutions with diversity.
## (s27) Gene/micro-array analysis
Number of References: 6

(p27.0) The Gene/Micro-array clustering analysis is applied to discover groups of correlated genes potentially co-regulated or associated with the disease or conditions under investigation. Romero-Zaliz et al. [95] provided an EMOC to identify conceptual models in structured datasets that can explain and predict phenotypes in the immune inflammatory response problem, similar to those provided by gene expression or other genetic markers. Li et al. [57] provided a new ensemble operator to improve the data clustering in gene expression datasets in IMOCLE [62]. Mukhopadhyay et al. [77] provide an approach that simultaneously selects relevant genes and clusters the input dataset. Mukhopadhyay et al. [78] presented an interactive approach to multi-objective clustering of gene expression patterns considering an adapted NSGA-II, in which inputs from the human decision-maker (DM) are taken to learn which objective functions are more suitable for the datasets. Dutta and Saha [24] presented an EMOC approach to identify gene clusters from a given expression dataset; in which apart from utilizing the gene expression values of the individual genes, the corresponding protein-protein interaction scores are also used while clustering the set of genes.
## (s28) Image Segmentation
Number of References: 6

(p28.0) Image segmentation consists of the process by which a digital image is partitioned into various subgroups (multiple parts or regions), often based on the characteristics of the pixels in the image. Qian et al. [86] presented a multi-objective evolutionary ensemble algorithm to perform texture image segmentation. Shirakawa and Nagao [101] introduced a variation of the MOCK [42] improving its general features for its application in image segmentation.

(p28.1) Zhang et al. [122] provided a multi-objective evolutionary fuzzy clustering for image segmentation, considering the original FCM energy function to preserve image details and a function based on local information to restrain noise, both minimized by MOEA/D. Zhao et al. [124,125] introduced the use of the concepts of intuitionistic fuzzy set (IFS) and multiple spatial information to generate an EMOC approach to overcome the effect of noise in image segmentation.
## (s30) Network community detection
Number of References: 4

(p30.0) Network community detection refers to the procedure of identifying groups of interacting vertices in a network depending upon their structural properties to unveil the dynamic behaviors of networks. Folino and Pizzuti [30] provided an approach for the detection of communities with temporal smoothness formulated as an EMOC. Hariz et al. [2] reformulate the community detection problem as an EMOC model that can simultaneously capture the intra and inter-community structures based on functions inspired by different types of node neighborhood relations. Shang et al. [99] introduced an EMOC approach based on k-nodes update policy and a similarity matrix for mining communities in social networks. Pizzuti and Socievole [84] provided a framework for detecting community structure in attributed networks, introducing a post-processing local search procedure that identifies those communities that can be merged to provide higher quality community divisions.
## (s32) WSN -Wireless Sensor Network topology management
Number of References: 2

(p32.0) There are several challenges in designing WSN because the sensor nodes have limited resources of energy, processing power, and memory. In this context, the clustering technique can organize nodes into a set of groups based on a set of pre-defined criteria to improve their usage. Peiravi et.al [83] provided an EMOC approach whose goal was to obtain clustering schemes in which the network lifetime was optimized for different delay values. Hacioglu et al. [37] presented an EMOC approach that can extend network lifetime while enabling high coverage and data.
## (s33) Other applications
Number of References: 5

(p33.0) Wang et al. [116] proposed an approach to solve the circuit clustering problem in field-programmable gate array computer-aided design flow. Bandyopadhyay et al. [73] introduced a multi-objective genetic clustering approach for pixel classification in remote sensing imagery. Wang et al. [114] and Li et al. [56] provided a multi-objective fuzzy clustering approach for change detection in Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) images. Liu et al. [63] presented an approach to automatic clustering of shapes considering a multi-objective optimization with decomposition and improvement in the shape descriptor and diffusion process (that was applied to transform the similarity distance matrix among total shapes of a dataset into a weighted graph).
## (s34) Conclusion
Number of References: 10

(p34.0) In this paper, we presented a review of the EMOC studies, focused on a general architecture of evolutionary multi- In terms of an evolutionary multi-objective approach, we can note the wide use of the NSGA-II as MOEAs over the years. In recent years, the use of MaOEAs has been verified [130,129], in contrast to other works [98,97,62] that considered the optimization of more than three objective functions in MOEAs (NSGA/NSGA-II). However, there are limited studies that analyze the behavior of the other MOEAs/MaOEAs, or even other categories of multi-objective methods (see Section 3). For example, the use of diversity-based MOEAs/MaOEAs in approaches that seek more diversity, as Liu et al. [62].

(p34.1) Another concern in this field is regarding real applications and large-scale clustering problems. Some works, as [33,35,129] improve the scalability on designing more efficient multi-objective evolutionary algorithms; however, most of the existing multi-objective evolutionary clustering algorithms are not well scalable to real-life applications that generate a huge amount of data. According to Mukhopadhyay et al. [79] it is a challenge for researchers to devise fast, scalable algorithms for multi-objective clustering.
