# A Survey of Blockchain Data Management Systems

CorpusID: 244714223 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0f38b3d717e0fcc6eacc9c6e78b252227440e04e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0f38b3d717e0fcc6eacc9c6e78b252227440e04e)

Fields: Business, Computer Science

## (s13) Data distribution
Number of References: 4

(p13.0) Xu et al. [98] 2018 Decrease in decentralization Dai et al. [19] 2018 Increase query complexity Guo et al. [35] 2019 Increase query complexity Jiang et al. [41] 2020 Increase query complexity Excessive data load
## (s31) Target problem Authors
Number of References: 8

(p31.0) Year Weakness of blockchains for data sharing but also decrease the implementation complexity. On the other hand, the database layer used for expansion will bring additional storage resource consumption. AliNSF et al. [3] propose the design and implementation of a new blockchain-based naming and storage system, called Blockstack. Unlike previous blockchain-based systems, Blockstack separates its control and data planes: it keeps only minimal metadata (namely, data hashes and state transitions) in the blockchain and uses external data stores for actual bulk storage. Grabis et al. [34] elaborate a method for efficient distributed storage and sharing of personal data assets within a community of users. The access to these data is controlled using a blockchain and smart contracts that define access conditions. Yang et al. [100] propose the smart toy edge computing-oriented data exchange accounting system based on the blockchain. Through smart contracts, each node in a data-exchange P2P network makes consensus and endorsements for each other, queries the transaction record and checks the payment bill from its local blockchain peer. Same as [100], there are also some other works [2,28,45,80] that use the storage of data on the blockchain and the use of smart contracts for secure cloud data sharing.
