# R E V I E W Polylysine for skin regeneration: A review of recent advances and future perspectives

CorpusID: 242604545 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0860c365df64c2fdf1302dc2f15cc088032b806a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0860c365df64c2fdf1302dc2f15cc088032b806a)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s4) | Patterned polylysine substrates
Number of References: 11

(p4.0) Besides physical and chemical cues which affect the cell behavior, other geometrical cues or anisotropic physical features (e.g., parallel microgrooves and collagen fibers) also affect the cell orientation on both two-(2D and three-dimensional (3D) substrates, which is known as the contact guidance phenomenon. 44,45 Contact guidance affects the shape, adhesion, and migration of cells. Indeed, cell migration, which is a key factor in many biological processes, is affected by both ECM guidance cues (e.g., a chemical species gradient or stiffness) and by contact guidance. Contact guidance results in cancer cell movement across the neighboring ECM and then to metastasis, by a process known as intravasation. 46,47 Furthermore, this phenomenon plays a key role in the wound healing process, where platelets and fibroblasts can induce a local contraction in the wound site, resulting in ECM fibers becoming radially oriented. This local fiber orientation guides the cell migration. 48 Appropriate signaling between cells, which is mediated via ECM proteins, significantly affects the redistribution of molecules that allow cell adhesion in dot or focal patterns. Cells are able to attach to the patterned polylysine substrate, while actin stress fibers are not created between neighboring dots. Irregular morphology was observed for cultured cells in which filopodia-like extensions were abundant; besides no clustering was observed for focal adhesion molecules. 49  Patterned co-cultures can be created using three different techniques. Photolithography is a robust method to create patterned surfaces composed of different materials, that allow selective adhesion of various cells onto the predetermined area. For example, when coculturing hepatocytes and fibroblasts on micropatterned substrates, hepatocytes selectively adhered to the collagen islands which optimized the interaction between the different cells. 50,51 The second approach involves the delivery of cells to the specific areas on the substrate. For instance, patterning of various types of cells onto specific regions was achieved using a microfluidic device. 52,53 Furthermore, cell attachment to specific regions of the substrate can be excluded using elastomeric membranes. After removing the membrane, the remaining surface can be used to attach another different cell type. 54 However, these strategies suffer from some limitations.
## (s5) | POLYLYSINE ANTIBACTERIAL ACTIVITY
Number of References: 9

(p5.0) 4.1 | Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli ε-Poly-L-lysine (ε-PL) exhibits the most pronounced antibacterial activity within the polylysine family, and inhibits the proliferation of most F I G U R E 3 Cell spreading on polylysine. B16 cells were cultured on patterned substrata of fibronectin (red; A) or polylysine (red; B,C) and labeled for actin (green; A,B) and paxillin (green; C). Cells can adhere to polylysine dots, however, the actin cytoskeleton is not reorganized (B) and paxillin does not accumulate over the dots (C). Scale bars: 10 μm. Reprinted with permission from Reference [49] microorganisms (Table 1). Generally, three mechanistic models including, barrel-stave, toroidal, and the carpet mechanism have been proposed to explain the antibacterial activity of polycationic polymers like PLL. The barrel-stave mechanism involves a rapid interaction with the hydrophobic core of the membrane lipid bilayer, while the other mechanisms rely on an interaction with the membrane surface and the headgroups. The residues with a hydrophobic nature not only can replace the headgroups of phospholipid units through a mechanism based on toroidal pore modeling, but can also induce pore lumen formation by altering the positive membrane curvature. The carpet-like mechanism is based on a theory in which membranes are permeabilized in a nonspecific manner, involving only a contact between the positively charged peptide and the negatively charged head-groups of the phospholipid. 71,72 The three models discussed above may not be sufficient to explain all the possible interactions within the membrane, so other models should be taken into consideration. 72 Scientists have also tried to explain the antimicrobial activity by other models, such as the gripand-dip, as well as the disordered toroidal pore model. 73,74 Moreover, many believe that some interactions could be mediated by a process analogous to electroporation, called the sinking raft model. 75 It should be noted that in addition to the peptide structure and headgroup constitution of the membrane, the composition of existing acyl chains could also affect the peptide interaction with the membranes. 76 Hyldgaard et al. clarified the mechanism of the antibacterial properties of ε-polylysine against E. coli as Gram-negative and Listeria innocua as Gram-positive model bacteria. It was found that some components of the E. coli lipopolysaccharide layer, such as the divalent cations, along with heptose (Types I and II)-phosphate could play a role in the binding process with polylysine. Polylysine destroyed the E. coli lipopolysaccharide layer and altered its morphology, while L. innocua showed only minimal morphological changes. The membranes of both the bacteria were attacked by polylysine, as shown by cytoplasmic membrane permeabilization. The carpet-like model could also explain how polylysine could disrupt the membrane stability. This involves the polylysine binding to negatively charged phospholipids and releasing existing divalent cations, and consequently changing the membrane curvature into negative folding, thereby producing structures similar to vesicles or micelles ( Figure 6). 69 The concentration of divalent cations in the ambient medium will competitively inhibit the binding of ε-PL to the bacterial membranes.
