# Utilization of kinase inhibitors as novel therapeutic drug targets: A review

CorpusID: 256583582 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7b9fc5e977e382294f58d7cc4353f7a5372e10](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7b9fc5e977e382294f58d7cc4353f7a5372e10)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 6

(p0.0) Cellular metabolism, cell cycle regulation, cellular endurance, and differentiation are the essential functions conducted by kinases [1][2][3]. Nowadays, considerable attention has been given to research on kinases. The signaling pathways mediated by protein kinases have been related to a variety of diseases, such as diabetes, inflammation, and cancer [4]. The kinases are categorized into a wide group lipid kinases, carbohydrates, and protein kinases. According to human genome sequencing, approximately 2% of the human genome codes for protein kinases, which are further classified as families and subfamilies. The major kinases found in mammalian signaling pathways are lipid kinases, tyrosine kinases, serine/threonine kinases, and dual kinases (Ser/Thr and Ty). Protein kinases are enzymes that use the end γ-phosphate group from ATP to phosphorylate serine, tyrosine, or threonine residues in other proteins. Phosphorylation changes target protein activity by controlling signaling pathways by amplification, cellular location, or interaction with other controlling proteins [5]. The study on human kinases revealed that there are 518 protein kinases grouped into families reliant on their biological functions as well as statistical sequence evaluation [6].
## (s3) ABL
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) The Tyr specific Abelson murine leukemia (Abl) viral oncogene analogue is another well-studied protein kinase named p150, JTK, c-Abl, Abl1. Dysregulation of Abl has been linked to apoptosis in cancer. ABL owns 1 cap with an N-terminal, 2 Src (SH2/3) homology domains, an actinbinding domain, and a DNA binding domain in addition to the kinase domain. Myristoylation of the N-terminal cap controls the autoinhibition of Abl by phosphorylation. GNF-2 binding caused Abl autoinhibition due to bending vibration of the α-I helix and the resulting configurationally stabilization of the kinase active site via the Sh2 and Sh3 domains [68][69][70]. Furthermore, GNF-2 enhances the effectiveness of the ATP-competitive antagonists, implying the possible contact of ATP pocket with the myristate. A larger and heavier ligand in the myristate groove, on the other hand, was found to provide an impact on the potential of Abl [68].

(p3.1) AKT Phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1, an AGC lineage constituent, is a leading kinase and a stimulator for several AGC kinases involved in insulin and growth factor signaling, including SGK, AKT, PKC, and S6K. Unlike other kinases, PDK1 lacks a C-terminal hydrophobic motif for intramolecular binding to the hydrophobic channel. The hydrophobic pocket of PDK1 performs like an identification spot in favor of the hydrophobic motif of its substrate kinases [71]. Balendran et al. revealed that the hydrophobic groove of PDK1 exhibited interaction with the C-terminal present in PKC-allied protein kinase 2 (PRK2) and named as PDK1-interacting fragment (PIK). Consequently, the hydrophobic groove was quickly labeled as a PIF binding pocket [72].
## (s4) JNK1
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) The JNKs are c-Jun N-terminal kinases comprising three isoforms, JNK 1/2/3, which are the subdivision of MAP kinases termed "anxiety/stress-triggered kinase". Accordingly, these have been linked to checking inflammatory responses by triggering cytokine expressions like eotaxin, GM-CSF, and IL-1 employing downstream targets such as p53, AP-1, ATF2, and BAD. Like a few other MAP kinases, JNKs are regulated by phosphorylation of the A-loop through higher kinases like MKK4/ MKK7. Stebbins et al. examined 30000 compounds using DELFIA, i.e. Dissociation Enhanced Lanthanide Fluoro-Immuno Assay, and determined a series of tiny compounds that interfere with JNK1-pepJIP1 binding [73]. Whereas several of these drugs compete successfully via pepJIP1 binding, and BI-78D3 like compounds were capable of subsiding JNK1 phosphorylation pursuit with IC50 value, both in the micromolar and nanomolar range [74].
## (s7) CDK2
Number of References: 6

(p7.0) Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are specifically Ser/Thr type kinases, and CDK2 is the fundamental unit in the transition phase of the cell cycle from G1 to S-phase. Misregulation of CDKs can result in various diseases, like inflammation and cancer. Although, some kinases may adopt unique A-loop configurations like DFG-in/ out that are usually markers of their activity level, others, like CDK2, exhibit difficulty in adopting the DFG-out conformation [80,81]. Betzi et al. discovered ANS, i.e., 8-anilino-1naphthalene sulfonate as a unique allosteric CDK2 antagonist in addition to a distinct mechanism of binding.

(p7.1) The antagonistic efficacy of ANS was comparable to that of CDK2 activator cyclin A but not to that of ATP or Type I CDK2 inhibitors like JWS648. ANS in bimolecular form bind near to DFG motif present in a void produced through C-helix and the filaments of N-lobe like β3, β4, β5, which is still in DFG-in conformation. Major reconstitutions of the ATP binding pocket were needed to fit the two inhibitor molecules [82]. mTOR Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase-related kinases, also known as Ser/Thr kinase mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) are a module of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling cascade. The mTOR complex 1, comprising mLST8, PRAS40, & raptor; mTOR complex 2, comprising mSIN1, mLST8, & rictor, all possessing separate biologic functions, can build 2 separate complexes using various protein combinations [83]. Rapamycin, a natural substrate derived from Streptomyces hygroscopicus, acts as an allosteric inhibitor of mTORC1. It binds to the C-terminus of mTOR, also termed the FKBP12-rapamycin binding domain, via hydrophobic interactions with the 12-kDa FK506-binding protein, culminating in a complex that can limit mTORC1 function [84]. Due to rapamycin's limited solubility and bioavailability, a variety of derivatives, also termed rapalogs, have been designed and investigated in clinical trials [85].
