# Warehouse Management Systems for Social and Environmental Sustainability: A Systematic Literature Review and Bibliometric Analysis

CorpusID: 259678975 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d2ec398b039a2276d354ef979a7d2deeb597f98c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d2ec398b039a2276d354ef979a7d2deeb597f98c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Business, Engineering

## (s11) Content Analysis
Number of References: 12

(p11.0) To access WMS and sustainability connection, all 12 articles were read, and their content was analyzed to understand their research aims (Table 12). to propose a theoretical framework for implementing IoT in a warehouse V to conduct a field study on the impact of a full shift usage of smart glasses in order picking processes on workers and picking process VI to present a laboratory experiment in which two gamification elements, goal setting and feedback, are implemented in a wearable WMS interface to examine their effect on user engagement and performance in picking task VII to present a way to raise the quality of life for people with disabilities using assistive technology (implementing smart wristbands) VIII to develop a list of 33 key performance indicators (KPIs) for a sustainable warehouse management system IX to propose a concept "IoT-controlled Safe Area" for communicating objects in smart logistics X to implement the concepts and architecture of IoT using ZigBee wireless sensor network platform and LabView software to design a risk monitoring system for a warehouse with hazardous products XI to demonstrate the IoT value for WMS using Node-RED and MongoDB software tools based on the real warehouse data XII to develop a control system of the Evolutionary Intelligence to manage robots during the order-picking process in a warehouse with WMS Figure 6 shows an overview of articles' focus on adding value to the environmental and social sustainability sides of WMS. We marked with green colors if an article discussed WMS and sustainability from both social and environmental sides or only one. In addition, the darker green indicates that a certain aspect is one of the article's core aspects. In contrast, aspects marked with the light green are not a primary focus of the paper and are partly discussed and slightly mentioned, e.g., in theory, as can be seen from the table, 10 out of 12 articles built some social sustainability connections with WMS. In comparison, only five articles contributed to WMS and environmental content. Nearly half of the articles (four) covered social and environmental sustainability associated with WMS usage and implementation. Together with the social or environmental sustainability focus in articles, all articles were assessed based on the technology interface with WMS. The evaluation was completed, as WMS integration into other systems had the technological capability to add a new level of sustainability to warehouse operations. Figure 7 gathers two tables about the assessment of technologies discussed in 12 selected articles. The left table identifies whether WMS alone or any additional technologies used with WMS contribute to environmental or social sustainability, where matches are marked with "X". At the same time, the right table has a detailed description of any other technologies used with WMS. In most papers (nine out of 12), assistive technology was integrated with WMS to work in tandem. Analyzing the found publications from a sustainability point of view, the article with the strongest contribution, connecting both social and environmental sustainability with WMS was written by ref. [27]. The authors devised 33 KPIs for WMS in all three sustainability pillars (economic, environmental, and social) derived from sustainability reporting guidance and literature and interviews with Malaysian automotive warehouse managers in 2004 (Figure 8). This study was also the only one discussing the sustainability performance of WMS. However, since the authors did not disclose the exact interview question list, it was hard to judge on the questions asked: were these questions related to warehouse performance, WMS functions, or the dashboard of WMS. Nevertheless, this research has made a good step towards researching and stating such metrics for policymakers and the government to push sustainability through warehousing operations to make them more sustainable. Developing sustainability indicators, ref. [27] did not say how WMS could contribute to reaching them or how these indicators affect warehousing operations. For the model's environmental group of indicators, the authors defined warehouse resources (consumption of recyclable materials, energy, water, impact on biodiversity and habitat), emission waste, and environmental commitment (emission and waste reduction, environmental laws violations, green investing). The authors identified labor practice, decent work, product responsibility, and society as social indicator groups. Besides, after analyzing interviews, the authors concluded that some indicators have a higher contribution among their own group indicators and sustainable warehousing. For example, the percentage of products sold with recyclable packaging material had the highest weight to form sustainable warehousing using WMS, and the total number of new employees hired by age, gender, and religion had the highest contribution to sustainable warehousing. The research of ref. [27] indicated a lack of theory in the field of KPIs for sustainable warehousing with WMS. This article was also the closest to the current core research connecting WMS to sustainability matters. The authors validated these KPIs with industry experts but did not align the defined KPIs with the actual scope of WMS activities, keeping the discussion at a general level. Thus, these KPIs cover general warehousing activities rather than activities that lie within the scope of WMS. Another group of three articles [47,51,52] with similar contribution weights to environmental and social sustainability and WMS discussed more social issues than environmental warehouse issues. Ref. [47] strongly emphasized the role of IoT implementation in warehousing. Namely, WMS received all the data captured from readers attached to gates, forklifts, products' tags, and shelves' sensors (product's location, product type, expiry date, storage, and picking confirmation) and converted this data into useful information and a set of actions providing real-time visibility of inventory levels and preventing stock-outs. Plus, the HVAC system got the data required to optimize energy consumption and assure product quality and warehouse safety. Controlled and reported actions in order picking helped to update the inventory level automatically, make immediate order fulfillment more efficient, easier, and accurate, and prevent counterfeiting. The authors' proposed IoT framework decreased human interventions and consequently led to more safety for warehouse workers and products, reduced accidents, decreased counterfeiting and fraud, and decreased theft. The other two articles shared the same research idea of bringing up social (mainly) and environmental sustainability in developing warehouse operations [51] and implementing [52] an IoT-controlled Safe Area. Ref. [51] implemented an IoT-controlled safety area to ensure safety control of all warehouse operations related to hazardous products, shelves, forklifts, and human labor. This study used WMS with highly autonomous components supporting a communicating object concept, RFID readers, and tags. In the paper of ref. [51], WMS and an IoT-architecture reference model generated safety-based scenarios with an IoT-controlled Safe Area improving warehousing operations of hazardous products by using safety mechanisms for detecting and pretending all potential conflictual and risky situations, environmental disturbances, and disasters (e.g., the absence of a product due to a theft or a human error in storing, the existence of an empty or damaged product, the lack of warehouse workers' safety protection equipment). Ref. [52] added safety to a WMS with the help of a smart product IoT-based risk monitoring system (ZigBee wireless sensor network platform and LabView software) to safely manage goods and people in a warehouse with hazardous chemical products (warehousing operations control, intelligence, and decision-making support, control sensors for storing products in different temperate sections, detection of environmental disturbances, and risky and conflictual situations). Furthermore, this article discussed warehouse safety issues (harmful forklift accidents, storage and transportation of dangerous goods, etc.) as a part of the literature review. Both papers revealed the importance of warehousing safety, overcoming safety problems in a warehouse, and investigating a lack of automated safety control during WMS operations with the smart product concept.
## (s12) Discussion
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) This study has collected the current literature on WMS and sustainability-related research together. Primarily, this study has searched for evidence of WMS contributing to social and environmental sustainability. Based on the found literature, this is the first SLR to address WMS and sustainability together. Additionally, as part of the goal to seek an answer to what the current state of the art and scale on topic-specific academic research, we were able to show this research topic is still in its early phases and quite narrow in scale. Figure 9 gathers a synthesis of findings with references to the articles in Roman numbers and presents the list of actions WMS can take to bring social and environmental sustainability into warehouse operations. Only 12 articles described the effect of WMS on sustainability in warehousing. From the found literature, the study most focused explicitly on this matter belongs to [27], who defined KPIs for a sustainable WMS. However, this study misses instructions on how exactly WMS could contribute to reaching these KPIs. The research on achieving social and/or environmental sustainability with WMS functions or through utilizing WMS as a part of operations management is missing from the current literature, indicating a clear research gap. Based on this finding, we suggest additional research on warehouse information systems utilization, social sustainability, and operations continuous improvement context. One should fit continuous improvement and employees' participation levels properly with the level of centralization of authority [60]. The fitment is essential for WMS utilization level studies and experiments when, e.g., action research and employee engagement-based development activities are studied.
