# Electron beam powder bed fusion of copper components: a review of mechanical properties and research opportunities

CorpusID: 251558253 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af577ecffd047508580c2f68d570081274fc09a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af577ecffd047508580c2f68d570081274fc09a3)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering

## (s4) Microstructure and mechanical property of EB-PBF copper components
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) The production of pure copper components by EB-PBF shows less chance of oxides as the material is processed in a vacuum. High preheats in EB-PBF show less thermal gradient and internal stresses in cooling. Ramirez et al. [28] investigated the microstructure and mechanical properties of open cellular parts. They showed that EB-PBF is a great tool to produce lattice copper parts, such as heat exchangers. This study showed that Cu 2 O appeared in the microstructure and it can improve the mechanical properties. However, if the Cu 2 O exceeds a certain value (0.0235%wt), cracks happen, which negatively affect the mechanical properties. Pure copper powder is much less reflective (< 50%) to the electron beam compared to the laser beam (~ 70%), and this causes higher induced heat on the surface of the powder bed. The generation of fully melted tracks and a reduction in pore formation were observed. However, due to difficulties such as over sintering due to increased heat in the build area, a higher layer cooling time was introduced to maintain the temperature of the process, which leads to elemental segregation and related defects. Momeni [29] reported that chrome-rich spheres (1 ≤ µm) surrounded by Cu matrix are formed in EB-PBF of copper chrome parts. This study also reported that elemental segregation can produce heterogeneous nucleation of primary Cr-rich particles and affect the produced parts.
