# Salinity tolerance mechanisms in glycophytes: An overview with the central focus on rice plants

CorpusID: 255572490 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/775bfb76270d6b266a93667da95de8f1a2f3feb7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/775bfb76270d6b266a93667da95de8f1a2f3feb7)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s0) Background
Number of References: 92

(p0.0) The global climate change is feared to promote rapid soil degradations in agricultural lands worldwide. Soil salinization is one of the serious soil degradations, which can arise from natural causes and human-mediated activity such as irrigation in arid and semi-arid regions. Approximately 20% of the irrigated lands in the world are presumably affected by soil salinization (Yeo 1999). Salinity stress significantly reduces growth and productivity of glycophytes, which are the majority of agricultural products. The term "salinity" represents all the problems of the soil accumulating excessive salts, which can be categorized into sodic (or alkaline) and saline soils (IRRI 2011). Sodic soils having a poor soil structure generally spread over arid and semi-arid regions, retaining high concentrations of Na + at the exchangeable site of clay particles in the soil, which shows high pH (greater than 8.5) with a high exchangeable sodium percentage (ESP > 15) (IRRI 2011). Saline soils can be generally found in arid regions, estuaries, and coastal fringes, which are dominated by Na + ions with electrical conductivity (EC) more than 4 dS/m that corresponds to approximately 40 mM NaCl (IRRI 2011;Munns and Tester 2008). Moreover, saline soils exhibit ESP of < 15 and much lower pH values than the sodic soils (IRRI 2011).

(p0.1) Plants have to cope with two major stresses under high salinity, osmotic stress and ionic stress (Figure 1). The former stress immediately comes over plants in accordance with a rise in salt levels outside the roots, which leads to inhibitions of water uptake, cell expansion and lateral bud development (Figure 1) (Munns and Tester 2008). The latter stress phase develops later when toxic ions such as Na + accumulate in excess in plants particularly in leaves over the threshold, which leads to an increase in leaf mortality with chlorosis and necrosis, and a decrease in the activity of essential cellular metabolisms including photosynthesis (Figure 1) (Yeo and Flowers 1986;Glenn et al. 1999). Recent molecular physiological and molecular genetic studies have increasingly gained knowledge for the protection mechanisms that plants use to cope with detrimental effects of salinity stress (Blumwald 2000;Zhu 2002;Pardo et al. 2006;Munns and Tester 2008;Horie et al. 2009;Hauser and Horie 2010). Many studies also highlight the significance and relevancy of the functions/regulations of important membrane proteins such as water channels and Na + transporters (Horie and Schroeder 2004;Maurel et al. 2008;Ward et al. 2009) and also signaling molecules (Zhu 2002) to plant salt tolerance.

(p0.2) In this review, we summarize the problems caused by soil salinity and molecular mechanisms that protect plants from salinity stress, combining knowledge from classic physiology with the recent findings. Rice is the most salt sensitive among cereals (Munns and Tester 2008). In rice, it has been observed that the rate of Na + uptake into shoots mediated by the intrusive apoplastic ion transport is considerably high under salinity stress (Yeo et al. 1987;Yadav et al. 1996;Ochiai and Matoh 2002). Therefore, in addition to the first two sections where responses of plants to osmotic stress and ionic stress are mentioned, we particularly highlight morphological traits/barriers of plant roots under salinity stress in the last section of this review. Current achievements of investigators and future prospects are discussed.

(p0.3) The global climate change is feared to promote rapid soil degradations in agricultural lands worldwide. Soil salinization is one of the serious soil degradations, which can arise from natural causes and human-mediated activity such as irrigation in arid and semi-arid regions. Approximately 20% of the irrigated lands in the world are presumably affected by soil salinization (Yeo 1999). Salinity stress significantly reduces growth and productivity of glycophytes, which are the majority of agricultural products. The term "salinity" represents all the problems of the soil accumulating excessive salts, which can be categorized into sodic (or alkaline) and saline soils (IRRI 2011). Sodic soils having a poor soil structure generally spread over arid and semi-arid regions, retaining high concentrations of Na + at the exchangeable site of clay particles in the soil, which shows high pH (greater than 8.5) with a high exchangeable sodium percentage (ESP > 15) (IRRI 2011). Saline soils can be generally found in arid regions, estuaries, and coastal fringes, which are dominated by Na + ions with electrical conductivity (EC) more than 4 dS/m that corresponds to approximately 40 mM NaCl (IRRI 2011;Munns and Tester 2008). Moreover, saline soils exhibit ESP of < 15 and much lower pH values than the sodic soils (IRRI 2011).

(p0.4) Plants have to cope with two major stresses under high salinity, osmotic stress and ionic stress (Figure 1). The former stress immediately comes over plants in accordance with a rise in salt levels outside the roots, which leads to inhibitions of water uptake, cell expansion and lateral bud development (Figure 1) (Munns and Tester 2008). The latter stress phase develops later when toxic ions such as Na + accumulate in excess in plants particularly in leaves over the threshold, which leads to an increase in leaf mortality with chlorosis and necrosis, and a decrease in the activity of essential cellular metabolisms including photosynthesis (Figure 1) (Yeo and Flowers 1986;Glenn et al. 1999). Recent molecular physiological and molecular genetic studies have increasingly gained knowledge for the protection mechanisms that plants use to cope with detrimental effects of salinity stress (Blumwald 2000;Zhu 2002;Pardo et al. 2006;Munns and Tester 2008;Horie et al. 2009;Hauser and Horie 2010). Many studies also highlight the significance and relevancy of the functions/regulations of important membrane proteins such as water channels and Na + transporters (Horie and Schroeder 2004;Maurel et al. 2008;Ward et al. 2009) and also signaling molecules (Zhu 2002) to plant salt tolerance.

(p0.5) In this review, we summarize the problems caused by soil salinity and molecular mechanisms that protect plants from salinity stress, combining knowledge from classic physiology with the recent findings. Rice is the most salt sensitive among cereals (Munns and Tester 2008). In rice, it has been observed that the rate of Na + uptake into shoots mediated by the intrusive apoplastic ion transport is considerably high under salinity stress (Yeo et al. 1987;Yadav et al. 1996;Ochiai and Matoh 2002). Therefore, in addition to the first two sections where responses of plants to osmotic stress and ionic stress are mentioned, we particularly highlight morphological traits/barriers of plant roots under salinity stress in the last section of this review. Current achievements of investigators and future prospects are discussed.
## (s1) Responses to osmotic stress caused by high salinity
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) Salinity-induced osmotic stress reduces water uptake into plant roots. Plants regulate water transport under salinity stress because a sufficient amount of water is indispensable for the cells to maintain their growth and vital cellular functions such as photosynthesis and metabolisms. In the long distance water transport from roots to shoots, evaporation is one of the main motive forces for the water movement, especially in the apoplastic pathway. Salinity/osmotic stress directly (Yeo et al. 1985) or indirectly via hormonal regulation (Jia et al. 2002) induces a stomatal closure, which leads to a reduction in the evaporation and overall water transport.
## (s3) Osmotic adjustments and compatible solutes
Number of References: 28

(p3.0) Osmotic adjustments by means of solute accumulations inside the cell are essential to reduce the cellular Ψ osm against an osmotic gradient between root cells and outside saline solution, which eventually restore the water uptake into roots during salinity stress (Greenway and Munns 1980). Ion accumulations in the cytosol (mainly K + ) and in the vacuole (Na + , especially in salt tolerant cultivars/species) are also found to be important for the osmotic adjustment of plant cells (Gorham et al. 1985). In addition to the accumulation of ions for cellular osmotic adjustment, certain organic compounds are known to accumulate in the cytosol under salinity/osmotic stress conditions. Such compounds are called compatible solutes (Bohnert and Shen 1999). Compatible solutes were initially determined as compounds that are non-toxic even when they are highly accumulated in the cytosol and contribute to decrease the cytoplasmic water potential. In addition to the role in osmotic adjustments, compatible solutes seem to function as a chaperone protecting enzymes and membrane structures, and as a scavenger reducing radical oxygen species under stress conditions including salinity stress (Bohnert and Shen 1999). Rice has two genes encoding the betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase, which catalyzes betaine aldehyde to glycine betaine (GB), a compatible solute. However, rice cannot synthesize GB because of the lack of an upstream enzyme, the choline monooxidase (CMO), which convert a choline to a betaine aldehyde. Introductions of spinach CMO genes or the Arthrobacter pascens choline oxidase into rice plants promoted the synthesis of GB in the transgenic rice plants (Sakamoto et al. 1998;Shirasawa et al. 2006). However, only relatively small amount of GB accumulation and slight enhancement of salt tolerance of transgenic rice plants were observed in some conditions tested, probably because of low activities and/or miss-localization of the introduced enzymes (Shirasawa et al. 2006).

(p3.1) Osmotic adjustments by means of solute accumulations inside the cell are essential to reduce the cellular Ψ osm against an osmotic gradient between root cells and outside saline solution, which eventually restore the water uptake into roots during salinity stress (Greenway and Munns 1980). Ion accumulations in the cytosol (mainly K + ) and in the vacuole (Na + , especially in salt tolerant cultivars/species) are also found to be important for the osmotic adjustment of plant cells (Gorham et al. 1985). In addition to the accumulation of ions for cellular osmotic adjustment, certain organic compounds are known to accumulate in the cytosol under salinity/osmotic stress conditions. Such compounds are called compatible solutes (Bohnert and Shen 1999). Compatible solutes were initially determined as compounds that are non-toxic even when they are highly accumulated in the cytosol and contribute to decrease the cytoplasmic water potential. In addition to the role in osmotic adjustments, compatible solutes seem to function as a chaperone protecting enzymes and membrane structures, and as a scavenger reducing radical oxygen species under stress conditions including salinity stress (Bohnert and Shen 1999). Rice has two genes encoding the betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase, which catalyzes betaine aldehyde to glycine betaine (GB), a compatible solute. However, rice cannot synthesize GB because of the lack of an upstream enzyme, the choline monooxidase (CMO), which convert a choline to a betaine aldehyde. Introductions of spinach CMO genes or the Arthrobacter pascens choline oxidase into rice plants promoted the synthesis of GB in the transgenic rice plants (Sakamoto et al. 1998;Shirasawa et al. 2006). However, only relatively small amount of GB accumulation and slight enhancement of salt tolerance of transgenic rice plants were observed in some conditions tested, probably because of low activities and/or miss-localization of the introduced enzymes (Shirasawa et al. 2006).
## (s6) Bypass flow of solutes and the apoplastic pathway in rice roots
Number of References: 80

(p6.0) From the general view point mentioned above, it is quite natural to hypothesize that the mechanism of salt exclusion could occur at the exodermis or at the endodermis in the radial direction, and from there, salt is transported radially via a symplastic pathway (Storey and Walker 1998;Munns 2002) because flow of solutes through the apoplast is arrested at the site of the Casparian band and finally solutes are selectively transported through the plasma membrane into the symplast ( Figure 5). However, as described in the previous section, studies using apoplastic tracer showed that major pathway of uptaking Na + ions into the stele is apoplastic pathway in the case of rice (Yeo et al. 1987;Yadav et al. 1996;Ochiai and Matoh 2002).

(p6.1) As discussed by Garcia et al. (1997) and also mentioned in the previous section, the uptake of sodium ions by the bypass flow possibly involves direct apoplastic leakage occurring at the root apices (Enstone and Peterson 1992) and the sites of secondary root emergence (Peterson et al. 1981;Ranathunge et al. 2005) (Figure 4a). On the other hand, experiments using pressure probes have indicated a possibility of some passage of water and perhaps also of solutes bypassing protoplasts (Steudle and Frensch 1996). With regard to the outer part of the root (OPR), Ranathunge et al. (2005) performed experiments introducing precipitates of insoluble inorganic salts to block apoplastic pores and suggested existence of predominant apoplastic bypass flow of water as well as high permeability of ions of the OPR, supporting at least a possibility of apoplastic bypass flow of solutes in the OPR. Although it may appear somehow controversial about the mechanism of the bypass flow of solutes, a fascinating model called "composite transport" of both water and solutes is proposed. This model assumes that a switching between the apoplastic and cell-to-cell pathways occurs depending on given circumstances and explains how plants optimize water uptake according to demands from the shoot (Steudle and Frensch 1996;Steudle and Peterson 1998;Miyamoto et al. 2001). The composite transport model may also be applied even to rice roots in which aerenchyma extensively develop .

(p6.2) A unique point of view accounting for the bypass flow discussed by Munns (2002) is that large gaps created between the plasma membrane and the cell wall may fill with solution and allow an artifactual apoplastic pathway for salts to move radially across the root under salinity stress conditions. However, this view might be unlikely at the sites of the Casparian band because plasma membrane tightly attaches to the cell wall at these sites even under osmotic (or salinity) stress conditions that causes severe plasmolysis (Karahara and Shibaoka 1992).

(p6.3) Silicon alleviates abiotic stresses including salinity stress in rice (Matoh et al. 1986;Ma and Yamaji 2006). This function of silicon may be ascribed, in part, to the partial blockage of the transpirational bypass flow (Ma 2004). In the case of alleviation of cadmium toxicity by silicon in maize, possible involvement of a change in the development of endodermal suberin lamellae is suggested (Vaculik et al. 2009). Such a possibility could also be suggested in the case of alleviation of salinity stress by silicon in rice.

(p6.4) From the general view point mentioned above, it is quite natural to hypothesize that the mechanism of salt exclusion could occur at the exodermis or at the endodermis in the radial direction, and from there, salt is transported radially via a symplastic pathway (Storey and Walker 1998;Munns 2002) because flow of solutes through the apoplast is arrested at the site of the Casparian band and finally solutes are selectively transported through the plasma membrane into the symplast ( Figure 5). However, as described in the previous section, studies using apoplastic tracer showed that major pathway of uptaking Na + ions into the stele is apoplastic pathway in the case of rice (Yeo et al. 1987;Yadav et al. 1996;Ochiai and Matoh 2002).

(p6.5) As discussed by Garcia et al. (1997) and also mentioned in the previous section, the uptake of sodium ions by the bypass flow possibly involves direct apoplastic leakage occurring at the root apices (Enstone and Peterson 1992) and the sites of secondary root emergence (Peterson et al. 1981;Ranathunge et al. 2005) (Figure 4a). On the other hand, experiments using pressure probes have indicated a possibility of some passage of water and perhaps also of solutes bypassing protoplasts (Steudle and Frensch 1996). With regard to the outer part of the root (OPR), Ranathunge et al. (2005) performed experiments introducing precipitates of insoluble inorganic salts to block apoplastic pores and suggested existence of predominant apoplastic bypass flow of water as well as high permeability of ions of the OPR, supporting at least a possibility of apoplastic bypass flow of solutes in the OPR. Although it may appear somehow controversial about the mechanism of the bypass flow of solutes, a fascinating model called "composite transport" of both water and solutes is proposed. This model assumes that a switching between the apoplastic and cell-to-cell pathways occurs depending on given circumstances and explains how plants optimize water uptake according to demands from the shoot (Steudle and Frensch 1996;Steudle and Peterson 1998;Miyamoto et al. 2001). The composite transport model may also be applied even to rice roots in which aerenchyma extensively develop .

(p6.6) A unique point of view accounting for the bypass flow discussed by Munns (2002) is that large gaps created between the plasma membrane and the cell wall may fill with solution and allow an artifactual apoplastic pathway for salts to move radially across the root under salinity stress conditions. However, this view might be unlikely at the sites of the Casparian band because plasma membrane tightly attaches to the cell wall at these sites even under osmotic (or salinity) stress conditions that causes severe plasmolysis (Karahara and Shibaoka 1992).

(p6.7) Silicon alleviates abiotic stresses including salinity stress in rice (Matoh et al. 1986;Ma and Yamaji 2006). This function of silicon may be ascribed, in part, to the partial blockage of the transpirational bypass flow (Ma 2004). In the case of alleviation of cadmium toxicity by silicon in maize, possible involvement of a change in the development of endodermal suberin lamellae is suggested (Vaculik et al. 2009). Such a possibility could also be suggested in the case of alleviation of salinity stress by silicon in rice.
## (s13) Background
Number of References: 92

(p13.0) The global climate change is feared to promote rapid soil degradations in agricultural lands worldwide. Soil salinization is one of the serious soil degradations, which can arise from natural causes and human-mediated activity such as irrigation in arid and semi-arid regions. Approximately 20% of the irrigated lands in the world are presumably affected by soil salinization (Yeo 1999). Salinity stress significantly reduces growth and productivity of glycophytes, which are the majority of agricultural products. The term "salinity" represents all the problems of the soil accumulating excessive salts, which can be categorized into sodic (or alkaline) and saline soils (IRRI 2011). Sodic soils having a poor soil structure generally spread over arid and semi-arid regions, retaining high concentrations of Na + at the exchangeable site of clay particles in the soil, which shows high pH (greater than 8.5) with a high exchangeable sodium percentage (ESP > 15) (IRRI 2011). Saline soils can be generally found in arid regions, estuaries, and coastal fringes, which are dominated by Na + ions with electrical conductivity (EC) more than 4 dS/m that corresponds to approximately 40 mM NaCl (IRRI 2011;Munns and Tester 2008). Moreover, saline soils exhibit ESP of < 15 and much lower pH values than the sodic soils (IRRI 2011).

(p13.1) Plants have to cope with two major stresses under high salinity, osmotic stress and ionic stress (Figure 1). The former stress immediately comes over plants in accordance with a rise in salt levels outside the roots, which leads to inhibitions of water uptake, cell expansion and lateral bud development (Figure 1) (Munns and Tester 2008). The latter stress phase develops later when toxic ions such as Na + accumulate in excess in plants particularly in leaves over the threshold, which leads to an increase in leaf mortality with chlorosis and necrosis, and a decrease in the activity of essential cellular metabolisms including photosynthesis (Figure 1) (Yeo and Flowers 1986;Glenn et al. 1999). Recent molecular physiological and molecular genetic studies have increasingly gained knowledge for the protection mechanisms that plants use to cope with detrimental effects of salinity stress (Blumwald 2000;Zhu 2002;Pardo et al. 2006;Munns and Tester 2008;Horie et al. 2009;Hauser and Horie 2010). Many studies also highlight the significance and relevancy of the functions/regulations of important membrane proteins such as water channels and Na + transporters (Horie and Schroeder 2004;Maurel et al. 2008;Ward et al. 2009) and also signaling molecules (Zhu 2002) to plant salt tolerance.

(p13.2) In this review, we summarize the problems caused by soil salinity and molecular mechanisms that protect plants from salinity stress, combining knowledge from classic physiology with the recent findings. Rice is the most salt sensitive among cereals (Munns and Tester 2008). In rice, it has been observed that the rate of Na + uptake into shoots mediated by the intrusive apoplastic ion transport is considerably high under salinity stress (Yeo et al. 1987;Yadav et al. 1996;Ochiai and Matoh 2002). Therefore, in addition to the first two sections where responses of plants to osmotic stress and ionic stress are mentioned, we particularly highlight morphological traits/barriers of plant roots under salinity stress in the last section of this review. Current achievements of investigators and future prospects are discussed.

(p13.3) The global climate change is feared to promote rapid soil degradations in agricultural lands worldwide. Soil salinization is one of the serious soil degradations, which can arise from natural causes and human-mediated activity such as irrigation in arid and semi-arid regions. Approximately 20% of the irrigated lands in the world are presumably affected by soil salinization (Yeo 1999). Salinity stress significantly reduces growth and productivity of glycophytes, which are the majority of agricultural products. The term "salinity" represents all the problems of the soil accumulating excessive salts, which can be categorized into sodic (or alkaline) and saline soils (IRRI 2011). Sodic soils having a poor soil structure generally spread over arid and semi-arid regions, retaining high concentrations of Na + at the exchangeable site of clay particles in the soil, which shows high pH (greater than 8.5) with a high exchangeable sodium percentage (ESP > 15) (IRRI 2011). Saline soils can be generally found in arid regions, estuaries, and coastal fringes, which are dominated by Na + ions with electrical conductivity (EC) more than 4 dS/m that corresponds to approximately 40 mM NaCl (IRRI 2011;Munns and Tester 2008). Moreover, saline soils exhibit ESP of < 15 and much lower pH values than the sodic soils (IRRI 2011).

(p13.4) Plants have to cope with two major stresses under high salinity, osmotic stress and ionic stress (Figure 1). The former stress immediately comes over plants in accordance with a rise in salt levels outside the roots, which leads to inhibitions of water uptake, cell expansion and lateral bud development (Figure 1) (Munns and Tester 2008). The latter stress phase develops later when toxic ions such as Na + accumulate in excess in plants particularly in leaves over the threshold, which leads to an increase in leaf mortality with chlorosis and necrosis, and a decrease in the activity of essential cellular metabolisms including photosynthesis (Figure 1) (Yeo and Flowers 1986;Glenn et al. 1999). Recent molecular physiological and molecular genetic studies have increasingly gained knowledge for the protection mechanisms that plants use to cope with detrimental effects of salinity stress (Blumwald 2000;Zhu 2002;Pardo et al. 2006;Munns and Tester 2008;Horie et al. 2009;Hauser and Horie 2010). Many studies also highlight the significance and relevancy of the functions/regulations of important membrane proteins such as water channels and Na + transporters (Horie and Schroeder 2004;Maurel et al. 2008;Ward et al. 2009) and also signaling molecules (Zhu 2002) to plant salt tolerance.

(p13.5) In this review, we summarize the problems caused by soil salinity and molecular mechanisms that protect plants from salinity stress, combining knowledge from classic physiology with the recent findings. Rice is the most salt sensitive among cereals (Munns and Tester 2008). In rice, it has been observed that the rate of Na + uptake into shoots mediated by the intrusive apoplastic ion transport is considerably high under salinity stress (Yeo et al. 1987;Yadav et al. 1996;Ochiai and Matoh 2002). Therefore, in addition to the first two sections where responses of plants to osmotic stress and ionic stress are mentioned, we particularly highlight morphological traits/barriers of plant roots under salinity stress in the last section of this review. Current achievements of investigators and future prospects are discussed.
## (s14) Responses to osmotic stress caused by high salinity
Number of References: 4

(p14.0) Salinity-induced osmotic stress reduces water uptake into plant roots. Plants regulate water transport under salinity stress because a sufficient amount of water is indispensable for the cells to maintain their growth and vital cellular functions such as photosynthesis and metabolisms. In the long distance water transport from roots to shoots, evaporation is one of the main motive forces for the water movement, especially in the apoplastic pathway. Salinity/osmotic stress directly (Yeo et al. 1985) or indirectly via hormonal regulation (Jia et al. 2002) induces a stomatal closure, which leads to a reduction in the evaporation and overall water transport.
## (s16) Osmotic adjustments and compatible solutes
Number of References: 28

(p16.0) Osmotic adjustments by means of solute accumulations inside the cell are essential to reduce the cellular Ψ osm against an osmotic gradient between root cells and outside saline solution, which eventually restore the water uptake into roots during salinity stress (Greenway and Munns 1980). Ion accumulations in the cytosol (mainly K + ) and in the vacuole (Na + , especially in salt tolerant cultivars/species) are also found to be important for the osmotic adjustment of plant cells (Gorham et al. 1985). In addition to the accumulation of ions for cellular osmotic adjustment, certain organic compounds are known to accumulate in the cytosol under salinity/osmotic stress conditions. Such compounds are called compatible solutes (Bohnert and Shen 1999). Compatible solutes were initially determined as compounds that are non-toxic even when they are highly accumulated in the cytosol and contribute to decrease the cytoplasmic water potential. In addition to the role in osmotic adjustments, compatible solutes seem to function as a chaperone protecting enzymes and membrane structures, and as a scavenger reducing radical oxygen species under stress conditions including salinity stress (Bohnert and Shen 1999). Rice has two genes encoding the betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase, which catalyzes betaine aldehyde to glycine betaine (GB), a compatible solute. However, rice cannot synthesize GB because of the lack of an upstream enzyme, the choline monooxidase (CMO), which convert a choline to a betaine aldehyde. Introductions of spinach CMO genes or the Arthrobacter pascens choline oxidase into rice plants promoted the synthesis of GB in the transgenic rice plants (Sakamoto et al. 1998;Shirasawa et al. 2006). However, only relatively small amount of GB accumulation and slight enhancement of salt tolerance of transgenic rice plants were observed in some conditions tested, probably because of low activities and/or miss-localization of the introduced enzymes (Shirasawa et al. 2006).

(p16.1) Osmotic adjustments by means of solute accumulations inside the cell are essential to reduce the cellular Ψ osm against an osmotic gradient between root cells and outside saline solution, which eventually restore the water uptake into roots during salinity stress (Greenway and Munns 1980). Ion accumulations in the cytosol (mainly K + ) and in the vacuole (Na + , especially in salt tolerant cultivars/species) are also found to be important for the osmotic adjustment of plant cells (Gorham et al. 1985). In addition to the accumulation of ions for cellular osmotic adjustment, certain organic compounds are known to accumulate in the cytosol under salinity/osmotic stress conditions. Such compounds are called compatible solutes (Bohnert and Shen 1999). Compatible solutes were initially determined as compounds that are non-toxic even when they are highly accumulated in the cytosol and contribute to decrease the cytoplasmic water potential. In addition to the role in osmotic adjustments, compatible solutes seem to function as a chaperone protecting enzymes and membrane structures, and as a scavenger reducing radical oxygen species under stress conditions including salinity stress (Bohnert and Shen 1999). Rice has two genes encoding the betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase, which catalyzes betaine aldehyde to glycine betaine (GB), a compatible solute. However, rice cannot synthesize GB because of the lack of an upstream enzyme, the choline monooxidase (CMO), which convert a choline to a betaine aldehyde. Introductions of spinach CMO genes or the Arthrobacter pascens choline oxidase into rice plants promoted the synthesis of GB in the transgenic rice plants (Sakamoto et al. 1998;Shirasawa et al. 2006). However, only relatively small amount of GB accumulation and slight enhancement of salt tolerance of transgenic rice plants were observed in some conditions tested, probably because of low activities and/or miss-localization of the introduced enzymes (Shirasawa et al. 2006).
## (s19) Bypass flow of solutes and the apoplastic pathway in rice roots
Number of References: 80

(p19.0) From the general view point mentioned above, it is quite natural to hypothesize that the mechanism of salt exclusion could occur at the exodermis or at the endodermis in the radial direction, and from there, salt is transported radially via a symplastic pathway (Storey and Walker 1998;Munns 2002) because flow of solutes through the apoplast is arrested at the site of the Casparian band and finally solutes are selectively transported through the plasma membrane into the symplast ( Figure 5). However, as described in the previous section, studies using apoplastic tracer showed that major pathway of uptaking Na + ions into the stele is apoplastic pathway in the case of rice (Yeo et al. 1987;Yadav et al. 1996;Ochiai and Matoh 2002).

(p19.1) As discussed by Garcia et al. (1997) and also mentioned in the previous section, the uptake of sodium ions by the bypass flow possibly involves direct apoplastic leakage occurring at the root apices (Enstone and Peterson 1992) and the sites of secondary root emergence (Peterson et al. 1981;Ranathunge et al. 2005) (Figure 4a). On the other hand, experiments using pressure probes have indicated a possibility of some passage of water and perhaps also of solutes bypassing protoplasts (Steudle and Frensch 1996). With regard to the outer part of the root (OPR), Ranathunge et al. (2005) performed experiments introducing precipitates of insoluble inorganic salts to block apoplastic pores and suggested existence of predominant apoplastic bypass flow of water as well as high permeability of ions of the OPR, supporting at least a possibility of apoplastic bypass flow of solutes in the OPR. Although it may appear somehow controversial about the mechanism of the bypass flow of solutes, a fascinating model called "composite transport" of both water and solutes is proposed. This model assumes that a switching between the apoplastic and cell-to-cell pathways occurs depending on given circumstances and explains how plants optimize water uptake according to demands from the shoot (Steudle and Frensch 1996;Steudle and Peterson 1998;Miyamoto et al. 2001). The composite transport model may also be applied even to rice roots in which aerenchyma extensively develop .

(p19.2) A unique point of view accounting for the bypass flow discussed by Munns (2002) is that large gaps created between the plasma membrane and the cell wall may fill with solution and allow an artifactual apoplastic pathway for salts to move radially across the root under salinity stress conditions. However, this view might be unlikely at the sites of the Casparian band because plasma membrane tightly attaches to the cell wall at these sites even under osmotic (or salinity) stress conditions that causes severe plasmolysis (Karahara and Shibaoka 1992).

(p19.3) Silicon alleviates abiotic stresses including salinity stress in rice (Matoh et al. 1986;Ma and Yamaji 2006). This function of silicon may be ascribed, in part, to the partial blockage of the transpirational bypass flow (Ma 2004). In the case of alleviation of cadmium toxicity by silicon in maize, possible involvement of a change in the development of endodermal suberin lamellae is suggested (Vaculik et al. 2009). Such a possibility could also be suggested in the case of alleviation of salinity stress by silicon in rice.

(p19.4) From the general view point mentioned above, it is quite natural to hypothesize that the mechanism of salt exclusion could occur at the exodermis or at the endodermis in the radial direction, and from there, salt is transported radially via a symplastic pathway (Storey and Walker 1998;Munns 2002) because flow of solutes through the apoplast is arrested at the site of the Casparian band and finally solutes are selectively transported through the plasma membrane into the symplast ( Figure 5). However, as described in the previous section, studies using apoplastic tracer showed that major pathway of uptaking Na + ions into the stele is apoplastic pathway in the case of rice (Yeo et al. 1987;Yadav et al. 1996;Ochiai and Matoh 2002).

(p19.5) As discussed by Garcia et al. (1997) and also mentioned in the previous section, the uptake of sodium ions by the bypass flow possibly involves direct apoplastic leakage occurring at the root apices (Enstone and Peterson 1992) and the sites of secondary root emergence (Peterson et al. 1981;Ranathunge et al. 2005) (Figure 4a). On the other hand, experiments using pressure probes have indicated a possibility of some passage of water and perhaps also of solutes bypassing protoplasts (Steudle and Frensch 1996). With regard to the outer part of the root (OPR), Ranathunge et al. (2005) performed experiments introducing precipitates of insoluble inorganic salts to block apoplastic pores and suggested existence of predominant apoplastic bypass flow of water as well as high permeability of ions of the OPR, supporting at least a possibility of apoplastic bypass flow of solutes in the OPR. Although it may appear somehow controversial about the mechanism of the bypass flow of solutes, a fascinating model called "composite transport" of both water and solutes is proposed. This model assumes that a switching between the apoplastic and cell-to-cell pathways occurs depending on given circumstances and explains how plants optimize water uptake according to demands from the shoot (Steudle and Frensch 1996;Steudle and Peterson 1998;Miyamoto et al. 2001). The composite transport model may also be applied even to rice roots in which aerenchyma extensively develop .

(p19.6) A unique point of view accounting for the bypass flow discussed by Munns (2002) is that large gaps created between the plasma membrane and the cell wall may fill with solution and allow an artifactual apoplastic pathway for salts to move radially across the root under salinity stress conditions. However, this view might be unlikely at the sites of the Casparian band because plasma membrane tightly attaches to the cell wall at these sites even under osmotic (or salinity) stress conditions that causes severe plasmolysis (Karahara and Shibaoka 1992).

(p19.7) Silicon alleviates abiotic stresses including salinity stress in rice (Matoh et al. 1986;Ma and Yamaji 2006). This function of silicon may be ascribed, in part, to the partial blockage of the transpirational bypass flow (Ma 2004). In the case of alleviation of cadmium toxicity by silicon in maize, possible involvement of a change in the development of endodermal suberin lamellae is suggested (Vaculik et al. 2009). Such a possibility could also be suggested in the case of alleviation of salinity stress by silicon in rice.
