# Relations between sleep patterns early in life and brain development: A review

CorpusID: 250053668 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ee0ced25dc6627be7d93366c59475bb2c734d09](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ee0ced25dc6627be7d93366c59475bb2c734d09)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 7

(p0.0) It is widely accepted that sleep is important for children. Sleep during the preschool years (~3-5 years) is especially unique in that children transition from a biphasic (naps and overnight sleep) to a monophasic (primarily overnight sleep) sleep pattern (Chokroverty, 1994;Weissbluth, 1995). Naps in young children have been shown to enhance learning through sleep-dependent memory consolidation (i.e., the notion that consolidation processes preferrentially occur during sleep; Cremone et al., 2017;Kurdziel et al., 2013;Lokhandwala and Spencer, 2021;Spanò et al., 2018;Williams and Horst, 2014). Moreover, sleep macrostructure (organization of sleep stages) and microstructure (characteristics of the sleep electroencephalogram (EEG) which measure electrical activity in the brain) change during this period. Brain maturation in particular is suggested to impact the biphasic to monophasic transition and the accompanying changes in EEG.
## (s2) Sleep architecture
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) Early in infancy, sleep is divided into 2 main periods-quiet sleep (QS) which is a precursor to non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep and encompasses both light and deep sleep. The second period is active sleep (AS) which is a precursor to rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and may be a cycle which involves more vivid dreaming (Carskadon and Dement, 2005). Over early development, QS and AS become NREM and REM as the sleep EEG becomes more pronounced and distinguishable. In adult humans, these two types of sleep alternate throughout the night, roughly every 90 min (McCarley et al., 1995). In young children, this cycle occurs approximately every 60 min (Davis et al., 2004).
## (s3) Sleep timing and regulation
Number of References: 14

(p3.0) Sleep is suggested to be controlled by two processes-a circadian process (Process C) and a homeostatic process (Process S). Our circadian rhythms are physical, mental, and behavioral changes that follow a 24hr cycle, including sleep (Borbély et al., 2016). Process C contributes to the timing of sleep and wake through external cues, the most central cue being the light/dark cycle. Sleep homeostasis on the other hand, is the mechanism that drives us to sleep. Homeostatic sleep pressure dissipates when we sleep and slow wave activity (SWA;0.5-4.5 Hz) is considered a marker of sleep pressure, with greater SWA seen following sleep deprivation (Bersagliere and Achermann, 2010).

(p3.1) Napping is considered a hallmark of early childhood. The drive to nap in early childhood has largely been associated with Process S. In particular, young children are suggested to have a more rapid accumulation of sleep pressure, with the need to more frequently nap, which may be necessary to dissipate that pressure ( Fig. 1; Jenni and LeBourgeois, 2006a;Kurth et al., 2016). While our understanding of the regulatory processes underlying napping is limited, examining naps as they relate to cognition and the factors that may play a role in nap cessation may elucidate the nap transition during this period. Although sleep is dynamic and changes across development, particularly with the transition out of napping in early childhood, there is clear evidence that naps may be necessary for learning and memory early in development. A recent review highlights that naps confer both immediate and delayed benefits on declarative, emotional, and procedural learning across infancy and childhood (see Spencer, 2021 for review). In particular, physiology in these naps (sleep spindles and SWS) has been shown to play a role in supporting these memories (Hahn et al., 2019;Kurdziel et al., 2013;Lokhandwala and Spencer, 2021;Simon et al., 2017;Spanò et al., 2018;Zinke, Wilhelm et al., 2017;Züst et al., 2019). These results are in line with the role sleep (i.e., overnight sleep in older children and adults) physiology plays on memory consolidation more broadly (Maingret et al., 2016;Rasch and Born, 2013). Given the beneficial role of early childhood sleep on learning and memory, it is therefore critical to understand the development of early sleep, the nap transition, and the factors that may contribute to the biphasic to monophasic sleep shift during this period in development.
## (s5) Relations between sleep and structural brain development
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Sleep has been shown to modulate brain activity during development. For instance, Cao and colleagues (2020) developed a framework for modeling neural repair, metabolic clearance, and sleep changes during development. Results reveal differences in sleep across phylogeny and during late ontogeny (after 2-3 years of age) are primarily due to sleep functioning for repair or clearance, while changes in sleep during early ontogeny (before 2-3 years of age) primarily support neural reorganization and learning. This process occurs primarily in REM and not NREM (Cao et al., 2020). One cross-sectional study examined the prospective relations between sleep disturbances across childhood and brain morphology at 7 years of age (Kocevska et al., 2017). They found that sleep disturbances from 2 years of age onward were associated with smaller gray matter volumes. In particular, children with sleep disturbances had a thinner dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. While the study did not include any sleep EEG and therefore was unable to examine associations between altered sleep physiology and brain morphology, the results suggest the influence sleep disturbances may have on neurodevelopment. It is important to keep in mind that as the study was cross-sectional and did not include baseline magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, it is possible that rather than being an outcome of sleep disruptions, brain structural development may underlie sleep disturbances in childhood. A study in cats found that sleep augmented the effects of a preceding period of monocular deprivation on visual cortical responses . This was not the case for wakefulness in complete darkness. This study illustrates that sleep (and the lack thereof) may be critical to modulating experience-dependent plasticity.
## (s6) The role REM sleep in brain development
Number of References: 16

(p6.0) Moreover, studies have further underscored the role REM and nREM sleep may be playing in brain development. Studies in human and nonhuman animals have found that REM sleep may be critical for brain development, particularly the maturation of the visual cortex (de Lima et al., 1985;Shaffery et al., 2006;Dumoulin Bridi et al., 2015) and motor system (Blumberg et al., 2013). With regards to the visual system, Dumoulin Bridi and colleagues (2015) found that withholding REM sleep after monocular deprivation in perinatal cats attenuated ocular dominance plasticity and inhibited the stimulation of the kinase necessary for such plasticity. Additional studies have reported that when rats are deprived of REM sleep (therefore reducing cortical activation during this phase) prior to the end of the critical period, the cessation of this period was delayed (Shaffery et al., 2002) by approximately 3 weeks (Shaffery et al., 2006). The results indicate that REM sleep may play a functional role in the maturational processes that terminate the critical period. Work in human infants found increased retinal activity during REM sleep compared to nREM sleep (Peña et al., 1999). The authors took this to suggest that increased retinal activity during REM may reflect a preferential role of REM in the maturation of the visual system.

(p6.1) Muscle twitches and jerks that are characteristic of early REM sleep may also play a role in the maturation of the motor circuit (Blumberg et al., 2013;Del Rio-Bermudez et al., 2017;Roffwarg et al., 1966;Sokoloff et al., 2020). Sleep in early infancy involves myoclonic twitches during active sleep (the precursor to REM; Kayser and Biron, 2016). These twitches have been shown to generate in the brainstem, which may have implications for experience-dependent development of the sensorimotor system (Blumberg et al., 2013;Khazipov et al., 2004;Tiriac et al., 2015). One study recorded extracellular activity in postnatal day 8 and postnatal day 12 rats as they went about their typical sleep-wake cycles and found that the red nucleus showed prominent theta activity during active sleep (Del Rio-Bermudez et al., 2017). By postnatal day 12, theta oscillations in the hippocampus and red nucleus were interactive. The results demonstrate that active sleep may be critical for functional connectivity early in development.
## (s8) Topography of SWA
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) With regards to human studies, while many are cross-sectional in nature and thus make it difficult to rule out causality, they provide valuable insight into the possible associations and trajectories of sleep and brain maturation. There appear to be age-dependent changes in SWA topography. For instance, one cross-sectional study examined the topographical distribution of sleep EEG from early childhood to adolescence (Kurth et al., 2010). The results illustrated age-dependent differences in SWA topography. That is, SWA was most concentrated over posterior regions during early childhood and then gradually shifted to more central and then frontal derivations by late adolescence.This trajectory of SWA parallels the course of cortical gray matter maturation (Huttenlocher and Dabholkar, 1997;Shaw et al., 2008). These results are further supported by a study investigating the relationship between sleep SWA and various markers of cortical maturation during adolescence (Buchmann et al., 2011). Using MRI and high-density EEG, the authors found that SWA and cortical gray matter decreases during adolescence (possibly due to synaptic pruning) and that the relationship between SWA and gray matter volume/thickness is heightened in areas showing the greatest maturational changes. Thus, it is possible that the large gray matter volume in children reflects, at least in part, higher synaptic density. As children are learning immensely and rapidly from their environment, frequent consolidation of the days' learning may be necessary in the form of naps.
## (s9) Relation between brain development and early sleep patterns
Number of References: 7

(p9.0) It may be that memory and brain development play a role in nap habituality (the frequency at which a child naps or not). Napping status is of particular interest, as studies have found that when deprived of a midday nap, habitually napping children have greater memory detriment than children who are non-nappers (Kurdziel et al., 2013;Leong et al., 2021). An explanation for this difference is that habitual nappers may have a less developed short-term memory storage (i.e., hippocampus) and thus require frequent consolidation in the form of naps to secure learning from the day. Non-nappers in comparison may have more mature hippocampi and, therefore, staying awake does not confer a similar detriment to memory. Riggins and Spencer (2020) showed that in younger children (4-6-year-olds), hippocampal subfield volume varied as a function of nap status. That is, children who were "nappers," had larger CA1 volumes in the body of the hippocampus compared to children who were no longer napping. This supports the hypothesis that hippocampi in nappers may be less developed (i.e., larger prior to synaptic downscaling) compared to non-nappers. While this study did not assess sleep physiology in relation to hippocampal volume, it provides support for the notion that early sleep patterns parallel development in the brain.

(p9.1) Further, there is work to suggest that sleep disturbances in early childhood may be associated with morphologic changes in subcortical structures, particularly in the context of autism spectrum disorder (ASD; MacDuffie et al., 2020). In this study, infants were assessed at 6, 12, and 24 months with MRI scans and parent reported measures of sleep problems. They found that infant sleep problems were related to hippocampal volume trajectories only in high-risk infants who developed ASD. Specifically, sleep onset difficulties were associated with increased hippocampal volume from 6 to 24 months only for high-risk infants who developed ASD. This finding is in line with evidence supporting that early cortical overgrowth is related to later social deficits (Hazlett et al., 2017). While the study does not examine more objective measures of sleep (i.e., actigraphy or polysomnography), the longitudinal reports of sleep problems provide initial evidence that sleep problems in infancy precede ASD diagnosis and are associated with altered hippocampal volume trajectories in infants at high familial risk who go on to develop ASD. Thus, it may be that early sleep disturbances impact typical sleep physiology and, in turn, may compromise typical cortical maturation. It is important to note, however, that early life sleep problems have different origins (e.g., family dynamics) and can often be addressed through interventions (Jenni and O'Connor, 2005;Tikotzky, 2017).
## (s10) SWA localization
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) More recent work demonstrates that sleep topography and sleep EEG coherence reflect developing neural networks. However, most of these studies are cross-sectional and/or involve prospective brain measures. While such studies make it difficult to illustrate the development of electrical cortical activity and brain maturation, these works collectively provide support that in early childhood and adolescence, sleep microstructure parallels and changes with brain development. For instance, one longitudinal study examined sleep physiology every 6 months over a period of 6 years in children 6-18 years of age found that delta power decreased earliest at an occipital derivation (O1) and latest at a frontal derivation (Fz; Feinberg et al., 2011). This propagation of delta power is similar to the trajectory of cortical thickness, where occipital regions mature first and frontal regions last (Shaw et al., 2008). A very similar time course of SWA has been found in non-human animals (Olini et al., 2013;Song et al., 1997). The parallel shift in distribution provides support that delta activity may reflect underlying processes of cortical maturation.
## (s12) Conclusions: understanding and promoting sleep for healthy cognitive development
Number of References: 3

(p12.0) In the present review, we have outlined how sleep changes developmentally and, specifically, how these changes may reflect modifications in early brain development in both humans and non-human animals. Broadly speaking, studies support that topographical shifts in maximal SWA, from more posterior regions to more anterior regions, reflect a similar trajectory to cortical maturation (Kurth, Ringli et al., 2010). Work examining both typical development and atypical neurodevelopment (ADHD, ASD) suggests that sleep spectral analyses may play a critical part in elucidating underlying cortical conditions (Page et al., 2020;Ringli et al., 2013). Evidence provided here likewise supports that cortical maturation may in turn reflect changes in early sleep patterns and sleep physiology localization. These results would seem to indicate that sleep and brain development may not be mutually exclusive. That is, it may be that early sleep patterns are indicative of brain maturation. However, whether early sleep characteristics play a causal functional role in brain development or are merely a reflection of cortical maturation is still unclear and requires further investigation.
