# Recycling phosphogypsum in road construction materials and associated environmental considerations: A review

CorpusID: 253484110 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d93536967f1d81aeb14bc69dc32083aa32379446](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d93536967f1d81aeb14bc69dc32083aa32379446)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s3) Chemical composition
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) The chemical composition of PG produced in different countries is shown in Table 1. It indicates that the chemical composition of PG varies from one area to another. In general, PG mainly consists of CaO and SO 3 , with both accounting for approximately 70% of the total mass. In addition, PG also contains Fe 2 O 3 , Mg, Al, sulphides and organic matters (Masmoudi-Soussi et al., 2019). During the reuse of PG, impurities in the PG affect the product properties. Singh et al. (Singh, 2005) found that more than 1.0% soluble phosphate adversely affected the setting time and strength development of selenite gypsum. Moreover, the fluoride and organic matters in PG can decrease the compressive strength of gypsum. Min et al. (2007) found that soluble phosphorus and organic matters in PG could prolong the gelling time of gel materials. Furthermore, these impurities in PG have adverse effects on the serviceability of gypsum dihydrate and gypsum hemihydrate. In other words, PG should be pretreated before reuse to remove impurities and prevent the adverse effects on PG-based materials.
## (s5) Nuclides
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) Naturally occurring radionuclides are mainly derived from phosphate rock used in processing (Rutherford et al., 1996). The mined phosphate rock is further processed into the required product by the WPA process, with PG as a by-product. The radionuclides that can occur naturally in the phosphate rock are transferred to PG, leading to the PG containing trace amounts of radioactive elements (Arhouni et al., 2022). The radioactivity is mainly from 238U, 232Th and 226Ra (Saadaoui et al., 2017). During phosphoric acid production, radionuclides are partitioned between the H 3 PO 4 and PG phases (Szajerski, 2020). Elemental uranium is transferred   from the non-mobile fraction in phosphate rock to the bioavailable fraction in PG at a rate of 23% (Perez-Lopez et al., 2007). 226Ra, 210Pb and thorium isotopes preferentially favour PG at 90% for 226Ra (with ore), 100% for 210Pb, and 80% for 232Th and 230Th (Mazzilli et al., 2000). The types and contents of nuclides in PG determined by various countries, regions and organisations are shown in Table3. The radiation hazard indicators for PG determined by various countries, regions and organisations are shown in Table 4. There are some variations in the types and contents of nuclides in PG produced in various countries, regions and organisations and in the radiation hazard indicators for PG measured by researchers.
## (s12) REEs recovery from PG
Number of References: 6

(p12.0) The REE is a global strategic resource composed of seventeen chemical elements such as lanthanide, scandium, and yttrium. Due to its unique electronic structure and special properties, it has become an essential element group for developing high-tech and cutting-edge technologies (Dushyantha et al., 2020). It plays a vital role in magnets, catalysts, biology, new materials, new energy, and atomic energy (Peiravi et al., 2021). China controls more than 90% of the world's REEs production (Blissett et al., 2014). In addition to the surge in China's domestic REEs consumption in recent years, the quota for REEs exports has been reduced. Therefore, finding new REEs sources has been a focus of scientists from all over the world. With the deepening of research, PG has attracted the attention of researchers worldwide. The PG has a low content of REEs, with the total amount in the mass range of 0.343-0.637% (Grabas et al., 2019). However, PG is a potential source of REEs due to its high annual production . With the development of science and technology, the leaching rate of REEs continues to increase. At present, there are two main methods, i.e., chemical and biological methods, for extracting REEs from PG.

(p12.1) Currently, researchers mostly use inorganic acids as leaching agents to leach REEs in PG. Strong acids, such as nitric acid and sulfuric acid, have attracted the attention of researchers because of their high leaching and recovery rates of REEs. C anovas et al. used HNO 3 (above 80%) or H 2 SO 4 as a leaching agent. The leaching rates of REEs with the addition of 3 mol/L HNO 3 and 0.5 mol/L H 2 SO 4 were 63% and 46%-58%, respectively. It can be seen that nitric acid is the best leaching agent. When the reaction time was increased from 2 h to 8 h, the leaching efficiency and the impurity release rate of the two leaching solutions increased by 8% and 6%, respectively. Adding the chelating agent DTPA (diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid) can increase the leaching rate of REEs from 13% to 22% (Canovas et al., 2019). In addition, Hammas-Nasri et al. leached REEs in PG with dilute sulfuric acid and leached PG samples twice with 10% H 2 SO 4 at 60 C with a liquid-solid ratio of 1.3:1. The mixture was stirred continuously for 1 h-2 h. Then, the solid and liquid were separated for evaporative crystallization. Finally, a sample with about 86% REEs was obtained (Hammas-Nasri et al., 2016).
## (s14) Soil stabilisation and amendment
Number of References: 9

(p14.0) The engineering properties of soils, the main material for road base construction, are crucial. In road foundations, sand and gravel soils make good fillers due to their excellent properties when compacted. Although certain soils (e.g., chalk and special soils) are not suitable for direct use as road base fillers, they can be stabilised in advance for improved strength and water sensitivity. Lime or cement stabilisations are common soil stabilisation methods (Kumar et al., 2015), which also have disadvantages such as high water-to-ash ratio and high cost. Therefore, when strengthening soft soil roadbeds, their chemical composition must be analysed first. Adding PG can reduce the amount of cement used while satisfying the same strength requirements, thus reducing construction costs. Degirmenci et al. (2007) found that the unconfined compressive strength of unstabilised soils was lower than that of stabilised soils. Cement with PG was significantly more effective than fly ash with PG for mixing modified soils. Shen et al. prepared a new lime-fly ash-PG binder for semi-rigid road subgrades, the optimum formulation of which was 8-12% modified lime, 18-23% PG, and 65-74% fly ash. Soils stabilised with the new lime-fly ash-PG binder had higher early strength than soils stabilised with lime-fly ash, lime, or cement, and granular soils stabilised with the new binder have higher long-term strength than typical road subgrade materials (Shen et al., 2007). Mineralogical analysis revealed that the chemical reaction between PG and the cementitious material (calcium aluminate hydrate) forms calcium alumina. In the meantime, the increased contents of calcium and PG positively affect the strength development of cement stabilised soils at full cementation after 28 days. The produced calcium alumina tends to swell, increasing the density and strength of the structure. However, excessive PG may increase the volume and cause structural damage and strength loss.

(p14.1) Treating waste with waste is an ideal way of recycling that increases waste reuse, protects the environment and conserves resources. Treated waste can be used to improve the soil for road construction. Dredging is conducted annually throughout China to maintain good drainage conditions of water systems and improve water quality. However, dredged silt is a soft soil with low compressive strength. The effects of PG on the unconfined compressive strength and early strength of cement stabilised dredged soils were investigated experimentally by Zeng et al. The experimental results showed that the unconfined compressive strength of cement-stabilised soils with PG contents of 1.4%-8.6% was about 31.7 to 9.4 times higher than that of cement-stabilised soils without PG. In particular, the early strengths of PG-doped stabilised soils were 1.3 and 2.1 times higher after curing for 3 and 7 days, respectively, compared to those without PG (Zeng et al., 2021). Microscopic analysis revealed that PG accelerated the volcanic ash reaction between lime and fly ash, forming AFt that fills the small pores in the binder. Therefore, road base materials with lime-fly ash-PG binder had excellent performance. Gu et al. (2021) found that PG, slag, and cement with a weight ratio of 6:3:1 mixed with 5% micro silica fume (MSF) and 3‰ hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) showed the best overall performance with a compressive strength of 28.8 MPa at 60 days and a softening coefficient of 0.9. At the optimum mix ratio, the weight of PG and slag was approximately 90% of the total, indicating that this waste recycling method can significantly increase the reuse and consumption of solid waste.

(p14.2) Expansive soils swell and soften with water and shrink with water loss. With poor scour resistance, expansive soils are unsuitable for direct use in highway engineering. Therefore, Oumnih et al. Oumnih et al. (2019) stabilised expansive soils with a mixture of lime and gypsum, concluding that the plasticity and swelling of the stabilised soils were significantly reduced. After cost analysis, the most economical combination was 8% lime and 8% gypsum. The reduced plasticity index indicated improved water stability of the soils and subsequently improved water resistance of the roadbed soils. Kumar et al. (2015) found that the dry bulk weight and optimum moisture content increased in the bentonite containing 8% PG and 8% lime. The increase in dry bulk weight indicated a lower water content and increased water stability of the stabilised soils.

(p14.3) As mentioned above, PG is mainly mixed with diatomaceous ash or cement to improve the strength and water stability of subgrade soils. Although cement-PG mixes provide better stability to the ground, there are disadvantages. Mousa et al. (Mousa and Hanna, 2013) found that impurities in PG can enhance its retarding effect on cement and reduce the early cement strength development rate mainly because they lowered the pH of the mixture and slowed down the reaction of the volcanic ash. Gu et al. (2021) revealed that adding 5% micro silica powder reduced the retarding effect of PG effectively and increased the 3-day compressive strength by 170%. In addition to the 3‰ hydroxypropyl, adding methyl cellulose also retarded the hydration reaction. Therefore, adding accelerators to the mix can improve the performance of stabilised soils and overcome their shortcomings, making their engineering properties more suitable for subgrade construction.
## (s16) Application to road base pavement materials
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) Acquiring conventional road base fillers such as soil and stone could damage the environment. Stabilised and cured PG can be used to replace traditional road materials, thus reducing rock and soil mining and protecting the environment while increasing PG utilisation for sustainable development. A mixture of 46.5% sand, 46.5% PG, and 7% cement was prepared, and its mechanical strength was discussed (Zmemla et al., 2022). The prepared mixture was subjected to conventional compressive and tensile strength tests as well as Young's modulus test, the results of Figure 6. FTIR spectra of pure bitumen with a modified binder from 2000 cm À1 to 900 cm À1 (Cuadri et al., 2014).
