# A Review on HEVC Video Forensic Investigation under Compressed Domain

CorpusID: 253038400 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95396daee6827d1b1d2ff68c44c1449af6e3d688](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95396daee6827d1b1d2ff68c44c1449af6e3d688)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s2) A. Coding units (CUs)
Number of References: 4

(p2.0) Block partitioning divides each frame into equal-sized units called Coding Tree Units (CTUs). Replacing the conventional macroblock structure where the size was fixed to 16x16, CTUs in HEVC are subdivided into flexible CUs to form a quadtree structure. To find the optimal portioning, an efficient Rate-Distortion Cost (RDCost) algorithm is employed [5]. Smoother regions of high-resolution pictures are encoded using larger-sized CUs to provide improved compression efficiency. Whereas smaller-sized CUs are more efficient in dealing with finer details of dense areas resulting in improved picture quality. Fig. 4 shows the partitioning structure of a CTU into CUs and the resulting quadtree formation for that portion of the video frame. 

(p2.1) Block partitioning divides each frame into equal-sized units called Coding Tree Units (CTUs). Replacing the conventional macroblock structure where the size was fixed to 16x16, CTUs in HEVC are subdivided into flexible CUs to form a quadtree structure. To find the optimal portioning, an efficient Rate-Distortion Cost (RDCost) algorithm is employed [5]. Smoother regions of high-resolution pictures are encoded using larger-sized CUs to provide improved compression efficiency. Whereas smaller-sized CUs are more efficient in dealing with finer details of dense areas resulting in improved picture quality. Fig. 4 shows the partitioning structure of a CTU into CUs and the resulting quadtree formation for that portion of the video frame. 
## (s5) HEVC Video Forgeries
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 

(p5.1) There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 
## (s7) B. Video Content Forgery
Number of References: 8

(p7.0) This type of forgery tampers the video either by manipulating the contents inside individual frames or by altering the original sequence of frames [13]. It is divided into two sub-categories: Intra-frame forgery and Inter-frame Forgery.

(p7.1) Intra-frame Forgery A digital video is essentially a collection of still images called frames [24]. A counterfeiter manipulates the contents of a frame in intra-frame forgery. Intra-frame forgeries can be carried out at the pixel level, where specific pixels are altered, or at the object level, where a region containing a specific object is tampered. Typically, the goal of this manipulation is to clone, splice, or inpaint an area or object at a specific location in a frame. Fig. 7 shows an example of intra-frame object forgery, wherein part (a) depicts the cloning operation. A white truck from the authentic sequence of frames is copied and pasted at some other location in the same sequence of frames. In part (b), a person from some other video is spliced into an authentic video to produce a spliced video. An example of an inpainted video is shown in part (c), where a cycle object is removed from the original video by replacing the object region with neighbouring pixel values. Fig. 7. Example of intra-frame forgery. (a) Cloning forgery; a white truck is copied and pasted, in the same sequence, at some other location (b) Splicing forgery; a lady is spliced in an authentic sequence, from another video (c) In-painting forgery; a cycle object is removed from the authentic sequence.

(p7.2) This type of forgery tampers the video either by manipulating the contents inside individual frames or by altering the original sequence of frames [13]. It is divided into two sub-categories: Intra-frame forgery and Inter-frame Forgery.

(p7.3) Intra-frame Forgery A digital video is essentially a collection of still images called frames [24]. A counterfeiter manipulates the contents of a frame in intra-frame forgery. Intra-frame forgeries can be carried out at the pixel level, where specific pixels are altered, or at the object level, where a region containing a specific object is tampered. Typically, the goal of this manipulation is to clone, splice, or inpaint an area or object at a specific location in a frame. Fig. 7 shows an example of intra-frame object forgery, wherein part (a) depicts the cloning operation. A white truck from the authentic sequence of frames is copied and pasted at some other location in the same sequence of frames. In part (b), a person from some other video is spliced into an authentic video to produce a spliced video. An example of an inpainted video is shown in part (c), where a cycle object is removed from the original video by replacing the object region with neighbouring pixel values. Fig. 7. Example of intra-frame forgery. (a) Cloning forgery; a white truck is copied and pasted, in the same sequence, at some other location (b) Splicing forgery; a lady is spliced in an authentic sequence, from another video (c) In-painting forgery; a cycle object is removed from the authentic sequence.
## (s8) Inter-frame Forgery
Number of References: 8

(p8.0) Inter-frame forgery is the act of altering a series of frames in a video. A fraudster may purposefully remove, insert, or duplicate a sequence of frames from a genuine video [25]. The objective could be to destroy evidence of a criminal act or to stage an event at an incorrect moment, in order to slander someone. Surveillance videos are frequently used in criminal case investigations as vital evidence. If such manipulation takes place in surveillance footage, it may go unnoticed by human eyes, jeopardizing justice. Fig. 8 shows an example of video interframe forgery. Row (a) depicts an authentic video sequence obtained from a surveillance camera. In row (b), frame deletion forgery is performed by removing a sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person in an office premise. Frame insertion forgery is performed in row (c), wherein, a forged sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person is inserted in the original sequence. The inserted sequence is obtained from the same surveillance camera, recorded on some other day. In row (d), a sequence of frames is copied and pasted in same surveillance footage to depict frame duplicated forged video.    9 illustrates the process of generating forged videos including, transcoded, fake bitrate, intra-frame forged and inter-frame forged. Typical forgery operations involve decoding the authentic video, performing manipulations and recompressing. Thus, a forgery operation always includes double compression. To detect forgery several double compression detection techniques are proposed in the literature. These techniques extract abnormal features either from decoded frames known as, decompressed domain or extract irregular coding features directly from encoded bitstream known as compression domain. The approaches proposed in the compression domain require less computation time and demand less cache for processing operations [13]. Thus, for data of high dimension or beyond, analysing compression domain features is more desirable. This paper aims at reviewing HEVC forensic techniques utilizing artefacts that occurred in HEVC coding elements.

(p8.1) Inter-frame forgery is the act of altering a series of frames in a video. A fraudster may purposefully remove, insert, or duplicate a sequence of frames from a genuine video [25]. The objective could be to destroy evidence of a criminal act or to stage an event at an incorrect moment, in order to slander someone. Surveillance videos are frequently used in criminal case investigations as vital evidence. If such manipulation takes place in surveillance footage, it may go unnoticed by human eyes, jeopardizing justice. Fig. 8 shows an example of video interframe forgery. Row (a) depicts an authentic video sequence obtained from a surveillance camera. In row (b), frame deletion forgery is performed by removing a sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person in an office premise. Frame insertion forgery is performed in row (c), wherein, a forged sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person is inserted in the original sequence. The inserted sequence is obtained from the same surveillance camera, recorded on some other day. In row (d), a sequence of frames is copied and pasted in same surveillance footage to depict frame duplicated forged video.    9 illustrates the process of generating forged videos including, transcoded, fake bitrate, intra-frame forged and inter-frame forged. Typical forgery operations involve decoding the authentic video, performing manipulations and recompressing. Thus, a forgery operation always includes double compression. To detect forgery several double compression detection techniques are proposed in the literature. These techniques extract abnormal features either from decoded frames known as, decompressed domain or extract irregular coding features directly from encoded bitstream known as compression domain. The approaches proposed in the compression domain require less computation time and demand less cache for processing operations [13]. Thus, for data of high dimension or beyond, analysing compression domain features is more desirable. This paper aims at reviewing HEVC forensic techniques utilizing artefacts that occurred in HEVC coding elements.
## (s10) A. Transcoding detection techniques
Number of References: 16

(p10.0) Genuine HEVC videos are directly formed from a sequence of raw uncompressed images, whereas transcoded HEVC videos are generated by re-encoding the decoded AVC/MPEG content. Costanzo et al. [10] analysed the frequency of uni-predicted CUs and bi-predicted CU's in all B-frames of genuine HEVC videos and transcoded HEVC videos. The authors observed that in genuine HEVC videos the number of bi-predicted CUs is substantially larger than the number of uni-predicted CUs. The number of uni-predicted CUs, on the other hand, makes up the vast bulk of all units when the HEVC sequence is generated by re-encoding a lower-quality AVC sequence. This approach, however, can only be used if the quantization mode is set to a constant value and QP in re-encoding is less than that first encoding.

(p10.1) Bian et al. [20] explored the differences in prediction unit statistics of I-frame and P-frames for single and double encoded videos. Differences in quantization parameters between the first and second encoding cause the distortion of the optimal encoding scheme thus, to achieve the least cost the partitioning scheme of transcoded video tries different patterns. Authors utilized this observation and came to a conclusion that there exists more fine-grained PUs, i.e., smaller-sized blocks, in transcoded HEVC videos, whereas, the amount of coarse-grained PUs is much less accordingly in transcoded HEVC videos. A 30-D feature vector comprising the statistics of PUs in I and P-frames is utilised for training and testing using an SVM classifier to support this claim. The proposed technique is robust against video enhancement.

(p10.2) Zhang et al. [21] concatenated the characteristics of CU partition types to the PU partition types. A 38-D feature vector is designed by extracting mean frequencies of CU and PU partition types from I-frames and first P-frames of each GOP. The features are then classified as transcoded or not using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel. The technique obtained an average accuracy of 98.98% for high-resolution movies, which is slightly better (0.81%) than the scheme described by [20]. The approach claimed to be resilient to both a shifted GOP structure attack and a frame deletion attack. A comparative study of transcoding detection techniques is given in Table 2. 

(p10.3) Genuine HEVC videos are directly formed from a sequence of raw uncompressed images, whereas transcoded HEVC videos are generated by re-encoding the decoded AVC/MPEG content. Costanzo et al. [10] analysed the frequency of uni-predicted CUs and bi-predicted CU's in all B-frames of genuine HEVC videos and transcoded HEVC videos. The authors observed that in genuine HEVC videos the number of bi-predicted CUs is substantially larger than the number of uni-predicted CUs. The number of uni-predicted CUs, on the other hand, makes up the vast bulk of all units when the HEVC sequence is generated by re-encoding a lower-quality AVC sequence. This approach, however, can only be used if the quantization mode is set to a constant value and QP in re-encoding is less than that first encoding.

(p10.4) Bian et al. [20] explored the differences in prediction unit statistics of I-frame and P-frames for single and double encoded videos. Differences in quantization parameters between the first and second encoding cause the distortion of the optimal encoding scheme thus, to achieve the least cost the partitioning scheme of transcoded video tries different patterns. Authors utilized this observation and came to a conclusion that there exists more fine-grained PUs, i.e., smaller-sized blocks, in transcoded HEVC videos, whereas, the amount of coarse-grained PUs is much less accordingly in transcoded HEVC videos. A 30-D feature vector comprising the statistics of PUs in I and P-frames is utilised for training and testing using an SVM classifier to support this claim. The proposed technique is robust against video enhancement.

(p10.5) Zhang et al. [21] concatenated the characteristics of CU partition types to the PU partition types. A 38-D feature vector is designed by extracting mean frequencies of CU and PU partition types from I-frames and first P-frames of each GOP. The features are then classified as transcoded or not using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel. The technique obtained an average accuracy of 98.98% for high-resolution movies, which is slightly better (0.81%) than the scheme described by [20]. The approach claimed to be resilient to both a shifted GOP structure attack and a frame deletion attack. A comparative study of transcoding detection techniques is given in Table 2. 
## (s37) A. Coding units (CUs)
Number of References: 4

(p37.0) Block partitioning divides each frame into equal-sized units called Coding Tree Units (CTUs). Replacing the conventional macroblock structure where the size was fixed to 16x16, CTUs in HEVC are subdivided into flexible CUs to form a quadtree structure. To find the optimal portioning, an efficient Rate-Distortion Cost (RDCost) algorithm is employed [5]. Smoother regions of high-resolution pictures are encoded using larger-sized CUs to provide improved compression efficiency. Whereas smaller-sized CUs are more efficient in dealing with finer details of dense areas resulting in improved picture quality. Fig. 4 shows the partitioning structure of a CTU into CUs and the resulting quadtree formation for that portion of the video frame. 

(p37.1) Block partitioning divides each frame into equal-sized units called Coding Tree Units (CTUs). Replacing the conventional macroblock structure where the size was fixed to 16x16, CTUs in HEVC are subdivided into flexible CUs to form a quadtree structure. To find the optimal portioning, an efficient Rate-Distortion Cost (RDCost) algorithm is employed [5]. Smoother regions of high-resolution pictures are encoded using larger-sized CUs to provide improved compression efficiency. Whereas smaller-sized CUs are more efficient in dealing with finer details of dense areas resulting in improved picture quality. Fig. 4 shows the partitioning structure of a CTU into CUs and the resulting quadtree formation for that portion of the video frame. 
## (s40) HEVC Video Forgeries
Number of References: 4

(p40.0) There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 

(p40.1) There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 
## (s42) B. Video Content Forgery
Number of References: 8

(p42.0) This type of forgery tampers the video either by manipulating the contents inside individual frames or by altering the original sequence of frames [13]. It is divided into two sub-categories: Intra-frame forgery and Inter-frame Forgery.

(p42.1) Intra-frame Forgery A digital video is essentially a collection of still images called frames [24]. A counterfeiter manipulates the contents of a frame in intra-frame forgery. Intra-frame forgeries can be carried out at the pixel level, where specific pixels are altered, or at the object level, where a region containing a specific object is tampered. Typically, the goal of this manipulation is to clone, splice, or inpaint an area or object at a specific location in a frame. Fig. 7 shows an example of intra-frame object forgery, wherein part (a) depicts the cloning operation. A white truck from the authentic sequence of frames is copied and pasted at some other location in the same sequence of frames. In part (b), a person from some other video is spliced into an authentic video to produce a spliced video. An example of an inpainted video is shown in part (c), where a cycle object is removed from the original video by replacing the object region with neighbouring pixel values. Fig. 7. Example of intra-frame forgery. (a) Cloning forgery; a white truck is copied and pasted, in the same sequence, at some other location (b) Splicing forgery; a lady is spliced in an authentic sequence, from another video (c) In-painting forgery; a cycle object is removed from the authentic sequence.

(p42.2) This type of forgery tampers the video either by manipulating the contents inside individual frames or by altering the original sequence of frames [13]. It is divided into two sub-categories: Intra-frame forgery and Inter-frame Forgery.

(p42.3) Intra-frame Forgery A digital video is essentially a collection of still images called frames [24]. A counterfeiter manipulates the contents of a frame in intra-frame forgery. Intra-frame forgeries can be carried out at the pixel level, where specific pixels are altered, or at the object level, where a region containing a specific object is tampered. Typically, the goal of this manipulation is to clone, splice, or inpaint an area or object at a specific location in a frame. Fig. 7 shows an example of intra-frame object forgery, wherein part (a) depicts the cloning operation. A white truck from the authentic sequence of frames is copied and pasted at some other location in the same sequence of frames. In part (b), a person from some other video is spliced into an authentic video to produce a spliced video. An example of an inpainted video is shown in part (c), where a cycle object is removed from the original video by replacing the object region with neighbouring pixel values. Fig. 7. Example of intra-frame forgery. (a) Cloning forgery; a white truck is copied and pasted, in the same sequence, at some other location (b) Splicing forgery; a lady is spliced in an authentic sequence, from another video (c) In-painting forgery; a cycle object is removed from the authentic sequence.
## (s43) Inter-frame Forgery
Number of References: 8

(p43.0) Inter-frame forgery is the act of altering a series of frames in a video. A fraudster may purposefully remove, insert, or duplicate a sequence of frames from a genuine video [25]. The objective could be to destroy evidence of a criminal act or to stage an event at an incorrect moment, in order to slander someone. Surveillance videos are frequently used in criminal case investigations as vital evidence. If such manipulation takes place in surveillance footage, it may go unnoticed by human eyes, jeopardizing justice. Fig. 8 shows an example of video interframe forgery. Row (a) depicts an authentic video sequence obtained from a surveillance camera. In row (b), frame deletion forgery is performed by removing a sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person in an office premise. Frame insertion forgery is performed in row (c), wherein, a forged sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person is inserted in the original sequence. The inserted sequence is obtained from the same surveillance camera, recorded on some other day. In row (d), a sequence of frames is copied and pasted in same surveillance footage to depict frame duplicated forged video.    9 illustrates the process of generating forged videos including, transcoded, fake bitrate, intra-frame forged and inter-frame forged. Typical forgery operations involve decoding the authentic video, performing manipulations and recompressing. Thus, a forgery operation always includes double compression. To detect forgery several double compression detection techniques are proposed in the literature. These techniques extract abnormal features either from decoded frames known as, decompressed domain or extract irregular coding features directly from encoded bitstream known as compression domain. The approaches proposed in the compression domain require less computation time and demand less cache for processing operations [13]. Thus, for data of high dimension or beyond, analysing compression domain features is more desirable. This paper aims at reviewing HEVC forensic techniques utilizing artefacts that occurred in HEVC coding elements.

(p43.1) Inter-frame forgery is the act of altering a series of frames in a video. A fraudster may purposefully remove, insert, or duplicate a sequence of frames from a genuine video [25]. The objective could be to destroy evidence of a criminal act or to stage an event at an incorrect moment, in order to slander someone. Surveillance videos are frequently used in criminal case investigations as vital evidence. If such manipulation takes place in surveillance footage, it may go unnoticed by human eyes, jeopardizing justice. Fig. 8 shows an example of video interframe forgery. Row (a) depicts an authentic video sequence obtained from a surveillance camera. In row (b), frame deletion forgery is performed by removing a sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person in an office premise. Frame insertion forgery is performed in row (c), wherein, a forged sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person is inserted in the original sequence. The inserted sequence is obtained from the same surveillance camera, recorded on some other day. In row (d), a sequence of frames is copied and pasted in same surveillance footage to depict frame duplicated forged video.    9 illustrates the process of generating forged videos including, transcoded, fake bitrate, intra-frame forged and inter-frame forged. Typical forgery operations involve decoding the authentic video, performing manipulations and recompressing. Thus, a forgery operation always includes double compression. To detect forgery several double compression detection techniques are proposed in the literature. These techniques extract abnormal features either from decoded frames known as, decompressed domain or extract irregular coding features directly from encoded bitstream known as compression domain. The approaches proposed in the compression domain require less computation time and demand less cache for processing operations [13]. Thus, for data of high dimension or beyond, analysing compression domain features is more desirable. This paper aims at reviewing HEVC forensic techniques utilizing artefacts that occurred in HEVC coding elements.
## (s45) A. Transcoding detection techniques
Number of References: 16

(p45.0) Genuine HEVC videos are directly formed from a sequence of raw uncompressed images, whereas transcoded HEVC videos are generated by re-encoding the decoded AVC/MPEG content. Costanzo et al. [10] analysed the frequency of uni-predicted CUs and bi-predicted CU's in all B-frames of genuine HEVC videos and transcoded HEVC videos. The authors observed that in genuine HEVC videos the number of bi-predicted CUs is substantially larger than the number of uni-predicted CUs. The number of uni-predicted CUs, on the other hand, makes up the vast bulk of all units when the HEVC sequence is generated by re-encoding a lower-quality AVC sequence. This approach, however, can only be used if the quantization mode is set to a constant value and QP in re-encoding is less than that first encoding.

(p45.1) Bian et al. [20] explored the differences in prediction unit statistics of I-frame and P-frames for single and double encoded videos. Differences in quantization parameters between the first and second encoding cause the distortion of the optimal encoding scheme thus, to achieve the least cost the partitioning scheme of transcoded video tries different patterns. Authors utilized this observation and came to a conclusion that there exists more fine-grained PUs, i.e., smaller-sized blocks, in transcoded HEVC videos, whereas, the amount of coarse-grained PUs is much less accordingly in transcoded HEVC videos. A 30-D feature vector comprising the statistics of PUs in I and P-frames is utilised for training and testing using an SVM classifier to support this claim. The proposed technique is robust against video enhancement.

(p45.2) Zhang et al. [21] concatenated the characteristics of CU partition types to the PU partition types. A 38-D feature vector is designed by extracting mean frequencies of CU and PU partition types from I-frames and first P-frames of each GOP. The features are then classified as transcoded or not using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel. The technique obtained an average accuracy of 98.98% for high-resolution movies, which is slightly better (0.81%) than the scheme described by [20]. The approach claimed to be resilient to both a shifted GOP structure attack and a frame deletion attack. A comparative study of transcoding detection techniques is given in Table 2. 

(p45.3) Genuine HEVC videos are directly formed from a sequence of raw uncompressed images, whereas transcoded HEVC videos are generated by re-encoding the decoded AVC/MPEG content. Costanzo et al. [10] analysed the frequency of uni-predicted CUs and bi-predicted CU's in all B-frames of genuine HEVC videos and transcoded HEVC videos. The authors observed that in genuine HEVC videos the number of bi-predicted CUs is substantially larger than the number of uni-predicted CUs. The number of uni-predicted CUs, on the other hand, makes up the vast bulk of all units when the HEVC sequence is generated by re-encoding a lower-quality AVC sequence. This approach, however, can only be used if the quantization mode is set to a constant value and QP in re-encoding is less than that first encoding.

(p45.4) Bian et al. [20] explored the differences in prediction unit statistics of I-frame and P-frames for single and double encoded videos. Differences in quantization parameters between the first and second encoding cause the distortion of the optimal encoding scheme thus, to achieve the least cost the partitioning scheme of transcoded video tries different patterns. Authors utilized this observation and came to a conclusion that there exists more fine-grained PUs, i.e., smaller-sized blocks, in transcoded HEVC videos, whereas, the amount of coarse-grained PUs is much less accordingly in transcoded HEVC videos. A 30-D feature vector comprising the statistics of PUs in I and P-frames is utilised for training and testing using an SVM classifier to support this claim. The proposed technique is robust against video enhancement.

(p45.5) Zhang et al. [21] concatenated the characteristics of CU partition types to the PU partition types. A 38-D feature vector is designed by extracting mean frequencies of CU and PU partition types from I-frames and first P-frames of each GOP. The features are then classified as transcoded or not using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel. The technique obtained an average accuracy of 98.98% for high-resolution movies, which is slightly better (0.81%) than the scheme described by [20]. The approach claimed to be resilient to both a shifted GOP structure attack and a frame deletion attack. A comparative study of transcoding detection techniques is given in Table 2. 
