# A review of the management of central retinal artery occlusion

CorpusID: 251263853 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e073c0e4dde850f3b07bf184acd7db4a157b0a7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e073c0e4dde850f3b07bf184acd7db4a157b0a7)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) C entral retinal artery occlusion (CRAO)
Number of References: 5

(p1.0) is an ophthalmic emergency which is analogous to a cerebral stroke. It is caused by the sudden blockage of the central retinal artery (CRA) and usually presents as sudden, painless monocular vision loss. The incidence of CRAO is estimated as 1 in 100,000 patients per year and 1 in 10,000 outpatient visits. [1,2] The average age of presentation of CRAO is in the early sixties with males tending to have a higher incidence. [1] Importantly, the prognosis for overall spontaneous visual recovery in CRAO is low, as it has been found that only 17.7% of patients obtain functional visual recovery without any treatment. [3] Furthermore, CRAO indicates end-organ ischemia, often due to underlying atherosclerosis. These underlying atherosclerotic risk factors also increase the risk of future cerebral stroke and ischemic heart disease in the individual. [4] There is currently no guideline-endorsed evidence for treatment of CRAO. As CRAO is the ocular analog of a cerebral stroke, the clinical approach and management is similar to stroke management.
## (s5) Arteritic central retinal artery occlusion
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Arteritic CRAO is usually secondary to giant cell arteritis and accounts for approximately 4% of cases. [12] Arteritic CRAO is more likely to occur in patients over 70 years of age. [13] Clinically, patients with arteritic CRAO have the classical fundus findings of CRAO. A fundus fluorescein angiopgraphy (FFA) is helpful to look for choroidal ischemia because giant cell arteritis affects large vessels and therefore both the CRA and the posterior ciliary arteries are affected [ Figure 5]. It is also important to look into the contralateral eye, as the patient may be at risk of bilateral permanent loss of vision due to ischemic changes, and the contralateral eye may have asymptomatic or incipient arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy [ Figure 6], or cotton wool spots due to retinal ischemia.
## (s9) Acute management of central retinal artery occlusion
Number of References: 9

(p9.0) CRAO can cause abrupt and often irreversible visual loss unless retinal circulation is re-established acutely. [2] There is no consensus in the management of acute CRAO, and various treatment options have been advocated. [7] Current literature suggests that acute management can be divided into noninvasive or invasive therapy.

(p9.1) The retinal tolerance time has been studied in various experimental analyses. A study of atherosclerotic and hypertensive rhesus monkeys has suggested that no detectable damage occurs with CRAO within 97 min, but occlusion lasting for 240 min or longer can cause irreversible damage. [17] This suggests that there may be a retinal tolerance time within 240 min and therefore any acute treatment should be provided within 4 h. However, the exact time of when the damage of CRAO can be reversed is unknown and has been postulated to be in between 4.5 and 12 h. [3,18,19] Previously, there were two randomized controlled trials investigating the use of thrombolysis in a 24-h window intravenously and intra-arterially but did not show any clinically significant outcome. [20,21] Recent meta-analysis showed   that the administration of intravenous (IV) alteplase within 4.5 h of symptom onset is associated with a higher likelihood of a favorable visual outcome for acute CRAO. [22] Noninvasive therapies include: 1. Vasodilation of the CRA 2. Reducing the intraocular pressure 3. Reducing retinal edema.
## (s12) Secondary prevention: Systemic control and prevention of future vascular ischemic events
Number of References: 7

(p12.0) Patients with CRAO have an increased risk of future ischemic events. [66] Therefore, a multidisciplinary team involving an ophthalmologist, neurologist, and a primary care physician or internist is important for long-term secondary prevention in patients with CRAO. [11] Sixty-four (64%) patients after CRAO had at least one undiagnosed vascular risk factor, with hyperlipidemia being the most common (36%). [65] Systemic atherosclerotic risk factors should be addressed through medical treatment, diet counseling, and lifestyle modification in order to decrease the risk of future ischemic disease. [10] This includes treatment of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity, and obstructive sleep apnea. A plant-based diet, regular physical activity, and smoking cessation are also important modifications for secondary prevention after CRAO. [11] The recommendation for antiplatelet therapy in CRAO parallel the guides from American Heart Association for transient ischemic attack or minor stroke. In the patients without contra-indication, an initial course of 21 days of dual antiplatelet therapy may be reasonably followed by long-term treatment with a single antiplatelet agent, typically aspirin 81 mg daily or clopidogrel 75 mg daily, as recommended by current guidelines. [11] Suggested management When a patient presents with a sudden loss of vision in one eye, with suspected CRAO, a thorough history should be taken, including the duration of symptoms, systemic symptoms indicating giant cell arteritis, and associated neurological symptoms, and it is important to rule out contraindications of tPA such as recent surgeries or severe bleeding. A complete eye examination should then be performed, preferably by an eyecare physician. If the patient's vision loss has been less than 4.5 h, IV tPA should be considered in collaboration with the stroke team. If the patient has had symptoms for over 4.5 h, the patient should be commenced on antiplatelet therapy and reviewed by the acute stroke unit for workup and secondary prevention. The American Heart Association has recommended that if there is no eye care specialist present on site and the treating physician is not comfortable in diagnosing, telemedicine/telestroke can be used to confirm the diagnosis. [43] Conclusion CRAO is an ocular emergency and is analogous to an ischemic stroke. The risk factors associated with nonarteritic CRAO are similar to that of acute ischemic syndrome or myocardial infarction. While various reports suggest different treatment modes for CRAO, there is little evidence supporting an optimal management plan. After taking a thorough history, ocular examination, and investigations, the principles of management of CRAO include acute management to restore blood flow, subacute management to prevent secondary complications, and secondary prevention.
