# Anabolic Steroids in Fattening Food-Producing Animals-A Review

CorpusID: 251695848 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f994d68163f7e5e71e3afe608344e2a2302f45f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f994d68163f7e5e71e3afe608344e2a2302f45f)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s11) Effect of Anabolic Steroids on Tissues
Number of References: 4

(p11.0) Regular intake of anabolic steroids causes changes in the organization at genetic, metabolomic, and structural levels directly in animal tissues. Increased protein synthesis, fat loss, and a better sensory profile of final meat products are the targeted changes for which anabolic steroids are used in animal fattening. Like natural hormones, synthetic steroids imitate hormonal functions and interfere with the endocrine system of animals. In addition to endocrine changes, steroids have been shown to have carcinogenic, immunotoxic, mutagenic, and teratogenic effects, and the changes are often irreversible. The risks always depend on the age, sex, and individual tolerance of the animals to these substances [96,97]. As the use of steroid substances in fattening animals poses a potential risk to consumers, their presence needs to be monitored and new detection methods developed to prevent the prevalence of public health risks. Many anabolic substances that can theoretically be misused in meat production have not been studied for toxic effects on humans yet [98,99].
## (s12) Effect of Anabolic Steroids on Skeletal Muscle
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) Skeletal muscle is the most economically important tissue in animal production and the application of anabolic steroids is mostly targeted at it. The increase in body parameters is best processed in beef cattle after the use of steroidal implants. Implanting increased average daily gain by 21% and improved feed efficiency by 11% in feedlot cattle. In addition, carcass weight was increased by 7% due to implanting. Moreover, a 5% increase was also reported in ribeye size, a 7% decrease in fat cover, a 5% decrease in marbling score, and a 17% decrease in percent of carcasses grading [7]. A study by Perry et al. compared the effects of steroid implants on performance and carcass composition in Holstein, Angus, and Angus x Simmental steers. Daily gain was increased by 17%, 26%, and 21% in Holstein, Angus, and crossbred steers, respectively. The implant increased total daily protein and fat gain by 23% [100].

(p12.1) Most studies describing the effect of anabolics on muscle mass have been performed in animal models such as mice or rats, and from livestock in cattle or sheep [101]. Very few studies have been performed on pig models, although in many European countries pork is consumed to a much greater extent than beef and lamb [102].
## (s16) Effect of Anabolic Steroids on Other Tissues
Number of References: 5

(p16.0) In addition to the above-mentioned tissues, in which the manifestation of AAS is the most intensively studied, anabolics also affect other tissues in the body. These are mostly significant degenerative changes and disorganization of the histological structure. A negative effect on the heart muscle, kidneys, liver, and bones is described [114]. The results of numerous studies, especially in rats, agree that long-term use of AAS causes pathological cardiac hypertrophy that persists and even increases after treatment. After higher doses of synthetic steroids, such as nandrolone decanolate, vasocongestion, muscle fiber retraction, massive dilaceration, and muscle fiber rupture occur in the heart tissue. Reduced pumping efficiency of the heart is reported [109,114,118]. These pathophysiological cardiac effects can be linked to the fact that androgen receptors in cardiomyocytes allow steroids to affect the physiology of the heart [114].
