# An extensive survey on the use of supervised machine learning techniques in the past two decades for prediction of drug side effects

CorpusID: 256897969 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/42a5ba555432bb09979ad43b6ad524dbb5f60e5e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/42a5ba555432bb09979ad43b6ad524dbb5f60e5e)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 5

(p0.0) Side Effects (SE) of a drug can be understood as unpleasant, undesirable, adverse, unexpected hazardous reactions related to the response of the drug in organs and tissues (Naranjo et al. 1981;Edwards and Aronson 2000;Linden 2013). Adverse drug response is the main reason for the side effects of drugs; many side effects are not detected in the drug development, discovery, and design process (Katragadda et al. 2015;Liu et al. 2017), and identifying the hazardous reactions of the drug is challenging. Therefore, predicting the risky responses of drugs during the development process remains an essential task for drug safety and commercial success. Side effects may injure body organs, and patients may die due to risky drug reactions. It is essential to ensure that drugs are efficacious for treatment. Thus, the harmful responses of drugs are one of the primary causes of drug failure, and most medicines are withdrawn from the market due to hazardous side effects.
## (s2) Drug descriptors used for side effects prediction
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) In this section, drug descriptors are presented, which have been utilized as an input feature of a supervised computational approach to predict the potential side effects of drugs. A variety of drug descriptors are available for side effects prediction. Some are clinical data (clinical trial data, health surveys, Electronic Health Records (EHR), administrative data, claim data, and disease-patient registries), and some are non-clinical information about drugs (pharmacokinetics, chemical, toxicological, safety, biological, pharmaceutical, pharmacological, and other pre-clinical data) (Lee et al. 2008;Andrade et al. 2016). Both clinical and non-clinical data are widely used for side effects prediction using computational approaches. Further, this drug information can be categorized into chemical (Che), Phenotypic (Phe), Biological(Bio), and other drug descriptors, illustrated in Fig. 1.
