# Sub-millimeter wave nanoantenna-a review

CorpusID: 258701847 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f51e0a15a4be26c7dab809bebe7b54371428461c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f51e0a15a4be26c7dab809bebe7b54371428461c)

Fields: Engineering, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) Sub-millimeter radiation, often referred to as terahertz radiation, is made up of electromagnetic waves that have frequencies ranging from 0.3 to 3 terahertz (THz), and their corresponding wavelengths vary from 1 mm to 0.1 mm. This kind of radiation is also known as terahertz radiation. Terahertz radiation begins at a wavelength of around one millimeter and continues farther down into shorter wavelengths; hence, this band of radiation is referred to as the sub millimeter band, and the radiation that corresponds to it is referred to as sub millimeter waves. Due to the fact that sub millimeter radiation is totally attenuated within a few meters of its source and is completely absorbed by the surrounding atmospheric gases, this kind of radiation is not appropriate for use in radio transmission. THz beams that get transmitted through materials can be used for material characterization, layer inspection, and as an alternative approach for X- 2 rays in order to produce high resolution images [1]. It has the potential to penetrate through thin layers of materials, and THz beams that get transmitted through materials can be used for this purpose. In this frequency range, it is no longer feasible for typical electronic devices to generate electromagnetic waves or modulate those waves. As a result, it is necessary to build new electronic devices as well as new methodologies. Another disadvantage of systems that were based on sub millimeter waves was that it was impossible to acquire planar detectors that were suitable for use with integrated antennas [2].
## (s10) Antenna in Communication
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) It was discussed an antenna for a dual band focal plane array (FPA) based heterodyne receiver that operates at 210-240 GHz and 500-580 GHz. The antenna is proposed to have fused silica lens with leaky wave waveguide feed based on single-layer frequency selective surface (FSS) having a quasi-optical system with overlapped beams and equal beam widths for operating at 210-240 GHz and 500-580 GHz frequency bands [30]. On a substrate made of 4-cyano-4-pentylbiphenyl [5CB], it was investigated how a sub millimeter wave antenna behaved while operating throughout a frequency range of 0.1 THz to 10 THz, and the results were analyzed and compared. Both the rectangular patch antenna (RPA) and the cylindrical dielectric resonator antenna (CDRA) are taken into consideration when it comes to the physical characteristics of an antenna. These characteristics include the size and shape of the antenna, as well as its gain/directivity, resonant frequency, bandwidth, and efficiency. These well-known millimeter-wave antennas are put to use by the sub millimeter-wave antenna so that its operational behavior may be evaluated. In addition, an investigation of the functionality of a huge sub millimeter wave multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) (8 by 8) RPA and CDRA was carried out [31].
