# Medicine ® Treatment of Alzheimer's disease by combination of acupuncture and Chinese medicine based on pathophysiological mechanism A review

CorpusID: 255226022 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6bea3825c6e030713e38feaf3762e7663e6ffe9e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6bea3825c6e030713e38feaf3762e7663e6ffe9e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Inheritance
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) Approximately 0.1% of AD cases are caused by genetics, which affects people who develop symptoms between the ages of 30 and 50 years. This is due to the autosomal dominance of one of the 3 genes encoding presenillins 1 and 2 and the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Mutations in any of these genes result in erroneous cleavage of APP to form Aβ42 instead of Aβ40. [13] The accumulation and aggregation of Aβ42 forms senile plaques, which are one of the main causes of AD. ABCA7 and SORL1 are other autosomal dominant genes responsible for inherited AD. [14] However, only a small proportion of AD cases exhibit autosomal dominant inheritance. Differences in genetic predisposition and environmental factors constitute a risk factor in most cases, with the presence of the ε4 allele of apolipoprotein E (APOE ε4) in heterozygotes and homozygotes increasing the risk by 3% and 15%, respectively. TREM2 is another gene involved in increasing the risk of AD when white blood cells do not control the amount of Aβ40 in the brain due to some variation in the allele of this gene. ABCA7, BIN1, CASS4, CD2AP, CELF1, CLU, CR1, EPHA1, FERMT2, HLA-DRB5, INPP5D, MEF2C, MS4A, NMES, PICALM, PTK2B, S1C24A4, SORL1, and ZCWPW1. A total of 19 genes were reported by the Genome Wide Association Study to clearly influence risk. [15] 
## (s4) Cholinergic hypothesis
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) The most widely accepted hypothesis states that the cause of AD is the lack of the adequate neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACH) in neurons and neuromuscular regions. [16] Biopsy reports from AD cases show that the activity of ACH transferase is decreased and the synthesis, absorption, and release of ACH are reduced. The reason for the deficiency of ACH in the brain is that its synthesis is reduced or the enzymatic activity of acetylcholin esterase is reduced. Four of the 5 main drugs marketed for the treatment of AD --donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine, and tacrine --are based on this hypothesis. [17] 
## (s6) Tau
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) Tau is phosphorylated at 3 different positions, threonine, serine, and an amino acid residue adjacent to proline. It attaches to microtubules at these residues. Protein hyperphosphorylation occurs mainly at T231, S235, and S265. Thereafter, proteins lose their ability to attach to microtubules and form neurofibrillary tangles. [21] Neurofibrillary tangles formed by the aggregation of hyperphosphorylated tau threads disrupt the microtubule network of nerve cells. This leads to the inhibition of any biochemical communication between the inside and outside of the cell and destruction of the cytoskeleton. Although neurofibrillary tangles constitute one of the main pathophysiological conditions of AD, some studies have shown that inhibition of neurofibrillary tangles alone cannot be a potential target; therefore, any therapeutic approach must be multi-targeted to make a real difference in the treatment of AD, and tau-targeted drugs often target amyloid plaques as well. [22,23] 
## (s7) Excitotoxicity
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Glutamate is another neurotransmitter present in the brain, and excessive glutamate levels can cause excitotoxicity, eventually leading to cell death. Minocycline is the only commercialized drug that targets the glutamate system to treat AD. It is a noncompetitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist that controls glutamate overstimulation. It regulates Ca2 + influx and efflux at the cell membrane via NMDA receptors. Minocycline also acts as an antagonist of the nACh and 5-HT3 receptors. Inhibition of NMDA can inhibit the expression of α-secretase, thereby reducing the production of Aβ. [21,24] 
## (s8) Vitamin B5 deficiency
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Some studies have investigated the role of vitamin B5 in AD. [25] Studies have found that the main and acute deficiency of vitamin B5 occurs in AD, and acute deficiency is considered to occur in AD. Areas thought to present with acute brain injury, including the middle temporal gyrus, entorhinal cortex, and hippocampus, experience more severe vitamin B5 deficiencies. Vitamin B5 is the precursor of acetyl-CoA and indirectly plays a key role in the metabolism of all organs, including the brain. Acetyl-Coa, the precursor of the neurotransmitter ACH, as well as complex fatty acyl groups that regulate the important insulating function of the myelin sheath, malfunctions in AD. Additionally, the concentration of vitamin B5 in the brain region coexists throughout the white matter. Therefore, researchers speculate that vitamin B5 deficiency may produce AD and ATN, which can be avoided or even reversed in the initial stage by oral administration of appropriate doses of vitamin B5. [26] 
## (s13) The prediction accuracy of pure biological definition is low
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) A major limitation of the biological definition of Alzheimer's is its low predictive accuracy. Some studies have shown [57] that the presence of tau and amyloid beta positivity is insufficient to unambiguously predict the occurrence of symptoms (MCI or dementia) in individuals without clinical impairment. (Fig. 4) Another challenge in the diagnosis of AD using pure biomarkers is that the presence of biomarkers of AD lesions in the body can be used as a primary indicator for the diagnosis of AD, as such lesions are commonly found in patients with other neurodegenerative diseases, most commonly Lewy body dementia. [58] This comorbid feature of dementia with Lewy bodies in this setting confuses the acceptance of biomarker-based diagnoses. Experienced clinicians determine the pathology of Lewy body dementia based on clinical signs and symptoms (such as hallucinations and parkinsonism) or indirect biomarkers (such as DaTscan innervation) to confirm the diagnosis of Lewy body dementia.
