# Narrative Why-Question Answering: A Review of Challenges and Datasets

CorpusID: 256461385 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/98f4b43487b8386728c14aba24f848b2eadad1e2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/98f4b43487b8386728c14aba24f848b2eadad1e2)

Fields: Linguistics, Computer Science

## (s2) Causality
Number of References: 6

(p2.0) Causality is a semantic relationship between events showing that an event occurs or holds due to another event (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016b). Mostafazadeh et al. (2016b) distinguish four types of lexical causality relations: cause, enable, prevent, and cause-to-end based on the works by Wolff and Song (2003), Wolff (2007), and Khemlani et al. (2014). Moreover, causality has temporal implications such that if an event A causes/enables/prevents an event B, then A should start before B, or if an event A causes an event B to end, then B should start before A. Causality relations can hold one of the three temporal implications: before, overlaps, and during (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016b). Thus, while answering a whyquestion, the temporal relation between the events should also be taken into account in addition to the causality relation.
## (s6) Narratives
Number of References: 5

(p6.0) Narratives are texts in which events are causally or thematically linked and develop within a temporal framework (Brewer, 2017). Narratives are generally agent-oriented and their main scope is centered on characters, their actions, and motivations (Sang et al., 2022). In narrative QA, stories, fairytales, books, and (movie) scripts are commonly utilized as narrative texts. Characteristics of narrative texts, such as causality of events and motivations of agents, make narratives a suitable context for asking why-questions. Additionally, fictional narratives can ensure the test of comprehension because they are self-contained, meaning that all elements needed to understand the narrative, such as events, characters, and settings, are present in the text and QA models need to comprehend the narrative in order to answer questions (Dunietz et al., 2020;Richardson et al., 2013;Kočiský et al., 2018). Implicitness is a key feature of narratives that makes it different from other types of texts. Length is another characteristic dimension of narratives which is also very important for QA systems. In the following subsections, we will review these characteristics in more detail.
