# GENE-OCCUPATION INTERACTIONS: A REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE ON BLADDER AND PROSTATE CANCER

CorpusID: 258716006 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/531a2dd0c534d7c946c10e7afdbdeba499d2fa6f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/531a2dd0c534d7c946c10e7afdbdeba499d2fa6f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) Bladder cancer (BCa) and prostate cancer (PCa) are genitourinary cancers, which are among the most commonly diagnosed cancers in men. The BCa was the ninth most common cancer in 2020 in the world and the one with the highest recurrence rates among all cancers. The authors observed male predominance all over the world (Figure 1). The BCa is the fourth in Europe and fifth in the world most common cancer in men. The highest worldwide incidence rates are observed in 2 common types of BCa. The first, which is called nonmuscle-invasive BCa occurs in approx. 75% of patients. It is characterized by non-aggressive natural history, has good prognosis, and can be treated locally. The second one, called muscle-invasive BCa, occurs in approx. 25% of patients and is often treated with cystectomy. The PCa has symptoms ranging from small indolent low-grade tumours, to large aggressive life-threatening tumours [3]. To estimate the prognosis and decide on the treatment of PCa, clinical factors such as tumour stage, diagnostic prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels and biopsy Gleason score [4] are used.
## (s4) N-acetyltransferase
Number of References: 9

(p4.0) The coding gene N-acetyltransferase (NAT) was the second most frequently studied gene. The NAT enzymes detoxify a large group of industrial chemicals. Its role is known in the metabolism of numerous aromatic amines [37]. Its enzymes can catalyse both N-acetylation and O-acetylation reactions and are implicated in the activation and detoxification of wellknown carcinogens [38]. The NAT2 is a carcinogen detoxification gene and several different allelic variants exist that determine the acetylator phenotype. Links with NAT2 acetylation status was well documented to be associated with the risk of BCa. The 2 expressed genes encoding NAT activity, NAT1 and NAT2 were screened for genotype in 10 studies. The authors reported that genetic polymorphism in NAT1 enzyme involved in biotransformation of benzidine and its metabolite, did not show a direct relationship with the BCa risk, genotypes in NAT1 T1088A, C1095A, G560A and exposure to benzidine in Chinese population [39]. Other studies conducted on Chinese population showed that NAT2 G191A, C282T, T341C, C481T, G590A, A803G, G857A genotypes have no impact on genetic susceptibility to occupational benzidine exposure and the BCa risk [40]. Also in Lebanese population, studies showed the lack of a direct relationship with gene encoding enzyme involved in carcinogens and their metabolites inactivation. The researcher showed that NAT2 genotypes C282T, G191A, A434C, C481T, T111C, G590A, C759T, G857A, T341C, A803G were not associated with BCa and exposure to AAs [27]. The studies conducted among Caucasian population [29,34], Japanese population [41], White race [26] also did not indicate genetic susceptibility to occupational exposure and the BCa risk. They included groups of workers exposed to AAs, PAHs, metalworking fluids or industrial chemicals, respectively.
## (s5) Cytochrome P450
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) Cytochrome P450 (CYP) is a key enzyme for activation of bladder carcinogens, i.e., AAs and PAHs, which require formation of reactive metabolites with damaging effects. Three studies investigated the relationship between CYP genetic polymorphisms, occupational exposure and the BCa risk [11,18,29]. The researchers focused on the following genotypes: CYP1A2(-2467T/delT rs35694136, -163C/Ars762551), CYP1A1, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP2E1. In these studies no significant relationship between the gene, exposure to AAs, PAHs or hazardous compounds and the BCa risk was observed. In the PCa risk study, genotypes of the gene such as CYP24A1, CYP27A1, CYP27B1 were also not related to pesticides exposure [43]. Even though in the last several years, studies showed that CYPs activity may be a modulating factor along the continuum from the occupational exposure and certain cancers, no molecular epidemiology study has shown the role of genetic polymorphisms of CYPs in the interaction between occupational exposure and the risk of BCa or PCa.
## (s8) Genes responsible for tumour suppression
Number of References: 5

(p8.0) Human tumour suppressor gene TP53 The human tumour suppressor gene TP53 is the most commonly mutated gene in cancer. Mutations in this gene are found in over half of human cancers. The human TP53 locus, encodes a tumour suppressor protein whose functions initiate transcription of genes involved in the processes such as cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, metabolism, DNA repair, autophagy, and cellular senescence in response to stressors. The wild type TP53 gene was classified as tumour suppressor [55]. Kannio et al. [56] in their case-control study and Taylor et al. [19] in their case-only study presented no direct relationship with TP53 mutation and exposure to asbestos or arylamines, respectively. In the case-only study by Kelsey et al. [57] a relationship with occupations (metal/plastic-processing machine operators, fabricators, assemblers) and TP53 mutation in men was shown. Koutros et al. [58] in the results of their caseonly study documented a relationship between highrisk occupations (workers occupationally exposed to cutting or lubricating oils, paint thinner, organic solvents, pesticides) and mutations in TP53 and cell-cycle pathway genes.
## (s9) Genes responsible for vitamin D pathway
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) One of hypotheses advanced that vitamin D as antitumour agent might be responsible for the occurrence of PCa. Researchers observed an association between the PCa risk and 2 factors affecting decreased synthesis of vitamin D -the first increasing age and the second increasing rates in African-American population. Epidemiologic studies suggest that PCa development is influenced by environmental factors, including UV radiation from the sun exposure [59]. Ultraviolet B-rich sunlight stimulates synthesis of vitamin D in the skin and has been hypothesized to reduce the risk of PCa. Vitamin D is involved in a wide range of pharmacological and physiological functions. It modulates numerous genes encoding proteins that regulate cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Therefore, it is now established that vitamin D also influences the processes of cell proliferation, differentiation, adhesion and apoptosis potentially leading to cancer [60]. Moreover, several studies investigated if vitamin D supplementation reduced circulating androgens (testosterone and dihydrotestosterone), reduced PSA secretion and inhibited cell growth of the hormone-sensitive PCa cell line [61]. The action of vitamin D is mediated by the vitamin D receptor gene (VDR). Hence, genetic variations in the VDR as a PCarelated gene, may be important in determining disease susceptibility. However, the findings from analytic studies have been inconsistent on the role of vitamin D in the PCa development. Two studies of the relationships between gene polymorphisms and PCa in outdoor workers analysed steroid hormone receptor gene polymorphisms such as VDR. One of the studies was a case-only study and showed a significant relationship between an increased PCa risk of metastases and VDR ff andmelanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R) Val92/Val92 [12]. The case-control study investigating 4 SNPs in VDR regulatory regions such as Cdx-2, FokI, TaqI, BglI showed a significant relationship with a reduced PCa risk, sun exposure and the following genotypes: FokI rs10735810 FF or Ff, TaqI rs731236 tt, BglI BB [62].
