# Comparative Study of Semiconductors for Terahertz Generation by Nonlinear Optical Process: An Overview Email address

CorpusID: 257482338 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83a3eae6640676ef854f136e2fbad04dc3ed7ab9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83a3eae6640676ef854f136e2fbad04dc3ed7ab9)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering, Physics

## (s7) Data Lacking and How to Determine It
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Despite being an important key for alternative THz sources, some of intrinsic properties of most semiconductor crystals are remain unknown. For example, despite the established summary on theoretical models and experimental values of 2PA and 3PA coefficients for a few common materials, little is known about the four-photon absorption (4PA) and nonlinearities of even higher order in semiconductors and other important optical materials. The knowledge of 4PA and higher-order nonlinearities can be crucial for applications driven by infrared pulses. For example, in the newly developed very promising semiconductor THz generators, 4PA can be a major design issue [64]. There is even no report of even 2PA for Selenium and Tellurium.
## (s14) GaP
Number of References: 4

(p14.0) GaP is another semiconductor nonlinear material of high interest for efficient THz generation, with 2.48 eV direct band gap. But no experimental data for higher order PA after 4PA coefficient are available. Thus, there is a clearly perceived lack of knowledge on important material data. The value of MPA coefficient for GaP at 4PA written here, 2.6 × 10 -4 cm5/GW3 was measured at 1750 nm cm5/GW3 measured at 1750 nm via indirect band gap absorption. The absorption edge is on 3PA as GaP, thus only 3PA and higher order are effective. The choice of the pump wavelength longer than the cut-off for 4PA ensured that no inter-band linear, as well as two-and three-photon absorptions had to be taken into account. GaP also have an indirect band gap mode, that shown to have a slightly different behavior compared to its direct band gap mode [92]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for GaP are presented in table 4. 

(p14.1) GaP is another semiconductor nonlinear material of high interest for efficient THz generation, with 2.48 eV direct band gap. But no experimental data for higher order PA after 4PA coefficient are available. Thus, there is a clearly perceived lack of knowledge on important material data. The value of MPA coefficient for GaP at 4PA written here, 2.6 × 10 -4 cm5/GW3 was measured at 1750 nm cm5/GW3 measured at 1750 nm via indirect band gap absorption. The absorption edge is on 3PA as GaP, thus only 3PA and higher order are effective. The choice of the pump wavelength longer than the cut-off for 4PA ensured that no inter-band linear, as well as two-and three-photon absorptions had to be taken into account. GaP also have an indirect band gap mode, that shown to have a slightly different behavior compared to its direct band gap mode [92]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for GaP are presented in table 4. 
## (s17) Se
Number of References: 4

(p17.0) Selenium crystal are rarely used for THz materials in the present time, even though the trigonal Selenium have a direct band gap energy in the same order of most common other zincblende materials (such as ZnTe and GaP). As far as our knowledge, no previous studies have been done to measure the MPA beyond 3PA. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium [95], thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far. The data related for MPA are shown in the table 7. 

(p17.1) Selenium crystal are rarely used for THz materials in the present time, even though the trigonal Selenium have a direct band gap energy in the same order of most common other zincblende materials (such as ZnTe and GaP). As far as our knowledge, no previous studies have been done to measure the MPA beyond 3PA. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium [95], thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far. The data related for MPA are shown in the table 7. 
## (s19) Electro-Optic Coefficient and Nonlinear Coefficient
Number of References: 2

(p19.0) Optical rectification (OR) can occur in the bulk of a material and has been studied in detail in various crystals. Complete expressions have been given for zincblende crystal faces of arbitrary orientation [97]. The terahertz generation in uniaxial birefringent crystals like LN or Se is similar in principle but differs in the important respect that the polarization of the pump beam rotates as it traverses the crystal. These processes directly related to the nonlinear susceptibility of the materials, which in tensor form have the non-vanishing term d14 called nonlinear coefficient (in pm/V). Smaller nonlinear coefficient means that longer effective interaction length for OR are needed for generating THz radiation, compared to the ones with higher nonlinear coefficient.
## (s45) Data Lacking and How to Determine It
Number of References: 2

(p45.0) Despite being an important key for alternative THz sources, some of intrinsic properties of most semiconductor crystals are remain unknown. For example, despite the established summary on theoretical models and experimental values of 2PA and 3PA coefficients for a few common materials, little is known about the four-photon absorption (4PA) and nonlinearities of even higher order in semiconductors and other important optical materials. The knowledge of 4PA and higher-order nonlinearities can be crucial for applications driven by infrared pulses. For example, in the newly developed very promising semiconductor THz generators, 4PA can be a major design issue [64]. There is even no report of even 2PA for Selenium and Tellurium.
## (s52) GaP
Number of References: 4

(p52.0) GaP is another semiconductor nonlinear material of high interest for efficient THz generation, with 2.48 eV direct band gap. But no experimental data for higher order PA after 4PA coefficient are available. Thus, there is a clearly perceived lack of knowledge on important material data. The value of MPA coefficient for GaP at 4PA written here, 2.6 × 10 -4 cm5/GW3 was measured at 1750 nm cm5/GW3 measured at 1750 nm via indirect band gap absorption. The absorption edge is on 3PA as GaP, thus only 3PA and higher order are effective. The choice of the pump wavelength longer than the cut-off for 4PA ensured that no inter-band linear, as well as two-and three-photon absorptions had to be taken into account. GaP also have an indirect band gap mode, that shown to have a slightly different behavior compared to its direct band gap mode [92]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for GaP are presented in table 4. 

(p52.1) GaP is another semiconductor nonlinear material of high interest for efficient THz generation, with 2.48 eV direct band gap. But no experimental data for higher order PA after 4PA coefficient are available. Thus, there is a clearly perceived lack of knowledge on important material data. The value of MPA coefficient for GaP at 4PA written here, 2.6 × 10 -4 cm5/GW3 was measured at 1750 nm cm5/GW3 measured at 1750 nm via indirect band gap absorption. The absorption edge is on 3PA as GaP, thus only 3PA and higher order are effective. The choice of the pump wavelength longer than the cut-off for 4PA ensured that no inter-band linear, as well as two-and three-photon absorptions had to be taken into account. GaP also have an indirect band gap mode, that shown to have a slightly different behavior compared to its direct band gap mode [92]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for GaP are presented in table 4. 
## (s55) Se
Number of References: 4

(p55.0) Selenium crystal are rarely used for THz materials in the present time, even though the trigonal Selenium have a direct band gap energy in the same order of most common other zincblende materials (such as ZnTe and GaP). As far as our knowledge, no previous studies have been done to measure the MPA beyond 3PA. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium [95], thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far. The data related for MPA are shown in the table 7. 

(p55.1) Selenium crystal are rarely used for THz materials in the present time, even though the trigonal Selenium have a direct band gap energy in the same order of most common other zincblende materials (such as ZnTe and GaP). As far as our knowledge, no previous studies have been done to measure the MPA beyond 3PA. Surprisingly enough, the absorption edge is on 2PA for Selenium [95], thus 3PA and higher order are already effective. This crystal also has 5 orders smaller effective MPA coefficient value at 3PA compared to the smallest value that we gathered so far. The data related for MPA are shown in the table 7. 
## (s57) Electro-Optic Coefficient and Nonlinear Coefficient
Number of References: 2

(p57.0) Optical rectification (OR) can occur in the bulk of a material and has been studied in detail in various crystals. Complete expressions have been given for zincblende crystal faces of arbitrary orientation [97]. The terahertz generation in uniaxial birefringent crystals like LN or Se is similar in principle but differs in the important respect that the polarization of the pump beam rotates as it traverses the crystal. These processes directly related to the nonlinear susceptibility of the materials, which in tensor form have the non-vanishing term d14 called nonlinear coefficient (in pm/V). Smaller nonlinear coefficient means that longer effective interaction length for OR are needed for generating THz radiation, compared to the ones with higher nonlinear coefficient.
