# A Review of Phosphate Mineral Nucleation in Biology and Geobiology

CorpusID: 253745727 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f5f88d9f9537b41b8e51c432e5088d7a90504bbb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f5f88d9f9537b41b8e51c432e5088d7a90504bbb)

Fields: Environmental Science, Geology, Biology

## (s7) Biologically Induced Apatite Nucleation: Oral Bacteria
Number of References: 42

(p7.0) There are many types of oral bacteria within dental plaques; some of them are correlated with dental calculus formation. Dental calculus includes a range of calcium phosphate minerals, including apatite, Whitlockite, tricalcium phosphate, and octacalcium phosphate [92][93][94][95]. To test if the aqueous oral environment provided the chemical driving force (IAP) for calculus formation, Poff et al. [96] surveyed patients with a wide range of supragingival calculus severity and compared the calculus severity to the measured hydroxyapatite saturation in their saliva. The results showed no correlation, suggesting that inorganic calcium phosphate nucleation was not the mechanism of calculus formation. Poff et al. also discussed the possible role of mineral nucleation and growth inhibitors such as pyrophosphate [97] and polyphosphate [7], but concluded that they did not affect the study conclusions.

(p7.1) Bacteria are known to contribute to dental calculus, although their specific role is not clear. Microbes encased in mineral result in a porous calculus structure [98], suggest extracellular mineralization occurs. The varied mineral composition in dental calculus may reflect the varied environment in which induced biomineralization takes place [81]. The mechanism for these calcification events has not yet been explained.

(p7.2) Dental calculus formation and intracellular mineralization have been associated with the oral microbe Bacterionema matruchotii. Ennever et al. [99] reviewed their work on this organism [90], explaining that apatite was identified in the cell-ash in 20-day-old cells and identified intracellular apatite mineral within fixed and embedded cells [100]. A survey of oral bacteria concluded that many, including Bacterionema matruchotii, contained ''dark-staining, electron-dense granules. . . 15 to 500 nm in diameter, probably polyphosphate granules'' [101]. Takazoe and Nakamura [102] identified ''metachromatic granules and intracellular calcification of Bacterionema matruchotii'' and reported that the granules were ''chiefly polymetaphosphate.'' They used both measurement of the metachromasy of toluidine blue and chemical analysis of the extracted granules to confirm their polymetaphosphate conclusion. They observed the absorption maximum of toluidine blue shift when exposed to the extract, and the destruction of the metachromatic extract by an acidic treatment. They also measured an increased Pi concentration in the extract after acid hydrolysis. They noted that polyP is a mineralization inhibitor, and that it might have an inhibitory effect against dental calculus formation [102]. Dentifrices containing polyP have since proven to reduce oral bacteria adherence [103,104] and to decrease dental caries formation [105].

(p7.3) The association of exogenous polyPs with mineral inhibition may have prevented Takazoe and Nakamura [102] from associating these intracellular granules within Bacterionema matruchotii as a Pi source for phosphate mineral formation. The identification of polyP within Bacterionema matruchotii, and the association of APase activity with bacteria of dental plaque [106,107] provide two clues to a possible chemical mechanism for increasing calcium phosphate mineral supersaturation within oral microbial biofilms.
## (s23) Biologically Induced Apatite Nucleation: Oral Bacteria
Number of References: 42

(p23.0) There are many types of oral bacteria within dental plaques; some of them are correlated with dental calculus formation. Dental calculus includes a range of calcium phosphate minerals, including apatite, Whitlockite, tricalcium phosphate, and octacalcium phosphate [92][93][94][95]. To test if the aqueous oral environment provided the chemical driving force (IAP) for calculus formation, Poff et al. [96] surveyed patients with a wide range of supragingival calculus severity and compared the calculus severity to the measured hydroxyapatite saturation in their saliva. The results showed no correlation, suggesting that inorganic calcium phosphate nucleation was not the mechanism of calculus formation. Poff et al. also discussed the possible role of mineral nucleation and growth inhibitors such as pyrophosphate [97] and polyphosphate [7], but concluded that they did not affect the study conclusions.

(p23.1) Bacteria are known to contribute to dental calculus, although their specific role is not clear. Microbes encased in mineral result in a porous calculus structure [98], suggest extracellular mineralization occurs. The varied mineral composition in dental calculus may reflect the varied environment in which induced biomineralization takes place [81]. The mechanism for these calcification events has not yet been explained.

(p23.2) Dental calculus formation and intracellular mineralization have been associated with the oral microbe Bacterionema matruchotii. Ennever et al. [99] reviewed their work on this organism [90], explaining that apatite was identified in the cell-ash in 20-day-old cells and identified intracellular apatite mineral within fixed and embedded cells [100]. A survey of oral bacteria concluded that many, including Bacterionema matruchotii, contained ''dark-staining, electron-dense granules. . . 15 to 500 nm in diameter, probably polyphosphate granules'' [101]. Takazoe and Nakamura [102] identified ''metachromatic granules and intracellular calcification of Bacterionema matruchotii'' and reported that the granules were ''chiefly polymetaphosphate.'' They used both measurement of the metachromasy of toluidine blue and chemical analysis of the extracted granules to confirm their polymetaphosphate conclusion. They observed the absorption maximum of toluidine blue shift when exposed to the extract, and the destruction of the metachromatic extract by an acidic treatment. They also measured an increased Pi concentration in the extract after acid hydrolysis. They noted that polyP is a mineralization inhibitor, and that it might have an inhibitory effect against dental calculus formation [102]. Dentifrices containing polyP have since proven to reduce oral bacteria adherence [103,104] and to decrease dental caries formation [105].

(p23.3) The association of exogenous polyPs with mineral inhibition may have prevented Takazoe and Nakamura [102] from associating these intracellular granules within Bacterionema matruchotii as a Pi source for phosphate mineral formation. The identification of polyP within Bacterionema matruchotii, and the association of APase activity with bacteria of dental plaque [106,107] provide two clues to a possible chemical mechanism for increasing calcium phosphate mineral supersaturation within oral microbial biofilms.
