# R E V I E W Potential Roles of mtDNA Mutations in PCOS-IR: A Review

CorpusID: 256254551 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73e6554f957d4012104ad370558b53c96fcc2a34](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/73e6554f957d4012104ad370558b53c96fcc2a34)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 13

(p0.0) Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common endocrine disease occurring during reproductive years. It was a kind of endocrine and metabolic disorders that results in obesity, irregularity of menstruation, OS, hyperinsulinemia, hyperandrogenism, infertility, and sterility. 1,2 First identified in 1935, PCOS was also recognized as Stein-Leventhal syndrome. 3 Diagnosis of PCOS in adults can be made when at least two of three criteria are met: impairment of ovarian function, clinical and/or biochemical hyperandrogenism, and polycystic ovaries. 4,5 Despite significant progress in diagnostic criteria for PCOS, the syndrome is still underdiagnosed or misunderstood by many practitioners. 6 In the early stage, PCOS is often complicated with infertility and adverse pregnancy outcomes, while in the long term, the incidence of endometrial cancer, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), and cardiovascular diseases gradually increase, seriously harming women's physical and mental health. Based on the National Institutes of Health's diagnostic criteria, the geographical prevalence of this disease is 8.7%, 17.8%, and 12% based on the definition proposed by the Androgen Excess and PCOS Society. 7 In a 2019 study, the prevalence of PCOS in Chinese women of reproductive age was 5.6%, which was consistent with other studies, 8 while its incidence in Indian women was 9.13% according to a recent study. 9 Interestingly, PCOS seems to be more frequent in black women (8.0%) than white women (4.8%), with an incidence of 6.6%. 10 The prevalence of oligoanovulation and hyperandrogenemia is 56.6% and 60% among women with PCOS, respectively. 11 Multiple morbidities are linked to PCOS, such as infertility, impairment of glucose tolerance, T2DM, coronary heart disease, depression, gynecological oncology, and nonalcoholic fatty-liver disease. 12 Despite these well-characterized phenotypes, the pathogenesis of PCOS remains unclear. Increasing evidence suggests that genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors contribute to PCOS progression. 13 However, it was generally accepted that IR and hyperandrogenism play key roles in its etiology. 14
## (s2) Mitochondrial Structure and Function
Number of References: 8

(p2.0) Mitochondria are very important organelles consisting an of outer membrane, intermembrane space, and inner membrane that surround the matrix. Structurally, the inner membrane is tightlyfolded and is the major site for electron-transport chain (ETC) (complexes I-IV), which are essential for oxygen consumption in mammalian cells. 26 Among these, complex I -nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide Q (NADH-Q) oxidoreductase, comprises enzymes consisting of iron sulfur and flavin mononucleotide. 27 Complex II, also known as succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), contains four nuclear encoded subunits: SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD. Interestingly, complex II has a dual role, ie, in the ETC. and the tricarboxylic acid cycle, linking the two essential energy-producing processes of the cell. 28,29 Complex I and II oxidize NADH and flavin adenine dinucleotide 2, respectively, transferring the resulting electrons to ubiquinol, which carries electrons to complex III. Complex III shunts the electrons across the intermembrane space to cytochrome C, which brings electrons to complex IV. 30,31 Complex IV then uses the electrons to reduce oxygen to water. There are many enzymes located within the mitochondrial matrix that are critical for metabolic pathways, including tricarboxylic acid cycle or β-oxidation.

(p2.1) Mitochondria are also important for the maintenance of cellular energy homeostasis. They are often called the powerhouses of the cell because of their significant role in the supplementation of ATP via oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos). In contrast, mitochondria also generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) through ETC complexes, and excess 140 ROS production will induce OS and cause mitochondrial dysfunctions. 32 Mitochondria contain their own genetic material, mtDNA, which encodes seven genes of the ETC complex I: one for ETC complex III, three for ETC complex IV, and two for ETC complex V. 33 The rest of the mitochondrial proteins are encoded by nuclear genes (Figure 3). 34
## (s3) Homoplasmy and Heteroplasmy
Number of References: 5

(p3.0) mtDNA has a very high sequence-evolution rate, in part because it is exposed to ROS. mtDNA mutations include point mutations, deletions, and insertions. mtDNA mutations can be either homoplasmic or heteroplasmic when just one or more than two variants exist, respectively. 35,36 The heteroplasmic level of a certain mtDNA mutation is critical in clinical phenotypes. 36 Heteroplasmic mtDNA mutations are frequently associated with human pathologies because they cause more severe mitochondrial dysfunction than homoplasmic mtDNA mutations. Under normal conditions, mtDNA can "repair" mitochondrial dysfunction. When it comes to a certain heteroplasmic level, nevertheless, such compensation will be insufficient and lead to clinical expression of disease ( Figure 4). 37,38 
## (s4) OS and PCOS-IR
Number of References: 13

(p4.0) Because mitochondria are the major sites for ROS generation, overproduction of ROS will lead to OS and consequent imunbalance between the oxidant and antioxidant systems. 39 This imbalance may be caused by several metabolic activities, including obesity, hyperinsulinemia, and dyslipidemia. 40 The predominant ROS in the mitochondria are superoxide anions (O 2 − ), which are produced by the leakage of electrons from the ETC, which can then react with O 2 . 41 Endometrial IR is linked to hyperandrogenemia, obesity, and inflammation and strongly associated with OS, resulting in an upregulation of OS caused by excessive ROS and pregnancy impairment. 42 OS can lead to IR through the impairment of insulin signaling and causing adipokine dysregulation. 43 OS also regulates some classical signaling pathways, such as NFκB and JNK, which in turn phosphorylate insulin-receptor substrate proteins and lead to their degradation. 44 Overproduction of ROS also suppresses GLUT4 translocation in cells via affecting insulin signaling. 45  The ND1 T3394C (p.Y30H) mutation changes an amino acid (AA) that is extremely conserved in >90% of mammalian mtDNAs and believed to be associated with PCOS-IR. 46,47 Functional analysis has revealed that this mutation affects the stability of ND1 mRNA, as well as complex I assembly and activity, decreases ATP levels and mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), and enhances ROS production. 47,48 ND2 C5178A Mutation

(p4.1) The m.C5178A mutation causes the alternation of leucine to methionine at position 237 of the corresponding AA, which occurrs within the ND2 gene in complex I and is associated with PCOS-IR, 46 longevity, 49 and acute myocardial infarction. 50 Markedly decreased ATP, MMP, superoxide dismutaseand significantly increased ROS, malondialdehyde, and 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine have been identified in polymononuclear leukocytes derived from subjects harboring this mutation, suggesting that the m.C5178A mutation may cause OS and result in mitochondrial dysfunction. 51
## (s5) ND5 T12338C and T12811C Mutations
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) We previously identified homoplasmic m.T12338C (p.M1T) together with tRNA Ser(UCN) C7492T mutation in a patient with PCOS-IR. 52 At the molecular level, m.T12338C altered well-conserved methionine with threonine; therefore, the ND5 mRNA was expected to be shortened by two AAs. 53 Using cybrid cell models, the m.T12338C mutation decreased the stability of the ND5 polypeptide, affecting the assembly and activity of respiratory chain complexes. 54 Therefore, m. T12338C causes a mitochondrial dysfunction that plays a key role in PCOS-IR.

(p5.1) The m.T12811C (p.Y159H) mutation occurs at extremely conserved residues in ND5, which is essential for the functions of complex I. 55 The alternation of tyrosine to histidine is believed to affect the structure and function of the transmembrane region of the ND5 protein. 56 Since ND5 plays a a putative role in maintening the functions of complex I, the m.T12811C mutation may affect the ND5 polypeptide and influence ETC activities. 57
## (s8) tRNA Leu(UUR) Mutations
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) We previously described a Chinese pedigree with PCOS-IR that harbored a heteroplasmic tRNA Leu(UUR) A3302G mutation. 65 The proband's mother and grandmother were diagnosed with T2DM. The m.A3302G mutation occurred at two nucleotides from the 5' end of tRNA Leu(UUR) , which is evolutionarily conserved from various species ( Figure 5A). As such, it can be anticipated that m.A3302G mutation may influence 5' end processing. 66 Biochemical analysis has revealed that this mutation leads to severe complex I and IV deficiencies. A marked decreased in the stability of tRNA Leu(UUR) was identified in cybrids with this mutation. In addition, the m.A3302G mutation led to abnormal Another PCOS-IR-associated mutation is m.C3275T in tRNA Leu(UUR) , which has been reported in another family with PCOS and metabolic syndrome. 69 The m.C3275T mutation was located in a well-conserved position in the variable region of tRNA Leu(UUR) ( Figure 5A). A recent study revealed that the m.C3275T mutation was a risk factor of Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy. 70 Intriguingly, m.C3275T disrupted Watson-Crick base-pairing (28A-46C) and may have caused a failure in tRNA Leu(UUR) metabolism.
## (s9) tRNA Gln Mutations
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) By mutational screening for mt-tRNA genes in 80 patients with PCOS-IR and 50 healthy controls, we identified a set of tRNA mutations. 71 Among these, m.T4363C mutation occurred at the anticodon stem of tRNA Gln (conventional position 38). A mutation at position 38 needed to be modified and played important roles in tRNA structure and function ( Figure 5B). 72 Bioinformatic analysis indicated that the m.T4363C mutation caused the thermodynamic change of tRNA Gln69 . The m.T4363C mutation has been identified in a Chinese pedigree with hypertension, but detailed molecular mechanisms remain unexplored. 73 While the m.T4395C mutation occurs at the sixth base of mt-tRNA Gln -accept arm, adjacent to the 5' end of tRNA Gln (Figure 5B), interestingly the mutant 4395C formed a novel (6C-64G) base-pairing that was associated with essential hypertension. 74 The secondary structure altered by the m.T4395C mutation may influence tRNA function and impair mitochondrial translation.
## (s10) tRNA Cys Mutation
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) The homoplasmic m.G5821A mutation resides at the acceptor arm of tRNA Cys gene (position 6). This mutation has been reported to be associated with cardiomyopathy, 75 and is also a risk factor in clinical expression of deafness-related m. A1555G mutation. 76 At the molecular level, m.G5821A abolishes conserved base-pairing (6G-67C); therefore, it may lead to failure of tRNA metabolism via the alternation of its structure ( Figure 5C). 77 The m.C7492T mutation in homoplasmy is located at the anticodon stem of tRNA Ser(UCN) (position 26). Notably, the cytosine at that position is conserved from bacteria to human mitochondria, emphasizing the importance of m.C7492T mutation to tRNA function ( Figure 5D). 78 A heteroplasmic mutation (m.T4295C) occurring at the same conventional position in tRNA Ile has been reported to cause chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia. 79 Therefore, the m.C7492T mutation may have the same impact on tRNA function.
