# Laser-Based Powder Bed Fusion Processing of Al Alloys and Potential Solutions from the Literature-A materials Ongoing Challenges of Laser-Based Powder Bed Fusion Processing of Al Alloys and Potential Solutions from the Literature-A Review

CorpusID: 256351230 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ddab7c0a201fd2202fe873e6cf5724edabf3d57](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ddab7c0a201fd2202fe873e6cf5724edabf3d57)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 5

(p0.0) In recent decades, additive manufacturing (AM) has been widely explored in industry and academia and has consequently become a key driver for the fourth industrial revolution [1]. Among AM techniques, the laser-based power bed fusion (PBF-LB/M) process stands out for producing complex-shaped functional components with good surface quality, excellent dimensional tolerance and unprecedented mechanical properties [2]. During this process, a tightly focused laser beam selectively melts a bed made of fine metal powder layer-by-layer achieving extremely high cooling rates (up to 10 5 K/s) [3]. The portfolio of metallic materials which can be processed via PBF-LB/M is continuously expanding. Among the alloys currently available, Al-based alloys are gaining increasing interest, especially in the automotive and aerospace sectors, thanks to their excellent strength-to-weight ratio and resistance to cyclic loads [4]. Therefore, the PBF-LB/M processing of commercial Al-based alloys and the development of new Al-based compositions are growing areas and, consequently, present numerous challenges. Considering the significant impact of processing quality on the mechanical and fatigue behaviour of final components [5], intense efforts at the research and industrial level need to be devoted to overcoming these challenges.
## (s5) Process Parameters Optimisation and Defect Prediction
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) One of the main drawbacks of the PBF-LB/M technique is the incomplete densification that could occur in the final component due to internal defects, such as porosities or cracks [53]. The prominence of internal defects that could cause an early failure of the component is directly linked with the PBF-LB/M parameters [54]. Their optimisation is, therefore, crucial to manufacture dense parts with high mechanical performance. However, Craeghs et al. [55] stated that more than 50 process parameters are involved in the PBF-LB/M process, making the optimisation and monitoring highly challenging. In addition, the process parameters require to be optimised for each powder and PBF-LB/M machine, so it is overly time-consuming.
## (s9) In-Situ Prediction of Defect Formation and Forward-Looking Machine Learning
Number of References: 7

(p9.0) The pores formed during the additive process impair the mechanical performance of final components, severely hampering their widespread application. In-situ monitoring allows the formation of defects to be detected in real time, enabling the operator to stop the job, modify some process parameters, and resume component production. Among the in-situ monitoring tools, X-ray technologies have recently gained increasing attention in this field. Exploiting X-ray technologies, the dynamics of spatter [108], pore formation [109], transfer of gas trapped in the powder into the bulk component, keyhole dynamics and keyhole pore formation [110], melt flow [111], solidification and phase transformation [112] may be investigated in real time. In-situ monitoring can also be used to improve the process repeatability by considering any changes in the powder bed [113]. Although the research world is suddenly evolving towards in-situ monitoring, cloud and edge computing still pose significant challenges to the processing and transmission of real-time sensing data due to the high sampling rate and the heaviness of the data. Furthermore, the real research frontier would be to use data from in-situ monitoring as input for machine learning (ML) techniques. The latter is essential to minimise trial-and-error experimentation, overcome the limitations of simulation systems and increase the repeatability of PBF-LB/M processes. Moreover, current machine learning techniques are merely used in a black-box modelling framework, and the results are not explainable and cannot directly compensate for the understanding of process dynamics [114]. Based on these considerations, much effort is required to investigate this field over the next few years. Creating a loop of in-situ monitoring, ML and online parameters readjustment is important not only for research purposes but also for industries with the aim of enabling additive processes for reliable mass production. This industrial interest is also evident from the numerous recent patents granted by the major additive companies. For example, General Electric holds a patent published in 2021 (US2021146480A1) on a diagnostic system of an additive manufacturing machine. This device allows the determination of parameters from in-situ sensors, the continuous comparison of these parameters with threshold values and, based on this comparation, the determination of a failure mode among a plurality of possible failure modes. General Electric also holds a further recently published patent (US2022035358A1) on a diagnostic system with multiple modules. Looking at the patents published by leading additive companies provides a concrete idea of what is to come on the market and thus of new frontiers for research.
## (s11) Defect Investigation in Bulk Samples
Number of References: 6

(p11.0) Although the PBF-LB/M process allows parts with a high level of densification to be easily produced, defects cannot be completely avoided. Since defects could seriously compromise mechanical properties acting as crack nucleation sites, the determination of the specimen densification level appears essential. Several methodologies are available to assess the density of a sample, some density-based such as Archimedes method and pycnometer and others defect-based such as image analysis of a cross-section of the sample and X-ray computed tomography (CT). As all these methods have strengths and weaknesses, as described in Figure 9, they are often used synergistically. Looking closer at the density-based analyses, the Archimedes method stands out for not requiring a long analysis time and any specific equipment. Using the Archimedes method, the sample density can be evaluated from the difference in the buoyancy of an object weighed in air and immersed in a fluid. As demonstrated by Spierings et al. [115], the Archimedes method proved to be accurate and repeatable in absolute density measurements, showing an overall standard deviation for 120 measurements of less than 0.1%. However, to deduce the part porosity, the evaluated density should be compared to the material nominal reference density. Unfortunately, this latter operation introduces calculation errors, as the material nominal reference density cannot be considered reliable for non-homogeneous parts. Furthermore, as a density-based methodology, it does not allow the shape and distribution of defects to be determined. The other density-based approach to consider is pycnometry, a methodology similar to the Archimedes method but with slightly more expensive equipment. The pycnometer evaluates part density by measuring part volume (determined by gas displacement) and considering the part mass which is evaluated separately. In line with Archimedes, part porosity is derived from the correlation between the evaluated part density and the nominal material density, introducing the same inaccuracy above mentioned. In the pycnometer method, such as in the Archimedes approach, an insufficient accuracy for bulk samples with a high level of densification could be obtained [116]. Moreover, even with this method it is not possible to localise defects or assess their morphology. To achieve this goal, it is necessary to use defect-based methodologies.

(p11.1) As defect-based methodologies, image analysis and CT investigation can be mentioned. The first one could be considered as the most widely employed approach. The image analysis is a destructive method in which samples need to be cut and polished using the standard metallographic procedure before to take several micrographs with an optical microscope. Subsequently, the micrographs require processing using dedicated software which is able to distinguish the pores after thresholding and thus calculate the mean porosity level, the defects distribution and the pores morphology. This methodology is considered accessible, as it merely requires widespread and inexpensive equipment, but the sample preparation and analysis procedure hide several pitfalls. For example, the magnification chosen for the micrographs and the cut plane (parallel or perpendicular to the growth direction) may significantly influence the density measurements. As demonstrated by Spierings et al. [115], the impact of the magnification value and of the analysis plane (horizontal or vertical) on the density measurement is significant for high porosity levels and becomes less remarkable when porosity levels are minimal. In their work, it was proved that the magnification value must be set appropriately to achieve a good compromise between image resolution and the number of images taken, ensuring the identification of even the smallest porosities while having good statistical results. Since samples produced via PBF-LB/M might be characterised by inhomogeneities in the porosity distribution along the growth direction, choosing a plane parallel to the growth direction as the analysis plane is recommended to obtain more representative data [115]. However, inhomogeneities have also been detected in the plane perpendicular to the growth direction, but the literature is not in agreement on this point. For example, Sanaei et al. [117] reported that the highest defect volume fraction and the highest defect concentration is placed near the outer surfaces of specimens. In contrast to this theory there is the research of Spierings et al. [115], where bigger more numerous pores are detected towards the centre of the part. The prediction of defect distribution is highly complex and depends on several factors such as the part orientation, scanning strategy, contour parameters, etc. Since the inhomogeneity of defect distribution is so challenging to predict, examining different sections of the samples is recommended. However, this procedure is more laborious and time-consuming. Another defect-based methodology often described as the best performing is the CT. In line with image analysis, the CT technique permits the investigation of the defect shape, size and distribution. In contrast to image analysis, however, this is a non-destructive technique that allows the entire volume of the sample to be scanned and not merely a section. During a CT scan, the specimen is placed on a rotating stage and irradiated with an X-ray beam. The result is a series of 2D X-ray projections at various angles that are then used to reconstruct a 3D model of the sample with a dedicated software. The reconstruction is in greyscale and a thresholding operation is required to distinguish air from bulk material to transform the 3D reconstruction into binary. From the binary 3D reconstruction, it is possible to extract all morphological and distributional information of the defects present. However, the high cost of equipment and the high operating time remain weaknesses of the CT method. In fact, the minimum size of detectable defects is closely related to the resolution, and high resolutions require long analysis times. Another drawback to point out is the maximum material thickness that can be penetrated by X-rays ( Table 1). The latter depends on the material attenuation coefficient and the energy of the X-ray photon. For this reason, although aluminium allows greater thicknesses to be scanned than steel samples, the sample size is still limited. CT is currently the method that offers the most comprehensive and accurate evaluation of defects; however, many challenges still need to be resolved. In particular, to take full advantage of this powerful technique, increasing the resolution without excessively increasing the analysis time, reducing the heaviness of the data and improving the scanning of multi-material objects could be some of the aspects to be improved.
## (s12) A Promising Post-Processing Procedure for Defect Mitigation
Number of References: 5

(p12.0) As previously explained, defects formed during the PBF-LB/M process can be minimized by process optimization but may not be completely avoided. Intrinsic defects in the PBF-LB/M process, such as lack of fusion, gas porosity and unmelted particles, are critical for fatigue, as crack nucleation usually takes place at stress concentration points. In order to achieve a near-perfect level of densification and thus obtain mechanical performance suitable for the high-criticality applications, post-processing techniques for defect mitigation have taken hold in the PBF-LB/M field in recent years. A performing method widely used in powder metallurgy and cast metals is the HIP. During the HIP process, the part is submerged in inert atmosphere (Ar) and simultaneously subjected to high temperature and confining gas pressure [118]. The temperature is set to reduce the yield strength below the gas pressure, thus allowing plastic flow, while high pressure causes substantial shrinkage or complete closure of pores [119]. Considering the efficiency of the HIP in closing pores with a diameter up to 5 mm in Ti6Al4V casting samples and the fatigue strength improvement of about 50% over the non-HIPped specimens recorded in an A356 casting sample, the application of this method was extended to the PBF-LB/M sector [120,121]. On AlSi10Mg samples produced by PBF-LB/M, an impressive decrease in the porosity volume fraction of about 64% was observed as a consequence of HIP [122]. Although the porosity could be significantly reduced with this technique, some critical aspects could be identified:
## (s14) Heat Treatments
Number of References: 4

(p14.0) The high cooling rate typical of the PBF-LB/M process results in an extremely fine non-equilibrium microstructure compared to conventional processes. This allows the grain refining strengthening to be exploited, resulting in high mechanical performance already from the as-built state. Moreover, as can be observed from the yellow schematisation in Figure 10, the peculiar microstructure of Al-Si alloys in the as-built state is characterised by a fine eutectic phase network, a matrix of α-Al with supersaturated Si and some fine and uniformly dispersed Si particles. This condition allows synergistic exploitation of solid solution and precipitation reinforcement in addition to grain refinement strengthening. However, the main weakness of the high cooling rate lies in the generation of considerable residual stresses in the as-built components. The need to decrease the tensional state of the built samples led to applying stress-relieving treatments after the PBF-LB/M process [125]. In addition, to increase the strengthening of PBF-LB/M alloys, different thermal postprocessing treatments are often performed. The heat treatments generally adopted for Al-Si alloys are artificial ageing treatments such as the T5 treatment-direct ageing and the T6 treatment, which consists of a combination of solubilisation and ageing. These treatments and their effects on melt pool morphology and microstructure of Al-Si systems have been illustrated in Figure 10. As reported in blue in Figure 10, the stress relieving treatments for Al-based alloys usually involve temperatures in the 270-350 • C range maintained for 2-4 h. Although this allows the component residual stresses to be significantly reduced, the grains result coarsened, the eutectic phase network globalised and the Si particles grown [126]. Up to now, no stress-relieving treatment has been found that does not compromise all the beneficial effects of the as-built microstructure of the PBF-LB/M process. One approach attempted in the literature was to adjust the composition of aluminium base alloys by adding alloying elements that induce the precipitation of intermetallic phase with a strong coarsening resistance [127]. Designing alloys that can age at higher temperatures, close to the stress relief temperature of 300 • C, would allow stress relief and strengthening goals to be achieved with single high-temperature ageing treatment. For example, this approach led to the patenting of Scalmalloy. The addition of slow-dissolving Sc and Zr to the non-heat-treatable Al-Mg system has, in fact, been demonstrated to induce impressive age hardening, achieving excellent stress-relieving and strengthening results with a simple post-heat treatment at 300-400 • C [128]. However, due to the high cost of these alloying elements, it is necessary to continue researching and developing tailored stress-relieving treatments for non-heat-treatable Al-based alloys without implying a change in the alloy formulation also on standard composition.
