# TherapeuTic advances in hematology Innovations in hematopoietic stem-cell mobilization: a review of the novel CXCR4 inhibitor motixafortide

CorpusID: 258879373 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3405e016d310de90b53fd01c7c14b142b1e3917](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3405e016d310de90b53fd01c7c14b142b1e3917)

Fields: Medicine

## (s9) Motixafortide and HSPC mobilization for HSPC-based gene-edited cellular therapies
Number of References: 7

(p9.0) Recent technological and scientific advances have facilitated the development of HSPC-based gene transduction and gene-editing therapies as potentially curative treatments for a number of hematologic diseases arising from specific genetic alterations, such as thalassemia and sickle-cell disease (SCD). As with HCT, the effectiveness of HSPC-based gene transduction and editing therapies relies, in part, on the ability to collect sufficient CD34+ cells. The numbers of HSPCs needed for such gene therapies, however, are significantly higher than what is needed for standard HCT, with typically >10-15 × 10 6 CD34+ cells/ kg needed to reliably manufacture these geneedited cellular therapies due to a number of technical factors. 44 In addition, due to potential loss of long-term engraftment of ex vivo genetically manipulated HSCs following infusion, HSPC backup grafts are necessary as a safety mechanism to rescue patients in the event of such graft failure. The most effective FDA approved HSPC mobilizing regimen at this time is G-CSF in combination with plerixafor. 25,26 Yet, G-CSF is unsafe in patients with SCD due to the increased risk of life-threatening vaso-occlusive episodes. Meanwhile, non-SCD patients typically require numerous G-CSF injections and multiple leukapheresis procedures with HSPC yields that are often suboptimal. [45][46][47] In addition, single-agent plerixafor is a relatively weak HSPC mobilizer, requiring multiple injections and leukapheresis procedures while also yielding suboptimal HSPC numbers for gene-edited therapies. Recent data highlight this issue, reporting that the majority of SCD patients mobilized with plerixafor alone remained unable to collect ⩾5 × 10 6 CD34+ cells/kg after two mobilization and collection cycles, making this potentially curative therapy inaccessible to a large number of otherwise eligible SCD patients. 44 Therefore, the development of safe, effective and efficient 'G-CSF-free' HSPC mobilization regimens specifically for HSPCbased gene therapies remain an unmet need.
