# Revolutionizing Agrifood Systems with Artificial Intelligence: A Survey

CorpusID: 258461477 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44b7981a24787d87a713c5dc1467282a5b08d97c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44b7981a24787d87a713c5dc1467282a5b08d97c)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s1) Relationship to Related Surveys
Number of References: 12

(p1.0) 1.2.1 Remote sensing. Several existing surveys have examined the intersection of RS and agriculture [67,74,144,177]. While all of these surveys provide detailed descriptions of the characteristics and applications of RS technology in agriculture, each survey has its own emphasis. For instance, [144] covers the history of RS and its impact on agriculture, as well as various vegetation indices that can be computed from RS images. Meanwhile, [74] reviews and analyzes literature to identify recent developments in agriculture RS from temporal and geographical attributes. In contrast, this survey focuses on RS as a crucial data source for AI models in agrifood systems. Other surveys have focused on specific RS data sources [95,101,136] or specific applications within agriculture [6,199]. Additionally, some surveys have reviewed specific AI models, such as CNNs, in the context of agriculture RS [71].
## (s2) Internet of Things.
Number of References: 38

(p2.0) Internet of Things (IoT) represents an intelligent network that enables cyber-physical interactions by connecting numerous things with the capacity to perceive, compute, execute, and communicate with the internet. As discussed in the recent surveys, IoT technologies have greatly advanced various areas [147,156,191], such as smart cities, smart homes, and smart health care. Smart agriculture with IoT technologies has also been discussed in [38]. However, they mostly focus on the integration of IoT devices and corresponding areas while neglecting the possibility of AI techniques along with the development of these devices. Recently, [201] discusses the possibilities AI techniques brought in the IoT area, while ignoring the development of integration of AI and the IoT (AIoT) in the agrifood systems. Instead, this survey covers a wide range of topics for the integration of IoT devices and AI techniques in different agrifood areas, including agriculture, animal husbandry, and fishery.

(p2.1) 1.2.3 Agriculture. As AI techniques continue to evolve within the field of agriculture, scholars have taken various perspectives in reviewing these methods. For example, [165] has focused on addressing the growing pressure on global agricultural production by exploring strategies for sustainable development in environment-friendly agriculture. They primarily review different learning methods for crops, including supervised learning, transfer learning, and few-shot Manuscript submitted to ACM learning. Notably, traditional learning methods and other agricultural sectors such as animal husbandry and fisheries are not addressed in their analysis. [68] conducts a comprehensive analysis of data resources, agriculture sectors, and learning methods in their paper. However, their work does not encompass the recent advancements in AI within the agriculture industry since 2018. [195] provides an overview of decision support systems in agriculture, focusing on their systematic application in areas such as agricultural mission planning, water resources management, climate change adaptation, and food waste control. Compared to previous surveys that cover a broad range of topics in agriculture, some researchers have chosen to focus on specific areas within the field of agriculture. For example, [98] analyzes over 30 datasets for diverse agricultural topics, discussing the main characteristics and applications of each dataset, and highlighting key considerations for creating high-quality public agricultural datasets. Crop-related methods are reviewed in [52,93,190] while [77] reviews DL methods in fruit growing, recognition, and yield estimation. Satellite RS technology has become a widely used tool for agrifood monitoring due to its vast observation range and timely data updates. Satellite images provide essential multi-source, multi-temporal, and multi-resolution data for monitoring agricultural production, animal husbandry, and fishery. RS satellites are typically classified as active or passive based on their onboard sensor data acquisition methods. Passive ones usually refer to optical RS satellites, which offer rich spectral and textural features but can be severely impacted by cloudy, rainy, and foggy weather conditions. While active RS technology mainly involves the synthetic aperture radar (SAR), which can operate all around the clock, detecting land surface information by receiving reflected echoes from actively emitted microwaves.  SAR distinguishes different features by analyzing their backscattering characteristics. Because the emitted microwaves are sensitive to moisture, SAR is often used to retrieve soil and vegetation moisture levels [158]. When combined with optical images, it allows for more accurate and refined crop classification [1,148] or monitoring [11,17]. Additionally, SAR can identify surface deformation information, making it useful for crop canopy monitoring. Currently, the most popular SAR satellite is the Sentinel-1, which is favored due to its free accessibility.

(p2.2) Images obtained by optical sensors can mainly be divided into three types: multispectral, hyper-spectral, and panchromatic, as shown in Fig. 1. Hyperspectral sensors receive abundant spectral information, allowing the extraction of a continuous spectral curve of a broad wavelength range for each pixel. Thus, the obtained images are appropriate for distinguishing vegetation with similar visual characteristics. This is very useful in fine-grained vegetation classification Manuscript submitted to ACM [13,111,166]. Multispectral images are most commonly used for agricultural classification and yield prediction. Moderateresolution imaging spectroradiometer (MODIS), Landsat-8, and Sentinel-2 are the three most popular medium-resolution multispectral satellites for agrifood monitoring [51,66,89,94,97,138,142] since their data are easy to acquire and rich in vegetation-sensitive bands. SPOT-5 2.5 [31] QuickBird 0.61 [31] world-view3 0.31 [1,26] AVIRIS*(airborne) 20 [13,111,166] * denotes containing hyperspectral sensor.

(p2.3) Some very high resolution (VHR) satellites such as SPOT5 [31], QuickBird [31], and RapidEye [11] are suitable for finegrained classification and field-level monitoring. However, due to their commercial availability and high cost, these satellites have relatively fewer applications in agrifood monitoring. Table 1 provides details of some common optical RS satellites and their resolutions.
## (s8) AI Methods in Agriculture
Number of References: 12

(p8.0) 3.2.1 Agrifood classification. RS technologies have been widely applied to agriculture, they provide multi-source, multi-temporal, and multi-resolution data for large-scale, all-weather automated monitoring of crops. As shown in Fig In the early years, most of the methods utilized band algebra and band transformation (e.g., difference vegetation index, enhanced vegetation index (EVI), normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) [16,121,198]) to extract features for classification. However, these methods often result in noisy and inaccurate classification due to manual threshold setting and subjective expert experience. In order to utilize the abundant inter-classes, sample-wise and temporal relationships introduced by RS images, traditional ML methods [137] have been applied in agrifood classification as they can explore the latent and complex information between samples belonging to different categories. At first, researchers usually use a single ML classifier for classification. [111] uses C4.5 DT for hyper-spectral soy-bean mapping. Although the rules generated by C4.5 are easy to understand, this algorithm has low efficiency and cannot handle large datasets due to the limitation of its structure. [79] adopts multilayer perceptron (MLP) for multi-temporal crop classification, but its performance is limited by the small number of latent layers. Most of the traditional ML methods can capture complex nonlinear features with relatively simple structures but some cannot cope with large datasets, and some are easy to trapped by local optimal values. These problems of using a single classifier may lead to a high erroneous recognition rate. Therefore, researchers try to integrate multiple classifiers to comprehensively utilize the advantages of different classifiers [5,121]. The idea of integrating multiple classifiers has later extended to the field of ensemble learning (EL), which is nowadays one of the most representative and effective methods. Typical EL methods like RF [161], XGBoost [88] and GBDT [94] are widely applied in agriculture classification and outperform other single classifier-based methods. [146] summarizes current state-of-theart techniques for sugarcane mapping and monitoring, where RF, SVM, and classification and regression tree are compared and RF shows the best performance.
## (s11) Manuscript submitted to ACM
Number of References: 15

(p11.0) Corn Belt using the regularized linear regression algorithm. [42] constructs a wheat yield prediction framework by combining various vegetation indices and multiple methods, such as linear regression, MLR, and stepwise multiple linear regression. Moreover, some other linear models including OLS [135,176], least absolute shrinkage selection operator (LASSO) [108,202,211], and PLSR [105,106] have also been used for yield prediction.

(p11.1) Although linear models are able to perform efficient yield prediction, the complex relationships between yields and some factors, such as crop genetics, environmental factors, and human management practices [128], are not always linear. In such cases, linear models may not perform well. To tackle these issues, various nonlinear ML models have been developed to predict crop yields. For instance, [69] constructs multiple ML models, including Cubist, MLP, support vector regression (SVR), GPR, KNN, and Multivariate

(p11.2) Adaptive Regression Splines, to predict wheat yield in the Australian wheat belt, and finds that SVR achieves the highest prediction accuracy. In another study, [48] develops a yield prediction model framework using the GEE platform to test the performance of KNN, NN, DT, SVM, and GPR models for winter wheat production in China. [108] uses SVR-Linear, SVR-RBF, and MLP models simultaneously to predict the national production of barley, soft wheat, and durum wheat in Algeria during the current season. Other commonly used ML models, such as ANN [42], bayesian neural networks (BNN) [66,99], have also been used to improve the accuracy of crop yield prediction. Nevertheless, since these methods rely on a single model, they may suffer from an overfitting issue when training data is limited.
## (s12) Artificial Intelligence Methods in Animal Husbandry
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) 3.3.1 Pasture monitoring and evaluation. The countries with a developed animal husbandry industry typically have vast grassland areas. Due to its contribution to carbon storage, grasslands are mainly used for animal feed production and play an important role in maintaining the ecological system [40]. Therefore, the yield of pasture directly affects animal husbandry productions, and the relevant monitoring is important for the utilization and management of pastures, and the improvement of ecological environments [180]. In recent years, big data-based grassland monitoring has become a hot-spot research topic.
## (s15) Other topics.
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) Automatic techniques of animal product generation are increasingly important aspects of modern animal husbandry. For example, image processing techniques can be used to determine the optimal storage conditions for meat. While [123] uses visible and NIR hyperspectral images to determine whether meat is fresh or not. This approach can accurately identify the freshness of the meat, ensuring food safety. In addition, AI methods have been also utilized for monitoring animal husbandry fences and poultry houses [216].
