# International Journal of Molecular Sciences Sustainable Exploitation of Posidonia oceanica Sea Balls (Egagropili): A Review

CorpusID: 258157530 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad33769567049e807548a06ea45ada996a4ca46a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad33769567049e807548a06ea45ada996a4ca46a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s5) Poseidonia oceanica Egagropili as Lignocellulosic Biomass to Valorize
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) Every year, huge quantities of POEG fragments accumulate on Mediterranean c resulting in a problem and a negative visual impact, creating the necessity for mun lities to remove this waste to keep beaches cleaned and ready for tourists and the su season [6]. As disposal of this waste is performed every year and does not have neg costs, it would be useful to find a way to valorize POEGs as readily available, low and renewable lignocellulose biomass and as a good source of cheap materials and to produce added-value products from the perspective of an eco-friendly society [1,1 The whole POEGs, themselves, have interesting properties that can be used for e production [15], dye removal from the environment, building materials in the con tion sector, as well as in the development of new packaging systems. They are a optimal source of lignin and cellulose fractions that might be widely used in the p making industry, as well as a source of carboxymethyl cellulose in the production of reinforced composite materials and biopolymeric films. Lastly, they might be used a bohydrate substrates to grow microorganisms in biotechnological processes. The fraction, made of numerous 4-hydroxybenzoic acid groups, might instead be used f synthesis of chemicals, such as parabens, and pharmaceutical molecules, such as p tamol. All new applications of POEGs and their derived fractions are reported in th lowing paragraphs from the literature published in the last few years in the fields o technology, environmental decontamination and bioremediation processes, biop and biocomposite preparations, and construction materials ( Figure 4 and Table 1).  
## (s9) Posidonia oceanica Egagropili in Bioplastic and Biocomposite Preparations
Number of References: 14

(p9.0) POEG fibers have been widely used to strengthen the matrix of plastics, both of bio-based and oil-based origins ( Table 1). Mirpoor et al. [2] have exploited both the lignincarbohydrate (LCC) and the nanocrystalline cellulose (NC) fractions, after extraction from egagropili collected in Poetto (Figure 2), as reinforcing agents for hydroplastic materials. The two fractions were able to improve the physicochemical properties of biodegradable films obtained from hemp (Cannabis sativa) oil seedcake protein concentrates. In fact, such materials exhibited a high tensile strength and Young's modulus; the Young's modulus increased from around 20 to 45 and to 80 MPa, while the elongation at break was reduced from 300% to 250% and to 120% in the presence of LCC and NC, respectively. They possessed barrier properties towards water vapor, O 2 , and CO 2 . In addition, both fractions decreased film hydrophilicity, infact, moisture content, solubility, and swelling ratio were lower for the films prepared in the presence of additives. In 2021, the same authors [12] investigated deeply the LCC fraction obtained from the same POEG samples from a chemical point of view using FT-IR and NMR analyses (see also Section 1.2). The LCC fraction was water soluble as it contained monosaccharides and exhibited a brownish-to-black color due to certain functional groups, such as phenylpropane-based polymers. Furthermore, it exhibited a remarkable and stable antioxidant activity that was easily released over 6 months when it was used as an additive in hemp protein-based films. On the other hand, in another paper, lignin-containing cellulose micro/nanofibrils (LCM/NF) were also obtained by combining the steam explosion process or twin-screw extrusion (as energy-efficient pretreatments) with a conventional grinding step [27]. The chemical composition of the fibers, collected in Monastir (Figure 2), before and after pulping, was analyzed. The obtained LCM/NF suspensions were characterized by several techniques, such as morphological and mechanical analysis. It has been shown that if the sulfonation method was coupled with steam explosion or twin-screw extrusion, then it was possible to obtain LCM/NF gels with relatively low viscosity and nano papers with a Young's modulus of around 5 GPa. Sulfonation was revealed to be an effective pretreatment to lower the energy during grinding, and therefore it can be considered a valid technique to be applied in the field of packaging [27]. POEG fibers, collected in Campello Beach in Alicante, Spain (38 • 21 00.01 N, 0 • 29 00 W) (Figure 2), were exploited in the reinforcement phase and in oil-based polymeric matrices, such as the high-density polyethylene (HDPE) [28] samples), and more recently even in polyesters [28,29]. In the first work, the authors investigated the influence of POEG fibers and deinking paper sludge (DPS) on the thermo-mechanical properties of high-density polyethylene binary and hybrid composites [29]. POEG fibers (samples collected in Monastir, Tunisia) ( Figure 2) were simply obtained by drying the washed balls at 80 • C in a hot air oven for 7 days and then reducing them to a powder by milling them with a grinder. They were subsequently sieved to an approx. 1 mm size. It was found that the properties of binary and hybrid composites depended on the chemical composition of the fillers, and the material's mechanical properties depended on the filler content as well (POEG and DPS). A better interfacial adhesion between fillers and matrix was achieved in the presence of maleated polyethylene (MAPE). HDPE/POEG/MAPE composites achieved the highest tensile modulus and strength with 40% of the POEG fibers [29]. The effect of the POEG fibers on the mechanical properties and water absorption behavior of unsaturated polyester resin matrices obtained by the compression molding process was also evaluated in the following paper [30] (samples collected in Mahdia, Tunisia, 35 • 30 24 N, 11 • 2 48 E, Figure 2). The obtained results showed that the stiffness, strength, and hardness of the unsaturated polyester resin/POEG fiber composite increased with increasing concentration of fibers, demonstrating that the latter acted as matrix reinforcing agents. Different amounts (10, 20, and 30 %wt) of fibers from POEG collected on the beach at Rosignano Solvay, Livorno, Italy (43 • 19 1.7 N, 10 • 27 52.7 E; Figure 2) were obtained as described above and incorporated into a thermoplastic matrix made of poly(hydroxybutyrate-cohydroxyvalerate) (PHBV). Moreover, acetyl tributyl citrate was used as a plasticizer to produce melt-processable and biodegradable composites for specialized applications in marine environments [31]. The produced materials were characterized in terms of processability, thermal/mechanical/morphological properties, and biodegradability under simulated and real marine environmental conditions. The obtained composites showed good thermal stability and mechanical properties, especially in terms of stress at break and impact resistance. The biodegradation test results in the simulated marine environment showed that the presence of POEG fibers in the composites accelerated the biodegradation of the polymeric matrix. Under real marine conditions, the samples with POEGs showed higher weight losses and mechanical feature reduction compared to those prepared without fibers. Due to the obtained results, the authors speculated that these biocomposites could be exploited as starting materials for low-cost and biodegradable items that are usable in the sea and/or sand dunes, increasing the market opportunities for biopolymers, such as PHBV, and at the same time, finding an eco-sustainable valorization for POEG residues accumulated in large quantities on Mediterranean shores [31]. More recently [32], the PHBV mixture with egagropili fibers was further employed to prepare novel bio-containers with the aim of restoring seagrass meadows and coastal dunes. The authors have discovered that the presence of such bio-containers on the coast has favored the establishment and spread of plants because they promoted shoot production, minimized transplant shock, and enhanced the capacity of plants to resist physical disturbances, such as those due to storm events. This novel approach is very useful for substituting polluting, non-biodegradable materials in recipient habitats [32].
