# Exploring the underutilized novel foods and starches for formulation of low glycemic therapeutic foods: a review

CorpusID: 258241337 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9fcbc5ba051a6b92207ac29426183dfb0c6aec12](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9fcbc5ba051a6b92207ac29426183dfb0c6aec12)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s7) Extruded products
Number of References: 4

(p7.0) Research indicates that underutilized cereals are used in development of extruded flours and find utilization as novel flour for development of various extruded or baked products (162). Ojedokun et al. (133) used blends of malted amaranth and roasted sesame for developing extruded breakfast cereal and stated that formulation with 50% amaranth flour and 50% sesame were best acceptable. This formulation of breakfast cereal had the highest TDF (6.23 g/100 g) which reduced the GI and glycemic load (GL) of the product. Even the amino acid profile was better with addition of grain amaranth and sesame than control breakfast cereal (133). Optimized quantities of amaranth (55%), shallot (25%) and soycake (20%) were combined for preparing nutrient rich extruded snack; and their sensory acceptability was above 7. It was observed that the different variations of extruded snacks developed using amaranth, shallot and soycake had higher magnesium (42.00-46.10 mg/100 g) than wheat shallot market sample used as control (28.60 mg/100 g) and lower GI ranging between 34.37 and 38.75. Thus, the scientists indicated that these products find best suitability as alternative snacks for hyperglycemic patients (134).

(p7.1) Cassava-vegetable pasta using leafy vegetables namely amaranth leaves and fluted pumpkin leaf (at conc. 5, 10%) was prepared by Frontiers in Nutrition 08 frontiersin.org   Lawal et al. (163). It was observed that nutritional content improved with the addition of leafy vegetables than control. The protein content nearly doubled from 0.99 g/100 g (control) to 2.95 g/100 g (10% fluted pumpkin leaf-fortified cassava pasta), and dietary fiber increased from 9 g/100 g (control) to 10 g/100 g (10% fluted pumpkin leaf-fortified cassava pasta). The TPC, TFC and β-carotene ranged between 445-1,098 μg GAE/g; 58-61. 6    Application of novel ingredients in therapeutic product development.
## (s11) Anti-obesity and hypolipidemic properties
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Fu et al. (169) indicated that 6-week supplementation of banana resistant starch (BRS) at low (1.25 g/kg), medium (2.50 g/kg) and high (5.0 g/kg) dose along with high fat diet (HFD), fed to obese rats could prevent rise of glucose (4.16-3.78 mmol/L) when compared to control (fed with HFD only) obese rats (9.77 mmol/L). Even the triglyceride, total cholesterol, and low-density lipoprotein levels were lower in BRS + HFD obese rats (0.44-0.47 mmol/L; 1.45-1.61 mmol/L; 0.49-0.33 mmol/L respectively) than control obese rats (0.65; 1.79; 0.48 respectively). The authors also indicated that the BRS improved the gut microbiota by increasing the ratio of Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes microorganism. Even the serum level of leptin and insulin decrease in rats fed with BRS (leptin: 1.82-1.37 ng/ml; insulin: 11.51-9.29 U/L) than the control rats (leptin: 2.10 ng/ml; insulin: 15.15 U/L). The ghrelin hormone level which was less in obese rat (0.76 mU/L) was improved in rats fed with BRS (0.79-0.92 mU/L). Adiponectin a hormone related to anti-diabetic and cardioprotective activity was low in obese rats (23.60 ng/ml) which was increased to 24.71-34.44 ng/ml in BRS fed rats. Thus, it was concluded that BRS demonstrated antiobesity effect by regulating the glucose and lipid mechanism, reducing the serum hormonal levels of leptin and insulin and increasing the ratio of beneficial gut microbiota (169).
## (s12) Hypoglycemic properties
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) Low GI and GL foods are known to have hypoglycemic effect, thus are recommended for diabetic patients as part of their diets. Management of diet plays a major role in preventing and maintaining normal blood sugar levels of a diabetic person (171). The current trend of snacking includes consumption of highly processed, high calorie foods, mainly bakery products, fried foods that lack fiber or other essential nutrients and also fall into high GI category. However, efforts are being taken to reduce the GI of some of these snacks like bakery products, by value adding or enriching these products with nutrient dense novel ingredients that are rich source of fiber and bioactive compounds apart from normal nutrients. When white bread enriched with oat fiber (insoluble fiber 10.4 g per portion) was supplemented to overweight and obese women for 3 days, their insulin sensitivity improved. Serum insulin was noted as 29.7 in experimental group while it was 32.3 pmol/l in control (172). Miranda-Ramos and Haros (37) developed bread by addition of amaranth (20%), chia (10%) and quinoa (4%) in wheat flour; which reduced the GI of optimized bread (85%) upon comparison with control (95%). This reduction in GI can be correlated to the GI of quinoa, amaranth and chia in the formulation due to high dietary fiber and decreased starch content. Further, addition of pseudocereals also reduced the starch hydrolysis at 90 mins in optimized bread (68.1%) as compared to control bread (84.6%) thereby providing hypoglycemic effect.

(p12.1) Research indicates development of low GI foods by adding fruits and vegetable by-products. The fruits by products like mango peel were implemented for reducing GI of foods as they are rich in dietary fiber and phenols. Ajila et al. (173) revealed that value addition of mango peel (5-20%) in biscuits increased the TDF content to 20.7% while control only had 6.5%. Similarly, the polyphenol content was higher in 20% mango peel incorporated biscuits (4,500 μg GAE/g) than control (540 μg GAE/g) thereby, making it richer in antioxidant and bioactive compounds. Silva et al. (174) indicated that unripe banana pasta (75%) when fed to diabetic rats was able to prevent the hyperglycemia and also decreased cholesterol and triglyceride levels compared to the control diabetic group.
