# Homogenizing Responses to Different Survey Questions on the Same Topic: Proposal of a Scale Homogenization Method Using a Reference Distribution

CorpusID: 255001988 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf40554629a2508aa229c63a7a767618699c41b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf40554629a2508aa229c63a7a767618699c41b1)

Fields: Sociology

## (s9) Early Scale Homogenization Methods
Number of References: 16

(p9.0) The Linear Stretch Method is the simplest of all SHM and seems to have been used first by Hull (1922). Other applications can be found in studies on happiness that were performed in Australia and Western Germany in the 1980s (Veenhoven 1993). The study conducted by Jones and Thurstone (1955) and the work done by Lodge (1981) are illustrative of the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method. Both this method and Linear Stretch have been used in the WDH since 1990, Linear Stretch to a range from 0 to 10 for numerical scales with at least seven steps and Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value for verbal response scales.

(p9.1) The Linear Stretch Method is the simplest of all SHM and seems to have been used first by Hull (1922). Other applications can be found in studies on happiness that were performed in Australia and Western Germany in the 1980s (Veenhoven 1993). The study conducted by Jones and Thurstone (1955) and the work done by Lodge (1981) are illustrative of the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method. Both this method and Linear Stretch have been used in the WDH since 1990, Linear Stretch to a range from 0 to 10 for numerical scales with at least seven steps and Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value for verbal response scales.
## (s12) Later Scale Homogenization Method Using Semantic Judgement of Word Value in Context (SHM-SJC)
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) The weaknesses of these early transformation methods also appeared when the transformed scores were compared to average ratings on 0-10 numerical scales in the same country in the same year (Kalmijn et al. 2011). These weaknesses instigated two further innovations.

(p12.1) The weaknesses of these early transformation methods also appeared when the transformed scores were compared to average ratings on 0-10 numerical scales in the same country in the same year (Kalmijn et al. 2011). These weaknesses instigated two further innovations.
## (s15) Difference with Early Methods for Scale Transformation
Number of References: 4

(p15.0) The approach to scale transformation used in the Happiness Scale Interval Study differs essentially from that used in the Linear Stretch Method and the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method, as the response options in the primary scale are not considered to be discrete points, but to be intervals each representing a part of the continuum from 0 to 10 where the perception of happiness can be found. This complies with the view of Kalmijn (2010), who considers happiness to be a latent continuous variable that underlies the survey questions being studied. Moreover, in the Happiness Scale Interval Study each response option is judged in the context for the other response options of the scale and this approach is illustrative of the Semantic Judgment of Word Value in Context Method.

(p15.1) The approach to scale transformation used in the Happiness Scale Interval Study differs essentially from that used in the Linear Stretch Method and the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method, as the response options in the primary scale are not considered to be discrete points, but to be intervals each representing a part of the continuum from 0 to 10 where the perception of happiness can be found. This complies with the view of Kalmijn (2010), who considers happiness to be a latent continuous variable that underlies the survey questions being studied. Moreover, in the Happiness Scale Interval Study each response option is judged in the context for the other response options of the scale and this approach is illustrative of the Semantic Judgment of Word Value in Context Method.
## (s54) Early Scale Homogenization Methods
Number of References: 16

(p54.0) The Linear Stretch Method is the simplest of all SHM and seems to have been used first by Hull (1922). Other applications can be found in studies on happiness that were performed in Australia and Western Germany in the 1980s (Veenhoven 1993). The study conducted by Jones and Thurstone (1955) and the work done by Lodge (1981) are illustrative of the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method. Both this method and Linear Stretch have been used in the WDH since 1990, Linear Stretch to a range from 0 to 10 for numerical scales with at least seven steps and Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value for verbal response scales.

(p54.1) The Linear Stretch Method is the simplest of all SHM and seems to have been used first by Hull (1922). Other applications can be found in studies on happiness that were performed in Australia and Western Germany in the 1980s (Veenhoven 1993). The study conducted by Jones and Thurstone (1955) and the work done by Lodge (1981) are illustrative of the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method. Both this method and Linear Stretch have been used in the WDH since 1990, Linear Stretch to a range from 0 to 10 for numerical scales with at least seven steps and Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value for verbal response scales.
## (s57) Later Scale Homogenization Method Using Semantic Judgement of Word Value in Context (SHM-SJC)
Number of References: 4

(p57.0) The weaknesses of these early transformation methods also appeared when the transformed scores were compared to average ratings on 0-10 numerical scales in the same country in the same year (Kalmijn et al. 2011). These weaknesses instigated two further innovations.

(p57.1) The weaknesses of these early transformation methods also appeared when the transformed scores were compared to average ratings on 0-10 numerical scales in the same country in the same year (Kalmijn et al. 2011). These weaknesses instigated two further innovations.
## (s60) Difference with Early Methods for Scale Transformation
Number of References: 4

(p60.0) The approach to scale transformation used in the Happiness Scale Interval Study differs essentially from that used in the Linear Stretch Method and the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method, as the response options in the primary scale are not considered to be discrete points, but to be intervals each representing a part of the continuum from 0 to 10 where the perception of happiness can be found. This complies with the view of Kalmijn (2010), who considers happiness to be a latent continuous variable that underlies the survey questions being studied. Moreover, in the Happiness Scale Interval Study each response option is judged in the context for the other response options of the scale and this approach is illustrative of the Semantic Judgment of Word Value in Context Method.

(p60.1) The approach to scale transformation used in the Happiness Scale Interval Study differs essentially from that used in the Linear Stretch Method and the Semantic Judgement of Fixed Word Value Method, as the response options in the primary scale are not considered to be discrete points, but to be intervals each representing a part of the continuum from 0 to 10 where the perception of happiness can be found. This complies with the view of Kalmijn (2010), who considers happiness to be a latent continuous variable that underlies the survey questions being studied. Moreover, in the Happiness Scale Interval Study each response option is judged in the context for the other response options of the scale and this approach is illustrative of the Semantic Judgment of Word Value in Context Method.
