# materials The Obstacles to a Broader Application of Alkali-Activated Binders as a Sustainable Alternative-A Review

CorpusID: 258195201 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50e6e2f440fa38efdc67b2e320618283a11b3677](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50e6e2f440fa38efdc67b2e320618283a11b3677)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s1) Obstacles Related to Technical Performance
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) The factors influencing the synthesis of AABs are the composition, fineness, quantity, and source of the precursor material; the type and composition of the AA employed; the quantity of free water used; and the type and duration of curing. These aspects affect both the fresh and hardened properties of AABs as well as their long-term performance. Various studies have investigated the effect of the chemical composition of AABs' ingredients on their material properties. For instance, the mechanical properties of metakaolin (MK)based geopolymers have been investigated with respect to the effect of Si/Al, Al/M (M is an alkali cation), and H 2 O/Na 2 O. In a study conducted by Lahoti et al., the Si/Al ratio was the most significant factor influencing compressive strength, followed by the Al/Na ratio [139]. On the other hand, the calcium content of ground-granulated-blast-furnace-slag (GGBFS)-based AABs seems to influence its mechanical properties, wherein excessive calcium content can confer an adverse effect [140]. Furthermore, control over the fresh properties is difficult, which is especially important because of the scarce availability of suitable admixtures. Notably, an excessive amount of water present in the mix of AABs decreases their strength because it is not essential in chemical reactions, unlike cement hydration [9]. It is mostly physically bonded and tends to increase the porosity of alkaliactivated material (AAM). It may also negatively influence mechanical and durability properties [141].
## (s2) Precursors
Number of References: 22

(p2.0) As mentioned above, one of the largest concerns in this field is insufficient uniformity in the composition of the precursor materials and hence its impact on the resulting AABs [9]. It has been recognised that AABs are highly sensitive to the chemical composition of the precursor, which varies based on the source material ( Figure 1a). One of the most important factors for producing a stable AAB is the use of highly amorphous precursors possessing adequate reactive glassy content. Additionally, its water demand should be relatively low, and it should release easily [140]. Figure 2 shows the strength ratio results representing a ratio of the compressive strength of the generated AAM and OPC-based material with respect to the specific precursor type used (i.e., cement paste, mortar, or concrete). The colour-and symbol-coding follows the scheme used in Figure 1a for the respective precursors. Each precursor type was assigned a code, X-P, where X corresponds to an abbreviation of the respective raw material (see Table 1) and P stands for precursor (another code, X-A, will be discussed in the next section). The data presented in Figure 2 demonstrate results obtained for mortar [28,81], concrete [55,69], and paste specimens [130]. Only papers referencing an OPC-based material are presented. For the most part, a combination of sodium silicate (SS) and sodium hydroxide (SH) was used as an activator, with varied concentrations and combinations (with some exceptions regarding the use of alternative AAs [28]). Few of the considered studies investigated AAMs' performance using heat curing [55,81]. These discrepancies are not comprehensively discussed herein since solely the possible variability of the final compressive strength results based on the type of precursor used is evaluated in this study. The wide range of strength ratio results shows the AAMs' mechanical-performance-related variability based on the type of precursor used. The strength ratio values ranged from about 0.2 to 3.6, where the lowest value (about 0.2) corresponded to a mix made with waste brick powder (WBP) as a part of the precursor, while the highest value (about 3.6) was associated with incorporating GGBFS into the precursor.  Figure 2 shows the strength ratio results representing a ratio of the compressive strength of the generated AAM and OPC-based material with respect to the specific precursor type used (i.e., cement paste, mortar, or concrete). The colour-and symbol-coding follows the scheme used in Figure 1a for the respective precursors. Each precursor type was assigned a code, X-P, where X corresponds to an abbreviation of the respective raw material (see Table 1) and P stands for precursor (another code, X-A, will be discussed in the next section). The data presented in Figure 2 demonstrate results obtained for mortar [28,81], concrete [55,69], and paste specimens [130]. Only papers referencing an OPCbased material are presented. For the most part, a combination of sodium silicate (SS) and sodium hydroxide (SH) was used as an activator, with varied concentrations and combinations (with some exceptions regarding the use of alternative AAs [28]). Few of the considered studies investigated AAMs' performance using heat curing [55,81]. These discrepancies are not comprehensively discussed herein since solely the possible variability of the final compressive strength results based on the type of precursor used is evaluated in this study. The wide range of strength ratio results shows the AAMs' mechanical-performance-related variability based on the type of precursor used. The strength ratio values ranged from about 0.2 to 3.6, where the lowest value (about 0.2) corresponded to a mix made with waste brick powder (WBP) as a part of the precursor, while the highest value (about 3.6) was associated with incorporating GGBFS into the precursor. The reactivity of the precursors used to date cannot be simply based on their broad typologies. Silica and alumina from the source materials are among the most influential factors with respect to the material properties of AAB. Another oxide that significantly contributes to the reaction kinetics of AAB materials is that formed with calcium. It has The reactivity of the precursors used to date cannot be simply based on their broad typologies. Silica and alumina from the source materials are among the most influential factors with respect to the material properties of AAB. Another oxide that significantly contributes to the reaction kinetics of AAB materials is that formed with calcium. It has been demonstrated that the workability of AAMs is reduced when a low-calcium precursor (e.g., fly ash) is partially/fully replaced by a high-calcium precursor (e.g., GGBFS). In general, the increase in the amount of calcium increases the rate of hydration (which is the opposite chemical process to polymerisation) while also consuming water. Due to these two effects, the viscosity can be increased, while the setting time can be decreased of the resulting AAM. Furthermore, Xie et al. [141] defined a threshold value for the content of CaO in AABs of 8%. When this value is surpassed, the effect of hydrates from the reactions involving CaO on the compressive strength of alkali-activated concrete (AAC) is more pronounced. In contrast, when the content of CaO is lower than 8%, the mechanical strength of the AAB is mainly contributed by the geopolymeric products (from alumina, silica and iron (III) oxide) [141].

(p2.1) Moreover, heat curing is usually applied to low-calcium systems because of the slow polymerisation process, which is also one of the major disadvantages of utilising this kind of AAC cast in situ. However, when GGBFS is considered, air-dry curing can be applied [4]. Moreover, mixing low-calcium fly ash (FA) and high-calcium GGBFS has been recognized as a solution that can result in air-dry curing due to the increased composition of calcium in the precursor. Finally, iron (III) oxide has been shown to inhibit C-A-S-H formation in hydrated high-calcium AAMs. The material properties of low-calcium AABs can be improved by replacing Al 3+ with Fe 3+ in the product's octahedral sites [141]. Hence, four oxides, namely, CaO, SiO 2 , Al 2 O 3 , and Fe 2 O 3 , can be recognised as the most influential for the material properties of AABs when the precursor is considered.
## (s3) Alkali Activators
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) The AAs suitable for AABs could be any sufficiently water-soluble compound whose use results in a high pH and that is able to provide alkali/alkali earth cations (e.g., alkalihydroxides/sulfates/carbonates/silicates) [3]. The adverse effects of the high quantity of AAs on the cost of production, strength gain, and performance in aggressive environmental conditions has been acknowledged [9]. Some of the most used AAs are SH and SS. Generally, SS results in a more compact and denser material with higher mechanical strength than SH. It also offers greater advantages regarding handling and usage compared to aqueous activators [8]. In AABs' systems, alkali hydroxides (e.g., SH) provide OH − , and, based on the interdiffusion and ion exchange of solutes and aluminosilicate network modifier cations (e.g., Ca 2+ ) of the precursors, the dissolution of the precursor is promoted. The dissolution of most of the precursors increases as a function of an increasing alkali hydroxide concentration. However, a considerable concentration of the alkali hydroxide in AABs can result in efflorescence problems. On the other hand, when silicate-based activators are used, the precursors' activation mechanism is similar to hydroxide-based activators with additional soluble silicate available. Moreover, carbonates, as activators, could aid CO 2 binding in the presence of calcium in the system. Adding alkali sulphates as activators can be a viable solution for durability enhancement, wherein chloride binding properties can be introduced. Nevertheless, alkali carbonates and sulphates are unsuitable for low-calcium precursors (e.g., MK) due to the relatively low pH value introduced in the mix. In comparison, alkali sulphates result in a substantially lower heat of hydration than most other activators, which could be beneficial for application to AABs. Finally, aluminate-based activators constitute another type of AA, which offer the benefit of dissolved alumina [3].

(p3.1) However, dual AAs of SH and SS have been recognised as highly efficient for use in AABs containing both low and high calcium content. In such a system, SH is the main activator providing hydroxide anions (OH − ), whereas SS acts as an auxiliary activator providing soluble silica. Moreover, the effect of AAs on the final and initial setting times has been recognised, where at a higher dosage of SS, the increased SS/SH ratio causes an accelerated rate of dissolution of the precursor, thereby altering reaction kinetics and the condensation process. This leads to fast initial and final setting times. However, the SS/SH ratio or the concentration of SH causing an increase in the overall liquid content to binder ratio substantially delays setting. The effect of the usage of other types of activators on the material properties of AAMs is discussed extensively in a study by Xie et al. [141], where the reader can find more detailed information. The findings of Xie et al. (which did not cover studies on alternative activators) suggest that the contribution of a structure-forming element to the strength of concrete depends on the solubility of the auxiliary and basicity of the main activator [141].
## (s10) Obstacles Related to Economic Performance
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) Economic performance is the least-studied aspect and, if investigated, has usually been conducted with environmental performance studies. According to Figure 9, we cannot generate straightforward conclusions regarding the economic performance of AAMs. This shows the complexity of the issue. Similar to LCA, the specification of the system boundary and the functional unit for LCC varied between studies (e.g., either m 3 or t). In addition, it is difficult to compare the results because of the various currencies used depending on the region in which the studies were performed. Hence, identifying the main factors impacting such cost data of AAMs is essential. Key challenges regarding LCC include expensive feedstocks and transportation costs connected to their acquisition. Benefits could be generated by carefully choosing the sources of raw materials [10]. Hence, the local availability of primary and secondary raw materials will positively impact the total cost of AAMs [8]. Nguyen et al. investigated costs for alternative cementitious binders such as OPC, SC, FAC, MKG, and HLAASC (check Section 3.3 for a detailed explanation of mixes). It was shown that all alternatives to OPC presented environmental advantages, but none of them could overcome the cost obstacle [85]. However, including LCC in future studies on AABs is essential since their application in the related industry would be hindered by their high cost. Optimisation should be achieved by considering the critical challenging factors of certain mixes and addressing them to generate a competitively priced product without compromising its technical and environmental performance. 
## (s13) Alkali Activators
Number of References: 16

(p13.0) In most of the studies concerning the LCC of AAMs, the type of AA used has been recognised as one of the most influential factors [8,28,60,85,114,146]. Regarding the cradleto-gate LCC of MK-based geopolymers, its cost was higher than that of OPC. SS was identified as one of the main contributors [85]. Moreover, in a study by Fernando et al., a 48% increment was observed for AACs compared to OPC concrete, which was mainly affected by the high cost of AAs. In this study, AAs accounted for around 74% of the total cost of AAC [60]. On the other hand, in the studies that focused on alternative activators, a decrease in the total cost of AABs was visible [8,28,114,146]. Abdulkareem et al. identified that by producing waste-derived AAMs (i.e., with alternative activators, such as WGP and RHA), a range of 9-19% cost savings could be achieved compared to the conventional counterpart [8]. When AAMs were compared to OPC, the use of WGP as a partial activator could lead to a 23% reduction in cost [146]. Tong et al. showed that RHA-derived waterglass could lead to an almost 55% reduction in cost for the activation of AAC. Based on volume, these savings would be equal to about 22% per m 3 [114]. Moreover, in a cost analysis on six different AAMs, 14% savings were achieved compared to OPC mortar, where a combination of RM and desulphurisation gypsum (DG) was used as an activator [28]. Using alternative sources was found to generate positive outcomes, even though AAs are among the primary causes of the high costs of AAMs.
## (s14) Regional Context
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) The transportation costs for the raw materials used in AABs are especially important for relatively isolated regions such as Australia. McLellan et al. [10] examined the LCC of OPC and geopolymer pastes based on Australian practices. The assessment covered the life-cycle stages up to the production of the binder. It was recognised that the critical factors influencing the costs of geopolymers are the source location, the energy source, and the transportation mode. When only production was considered, geopolymers were acknowledged as potentially competitive in terms of cost. However, when transportation was included in the assessment, a negative impact was observed due to long distances. Moreover, the influence of transport on cost was more significant for the geopolymer paste than the OPC paste. Compared to OPC, the difference ranged from a 7% reduction to a 39% increase for the geopolymer paste. Through optimising transport, further cost reductions could be afforded [10]. On the other hand, in a study based on US data, the use of MK-based AAB resulted in a fivefold higher cost than OPC. The scarcity of the mineral in the USA and supply-related costs were recognised as the main contributors to such a trend. Therefore, transportation was a key contributor to the cost for all investigated types of binders, corresponding to increases of up to 65% [85]. The overall interconnectivity of the main contributors to AABs' economic performance could also be related to the diagram shown in Figure 8. Hence, the utilisation of locally available raw materials for producing AABs would also lead to lower costs.
