# Comprehensive overview of COVID-19-related respiratory failure: focus on cellular interactions

CorpusID: 255356090 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9676804f7561f9ac517c69c3213e61bf3120afd4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9676804f7561f9ac517c69c3213e61bf3120afd4)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s2) Endothelial cells
Number of References: 24

(p2.0) As shown in Fig. 2, endothelial cells ACE2 [20], transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) [21], sialic acid receptors (a surface adhesion molecule) [22], extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (CD147, or basigin), TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, and TLR9 [23], and NRP1 [24] are all reportedly implicated in SARS-CoV-2 entry. Moreover, it is reported that cathepsin B and L are also essential entry factors in COVID-19. L-SIGN is reportedly expressed in type II human alveolar cells, and pulmonary endothelial cells also mediate SARS-CoV-2 entry [67].

(p2.1) When the SARS-CoV-2 enters endothelial cells, it adversely affects these cells. Moreover, endothelial cells can be affected by molecules produced by other cells fighting against the virus. These molecules can bind to their receptors expressed on the endothelial cell surface. Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is one molecule released by a variety of cell types and tissues, but the main source of PAF is leukocytes. PAF mediates the inflammation process. Platelet-activating factor receptor (PAFR) is thought to be formed on the cytoplasmic or nuclear membrane of various cells, in particular endothelial cells, platelets, and leukocytes. The PAF/PAFR complex in endothelial cells may induce increased vascular permeability, hypotension, and expression of cytokines such as CXCL1, interleukin 6 (IL6), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), and IFN-γ [68,69].
## (s3) Platelets
Number of References: 12

(p3.0) Studies have shown that coagulopathy is a common symptom in patients with severe COVID-19. This could be a result of excessive inflammation. Coagulopathy is characterized by dysregulated coagulation parameters, lower platelet count, increased microthrombi, elevated D-dimer, etc. It is reported that patients with COVID-19 who have lower platelet counts and disseminated intravascular coagulation have a poor prognosis and increased mortality [27,28]. In many viral infections, platelets can be activated, and are involved in inflammation and thrombotic processes. The low platelet level in some patients with COVID-19 could be due to increased consumption and thrombus formation by massively activated platelets [98,99].
## (s6) Role of DAMPs in SARS CoV-2-induced respiratory failure
Number of References: 90

(p6.0) Widespread endothelial dysfunction caused by direct viral infection or immune response results in the secretion of numerous cytokines and DAMPs. DAMPs can directly induce NETosis following influenza virus infection [150,151]. NETs are made up of DNA, histones, and enzymes such as serine proteases [106,107]. The released histones can activate pro-factor VII activating protease (pro-FSAP) to produce factor VII activating protease (FSAP). FSAP contributes to the coagulation and fibrinolysis cascades, by indirectly mediating plasminogen activation. Interestingly FSAP can also degrade histones [152].

(p6.1) NETs can also stimulate FXII activation, and FXIIa is able to directly convert prothrombin to thrombin, which is a key factor in coagulation. Thrombin causes fibrinogen conversion to fibrin, which is amplified by factor XIII activation. Then, the soluble fibrin monomers interact with each other to produce a cross-linked network of long fibrin threads that trap the platelets. Then a spongy mass builds up, hardens, and contracts to form the final blood clot. The coagulation cascade is important both in normal circulatory conditions and in pathological reactions [152,153]. Moreover, NET serine proteases and histones may also play a role in platelet activation [106,154,155]. 

(p6.2) Widespread endothelial dysfunction caused by direct viral infection or immune response results in the secretion of numerous cytokines and DAMPs. DAMPs can directly induce NETosis following influenza virus infection [150,151]. NETs are made up of DNA, histones, and enzymes such as serine proteases [106,107]. The released histones can activate pro-factor VII activating protease (pro-FSAP) to produce factor VII activating protease (FSAP). FSAP contributes to the coagulation and fibrinolysis cascades, by indirectly mediating plasminogen activation. Interestingly FSAP can also degrade histones [152].

(p6.3) NETs can also stimulate FXII activation, and FXIIa is able to directly convert prothrombin to thrombin, which is a key factor in coagulation. Thrombin causes fibrinogen conversion to fibrin, which is amplified by factor XIII activation. Then, the soluble fibrin monomers interact with each other to produce a cross-linked network of long fibrin threads that trap the platelets. Then a spongy mass builds up, hardens, and contracts to form the final blood clot. The coagulation cascade is important both in normal circulatory conditions and in pathological reactions [152,153]. Moreover, NET serine proteases and histones may also play a role in platelet activation [106,154,155]. 

(p6.4) Widespread endothelial dysfunction caused by direct viral infection or immune response results in the secretion of numerous cytokines and DAMPs. DAMPs can directly induce NETosis following influenza virus infection [150,151]. NETs are made up of DNA, histones, and enzymes such as serine proteases [106,107]. The released histones can activate pro-factor VII activating protease (pro-FSAP) to produce factor VII activating protease (FSAP). FSAP contributes to the coagulation and fibrinolysis cascades, by indirectly mediating plasminogen activation. Interestingly FSAP can also degrade histones [152].

(p6.5) NETs can also stimulate FXII activation, and FXIIa is able to directly convert prothrombin to thrombin, which is a key factor in coagulation. Thrombin causes fibrinogen conversion to fibrin, which is amplified by factor XIII activation. Then, the soluble fibrin monomers interact with each other to produce a cross-linked network of long fibrin threads that trap the platelets. Then a spongy mass builds up, hardens, and contracts to form the final blood clot. The coagulation cascade is important both in normal circulatory conditions and in pathological reactions [152,153]. Moreover, NET serine proteases and histones may also play a role in platelet activation [106,154,155]. 
## (s7) The role of von Willebrand factor and granulocyte subsets in SARS CoV-2-induced respiratory failure
Number of References: 45

(p7.0) Von Willebrand factor (vWF) is another factor involved in SARS-CoV-2 coagulopathy. It is secreted by endothelial cells and megakaryocytes. Increased vWF antigen concentrations in plasma have been measured in COVID-19 infections [155,156]. Reportedly, the increased concentration of vWF enhanced the adhesion of platelets onto the collagen surface, and increased the aggregation of platelets. vWF could be a therapeutic target in patients with thrombocytopenia [157]. On the basis of some studies, basophil and eosinophil counts, as well as granulocyte subsets, are altered in severe COVID-19 infection. These cells play a pivotal role in the antiviral response and immunopathology in COVID-19. Basophils are decreased during the acute phase, while the numbers recover during the COVID-19 recovery period. Basophils can enhance B-cell responses during the humoral immune response triggered by IL-4 or IL-6 production. Moreover, it has been shown that basophil count is significantly correlated with the concentration of IgG antibodies against SARS CoV-2 [157]. However, the level of IL-6 is inversely correlated with antibody production [158]. It was also reported that basophils can secrete IL-13 following activation, and IL-13 receptors are expressed on mature human B cells, so basophils may contribute to humoral immune responses and inflammatory allergic reactions [159].

(p7.1) Notch signaling is a juxtacrine signaling pathway, mediated by receptor-ligand interactions between neighboring cells. The notch signaling pathway is dysregulated in many pathological conditions, especially inflammation [160][161][162]. In experimental animal models, the pharmacological blocking of notch signaling has been reported to improve inflammatory conditions [163]. In vitro, it was shown that cytokines can affect notch signaling in basophils, and inhibition of this signaling pathway reduced basophil cytokine production. It was also reported that the notch signaling pathway is involved in the expression of cytokine genes in activated macrophages during inflammation [164]. Notch signaling is also important for peripheral T-cell differentiation and activation [165].

(p7.2) The overexpression of Jagged (a notch ligand) in professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs) has been reported [166]. Although there is not enough evidence for basophils to function as antigen-presenting cells, it is known that B cells are APCs, and can activate T cells [167]. Moreover, basophils can enhance B-cell responses [158].
## (s16) Endothelial cells
Number of References: 24

(p16.0) As shown in Fig. 2, endothelial cells ACE2 [20], transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) [21], sialic acid receptors (a surface adhesion molecule) [22], extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (CD147, or basigin), TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, and TLR9 [23], and NRP1 [24] are all reportedly implicated in SARS-CoV-2 entry. Moreover, it is reported that cathepsin B and L are also essential entry factors in COVID-19. L-SIGN is reportedly expressed in type II human alveolar cells, and pulmonary endothelial cells also mediate SARS-CoV-2 entry [67].

(p16.1) When the SARS-CoV-2 enters endothelial cells, it adversely affects these cells. Moreover, endothelial cells can be affected by molecules produced by other cells fighting against the virus. These molecules can bind to their receptors expressed on the endothelial cell surface. Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is one molecule released by a variety of cell types and tissues, but the main source of PAF is leukocytes. PAF mediates the inflammation process. Platelet-activating factor receptor (PAFR) is thought to be formed on the cytoplasmic or nuclear membrane of various cells, in particular endothelial cells, platelets, and leukocytes. The PAF/PAFR complex in endothelial cells may induce increased vascular permeability, hypotension, and expression of cytokines such as CXCL1, interleukin 6 (IL6), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), and IFN-γ [68,69].
## (s17) Platelets
Number of References: 12

(p17.0) Studies have shown that coagulopathy is a common symptom in patients with severe COVID-19. This could be a result of excessive inflammation. Coagulopathy is characterized by dysregulated coagulation parameters, lower platelet count, increased microthrombi, elevated D-dimer, etc. It is reported that patients with COVID-19 who have lower platelet counts and disseminated intravascular coagulation have a poor prognosis and increased mortality [27,28]. In many viral infections, platelets can be activated, and are involved in inflammation and thrombotic processes. The low platelet level in some patients with COVID-19 could be due to increased consumption and thrombus formation by massively activated platelets [98,99].
## (s20) Role of DAMPs in SARS CoV-2-induced respiratory failure
Number of References: 90

(p20.0) Widespread endothelial dysfunction caused by direct viral infection or immune response results in the secretion of numerous cytokines and DAMPs. DAMPs can directly induce NETosis following influenza virus infection [150,151]. NETs are made up of DNA, histones, and enzymes such as serine proteases [106,107]. The released histones can activate pro-factor VII activating protease (pro-FSAP) to produce factor VII activating protease (FSAP). FSAP contributes to the coagulation and fibrinolysis cascades, by indirectly mediating plasminogen activation. Interestingly FSAP can also degrade histones [152].

(p20.1) NETs can also stimulate FXII activation, and FXIIa is able to directly convert prothrombin to thrombin, which is a key factor in coagulation. Thrombin causes fibrinogen conversion to fibrin, which is amplified by factor XIII activation. Then, the soluble fibrin monomers interact with each other to produce a cross-linked network of long fibrin threads that trap the platelets. Then a spongy mass builds up, hardens, and contracts to form the final blood clot. The coagulation cascade is important both in normal circulatory conditions and in pathological reactions [152,153]. Moreover, NET serine proteases and histones may also play a role in platelet activation [106,154,155]. 

(p20.2) Widespread endothelial dysfunction caused by direct viral infection or immune response results in the secretion of numerous cytokines and DAMPs. DAMPs can directly induce NETosis following influenza virus infection [150,151]. NETs are made up of DNA, histones, and enzymes such as serine proteases [106,107]. The released histones can activate pro-factor VII activating protease (pro-FSAP) to produce factor VII activating protease (FSAP). FSAP contributes to the coagulation and fibrinolysis cascades, by indirectly mediating plasminogen activation. Interestingly FSAP can also degrade histones [152].

(p20.3) NETs can also stimulate FXII activation, and FXIIa is able to directly convert prothrombin to thrombin, which is a key factor in coagulation. Thrombin causes fibrinogen conversion to fibrin, which is amplified by factor XIII activation. Then, the soluble fibrin monomers interact with each other to produce a cross-linked network of long fibrin threads that trap the platelets. Then a spongy mass builds up, hardens, and contracts to form the final blood clot. The coagulation cascade is important both in normal circulatory conditions and in pathological reactions [152,153]. Moreover, NET serine proteases and histones may also play a role in platelet activation [106,154,155]. 

(p20.4) Widespread endothelial dysfunction caused by direct viral infection or immune response results in the secretion of numerous cytokines and DAMPs. DAMPs can directly induce NETosis following influenza virus infection [150,151]. NETs are made up of DNA, histones, and enzymes such as serine proteases [106,107]. The released histones can activate pro-factor VII activating protease (pro-FSAP) to produce factor VII activating protease (FSAP). FSAP contributes to the coagulation and fibrinolysis cascades, by indirectly mediating plasminogen activation. Interestingly FSAP can also degrade histones [152].

(p20.5) NETs can also stimulate FXII activation, and FXIIa is able to directly convert prothrombin to thrombin, which is a key factor in coagulation. Thrombin causes fibrinogen conversion to fibrin, which is amplified by factor XIII activation. Then, the soluble fibrin monomers interact with each other to produce a cross-linked network of long fibrin threads that trap the platelets. Then a spongy mass builds up, hardens, and contracts to form the final blood clot. The coagulation cascade is important both in normal circulatory conditions and in pathological reactions [152,153]. Moreover, NET serine proteases and histones may also play a role in platelet activation [106,154,155]. 
## (s21) The role of von Willebrand factor and granulocyte subsets in SARS CoV-2-induced respiratory failure
Number of References: 45

(p21.0) Von Willebrand factor (vWF) is another factor involved in SARS-CoV-2 coagulopathy. It is secreted by endothelial cells and megakaryocytes. Increased vWF antigen concentrations in plasma have been measured in COVID-19 infections [155,156]. Reportedly, the increased concentration of vWF enhanced the adhesion of platelets onto the collagen surface, and increased the aggregation of platelets. vWF could be a therapeutic target in patients with thrombocytopenia [157]. On the basis of some studies, basophil and eosinophil counts, as well as granulocyte subsets, are altered in severe COVID-19 infection. These cells play a pivotal role in the antiviral response and immunopathology in COVID-19. Basophils are decreased during the acute phase, while the numbers recover during the COVID-19 recovery period. Basophils can enhance B-cell responses during the humoral immune response triggered by IL-4 or IL-6 production. Moreover, it has been shown that basophil count is significantly correlated with the concentration of IgG antibodies against SARS CoV-2 [157]. However, the level of IL-6 is inversely correlated with antibody production [158]. It was also reported that basophils can secrete IL-13 following activation, and IL-13 receptors are expressed on mature human B cells, so basophils may contribute to humoral immune responses and inflammatory allergic reactions [159].

(p21.1) Notch signaling is a juxtacrine signaling pathway, mediated by receptor-ligand interactions between neighboring cells. The notch signaling pathway is dysregulated in many pathological conditions, especially inflammation [160][161][162]. In experimental animal models, the pharmacological blocking of notch signaling has been reported to improve inflammatory conditions [163]. In vitro, it was shown that cytokines can affect notch signaling in basophils, and inhibition of this signaling pathway reduced basophil cytokine production. It was also reported that the notch signaling pathway is involved in the expression of cytokine genes in activated macrophages during inflammation [164]. Notch signaling is also important for peripheral T-cell differentiation and activation [165].

(p21.2) The overexpression of Jagged (a notch ligand) in professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs) has been reported [166]. Although there is not enough evidence for basophils to function as antigen-presenting cells, it is known that B cells are APCs, and can activate T cells [167]. Moreover, basophils can enhance B-cell responses [158].
## (s30) Endothelial cells
Number of References: 24

(p30.0) As shown in Fig. 2, endothelial cells ACE2 [20], transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) [21], sialic acid receptors (a surface adhesion molecule) [22], extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (CD147, or basigin), TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, and TLR9 [23], and NRP1 [24] are all reportedly implicated in SARS-CoV-2 entry. Moreover, it is reported that cathepsin B and L are also essential entry factors in COVID-19. L-SIGN is reportedly expressed in type II human alveolar cells, and pulmonary endothelial cells also mediate SARS-CoV-2 entry [67].

(p30.1) When the SARS-CoV-2 enters endothelial cells, it adversely affects these cells. Moreover, endothelial cells can be affected by molecules produced by other cells fighting against the virus. These molecules can bind to their receptors expressed on the endothelial cell surface. Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is one molecule released by a variety of cell types and tissues, but the main source of PAF is leukocytes. PAF mediates the inflammation process. Platelet-activating factor receptor (PAFR) is thought to be formed on the cytoplasmic or nuclear membrane of various cells, in particular endothelial cells, platelets, and leukocytes. The PAF/PAFR complex in endothelial cells may induce increased vascular permeability, hypotension, and expression of cytokines such as CXCL1, interleukin 6 (IL6), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), and IFN-γ [68,69].
## (s31) Platelets
Number of References: 12

(p31.0) Studies have shown that coagulopathy is a common symptom in patients with severe COVID-19. This could be a result of excessive inflammation. Coagulopathy is characterized by dysregulated coagulation parameters, lower platelet count, increased microthrombi, elevated D-dimer, etc. It is reported that patients with COVID-19 who have lower platelet counts and disseminated intravascular coagulation have a poor prognosis and increased mortality [27,28]. In many viral infections, platelets can be activated, and are involved in inflammation and thrombotic processes. The low platelet level in some patients with COVID-19 could be due to increased consumption and thrombus formation by massively activated platelets [98,99].
## (s34) Role of DAMPs in SARS CoV-2-induced respiratory failure
Number of References: 90

(p34.0) Widespread endothelial dysfunction caused by direct viral infection or immune response results in the secretion of numerous cytokines and DAMPs. DAMPs can directly induce NETosis following influenza virus infection [150,151]. NETs are made up of DNA, histones, and enzymes such as serine proteases [106,107]. The released histones can activate pro-factor VII activating protease (pro-FSAP) to produce factor VII activating protease (FSAP). FSAP contributes to the coagulation and fibrinolysis cascades, by indirectly mediating plasminogen activation. Interestingly FSAP can also degrade histones [152].

(p34.1) NETs can also stimulate FXII activation, and FXIIa is able to directly convert prothrombin to thrombin, which is a key factor in coagulation. Thrombin causes fibrinogen conversion to fibrin, which is amplified by factor XIII activation. Then, the soluble fibrin monomers interact with each other to produce a cross-linked network of long fibrin threads that trap the platelets. Then a spongy mass builds up, hardens, and contracts to form the final blood clot. The coagulation cascade is important both in normal circulatory conditions and in pathological reactions [152,153]. Moreover, NET serine proteases and histones may also play a role in platelet activation [106,154,155]. 

(p34.2) Widespread endothelial dysfunction caused by direct viral infection or immune response results in the secretion of numerous cytokines and DAMPs. DAMPs can directly induce NETosis following influenza virus infection [150,151]. NETs are made up of DNA, histones, and enzymes such as serine proteases [106,107]. The released histones can activate pro-factor VII activating protease (pro-FSAP) to produce factor VII activating protease (FSAP). FSAP contributes to the coagulation and fibrinolysis cascades, by indirectly mediating plasminogen activation. Interestingly FSAP can also degrade histones [152].

(p34.3) NETs can also stimulate FXII activation, and FXIIa is able to directly convert prothrombin to thrombin, which is a key factor in coagulation. Thrombin causes fibrinogen conversion to fibrin, which is amplified by factor XIII activation. Then, the soluble fibrin monomers interact with each other to produce a cross-linked network of long fibrin threads that trap the platelets. Then a spongy mass builds up, hardens, and contracts to form the final blood clot. The coagulation cascade is important both in normal circulatory conditions and in pathological reactions [152,153]. Moreover, NET serine proteases and histones may also play a role in platelet activation [106,154,155]. 

(p34.4) Widespread endothelial dysfunction caused by direct viral infection or immune response results in the secretion of numerous cytokines and DAMPs. DAMPs can directly induce NETosis following influenza virus infection [150,151]. NETs are made up of DNA, histones, and enzymes such as serine proteases [106,107]. The released histones can activate pro-factor VII activating protease (pro-FSAP) to produce factor VII activating protease (FSAP). FSAP contributes to the coagulation and fibrinolysis cascades, by indirectly mediating plasminogen activation. Interestingly FSAP can also degrade histones [152].

(p34.5) NETs can also stimulate FXII activation, and FXIIa is able to directly convert prothrombin to thrombin, which is a key factor in coagulation. Thrombin causes fibrinogen conversion to fibrin, which is amplified by factor XIII activation. Then, the soluble fibrin monomers interact with each other to produce a cross-linked network of long fibrin threads that trap the platelets. Then a spongy mass builds up, hardens, and contracts to form the final blood clot. The coagulation cascade is important both in normal circulatory conditions and in pathological reactions [152,153]. Moreover, NET serine proteases and histones may also play a role in platelet activation [106,154,155]. 
## (s35) The role of von Willebrand factor and granulocyte subsets in SARS CoV-2-induced respiratory failure
Number of References: 45

(p35.0) Von Willebrand factor (vWF) is another factor involved in SARS-CoV-2 coagulopathy. It is secreted by endothelial cells and megakaryocytes. Increased vWF antigen concentrations in plasma have been measured in COVID-19 infections [155,156]. Reportedly, the increased concentration of vWF enhanced the adhesion of platelets onto the collagen surface, and increased the aggregation of platelets. vWF could be a therapeutic target in patients with thrombocytopenia [157]. On the basis of some studies, basophil and eosinophil counts, as well as granulocyte subsets, are altered in severe COVID-19 infection. These cells play a pivotal role in the antiviral response and immunopathology in COVID-19. Basophils are decreased during the acute phase, while the numbers recover during the COVID-19 recovery period. Basophils can enhance B-cell responses during the humoral immune response triggered by IL-4 or IL-6 production. Moreover, it has been shown that basophil count is significantly correlated with the concentration of IgG antibodies against SARS CoV-2 [157]. However, the level of IL-6 is inversely correlated with antibody production [158]. It was also reported that basophils can secrete IL-13 following activation, and IL-13 receptors are expressed on mature human B cells, so basophils may contribute to humoral immune responses and inflammatory allergic reactions [159].

(p35.1) Notch signaling is a juxtacrine signaling pathway, mediated by receptor-ligand interactions between neighboring cells. The notch signaling pathway is dysregulated in many pathological conditions, especially inflammation [160][161][162]. In experimental animal models, the pharmacological blocking of notch signaling has been reported to improve inflammatory conditions [163]. In vitro, it was shown that cytokines can affect notch signaling in basophils, and inhibition of this signaling pathway reduced basophil cytokine production. It was also reported that the notch signaling pathway is involved in the expression of cytokine genes in activated macrophages during inflammation [164]. Notch signaling is also important for peripheral T-cell differentiation and activation [165].

(p35.2) The overexpression of Jagged (a notch ligand) in professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs) has been reported [166]. Although there is not enough evidence for basophils to function as antigen-presenting cells, it is known that B cells are APCs, and can activate T cells [167]. Moreover, basophils can enhance B-cell responses [158].
