# Medicine ® Experience of CT diagnosis and management of primary renal Ewing's sarcoma A retrospective analysis of 6 cases and a literature review

CorpusID: 255226003 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/752dea73437954466960b672cb76cb9dc40580f5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/752dea73437954466960b672cb76cb9dc40580f5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s9) Discussion
Number of References: 23

(p9.0) It is known from the literature that EWs/PNET is most common in bone, trunk, pelvis, retroperitoneum, soft tissue parts of limbs and the central nervous system while less common in the kidney. [9] In addition to the 6 rEWs cases we are studying,  to our knowledge, 331 cases of rEWs have been reported in the published literature, and we compared and integrated the data from the current study with published data. The pathogenesis of rEWs is relatively complex, and some literature suggested that it may be related to the chromosomal translocation of EWSR1, but it has not been confirmed yet. [10,11] The clinical manifestations of rEWs are similar to other renal malignant tumors, including lumbago or abdominal pain, hematuria and fever, and nonspecific manifestations such as abdominal mass and weight loss as the disease progresses, in addition, several cases of rEWs were reported in the literature with acute hypertension as the first symptom, which may be related to the secretion of endocrine active substances by tumor. [12][13][14][15] Imaging examination plays an important role in the detection of renal space-occupying lesions, especially CT, which can clearly show the origin, tumor morphology, size and invasion scope of lesions. From the CT data of our present study and literature published, it can be known that the CT signs of rEWs  has a certain relative specificity: it is usually presented as a single, large, fuzzy boundary and irregular soft tissue mass in the kidney. EWs/PNET is highly invasive and prone to necrosis, cystic degeneration, and intratumoral bleeding, resulting in inhomogeneous density. In the present study and literature published, only several cases had relatively uniform lesion density. The density of the solid portion of the mass is equal to or slightly less than that of the renal parenchyma, the density of necrotic and cystic components is low. Calcification occurred in tumor tissues of a small proportion of rEWs patients. Because of the aggressiveness of the tumor, 1 to 3rd of patients have an inferior vena cava or renal vein thrombosis at diagnosis. The enhancement degree of the substantive part of rEWs in dynamic enhanced scanning was varied, most of which presented mild or moderate enhancement at the renal cortical phase, and moderate or evident enhancement at the renal parenchymal phase. Some studies [16,17] believed that multiple irregular septum-like structure and delayed enhancement in lesions are characteristic manifestations of rEWs and can be used to differentiate from other renal tumors. In younger patients, rEWs needs to be differentiated from nephroblastoma, the most common tumor in children. The CT image of the latter also shows a large mass with equal or slightly lower density, necrosis, cystic change and hemorrhage are also common, and calcification can be seen in some lesions (as sown in Fig. 4A, B). On contrast-enhanced scans, Wilms tumors almost always show heterogeneous enhancement. [18] Moreover, rEWs also need to be differentiated from renal neuroblastoma, another rare tumor of the kidney. A typical renal neuroblastoma is a huge lobulated soft tissue mass, which is easy to surround and bury renal blood vessels. It is also prone to necrosis, cystic degeneration, and hemorrhage, but it has a high probability of calcification, which usually presents as sandy or massive calcification. [19] On contrast-enhanced scans, renal neuroblastoma does not show "septum-like" enhancement in rEWs, which is helpful for its identification (as sown in Fig. 4C, D). Renal clear cell carcinoma (RCC) is less common in childhood, and tumors are usually smaller in greatest dimension than sarcomas. Most RCC were significantly enhanced at the cortical phase of contrast-enhanced CT, and the parenchymal phase and delayed scanning of the lesion rapidly reduce the enhancement degree, presenting a typical "fast in and out," while the enhancement degree of rEWs in cortical and parenchymal phase was far lower than that of RCC. [20] At present, the diagnosis rEWs is mainly based on pathology and immunohistochemistry. Under the microscope, the tumor is mainly composed of primitive small round cells with dense staining and relatively consistent morphology, which is easy to see mitotic image. Immunohistochemistry showed that tumor cells consistently and diffusely expressed CD99, and expressed Vimentin, Syn and NSE to varying degrees, while CgA a.nd S-100 were often negative. [21,22] There is no unified treatment guideline for rEWs, and the treatment principles of other renal malignancies or osseous EWs are mainly referred to at present. [23] Radical nephrectomy (RN) is the main treatment method for rEWs, and adjuvant therapy such as chemotherapy and radiotherapy can be decided after surgery according to the patient's condition. [24][25][26] A study suggested that the recurrence rate after RN is still high even if the tumor does not metastasize at the early stage, and chemotherapy adjuvant therapy should still be routinely performed. [27] Of our enrolled patients (both our present study and literature published), 85.6% (237 of 277 patients) underwent RN or RN combined with chemotherapy/radiotherapy, and only 40 patients just received chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy due to multiple distant metastases. The commonly used chemotherapy drugs of EWs/PENT include vincristine, cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin, etc, which can be changed or not according to the patient's tolerance. [28][29][30] In a study by Gaetano Bacci et al, the effect of radiotherapy on EWs is not clear and should be considered only in terminal patients or when perirenal fascia is Figure 4. A 9-year-old girl with pathologically confirmed Wilms tumor, and CT showed a huge soft tissue mass in the left retroperitoneum with multiple calcifications (A, black arrows). Contrast-enhanced scans showed that the mass was heterogeneously enhanced, with low-density and non-enhancing necrotic areas (B, black arrows). A 5-year-old male patient with pathologically confirmed renal neuroblastoma, and CT showed a huge, superficially foliated, iso-softtissue density mass in the left kidney, and a large low-density cystic area was seen in the left kidney (C, black arrows). Contrast-enhanced scan showed mild enhancement of the lesion, and the mass grew around the abdominal aorta (D, black arrow) and left renal artery (white arrow). CT = computed tomography. www.md-journal.com involved. [31] According to the data in Table 2 and the survival curve of Figure 2, the gender, age, tumor location and whether the patient has abdominal pain, hematuria, abdominal mass or fever have no statistical significance for the prognosis of the patient. However, tumor size, weight loss as the first clinical symptom, metastasis, tumor thrombosis, and radical nephrectomy received for patients were independent prognostic factors. To be specific, patients with tumors with a maximum diameter of more than 10 cm, with symptoms of weight loss at the time of visit, and with tumor thrombosis, metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis, and with failure to undergo radical nephrectomy had a lower average survival rate. Therefore, early accurate diagnosis is of great significance for the prognosis of patients.
