# R E V I E W Open Access Fluoroacetate in plants -a review of its distribution, toxicity to livestock and microbial detoxification

CorpusID: 256337222 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/05277dc9878444e7f7491948aa77b80d46bc807f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/05277dc9878444e7f7491948aa77b80d46bc807f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Biology

## (s0) Background
Number of References: 6

(p0.0) Sodium monofluoroacetate (referred to as fluoroacetate hereafter), has the chemical formula FCH 2 COO − Na + , and is a highly toxic compound primarily used as a pesticide known commercially as Compound 1080. Despite having a strong carbon-fluorine bond (one of the strongest bonds in nature), fluoroacetate appears to be rather labile in the environment being readily degraded by different microorganisms [1] or anabolised by higher organisms. This is in contrast to polyfluorinated compounds (such as Teflon) which are very recalcitrant and can persist in the environment for many years [2]. It is well suited as a pesticide because it is virtually tasteless and odourless, which enables it to be easily disguised within bait material targeted towards a specific pest species [3]. However, due to its non-specific poisoning of other animals and accidental human ingestion, this pesticide is currently used under strict control by governments around the world.
## (s5) Microbial aerobic degradation
Number of References: 108

(p5.0) Contrary to the animal studies on fluoroacetate detoxification, microbial degradation of fluoroacetate has been extensively studied. Moreover, the mechanism for aerobic fluoroacetate degradation is well characterised and documented [59][60][61][62][63][64]. Microorganisms from the soil have been identified with ability to aerobically degrade fluoroacetate. The bacterial communities involved in fluoroacetate degradation vary significantly depending on the areas studied. In Western Australia, species of Bacillus, Pseudomonas, Aspergillus, Penicillium and Streptomyces were isolated from soil in a of temperate climate [64], while Burkholderiaceae, Ancylobacter sp., Paenibacillus sp., Staphylococcus sp. and Stenotrophomonas sp. were isolated from the soil of Brazilian areas where the fluoroacetate-containing plants Mascagnia rigida and Palicourea aenofusca are found [65].

(p5.1) Microorganisms have also been isolated from bait containing the 1080 poison (fluoroacetate) that is used for vertebrate pest control [66]. Bacteria, particularly Pseudomonas fluorescens, were isolated from the 1080 bait when mixed with ground kangaroo meat, while both bacteria and soil fungi such as Fusorium oxysporum have been isolated from the bait mixed with oats [66,67]. The bacteria and soil fungi degraded fluoroacetate in the presence and absence of another carbon source. However in the presence of peptone, degradation was higher.

(p5.2) In Western Australia, several microorganisms were isolated from soil with and without previous exposure to fluoroacetate. These included (Aspergillus fumigatus, Fusarium oxysporum, Pseudomonas acidovorans, Pseudomonas fluorescens 1, an unidentified Pseudomonas sp., Penicillium purpurescens and Penicillium restriction. These microbes can degrade fluoroacetate, presumably utilising it as a carbon source when grown in solution (2 to 89%) [67]. Recently, two other fluoroacetate degrading-bacteria were isolated from the Brazilian caprine rumen which had the ability to degrade fluoroacetate under aerobic conditions [68]. The bacteria were closely related to Pigmentiphaga kullae and Ancylobacter polymorphus. Fluoroacetate was degraded to fluoride ions, but the end products containing the carbon atoms from fluoroacetate were not discussed. Moreover, these bacteria might potentially be facultative anaerobes, and it was speculated that degradation occurred through the aerobic process.

(p5.3) Walker and Lien [59] were first to identify two fluoroacetate-degrading enzymes (initially termed haloacetate halidohydrolase) from Pseudomonas species and a fungus Fusarium solani. At the same time, a fluoroacetate dehalogenase was isolated from a fluoroacetatedehalogenating bacterium in industrial wastewater, and tentatively named Moraxella sp. strain B [62]. It has now been reclassified as Delftia acidovorans strain B. Other soil bacteria which play a role in defluorination of fluoroacetate are Burkholderia sp. strain FA1, P. fluorescens, Rhodopseudomonas palustris CGA009 and different strains of Pseudomonas species [61,66,69,70]. The fluoroacetate dehalogenase enzymes identified in some of these bacteria appear to degrade fluoroacetate via a similar mechanism, where an ester is produced as an intermediate which is hydrolyzed by a water molecule to form glycolate (Fig. 4).

(p5.4) In spite of their novel mechanisms, limited work has been conducted on these enzymes. The biochemical studies show (Table 1) relatively similar properties between these dehalogenases. All the bacterial enzymes have optimal activities at a slightly alkaline pH around pH 8.0 to 9.0 [59,61,69]. However, defluorinating activities in fungi have a wider optimal pH range, with pH 7-8 for F. solani compared to pH 5-8 for F. oxysporium [59,67].

(p5.5) The thermal stability of these enzymes differs significantly depending on the species of the microorganisms. Fluoroacetate dehalogenase in Pseudomonas sp. from the New Zealand soil was shown to have higher thermal stability, approximately 55°C, than the fluoroacetate dehalogenase in F. solani [59]. However, this notion of high thermal stability was not observed in some Psuedomonas species, P. fluorescens DSM 8341 was shown to have thermal stabilities to 30°C [69].

(p5.6) The dehalogenases were shown to use water as the sole co-substrate, and no evidence indicates the involvement of metal ions in their catalytic activity [59,71]. However, an increase in fluoroacetate degradation activity with addition of low concentration metals ion such as Mg 2+ , Fe 2+ and Mn 2+ has been demonstrated but higher concentration of these metals were inhibitory [69]. Although all the enzymes have a similar degradation mechanism, the size of these enzymes varies significantly. Pseudomonas sp. strain A and P. fluorescens enzymes are presumed to be monomers, and have an estimated molecular weight of 42 and 32.5 kDa, respectively. Conversely Burkholderia sp. FA1 and D. acidovorans strain B are dimers of two identical subunits with an estimated molecular mass of 79 and 67 kDa, respectively [61,72].

(p5.7) All these enzymes release inorganic fluoride from fluoroacetate, but some also cleave chlorinated and brominated analogues, albeit at slower rates [59,61,73]. To date, D. acidovorans strain B is the only fluoroacetatedehalogenating bacterium which harbours two haloacetate dehalogenase enzymes; Fluoroacetate dehalogenase H-1 (dehH1) and fluoroacetate dehalogenase H-2 (dehH2) which are encoded by two different genes on its 65 kb plasmid pUO1. Fluoroacetate dehalogenase H-1 acts predominately on fluoroacetate, while fluoroacetate dehalogenase H-2 has a broader range of substrate specificity for haloacetate, but not fluoroacetate [73].

(p5.8) Two other fluoroacetate dehalogenase enzymes which were purified and tested for their substrate specificities are fluoroacetate dehalogenases from Burkholderia sp. FA1 (Fac-dex) and R. palustris CGA009 (RPA1163) [61,70]. When compared to DelH1 of D. acidovorans strain B, the two fluoroacetate dehalogenases were more specific to fluoroacetate than to other halogenated analogues [61,70].

(p5.9) To date, the mechanism of fluoroacetate degradation by fluoroacetate dehalogenase has been extensively studied in Burkholderia sp. strain FA1 and D. acidovorans strain B [63,70,72,[74][75][76]. Several catalytic regions were identified by comparing the amino acid sequence with that of a haloalkane dehalogenase from Xanthobacter autotrophicus [60], and the specific amino acids have been identified by mutagenic studies [63]. It has been found that the active site of the H-1 enzyme contains a conserved Asp105 and His272.

(p5.10) In the initial steps of the pathway for fluoroacetate degradation to glycolate, the carboxylate group of Asp105 acts as a nucleophile to form an ester   [63,75]. Then the acetate intermediate is hydrolysed by a deprotonated water molecule formed by a conserved His272. The net result of the reaction is a displacement of a fluoride ion producing glycolate and regeneration of the carboxylate group belonging to Asp105 (Fig. 4). The catalytic sites of D. acidovorans strain B are also conserved as Asp105 and His271 in Burkholderia sp. strain FA1 [72]. Moreover, release of fluoride was found to be stabilised by the hydrogen bonds to His149, Trp150 and Tyr212 of Burkholderia sp. strain FA1 [75]. This stabilisation effect reduces the activation barrier, where the energy required to cleave the C-F bond was calculated to be only 2.7 kcal/mol, despite the strong C-F bond. A similar structure was also noted in the fluoroacetate dehalogenase from R. palustris CGA009 [70].

(p5.11) Due to the fact that the fluoroacetate dehalogenase of Burkholderia sp. strain FA1 has a preference for fluoroacetate compared to chloroacetate, the substrate specificity was tested using this enzyme [76]. Using docking stimulations and quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM), Nakayama and colleagues [76] managed to show that fluoroacetate and chloroacetate were incorporated into the active site of fluoroacetate dehalogenase in different conformations. Moreover, the hydrogen bonds of the chloroacetate-enzyme complex do not sufficiently reduce the activation barrier for chloroacetate, which is in a good agreement with the observed high specificity of this enzyme towards fluoroacetate.
## (s7) Biotechnological-derived methods for fluoroacetate detoxification in cattle
Number of References: 64

(p7.0) There have been several attempts to reduce the toxic effects of fluoroacetate in ruminant livestock production. A biotechnological approach to the problem did provide some evidence that detoxifying fluoroacetate by microbial metabolism was possible in the rumen [84]. Gregg and colleagues [84] transformed the rumen bacterium Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens with the fluoroacetate dehalogenase gene (DelH1) from Delfitia acidovorans strain B, and the recombinant bacteria demonstrated active dehalogenation of fluoroacetate in vitro.

(p7.1) The fluoroacetate dehalogenase H1 gene from D. acidovorans strain B was incorporated into the plasmid pBHf for transfection into Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens [84]. The transfection was relatively stable, with the pBHf plasmid remaining detectable after 500 generations under non-selective conditions. Gregg and colleagues [84] also performed an in vitro study, where a growing population of the recombinant bacterium was able to release fluorine from fluoroacetate at the rate of 9.9 nmol/min/mg [84]. However, dehalogenase activity was not detected outside the bacterial cells, and so it was predicted that fluoroacetate in the media diffused readily into the cells [84]. The genetically modified B. fibrisolvens strain expressed dehalogenase enough to detoxify fluoroacetate from the surrounding medium at a rate of 10 nmol/(min·mg) bacterial protein in in vitro testing. The plasmid that carries the dehalogenase gene appears to be very stable and was retained by 100% of the transformed bacteria after 500 generations of growth in non-selective media [84].

(p7.2) In an in vivo study conducted by Gregg and colleagues [85], one group of sheep were inoculated with the recombinant bacteria before being fed fluoroacetateinjected snow-peas, while a control group was not inoculated with the recombinant bacteria. This study showed a significant difference between groups, where the inoculated sheep appeared to be relatively normal despite a 0.4 mg dose of fluoroacetate per kg of animal, while the control sheep died of the fluoroacetate poisoning [85]. The modified bacteria were able to colonise the rumens of two sheep and were shown to persist for an experimental period of 5 months.

(p7.3) In another in vivo study conducted using 20 Angus steers, animals orally inoculated with seven different strains of Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens (B. fibrisolvens 0/10, 10/1, 85, 149/83, 156, 291, 52/10 strains respectively) containing the plasmid (pBHf )-bearing the fluoroacetate dehalogenase gene DelH1 did not develop the acute symptoms of fluoroacetate toxicity compared to the controls [86]. PCR analysis of rumen fluid collected at 7, 12 and 15 days post-inoculation confirmed the presence of the recombinant bacteria in the rumen at 10 4 to 10 7 cells/ mL. Post-mortem PCR analysis of the rumen fluid from all test animals showed approximately 10 6 colony forming units (CFU) per mL of recombinant B. fibrisolvens for several of the strains, 20 days after inoculation [86]. The dose of recombinant bacteria used was able to significantly diminish the effects of fluoroacetate poisoning. Therefore, these in vivo tests showed significant protection of livestock from fluoroacetate using the recombinant bacteria approach. However, in Australia, this technology has not been adopted because approval has not been granted due to strict government regulations regarding release of genetically modified organisms.

(p7.4) In order to prevent animals from unintentional fluoroacetate poisoning, one of the therapies involves the adsorption of fluoroacetate with activated charcoal or other resins. These agents were investigated for their abilities to absorb fluoroacetate from gastrointestinal fluid, thus potentially preventing the conversion of fluoroacetate to fluorocitrate [87]. Moreover, the doses of 2 g/kg of such resins are impractical for preventing fluoroacetate poisoning in livestock. Acetate donor therapy has also been investigated as a treatment for poisoning. Early studies on the effect of fluoroacetate poisoning revealed that fluoroacetate inhibits acetate metabolism in poisoned animals [88]. This led to other studies to investigate whether acetate in the animal at high concentration would provide protection to the animals from fluoroacetate poisoning [89]. This treatment was only effective when provided immediately after the ingestion of the toxin and therefore not practical for treating grazing livestock due to limited surveillance of animals in a rangeland production system. In some cases, animals have died after consumption of fluoroacetate due to the severity of symptoms caused by the depletion of tissue citrate. Therefore, by relieving the symptoms of fluoroacetate poisoning using citrate therapy, researchers have been able to enhance the survival rate of poisoned animals [90]. However, these symptom-reversing therapies would need to be administrated immediately to the poisoned animals to show any effect. Furthermore, some of the poisoned animals in these studies died of other complications even though the major symptoms were suppressed [90].

(p7.5) There have been several attempts to reduce the toxic effects of fluoroacetate in ruminant livestock production. A biotechnological approach to the problem did provide some evidence that detoxifying fluoroacetate by microbial metabolism was possible in the rumen [84]. Gregg and colleagues [84] transformed the rumen bacterium Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens with the fluoroacetate dehalogenase gene (DelH1) from Delfitia acidovorans strain B, and the recombinant bacteria demonstrated active dehalogenation of fluoroacetate in vitro.

(p7.6) The fluoroacetate dehalogenase H1 gene from D. acidovorans strain B was incorporated into the plasmid pBHf for transfection into Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens [84]. The transfection was relatively stable, with the pBHf plasmid remaining detectable after 500 generations under non-selective conditions. Gregg and colleagues [84] also performed an in vitro study, where a growing population of the recombinant bacterium was able to release fluorine from fluoroacetate at the rate of 9.9 nmol/min/mg [84]. However, dehalogenase activity was not detected outside the bacterial cells, and so it was predicted that fluoroacetate in the media diffused readily into the cells [84]. The genetically modified B. fibrisolvens strain expressed dehalogenase enough to detoxify fluoroacetate from the surrounding medium at a rate of 10 nmol/(min·mg) bacterial protein in in vitro testing. The plasmid that carries the dehalogenase gene appears to be very stable and was retained by 100% of the transformed bacteria after 500 generations of growth in non-selective media [84].

(p7.7) In an in vivo study conducted by Gregg and colleagues [85], one group of sheep were inoculated with the recombinant bacteria before being fed fluoroacetateinjected snow-peas, while a control group was not inoculated with the recombinant bacteria. This study showed a significant difference between groups, where the inoculated sheep appeared to be relatively normal despite a 0.4 mg dose of fluoroacetate per kg of animal, while the control sheep died of the fluoroacetate poisoning [85]. The modified bacteria were able to colonise the rumens of two sheep and were shown to persist for an experimental period of 5 months.

(p7.8) In another in vivo study conducted using 20 Angus steers, animals orally inoculated with seven different strains of Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens (B. fibrisolvens 0/10, 10/1, 85, 149/83, 156, 291, 52/10 strains respectively) containing the plasmid (pBHf )-bearing the fluoroacetate dehalogenase gene DelH1 did not develop the acute symptoms of fluoroacetate toxicity compared to the controls [86]. PCR analysis of rumen fluid collected at 7, 12 and 15 days post-inoculation confirmed the presence of the recombinant bacteria in the rumen at 10 4 to 10 7 cells/ mL. Post-mortem PCR analysis of the rumen fluid from all test animals showed approximately 10 6 colony forming units (CFU) per mL of recombinant B. fibrisolvens for several of the strains, 20 days after inoculation [86]. The dose of recombinant bacteria used was able to significantly diminish the effects of fluoroacetate poisoning. Therefore, these in vivo tests showed significant protection of livestock from fluoroacetate using the recombinant bacteria approach. However, in Australia, this technology has not been adopted because approval has not been granted due to strict government regulations regarding release of genetically modified organisms.

(p7.9) In order to prevent animals from unintentional fluoroacetate poisoning, one of the therapies involves the adsorption of fluoroacetate with activated charcoal or other resins. These agents were investigated for their abilities to absorb fluoroacetate from gastrointestinal fluid, thus potentially preventing the conversion of fluoroacetate to fluorocitrate [87]. Moreover, the doses of 2 g/kg of such resins are impractical for preventing fluoroacetate poisoning in livestock. Acetate donor therapy has also been investigated as a treatment for poisoning. Early studies on the effect of fluoroacetate poisoning revealed that fluoroacetate inhibits acetate metabolism in poisoned animals [88]. This led to other studies to investigate whether acetate in the animal at high concentration would provide protection to the animals from fluoroacetate poisoning [89]. This treatment was only effective when provided immediately after the ingestion of the toxin and therefore not practical for treating grazing livestock due to limited surveillance of animals in a rangeland production system. In some cases, animals have died after consumption of fluoroacetate due to the severity of symptoms caused by the depletion of tissue citrate. Therefore, by relieving the symptoms of fluoroacetate poisoning using citrate therapy, researchers have been able to enhance the survival rate of poisoned animals [90]. However, these symptom-reversing therapies would need to be administrated immediately to the poisoned animals to show any effect. Furthermore, some of the poisoned animals in these studies died of other complications even though the major symptoms were suppressed [90].
## (s8) Rumen microbial transfer
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) Amorimia pubiflora is one of the main causes of fluoroacetate poisoning in Brazil. In a recent study researchers were able to induce resistance to toxicity by feeding non-toxic doses of this plant to sheep. In addition transferring rumen contents from the resistant animals to naïve sheep was able to confer protection from toxicity [91].

(p8.1) Amorimia pubiflora is one of the main causes of fluoroacetate poisoning in Brazil. In a recent study researchers were able to induce resistance to toxicity by feeding non-toxic doses of this plant to sheep. In addition transferring rumen contents from the resistant animals to naïve sheep was able to confer protection from toxicity [91].
## (s9) Conclusions
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) To date, attempts to prevent fluoroacetate toxicity have been unsuccessful except for physically preventing access to toxic plants in the grazing environment. Animal house studies have demonstrated in principle that rumen bacteria engineered to hydrolyse the toxin could prevent toxicity but approvals for the release of these organisms into the environment are unlikely due to current government regulatory restrictions. However the recent discovery of a naturally occurring rumen bacterium (Synergistetes strain MFA1) capable of degrading fluoroacetate may provide a biotechnological solution to the problem of toxicity in rangeland animals. Even though Synergistetes strain MFA1 appears to be ubiquitous throughout the digestive systems of animals such as emus, kangaroos and other cattle, they are present in low numbers which may limit their ability to protect the animal from a lethal dose of the toxin [1]. However it is possible that there are other rumen bacteria able to degrade fluoroacetate which are at higher abundance or could act in concert with other rumen microorganisms to ameliorate the full impact of the toxin. Therefore, further surveys for the presence of other fluoroacetate degrading rumen bacteria and studies on increasing the numbers of these bacteria and expression of the genes responsible for degrading the toxin seems a logical approach for developing a practical strategy to protect livestock from fluoroacetate poisoning. Recent studies demonstrating tolerance to toxicity by adapting the rumen microbiota to non-toxic doses of fluoroacetate further supports a 'rumen detoxification' approach. 

(p9.1) To date, attempts to prevent fluoroacetate toxicity have been unsuccessful except for physically preventing access to toxic plants in the grazing environment. Animal house studies have demonstrated in principle that rumen bacteria engineered to hydrolyse the toxin could prevent toxicity but approvals for the release of these organisms into the environment are unlikely due to current government regulatory restrictions. However the recent discovery of a naturally occurring rumen bacterium (Synergistetes strain MFA1) capable of degrading fluoroacetate may provide a biotechnological solution to the problem of toxicity in rangeland animals. Even though Synergistetes strain MFA1 appears to be ubiquitous throughout the digestive systems of animals such as emus, kangaroos and other cattle, they are present in low numbers which may limit their ability to protect the animal from a lethal dose of the toxin [1]. However it is possible that there are other rumen bacteria able to degrade fluoroacetate which are at higher abundance or could act in concert with other rumen microorganisms to ameliorate the full impact of the toxin. Therefore, further surveys for the presence of other fluoroacetate degrading rumen bacteria and studies on increasing the numbers of these bacteria and expression of the genes responsible for degrading the toxin seems a logical approach for developing a practical strategy to protect livestock from fluoroacetate poisoning. Recent studies demonstrating tolerance to toxicity by adapting the rumen microbiota to non-toxic doses of fluoroacetate further supports a 'rumen detoxification' approach. 
## (s15) Background
Number of References: 6

(p15.0) Sodium monofluoroacetate (referred to as fluoroacetate hereafter), has the chemical formula FCH 2 COO − Na + , and is a highly toxic compound primarily used as a pesticide known commercially as Compound 1080. Despite having a strong carbon-fluorine bond (one of the strongest bonds in nature), fluoroacetate appears to be rather labile in the environment being readily degraded by different microorganisms [1] or anabolised by higher organisms. This is in contrast to polyfluorinated compounds (such as Teflon) which are very recalcitrant and can persist in the environment for many years [2]. It is well suited as a pesticide because it is virtually tasteless and odourless, which enables it to be easily disguised within bait material targeted towards a specific pest species [3]. However, due to its non-specific poisoning of other animals and accidental human ingestion, this pesticide is currently used under strict control by governments around the world.
## (s20) Microbial aerobic degradation
Number of References: 108

(p20.0) Contrary to the animal studies on fluoroacetate detoxification, microbial degradation of fluoroacetate has been extensively studied. Moreover, the mechanism for aerobic fluoroacetate degradation is well characterised and documented [59][60][61][62][63][64]. Microorganisms from the soil have been identified with ability to aerobically degrade fluoroacetate. The bacterial communities involved in fluoroacetate degradation vary significantly depending on the areas studied. In Western Australia, species of Bacillus, Pseudomonas, Aspergillus, Penicillium and Streptomyces were isolated from soil in a of temperate climate [64], while Burkholderiaceae, Ancylobacter sp., Paenibacillus sp., Staphylococcus sp. and Stenotrophomonas sp. were isolated from the soil of Brazilian areas where the fluoroacetate-containing plants Mascagnia rigida and Palicourea aenofusca are found [65].

(p20.1) Microorganisms have also been isolated from bait containing the 1080 poison (fluoroacetate) that is used for vertebrate pest control [66]. Bacteria, particularly Pseudomonas fluorescens, were isolated from the 1080 bait when mixed with ground kangaroo meat, while both bacteria and soil fungi such as Fusorium oxysporum have been isolated from the bait mixed with oats [66,67]. The bacteria and soil fungi degraded fluoroacetate in the presence and absence of another carbon source. However in the presence of peptone, degradation was higher.

(p20.2) In Western Australia, several microorganisms were isolated from soil with and without previous exposure to fluoroacetate. These included (Aspergillus fumigatus, Fusarium oxysporum, Pseudomonas acidovorans, Pseudomonas fluorescens 1, an unidentified Pseudomonas sp., Penicillium purpurescens and Penicillium restriction. These microbes can degrade fluoroacetate, presumably utilising it as a carbon source when grown in solution (2 to 89%) [67]. Recently, two other fluoroacetate degrading-bacteria were isolated from the Brazilian caprine rumen which had the ability to degrade fluoroacetate under aerobic conditions [68]. The bacteria were closely related to Pigmentiphaga kullae and Ancylobacter polymorphus. Fluoroacetate was degraded to fluoride ions, but the end products containing the carbon atoms from fluoroacetate were not discussed. Moreover, these bacteria might potentially be facultative anaerobes, and it was speculated that degradation occurred through the aerobic process.

(p20.3) Walker and Lien [59] were first to identify two fluoroacetate-degrading enzymes (initially termed haloacetate halidohydrolase) from Pseudomonas species and a fungus Fusarium solani. At the same time, a fluoroacetate dehalogenase was isolated from a fluoroacetatedehalogenating bacterium in industrial wastewater, and tentatively named Moraxella sp. strain B [62]. It has now been reclassified as Delftia acidovorans strain B. Other soil bacteria which play a role in defluorination of fluoroacetate are Burkholderia sp. strain FA1, P. fluorescens, Rhodopseudomonas palustris CGA009 and different strains of Pseudomonas species [61,66,69,70]. The fluoroacetate dehalogenase enzymes identified in some of these bacteria appear to degrade fluoroacetate via a similar mechanism, where an ester is produced as an intermediate which is hydrolyzed by a water molecule to form glycolate (Fig. 4).

(p20.4) In spite of their novel mechanisms, limited work has been conducted on these enzymes. The biochemical studies show (Table 1) relatively similar properties between these dehalogenases. All the bacterial enzymes have optimal activities at a slightly alkaline pH around pH 8.0 to 9.0 [59,61,69]. However, defluorinating activities in fungi have a wider optimal pH range, with pH 7-8 for F. solani compared to pH 5-8 for F. oxysporium [59,67].

(p20.5) The thermal stability of these enzymes differs significantly depending on the species of the microorganisms. Fluoroacetate dehalogenase in Pseudomonas sp. from the New Zealand soil was shown to have higher thermal stability, approximately 55°C, than the fluoroacetate dehalogenase in F. solani [59]. However, this notion of high thermal stability was not observed in some Psuedomonas species, P. fluorescens DSM 8341 was shown to have thermal stabilities to 30°C [69].

(p20.6) The dehalogenases were shown to use water as the sole co-substrate, and no evidence indicates the involvement of metal ions in their catalytic activity [59,71]. However, an increase in fluoroacetate degradation activity with addition of low concentration metals ion such as Mg 2+ , Fe 2+ and Mn 2+ has been demonstrated but higher concentration of these metals were inhibitory [69]. Although all the enzymes have a similar degradation mechanism, the size of these enzymes varies significantly. Pseudomonas sp. strain A and P. fluorescens enzymes are presumed to be monomers, and have an estimated molecular weight of 42 and 32.5 kDa, respectively. Conversely Burkholderia sp. FA1 and D. acidovorans strain B are dimers of two identical subunits with an estimated molecular mass of 79 and 67 kDa, respectively [61,72].

(p20.7) All these enzymes release inorganic fluoride from fluoroacetate, but some also cleave chlorinated and brominated analogues, albeit at slower rates [59,61,73]. To date, D. acidovorans strain B is the only fluoroacetatedehalogenating bacterium which harbours two haloacetate dehalogenase enzymes; Fluoroacetate dehalogenase H-1 (dehH1) and fluoroacetate dehalogenase H-2 (dehH2) which are encoded by two different genes on its 65 kb plasmid pUO1. Fluoroacetate dehalogenase H-1 acts predominately on fluoroacetate, while fluoroacetate dehalogenase H-2 has a broader range of substrate specificity for haloacetate, but not fluoroacetate [73].

(p20.8) Two other fluoroacetate dehalogenase enzymes which were purified and tested for their substrate specificities are fluoroacetate dehalogenases from Burkholderia sp. FA1 (Fac-dex) and R. palustris CGA009 (RPA1163) [61,70]. When compared to DelH1 of D. acidovorans strain B, the two fluoroacetate dehalogenases were more specific to fluoroacetate than to other halogenated analogues [61,70].

(p20.9) To date, the mechanism of fluoroacetate degradation by fluoroacetate dehalogenase has been extensively studied in Burkholderia sp. strain FA1 and D. acidovorans strain B [63,70,72,[74][75][76]. Several catalytic regions were identified by comparing the amino acid sequence with that of a haloalkane dehalogenase from Xanthobacter autotrophicus [60], and the specific amino acids have been identified by mutagenic studies [63]. It has been found that the active site of the H-1 enzyme contains a conserved Asp105 and His272.

(p20.10) In the initial steps of the pathway for fluoroacetate degradation to glycolate, the carboxylate group of Asp105 acts as a nucleophile to form an ester   [63,75]. Then the acetate intermediate is hydrolysed by a deprotonated water molecule formed by a conserved His272. The net result of the reaction is a displacement of a fluoride ion producing glycolate and regeneration of the carboxylate group belonging to Asp105 (Fig. 4). The catalytic sites of D. acidovorans strain B are also conserved as Asp105 and His271 in Burkholderia sp. strain FA1 [72]. Moreover, release of fluoride was found to be stabilised by the hydrogen bonds to His149, Trp150 and Tyr212 of Burkholderia sp. strain FA1 [75]. This stabilisation effect reduces the activation barrier, where the energy required to cleave the C-F bond was calculated to be only 2.7 kcal/mol, despite the strong C-F bond. A similar structure was also noted in the fluoroacetate dehalogenase from R. palustris CGA009 [70].

(p20.11) Due to the fact that the fluoroacetate dehalogenase of Burkholderia sp. strain FA1 has a preference for fluoroacetate compared to chloroacetate, the substrate specificity was tested using this enzyme [76]. Using docking stimulations and quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM), Nakayama and colleagues [76] managed to show that fluoroacetate and chloroacetate were incorporated into the active site of fluoroacetate dehalogenase in different conformations. Moreover, the hydrogen bonds of the chloroacetate-enzyme complex do not sufficiently reduce the activation barrier for chloroacetate, which is in a good agreement with the observed high specificity of this enzyme towards fluoroacetate.
## (s22) Biotechnological-derived methods for fluoroacetate detoxification in cattle
Number of References: 64

(p22.0) There have been several attempts to reduce the toxic effects of fluoroacetate in ruminant livestock production. A biotechnological approach to the problem did provide some evidence that detoxifying fluoroacetate by microbial metabolism was possible in the rumen [84]. Gregg and colleagues [84] transformed the rumen bacterium Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens with the fluoroacetate dehalogenase gene (DelH1) from Delfitia acidovorans strain B, and the recombinant bacteria demonstrated active dehalogenation of fluoroacetate in vitro.

(p22.1) The fluoroacetate dehalogenase H1 gene from D. acidovorans strain B was incorporated into the plasmid pBHf for transfection into Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens [84]. The transfection was relatively stable, with the pBHf plasmid remaining detectable after 500 generations under non-selective conditions. Gregg and colleagues [84] also performed an in vitro study, where a growing population of the recombinant bacterium was able to release fluorine from fluoroacetate at the rate of 9.9 nmol/min/mg [84]. However, dehalogenase activity was not detected outside the bacterial cells, and so it was predicted that fluoroacetate in the media diffused readily into the cells [84]. The genetically modified B. fibrisolvens strain expressed dehalogenase enough to detoxify fluoroacetate from the surrounding medium at a rate of 10 nmol/(min·mg) bacterial protein in in vitro testing. The plasmid that carries the dehalogenase gene appears to be very stable and was retained by 100% of the transformed bacteria after 500 generations of growth in non-selective media [84].

(p22.2) In an in vivo study conducted by Gregg and colleagues [85], one group of sheep were inoculated with the recombinant bacteria before being fed fluoroacetateinjected snow-peas, while a control group was not inoculated with the recombinant bacteria. This study showed a significant difference between groups, where the inoculated sheep appeared to be relatively normal despite a 0.4 mg dose of fluoroacetate per kg of animal, while the control sheep died of the fluoroacetate poisoning [85]. The modified bacteria were able to colonise the rumens of two sheep and were shown to persist for an experimental period of 5 months.

(p22.3) In another in vivo study conducted using 20 Angus steers, animals orally inoculated with seven different strains of Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens (B. fibrisolvens 0/10, 10/1, 85, 149/83, 156, 291, 52/10 strains respectively) containing the plasmid (pBHf )-bearing the fluoroacetate dehalogenase gene DelH1 did not develop the acute symptoms of fluoroacetate toxicity compared to the controls [86]. PCR analysis of rumen fluid collected at 7, 12 and 15 days post-inoculation confirmed the presence of the recombinant bacteria in the rumen at 10 4 to 10 7 cells/ mL. Post-mortem PCR analysis of the rumen fluid from all test animals showed approximately 10 6 colony forming units (CFU) per mL of recombinant B. fibrisolvens for several of the strains, 20 days after inoculation [86]. The dose of recombinant bacteria used was able to significantly diminish the effects of fluoroacetate poisoning. Therefore, these in vivo tests showed significant protection of livestock from fluoroacetate using the recombinant bacteria approach. However, in Australia, this technology has not been adopted because approval has not been granted due to strict government regulations regarding release of genetically modified organisms.

(p22.4) In order to prevent animals from unintentional fluoroacetate poisoning, one of the therapies involves the adsorption of fluoroacetate with activated charcoal or other resins. These agents were investigated for their abilities to absorb fluoroacetate from gastrointestinal fluid, thus potentially preventing the conversion of fluoroacetate to fluorocitrate [87]. Moreover, the doses of 2 g/kg of such resins are impractical for preventing fluoroacetate poisoning in livestock. Acetate donor therapy has also been investigated as a treatment for poisoning. Early studies on the effect of fluoroacetate poisoning revealed that fluoroacetate inhibits acetate metabolism in poisoned animals [88]. This led to other studies to investigate whether acetate in the animal at high concentration would provide protection to the animals from fluoroacetate poisoning [89]. This treatment was only effective when provided immediately after the ingestion of the toxin and therefore not practical for treating grazing livestock due to limited surveillance of animals in a rangeland production system. In some cases, animals have died after consumption of fluoroacetate due to the severity of symptoms caused by the depletion of tissue citrate. Therefore, by relieving the symptoms of fluoroacetate poisoning using citrate therapy, researchers have been able to enhance the survival rate of poisoned animals [90]. However, these symptom-reversing therapies would need to be administrated immediately to the poisoned animals to show any effect. Furthermore, some of the poisoned animals in these studies died of other complications even though the major symptoms were suppressed [90].

(p22.5) There have been several attempts to reduce the toxic effects of fluoroacetate in ruminant livestock production. A biotechnological approach to the problem did provide some evidence that detoxifying fluoroacetate by microbial metabolism was possible in the rumen [84]. Gregg and colleagues [84] transformed the rumen bacterium Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens with the fluoroacetate dehalogenase gene (DelH1) from Delfitia acidovorans strain B, and the recombinant bacteria demonstrated active dehalogenation of fluoroacetate in vitro.

(p22.6) The fluoroacetate dehalogenase H1 gene from D. acidovorans strain B was incorporated into the plasmid pBHf for transfection into Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens [84]. The transfection was relatively stable, with the pBHf plasmid remaining detectable after 500 generations under non-selective conditions. Gregg and colleagues [84] also performed an in vitro study, where a growing population of the recombinant bacterium was able to release fluorine from fluoroacetate at the rate of 9.9 nmol/min/mg [84]. However, dehalogenase activity was not detected outside the bacterial cells, and so it was predicted that fluoroacetate in the media diffused readily into the cells [84]. The genetically modified B. fibrisolvens strain expressed dehalogenase enough to detoxify fluoroacetate from the surrounding medium at a rate of 10 nmol/(min·mg) bacterial protein in in vitro testing. The plasmid that carries the dehalogenase gene appears to be very stable and was retained by 100% of the transformed bacteria after 500 generations of growth in non-selective media [84].

(p22.7) In an in vivo study conducted by Gregg and colleagues [85], one group of sheep were inoculated with the recombinant bacteria before being fed fluoroacetateinjected snow-peas, while a control group was not inoculated with the recombinant bacteria. This study showed a significant difference between groups, where the inoculated sheep appeared to be relatively normal despite a 0.4 mg dose of fluoroacetate per kg of animal, while the control sheep died of the fluoroacetate poisoning [85]. The modified bacteria were able to colonise the rumens of two sheep and were shown to persist for an experimental period of 5 months.

(p22.8) In another in vivo study conducted using 20 Angus steers, animals orally inoculated with seven different strains of Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens (B. fibrisolvens 0/10, 10/1, 85, 149/83, 156, 291, 52/10 strains respectively) containing the plasmid (pBHf )-bearing the fluoroacetate dehalogenase gene DelH1 did not develop the acute symptoms of fluoroacetate toxicity compared to the controls [86]. PCR analysis of rumen fluid collected at 7, 12 and 15 days post-inoculation confirmed the presence of the recombinant bacteria in the rumen at 10 4 to 10 7 cells/ mL. Post-mortem PCR analysis of the rumen fluid from all test animals showed approximately 10 6 colony forming units (CFU) per mL of recombinant B. fibrisolvens for several of the strains, 20 days after inoculation [86]. The dose of recombinant bacteria used was able to significantly diminish the effects of fluoroacetate poisoning. Therefore, these in vivo tests showed significant protection of livestock from fluoroacetate using the recombinant bacteria approach. However, in Australia, this technology has not been adopted because approval has not been granted due to strict government regulations regarding release of genetically modified organisms.

(p22.9) In order to prevent animals from unintentional fluoroacetate poisoning, one of the therapies involves the adsorption of fluoroacetate with activated charcoal or other resins. These agents were investigated for their abilities to absorb fluoroacetate from gastrointestinal fluid, thus potentially preventing the conversion of fluoroacetate to fluorocitrate [87]. Moreover, the doses of 2 g/kg of such resins are impractical for preventing fluoroacetate poisoning in livestock. Acetate donor therapy has also been investigated as a treatment for poisoning. Early studies on the effect of fluoroacetate poisoning revealed that fluoroacetate inhibits acetate metabolism in poisoned animals [88]. This led to other studies to investigate whether acetate in the animal at high concentration would provide protection to the animals from fluoroacetate poisoning [89]. This treatment was only effective when provided immediately after the ingestion of the toxin and therefore not practical for treating grazing livestock due to limited surveillance of animals in a rangeland production system. In some cases, animals have died after consumption of fluoroacetate due to the severity of symptoms caused by the depletion of tissue citrate. Therefore, by relieving the symptoms of fluoroacetate poisoning using citrate therapy, researchers have been able to enhance the survival rate of poisoned animals [90]. However, these symptom-reversing therapies would need to be administrated immediately to the poisoned animals to show any effect. Furthermore, some of the poisoned animals in these studies died of other complications even though the major symptoms were suppressed [90].
## (s23) Rumen microbial transfer
Number of References: 4

(p23.0) Amorimia pubiflora is one of the main causes of fluoroacetate poisoning in Brazil. In a recent study researchers were able to induce resistance to toxicity by feeding non-toxic doses of this plant to sheep. In addition transferring rumen contents from the resistant animals to naïve sheep was able to confer protection from toxicity [91].

(p23.1) Amorimia pubiflora is one of the main causes of fluoroacetate poisoning in Brazil. In a recent study researchers were able to induce resistance to toxicity by feeding non-toxic doses of this plant to sheep. In addition transferring rumen contents from the resistant animals to naïve sheep was able to confer protection from toxicity [91].
## (s24) Conclusions
Number of References: 4

(p24.0) To date, attempts to prevent fluoroacetate toxicity have been unsuccessful except for physically preventing access to toxic plants in the grazing environment. Animal house studies have demonstrated in principle that rumen bacteria engineered to hydrolyse the toxin could prevent toxicity but approvals for the release of these organisms into the environment are unlikely due to current government regulatory restrictions. However the recent discovery of a naturally occurring rumen bacterium (Synergistetes strain MFA1) capable of degrading fluoroacetate may provide a biotechnological solution to the problem of toxicity in rangeland animals. Even though Synergistetes strain MFA1 appears to be ubiquitous throughout the digestive systems of animals such as emus, kangaroos and other cattle, they are present in low numbers which may limit their ability to protect the animal from a lethal dose of the toxin [1]. However it is possible that there are other rumen bacteria able to degrade fluoroacetate which are at higher abundance or could act in concert with other rumen microorganisms to ameliorate the full impact of the toxin. Therefore, further surveys for the presence of other fluoroacetate degrading rumen bacteria and studies on increasing the numbers of these bacteria and expression of the genes responsible for degrading the toxin seems a logical approach for developing a practical strategy to protect livestock from fluoroacetate poisoning. Recent studies demonstrating tolerance to toxicity by adapting the rumen microbiota to non-toxic doses of fluoroacetate further supports a 'rumen detoxification' approach. 

(p24.1) To date, attempts to prevent fluoroacetate toxicity have been unsuccessful except for physically preventing access to toxic plants in the grazing environment. Animal house studies have demonstrated in principle that rumen bacteria engineered to hydrolyse the toxin could prevent toxicity but approvals for the release of these organisms into the environment are unlikely due to current government regulatory restrictions. However the recent discovery of a naturally occurring rumen bacterium (Synergistetes strain MFA1) capable of degrading fluoroacetate may provide a biotechnological solution to the problem of toxicity in rangeland animals. Even though Synergistetes strain MFA1 appears to be ubiquitous throughout the digestive systems of animals such as emus, kangaroos and other cattle, they are present in low numbers which may limit their ability to protect the animal from a lethal dose of the toxin [1]. However it is possible that there are other rumen bacteria able to degrade fluoroacetate which are at higher abundance or could act in concert with other rumen microorganisms to ameliorate the full impact of the toxin. Therefore, further surveys for the presence of other fluoroacetate degrading rumen bacteria and studies on increasing the numbers of these bacteria and expression of the genes responsible for degrading the toxin seems a logical approach for developing a practical strategy to protect livestock from fluoroacetate poisoning. Recent studies demonstrating tolerance to toxicity by adapting the rumen microbiota to non-toxic doses of fluoroacetate further supports a 'rumen detoxification' approach. 
