# A Survey on Federated Learning for the Healthcare Metaverse: Concepts, Applications, Challenges, and Future Directions

CorpusID: 257913812 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39d3ac2b003398e4c2876cb311fd98a9ce56f21f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39d3ac2b003398e4c2876cb311fd98a9ce56f21f)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s4) • Reduced Computational Cost and Power Consumption:
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) The accuracy of AI models will increase as more data is gathered. However, if all the healthcare data is kept in one location, training a model will take more time and resources [32]. With FL, there is no need to store data in a certain place. Instead, a global model can be trained based on the parameters shared by the local models. When compared to conventional models, FL does not require any personal data from the local models, which lowers the cost of computational resources and lowers power usage [33]. • Personalization: FL also allows local model to train at local network, and the cloud for global model aggregation. The distributed datasets, which may vary across various local nodes, are the major source of data used for training at the cloud server. The shared model may not work well for a specific user since it purely accounts for the traits that all health users have in common [34]. As a consequence, each user incorporates the learned global model with his own unique health data to provide personalized health monitoring. The local devices get the global model from the cloud and train their unique model in order to capture the tailored services. Additionally, a balanced dataset is created for every device using the global model from the cloud, reducing the disparity between individualised models and the global model [35].
## (s8) B. Better Interoperability between Different Stakeholders
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) The healthcare Metaverse can collect data from multiple healthcare centres/ hospitals for ensuring greater patient diversity from different demographics [42]. However, data interoperability between different stakeholders is a significant challenge in the Metaverse environment, since the data collected from multiple devices/ Metaverses need to be made accessible to the trusted parties. Such data can be used for finding patient similarity [43], remote patient monitoring [44], and for predicting mortality rates. In order to address these issues, FL can be used for pooling data from every edge node/ hospital, train them on the edge devices itself and send the updates to the server, so that the model can be globally trained in the Metaverse, thereby mitigating localized biases and offering customized and effective solutions for rare diseases or during a pandemic. The problem of data interoperability can thus be addressed using FL mechanisms, thereby providing quality healthcare to the patients.
## (s15) A. Medical Diagnosis
Number of References: 5

(p15.0) Medical diagnosis deals with identifying patients' diseases based on their symptoms [50]. The conventional method of disease diagnosis is carried out physically at health centres or hospitals, where the patient needs to be examined by a doctor. However, during emergencies, the conventional diagnosis approaches may result in delayed treatment that may cause loss of lives. Therefore, telemedicine was introduced as a solution for monitoring patients remotely [51]. Furthermore, the rapid developments in AI have contributed to all domains, including healthcare. By mimicking human cognitive capabilities, ML models can make better decisions regarding disease diagnosis by getting trained on the data collected from various health centres [52]. However, one of the notable limitations of telemedicine is that the patients cannot clearly express their symptoms or the level of injury as they don't meet the health professionals in person.

(p15.1) The Metaverse is an ideal solution in such scenarios where enabling technologies like AR, VR, digital twins, and blockchain helps create a real-world digital simulation. Medi-cal professionals can even provide personalized diagnoses with the help of the Metaverse, where doctors and patients can interact in shared, persistent and immersive virtual worlds [11]. ML models can use the data collected using wearable devices and other systems in the Metaverse environment for training the model. However, this requires the entire data to be present in the system where the training is done. In addition, as the data collected may contain patients' private information, any leakage of such information may have serious consequences. For instance, the Metaverse environment requires data from the real world to create digital simulations of the patients through digital twins [53]. Digital twins can be created for the patient population, individuals, or the organs. These digital twins can be manipulated to obtain clear insights in the decision making process. The data may be collected through different sources such as AR/VR devices and wearables. If the malicious users get hold of this collected data, they could manipulate it to create false diagnoses and improper treatments. Therefore, the model training should happen without exposing the patients' private information.
## (s17) C. Collaborative Research and Medical Education
Number of References: 5

(p17.0) Digital transformation has been adopted enthusiastically in various domains especially in collaborative research due to the emergence of virtual reality and related technologies. Further, VR has visualized rapid proliferation with the progressive growth in Metaverse technology. The increased adoption of these technologies have reduced the associated cost of implementation and made it more accessible for common users [62]. Experimentation and research are intrinsic aspects of higher education programs wherein researchers often find it difficult to learn and retain information without handson experimentation. Also justification of the experimental results lag authenticity due to the same reason. The VR based simulated labs provide the necessary experimental and hands-on learning experience. In case of biomedical research, students can perform various critical experimentation using chemicals in a VR based safe zone with no risks of harming property or human life [63]. The challenges pertaining to availability of chemical or related resources also gets eliminated wherein experiments can be repeated multiple times to ensure justification of results. Also, the removal of risks ensues innovation and creativity among student minds to design and develop experiments which could lead to path-breaking results and discoveries contributing immensely towards the growth of science [64]. The impact of Metaverse can be a game changing experience in collaborative research wherein improved data driven decision making would be possible across chemical value chain existing in various laboratories across the globe. A holistic approach to digital twin can enable improvement of process and control-system engineering from the very early stages of any collaborative project design. The use of advanced simulation and modeling technologies can enable multiple teams located globally to work on common projects, develop steady state design models and then integrate them into dynamic models. These models can be tested through realtime dynamic simulations for supporting process engineering execution [65]. Although Metaverse enables such collaborative research but there are associated concerns pertaining to distributional discrepancies across multiple stake holders which could lead to counterproductive consequences. FL enables achieving collaborative equilibrium by ensuring security is not compromised wherein smaller collaboration coalitions can be created. In such cases each client can collaborate with other team members who maximally improve the model and isolate the ones whose contribution is minimum. FL enables multi-institutional collaborations ensuring data privacy is maintained. The model-learning manages all the available data without sharing it across the participating Institutions, The model-training is distributed across all the data-owners and the results are aggregated [66].
## (s18) D. Infectious diseases/ Pandemic
Number of References: 3

(p18.0) The COVID-19 pandemic has set up a perfect stage for the Metaverse technology to take off. The pandemic has affected the economic and social stability of the nations to a great extent. Longer periods of isolation has even created a society with social anxiety [70]. However, the pandemic has made huge technological advancements in education, healthcare, and entertainment. The wide adoption of online classes, virtual meetings, telemedicine and OTT movie release are all a result of the pandemic [71]. Pandemic surveillance is an important aspect that helps to understand the pattern of the spread of the disease so that appropriate measures can be adopted to alleviate the spread [72]. The transparency and efficiency of the surveillance can be enhanced by building a platform that can integrate data from multiple domains such as transportation, retail and telecommunications. However, such an integration would be difficult to be accomplished in a real world even with the advanced technologies due to the risk of the spread of disease.
## (s19) E. Drug Discovery
Number of References: 2

(p19.0) Drug discovery is the technique through which potential novel therapeutic entities are identified, using an amalgamation of experimental, computational, clinical and translational models. Machine learning models play a major role here in improving the decision making for applications such as hit discoveries, target identification, hit to lead and lead optimization [75]. Computational growth algorithms are also used in De novo drug design (DNDD) to understand and design new chemical entities that fits in the defined constraint sets [76]. Enhanced experimental results can be obtained if researchers can collaborate in building the required models. However, conducting experiments for discovering new drugs is critical and requires a lot of human effort and expenses.
