# Non-coding yet non-trivial: a review on the computational genomics of lincRNAs

CorpusID: 255988694 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a63f9b0555e4ec19bb5a38d4e4f282ed9bbb8612](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a63f9b0555e4ec19bb5a38d4e4f282ed9bbb8612)

Fields: Medicine, Biology, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 8

(p0.0) The mainstream focus of biomedical research has been in elucidating the functions and interactions among proteins within the cell. In line with the central dogma of molecular biology, RNAs were once perceived as the intermediary for protein production and the archaic precursor molecule of DNA. However, RNAs are transcribed from more than 85 % of genomic regions [1], whereas proteins are only encoded in less than 3 % of human genome sequences [2]. This leaves a mysterious knowledge gap in either the efficiency of cellular transcription to translation or a foundational misunderstanding in gene expression regulation and RNA function. It was thought that RNAs had limited but essential and evolutionarily common roles of basic cell machinery such as tRNA, rRNA, and mRNA. The few examples of functional RNAs or RNAs with enzymatic-like activity, were considered as evolutionary remnants [3]. For a long period of time, non-coding RNA (ncRNA) transcripts were believed to be by-products derived from mRNA degradation or nonspecific polymerase activity, and therefore termed "transcriptional noise" [4].
## (s2) Emerging characteristics of lincRNAs
Number of References: 52

(p2.0) LincRNAs are a putatively heterogeneous group, conventionally defined as ncRNA transcripts of more than 200 bp located in regions with no overlap to any known proteincoding genes. According to Lncipedia, a comprehensive lncRNA database, high-throughput studies of transcriptome data have catalogued over 111,000 lncRNA transcripts, with roughly 50 % coming from intergenic regions [5]. The majority of lincRNAs are thought to be transcribed from RNA polymerase II, and are therefore usually modified by post-transcriptional 5′ capping and 3′ polyadenylation [6]. Surprisingly, lincRNAs show ribosome occupancy similar to the 5′UTRs of protein coding genes [7]. What differentiates lincRNAs from protein coding genes seems to be the lack of release upon encountering a stop codon in the lincRNA sequences [7]. Therefore, polyadenlyation and 5′ capping are not necessarily markers of protein coding functionality. However, lincRNAs show a markedly higher degree of tissue-specific [8] and disease specific expression [9], suggesting some biological function.

(p2.1) LincRNA expression is generally much lower than protein coding genes, with a few exceptions such as the XIST lincRNA [10]. For some lincRNAs, even just a few or a single transcript exist in a cell, determined by RNA-Seq data [10]. However, rather than being spurious by-products of non-specific RNA transcription, the expression levels of lincRNAs in any given cell are precisely coordinated throughout the tissue, and dynamic through the course of development [11]. Researchers have detected differential expression of lincRNA in a range of tissues, diseases, and specific cellular responses. Efforts have been made to take advantage of these properties of lincRNAs for translational and clinical applications, such as disease biomarkers [12].

(p2.2) Another unique feature of lincRNAs is the low sequence conservation. LincRNAs exhibit 22-25 % of conserved bases under purifying selection, compared to 77 % in protein coding sequences. However, they are considerably more conserved than introns, which have 7 % conservation [13]. Under the assumption that sequence conservation reflects biological significance, the high genomic sequence variability in lincRNAs was the initial basis to call them "junk RNAs". Unlike proteins, where evolutionary conservation correlates highly with functional importance, lincRNAs seem to be under different selective pressures. Many lincRNA are predicted to have secondary structure and may therefore act in a sequence independent manner [14]. Consequently, there may be a greater functional importance on molecular 3D conformation over the primary sequence. This is supported by a recent global study of genetic variants in human lincRNAs in association with diseases, where single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in evolutionarily conserved regions of lincRNAs had significant effects on predicted secondary structure [15].

(p2.3) LincRNAs are a putatively heterogeneous group, conventionally defined as ncRNA transcripts of more than 200 bp located in regions with no overlap to any known proteincoding genes. According to Lncipedia, a comprehensive lncRNA database, high-throughput studies of transcriptome data have catalogued over 111,000 lncRNA transcripts, with roughly 50 % coming from intergenic regions [5]. The majority of lincRNAs are thought to be transcribed from RNA polymerase II, and are therefore usually modified by post-transcriptional 5′ capping and 3′ polyadenylation [6]. Surprisingly, lincRNAs show ribosome occupancy similar to the 5′UTRs of protein coding genes [7]. What differentiates lincRNAs from protein coding genes seems to be the lack of release upon encountering a stop codon in the lincRNA sequences [7]. Therefore, polyadenlyation and 5′ capping are not necessarily markers of protein coding functionality. However, lincRNAs show a markedly higher degree of tissue-specific [8] and disease specific expression [9], suggesting some biological function.

(p2.4) LincRNA expression is generally much lower than protein coding genes, with a few exceptions such as the XIST lincRNA [10]. For some lincRNAs, even just a few or a single transcript exist in a cell, determined by RNA-Seq data [10]. However, rather than being spurious by-products of non-specific RNA transcription, the expression levels of lincRNAs in any given cell are precisely coordinated throughout the tissue, and dynamic through the course of development [11]. Researchers have detected differential expression of lincRNA in a range of tissues, diseases, and specific cellular responses. Efforts have been made to take advantage of these properties of lincRNAs for translational and clinical applications, such as disease biomarkers [12].

(p2.5) Another unique feature of lincRNAs is the low sequence conservation. LincRNAs exhibit 22-25 % of conserved bases under purifying selection, compared to 77 % in protein coding sequences. However, they are considerably more conserved than introns, which have 7 % conservation [13]. Under the assumption that sequence conservation reflects biological significance, the high genomic sequence variability in lincRNAs was the initial basis to call them "junk RNAs". Unlike proteins, where evolutionary conservation correlates highly with functional importance, lincRNAs seem to be under different selective pressures. Many lincRNA are predicted to have secondary structure and may therefore act in a sequence independent manner [14]. Consequently, there may be a greater functional importance on molecular 3D conformation over the primary sequence. This is supported by a recent global study of genetic variants in human lincRNAs in association with diseases, where single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in evolutionarily conserved regions of lincRNAs had significant effects on predicted secondary structure [15].
## (s3) Genome-wide detection of lincRNAs
Number of References: 48

(p3.0) Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) is an NGS method that has allowed the discovery of global genomic binding sites of DNA-interacting proteins, such as transcription factors and histones. Using ChIP-Seq signatures of histone 3 lysine 4 tri-methylation (H3K4me3) and histone 3 lysine 36 tri-methylation (HK36me3), or so called "K4-K36" clusters, Guttman et al. detected approximately 1700 transcriptional units >5 kb among four mouse cell lines, which were confirmed by tiling microarrays, PCR and northern blots [16]. This type of chromatin signature was later applied to human cell lines to identify lincRNAs and was shown that along with HOTAIR, 20 % of lincRNAs were associated with the Polycomb repressive complexes 2 (PRC2) [4]. ChIP-Seq has also been applied to the detection of RNA pol II occupancy to identify lincRNAs in mouse macrophages upon endotoxin stimulation [17]. The authors found that 70 % of extragenic polymerase II peaks were associated with genomic regions with a canonical chromatin signature of enhancers.

(p3.1) Clearly, decisions made during the library preparation phase of an RNA-seq experiment will affect lincRNA measurements. Since many but not all lincRNA transcripts are poly-adenylated [18], the decision to select poly-adenylated RNAs or to use ribodepletion methods should be made with care. Yang et al. [19] state that approximately 20 % of transcripts are non-poly adenylated, suggesting that ribo-depletion methods are necessary to gain a more comprehensive picture of the transcriptome. In addition, Yang et al. find that some transcripts, such as the Malat1 lincRNA are bimorphic, meaning they exist in poly-A(+) and poly-A(−) configurations. Thus, ribo-depletion and poly-A selection methods could provide complementary information on the relative proportions of poly-adenylation of transcripts. Moreover, the adoption of strand-specific sequencing protocols provides a means of making more detailed annotations of lncRNAs, especially the antisense lncRNAs [20]. Nevertheless, even without strand information, RNA-seq has proven useful for the identification of lincRNAs. For example, Cabili et al. analysed lincRNAs in 24 tissues and mapped out nearly 9000 lincRNAs coupled to expression profile information [8].

(p3.2) Not all NGS methods are ideal for identifying the precise boundaries of lincRNAs. ChIP-Seq using antibodies against RNA polymerases can only provide a rough estimation of transcription location but not the precise boundaries of transcripts [17]. RNA-Seq may also have trouble to detect isoforms and their exact start and end sites, as the cDNA is randomly fragmented, and accumulated from all isoforms within a given genomic loci [21]. Moreover, if RNA-Seq is conducted by a poly-A enriched approach, the internal bias against 5′ ends make it difficult to map out the exact start sites of a transcript. However, some other NGS methods have been adopted to overcome this problem. For example, cap analysis gene expression (CAGE) tag sequencing has been used to aid the identification of transcription start sites in human cells [18], and 3′-end sequencing (3SEQ) has also been used in a zebrafish model to aid the determination of the 3′ bounds of lincRNA transcripts [22]. Additionally, tiling arrays that enable direct observation of lincRNAs transcript exons have been used to detect gene boundaries and alternative splicing. For example, Tahira et al. sampled intergenic and intronic ESTs from over one million ESTs from The Cancer Genome Project to develop a custom microarray, and subsequently identified lincRNAs differentially expressed between primary and metastatic pancreatic cancers [23].

(p3.3) Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) is an NGS method that has allowed the discovery of global genomic binding sites of DNA-interacting proteins, such as transcription factors and histones. Using ChIP-Seq signatures of histone 3 lysine 4 tri-methylation (H3K4me3) and histone 3 lysine 36 tri-methylation (HK36me3), or so called "K4-K36" clusters, Guttman et al. detected approximately 1700 transcriptional units >5 kb among four mouse cell lines, which were confirmed by tiling microarrays, PCR and northern blots [16]. This type of chromatin signature was later applied to human cell lines to identify lincRNAs and was shown that along with HOTAIR, 20 % of lincRNAs were associated with the Polycomb repressive complexes 2 (PRC2) [4]. ChIP-Seq has also been applied to the detection of RNA pol II occupancy to identify lincRNAs in mouse macrophages upon endotoxin stimulation [17]. The authors found that 70 % of extragenic polymerase II peaks were associated with genomic regions with a canonical chromatin signature of enhancers.

(p3.4) Clearly, decisions made during the library preparation phase of an RNA-seq experiment will affect lincRNA measurements. Since many but not all lincRNA transcripts are poly-adenylated [18], the decision to select poly-adenylated RNAs or to use ribodepletion methods should be made with care. Yang et al. [19] state that approximately 20 % of transcripts are non-poly adenylated, suggesting that ribo-depletion methods are necessary to gain a more comprehensive picture of the transcriptome. In addition, Yang et al. find that some transcripts, such as the Malat1 lincRNA are bimorphic, meaning they exist in poly-A(+) and poly-A(−) configurations. Thus, ribo-depletion and poly-A selection methods could provide complementary information on the relative proportions of poly-adenylation of transcripts. Moreover, the adoption of strand-specific sequencing protocols provides a means of making more detailed annotations of lncRNAs, especially the antisense lncRNAs [20]. Nevertheless, even without strand information, RNA-seq has proven useful for the identification of lincRNAs. For example, Cabili et al. analysed lincRNAs in 24 tissues and mapped out nearly 9000 lincRNAs coupled to expression profile information [8].

(p3.5) Not all NGS methods are ideal for identifying the precise boundaries of lincRNAs. ChIP-Seq using antibodies against RNA polymerases can only provide a rough estimation of transcription location but not the precise boundaries of transcripts [17]. RNA-Seq may also have trouble to detect isoforms and their exact start and end sites, as the cDNA is randomly fragmented, and accumulated from all isoforms within a given genomic loci [21]. Moreover, if RNA-Seq is conducted by a poly-A enriched approach, the internal bias against 5′ ends make it difficult to map out the exact start sites of a transcript. However, some other NGS methods have been adopted to overcome this problem. For example, cap analysis gene expression (CAGE) tag sequencing has been used to aid the identification of transcription start sites in human cells [18], and 3′-end sequencing (3SEQ) has also been used in a zebrafish model to aid the determination of the 3′ bounds of lincRNA transcripts [22]. Additionally, tiling arrays that enable direct observation of lincRNAs transcript exons have been used to detect gene boundaries and alternative splicing. For example, Tahira et al. sampled intergenic and intronic ESTs from over one million ESTs from The Cancer Genome Project to develop a custom microarray, and subsequently identified lincRNAs differentially expressed between primary and metastatic pancreatic cancers [23].
## (s6) Genomic assays to study lincRNA regulations
Number of References: 6

(p6.0) Methods to elucidate the functions of individual lincRNAs have made much slower progress compared to large-scale genomic assays. In this section we survey the increasing number of genome-scale molecular interaction studies to investigate the cellular functions of lincRNAs. Several genomic approaches have been reported to identify specific functions of lincR-NAs. One popular technique is the protein-centric RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP), which selects a particular protein or a group of proteins to co-precipitate RNAs and determines functional relationships based on physical interactions [41]. This allows one to ascribe functions of the protein(s) with co-precipitated lincRNAs. For example, Shi et al. used RIP to identify novel functional lincRNAs involved in the regulation of TNF expression through binding to PRC2 [42], and found that PRC2 binds to thousands of RNA species. Thus, protein-centric methods focusing on PRC2 have provided us critical insights into the genome-wide regulation by lincRNAs [43].
## (s7) Known functions and mechanisms of lincRNAs
Number of References: 12

(p7.0) Historically, lincRNAs have been shown to have a greater likelihood to be functionally associated with their nearest neighboring protein-coding genes. However, more recent analyses show that the expression correlation between a lincRNA and its closest coding gene is not statistically significant when compared to the correlation between two neighboring protein-coding genes [8,46]. While complementary base pairing may be the mechanism of action for some small RNAs such as microRNAs, lincRNAs by their nature are unlikely to exert their regulatory function solely through sequence pairing. Instead, lincRNAs have been shown to mediate the interplay between many molecular species simultaneously [47]. LincRNAs affect gene expression by many different mechanisms -from chromatin remodelling and epigenetic regulation, to transcriptional, posttranscriptional, and protein-level control. So far, no unifying genome-wide theme has been found to explain all the complexities of lincRNA regulation. We review the handful of competing theories that attempt to address this problem.

(p7.1) Historically, lincRNAs have been shown to have a greater likelihood to be functionally associated with their nearest neighboring protein-coding genes. However, more recent analyses show that the expression correlation between a lincRNA and its closest coding gene is not statistically significant when compared to the correlation between two neighboring protein-coding genes [8,46]. While complementary base pairing may be the mechanism of action for some small RNAs such as microRNAs, lincRNAs by their nature are unlikely to exert their regulatory function solely through sequence pairing. Instead, lincRNAs have been shown to mediate the interplay between many molecular species simultaneously [47]. LincRNAs affect gene expression by many different mechanisms -from chromatin remodelling and epigenetic regulation, to transcriptional, posttranscriptional, and protein-level control. So far, no unifying genome-wide theme has been found to explain all the complexities of lincRNA regulation. We review the handful of competing theories that attempt to address this problem.
## (s9) LincRNAs as transcription co-factors
Number of References: 20

(p9.0) Many lincRNAs are known to act as transcription co-factors. In some cases, the act of transcription of a lincRNA may positively or negatively affect expression of nearby genes [51]. Dimitrova et al. showed that lincRNA-p21 acts as a transcriptional coactivator and was required for recruitment of ribonucleoproteins to promoter elements associated with pre-mRNA [52]. MALAT1 is also known to act as a transcription co-factor. This lincRNA is well characterized as one of the most highly expressed mammalian lincRNAs. It is also known to significantly affect the metastasic process in lung adenocarcinoma, by enhancing the expression of cell motility genes [53]. It was found that MALAT1 acts as a molecular scaffold to allow gene expression by promoting the interaction among unmethylated PRC2, E2F1 transcription factor, histone markers, and the other transcriptional coactivator complexes [54]. Interestingly, this protein sequestration mechanism of ncRNA is not unique to eukaryotes, and it also occurs in bacteria [55].

(p9.1) Many lincRNAs are known to act as transcription co-factors. In some cases, the act of transcription of a lincRNA may positively or negatively affect expression of nearby genes [51]. Dimitrova et al. showed that lincRNA-p21 acts as a transcriptional coactivator and was required for recruitment of ribonucleoproteins to promoter elements associated with pre-mRNA [52]. MALAT1 is also known to act as a transcription co-factor. This lincRNA is well characterized as one of the most highly expressed mammalian lincRNAs. It is also known to significantly affect the metastasic process in lung adenocarcinoma, by enhancing the expression of cell motility genes [53]. It was found that MALAT1 acts as a molecular scaffold to allow gene expression by promoting the interaction among unmethylated PRC2, E2F1 transcription factor, histone markers, and the other transcriptional coactivator complexes [54]. Interestingly, this protein sequestration mechanism of ncRNA is not unique to eukaryotes, and it also occurs in bacteria [55].
## (s11) LincRNAs as evolutionary reservoirs
Number of References: 24

(p11.0) While lincRNAs have less sequence conservation than protein-coding genes, they have a greater degree of secondary motif conservation compared to mRNAs [62]. These elements may explain the origins of lincRNAs, which provide a reservoir of evolutionarily constrained RNA motifs [62,63] to supply extra genetic modules for evolutionary tinkering. It is also known that Retrotransposon and tandem repeat sequences are more common within lincRNAs compared to protein-coding genes [64]. Embedded microRNAs and the hypothesized ceRNA mechanism mentioned earlier may be accounted for by such duplication events, as modulating copy number of an embedded microRNA or target site would allow for fine-tuned regulation [56,65].

(p11.1) While lincRNAs have less sequence conservation than protein-coding genes, they have a greater degree of secondary motif conservation compared to mRNAs [62]. These elements may explain the origins of lincRNAs, which provide a reservoir of evolutionarily constrained RNA motifs [62,63] to supply extra genetic modules for evolutionary tinkering. It is also known that Retrotransposon and tandem repeat sequences are more common within lincRNAs compared to protein-coding genes [64]. Embedded microRNAs and the hypothesized ceRNA mechanism mentioned earlier may be accounted for by such duplication events, as modulating copy number of an embedded microRNA or target site would allow for fine-tuned regulation [56,65].
## (s13) Correlation with protein coding genes and biological processes
Number of References: 20

(p13.0) One of the simplest approaches to determine the function of lincRNAs is to examine their correlations with protein coding genes [66]. However, this is a "black box" approach that identifies neither causality nor lincRNA functions at the molecular level. Another naïve approach is to relate the function of lincRNAs to the nearby protein coding genes [67]. Many lincRNAs have been found to exert regulatory activity on protein coding genes in cis [45,52]. However, Khalil et al. found that knockdown of six different lincRNAs did not affect the expression of level of nearby genes [4]. This suggests that lincRNAs can work in trans as well, and that the correlation between a lincRNA and its nearby protein coding genes may not necessarily be a causative relationship, but rather a result of sharing a region of active transcription.

(p13.1) One of the simplest approaches to determine the function of lincRNAs is to examine their correlations with protein coding genes [66]. However, this is a "black box" approach that identifies neither causality nor lincRNA functions at the molecular level. Another naïve approach is to relate the function of lincRNAs to the nearby protein coding genes [67]. Many lincRNAs have been found to exert regulatory activity on protein coding genes in cis [45,52]. However, Khalil et al. found that knockdown of six different lincRNAs did not affect the expression of level of nearby genes [4]. This suggests that lincRNAs can work in trans as well, and that the correlation between a lincRNA and its nearby protein coding genes may not necessarily be a causative relationship, but rather a result of sharing a region of active transcription.
## (s14) Relation between lincRNAs with microRNAs and other small non-coding RNAs
Number of References: 12

(p14.0) Other more sophisticated tools have been developed to identify more succinct functions. Boerner and McGinnis constructed a pipeline to seek functions of lncRNAs in Zea Mays [33]. Using BLAST search, they found that the majority of lncRNAs have strong homology to small RNA molecules. They hypothesized that many lncRNAs are simply unprocessed pre-cursors to small non-coding RNAs, such as microRNA, shRNA and siRNA [33]. Based on the "ceRNA hypothesis" mentioned earlier, Liu et al. developed "linc2GO", a software for identifying mRNA and lincRNA pairs [57]. Using predicted microRNA targets from miRanda, TargetScan and PITA software, they predicted microRNA targets on both mRNAs and lincRNAs; The mRNAs and lincRNAs that had statistically significant target sites for a particular microRNA were proposed to have a "competing endogenous" relationship.

(p14.1) Other more sophisticated tools have been developed to identify more succinct functions. Boerner and McGinnis constructed a pipeline to seek functions of lncRNAs in Zea Mays [33]. Using BLAST search, they found that the majority of lncRNAs have strong homology to small RNA molecules. They hypothesized that many lncRNAs are simply unprocessed pre-cursors to small non-coding RNAs, such as microRNA, shRNA and siRNA [33]. Based on the "ceRNA hypothesis" mentioned earlier, Liu et al. developed "linc2GO", a software for identifying mRNA and lincRNA pairs [57]. Using predicted microRNA targets from miRanda, TargetScan and PITA software, they predicted microRNA targets on both mRNAs and lincRNAs; The mRNAs and lincRNAs that had statistically significant target sites for a particular microRNA were proposed to have a "competing endogenous" relationship.
## (s17) Conclusion
Number of References: 12

(p17.0) Statistical evaluation studies for lincRNAs are urgently needed, as datasets produced by these various methods have thus far shown only modest overlaps in their identified lincRNAs [14]. Besides lack of sequence conservation among lincRNAs, another major issue hindering functional prediction is the lack of validated data. While there are many well-studied lincRNAs, there are massively more unannotated lincRNAs. Machine learning methods often require a large training dataset to produce accurate results. Several functional lincRNA/lncRNA databases exist (such as lncrnaDB), however the number of entries are very low and do not categorize the function of the lncRNAs in a systematic manner [80]. As more and more lincRNAs become functionally validated, comprehensive and regularly updated databases would be a great source to build good prediction methods. Perhaps even more important is the advancement of experimental techniques to provide quality data required for the prediction. Currently, most experimental techniques focus on a single protein or a small number of proteins (protein-centric) or a single lincRNA or family of lincRNAs (RNA-centric) [41]. New methods are required that can provide high-throughput protein and RNA targets of thousands of lincRNAs in parallel.

(p17.1) Statistical evaluation studies for lincRNAs are urgently needed, as datasets produced by these various methods have thus far shown only modest overlaps in their identified lincRNAs [14]. Besides lack of sequence conservation among lincRNAs, another major issue hindering functional prediction is the lack of validated data. While there are many well-studied lincRNAs, there are massively more unannotated lincRNAs. Machine learning methods often require a large training dataset to produce accurate results. Several functional lincRNA/lncRNA databases exist (such as lncrnaDB), however the number of entries are very low and do not categorize the function of the lncRNAs in a systematic manner [80]. As more and more lincRNAs become functionally validated, comprehensive and regularly updated databases would be a great source to build good prediction methods. Perhaps even more important is the advancement of experimental techniques to provide quality data required for the prediction. Currently, most experimental techniques focus on a single protein or a small number of proteins (protein-centric) or a single lincRNA or family of lincRNAs (RNA-centric) [41]. New methods are required that can provide high-throughput protein and RNA targets of thousands of lincRNAs in parallel.
## (s19) Introduction
Number of References: 8

(p19.0) The mainstream focus of biomedical research has been in elucidating the functions and interactions among proteins within the cell. In line with the central dogma of molecular biology, RNAs were once perceived as the intermediary for protein production and the archaic precursor molecule of DNA. However, RNAs are transcribed from more than 85 % of genomic regions [1], whereas proteins are only encoded in less than 3 % of human genome sequences [2]. This leaves a mysterious knowledge gap in either the efficiency of cellular transcription to translation or a foundational misunderstanding in gene expression regulation and RNA function. It was thought that RNAs had limited but essential and evolutionarily common roles of basic cell machinery such as tRNA, rRNA, and mRNA. The few examples of functional RNAs or RNAs with enzymatic-like activity, were considered as evolutionary remnants [3]. For a long period of time, non-coding RNA (ncRNA) transcripts were believed to be by-products derived from mRNA degradation or nonspecific polymerase activity, and therefore termed "transcriptional noise" [4].
## (s21) Emerging characteristics of lincRNAs
Number of References: 52

(p21.0) LincRNAs are a putatively heterogeneous group, conventionally defined as ncRNA transcripts of more than 200 bp located in regions with no overlap to any known proteincoding genes. According to Lncipedia, a comprehensive lncRNA database, high-throughput studies of transcriptome data have catalogued over 111,000 lncRNA transcripts, with roughly 50 % coming from intergenic regions [5]. The majority of lincRNAs are thought to be transcribed from RNA polymerase II, and are therefore usually modified by post-transcriptional 5′ capping and 3′ polyadenylation [6]. Surprisingly, lincRNAs show ribosome occupancy similar to the 5′UTRs of protein coding genes [7]. What differentiates lincRNAs from protein coding genes seems to be the lack of release upon encountering a stop codon in the lincRNA sequences [7]. Therefore, polyadenlyation and 5′ capping are not necessarily markers of protein coding functionality. However, lincRNAs show a markedly higher degree of tissue-specific [8] and disease specific expression [9], suggesting some biological function.

(p21.1) LincRNA expression is generally much lower than protein coding genes, with a few exceptions such as the XIST lincRNA [10]. For some lincRNAs, even just a few or a single transcript exist in a cell, determined by RNA-Seq data [10]. However, rather than being spurious by-products of non-specific RNA transcription, the expression levels of lincRNAs in any given cell are precisely coordinated throughout the tissue, and dynamic through the course of development [11]. Researchers have detected differential expression of lincRNA in a range of tissues, diseases, and specific cellular responses. Efforts have been made to take advantage of these properties of lincRNAs for translational and clinical applications, such as disease biomarkers [12].

(p21.2) Another unique feature of lincRNAs is the low sequence conservation. LincRNAs exhibit 22-25 % of conserved bases under purifying selection, compared to 77 % in protein coding sequences. However, they are considerably more conserved than introns, which have 7 % conservation [13]. Under the assumption that sequence conservation reflects biological significance, the high genomic sequence variability in lincRNAs was the initial basis to call them "junk RNAs". Unlike proteins, where evolutionary conservation correlates highly with functional importance, lincRNAs seem to be under different selective pressures. Many lincRNA are predicted to have secondary structure and may therefore act in a sequence independent manner [14]. Consequently, there may be a greater functional importance on molecular 3D conformation over the primary sequence. This is supported by a recent global study of genetic variants in human lincRNAs in association with diseases, where single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in evolutionarily conserved regions of lincRNAs had significant effects on predicted secondary structure [15].

(p21.3) LincRNAs are a putatively heterogeneous group, conventionally defined as ncRNA transcripts of more than 200 bp located in regions with no overlap to any known proteincoding genes. According to Lncipedia, a comprehensive lncRNA database, high-throughput studies of transcriptome data have catalogued over 111,000 lncRNA transcripts, with roughly 50 % coming from intergenic regions [5]. The majority of lincRNAs are thought to be transcribed from RNA polymerase II, and are therefore usually modified by post-transcriptional 5′ capping and 3′ polyadenylation [6]. Surprisingly, lincRNAs show ribosome occupancy similar to the 5′UTRs of protein coding genes [7]. What differentiates lincRNAs from protein coding genes seems to be the lack of release upon encountering a stop codon in the lincRNA sequences [7]. Therefore, polyadenlyation and 5′ capping are not necessarily markers of protein coding functionality. However, lincRNAs show a markedly higher degree of tissue-specific [8] and disease specific expression [9], suggesting some biological function.

(p21.4) LincRNA expression is generally much lower than protein coding genes, with a few exceptions such as the XIST lincRNA [10]. For some lincRNAs, even just a few or a single transcript exist in a cell, determined by RNA-Seq data [10]. However, rather than being spurious by-products of non-specific RNA transcription, the expression levels of lincRNAs in any given cell are precisely coordinated throughout the tissue, and dynamic through the course of development [11]. Researchers have detected differential expression of lincRNA in a range of tissues, diseases, and specific cellular responses. Efforts have been made to take advantage of these properties of lincRNAs for translational and clinical applications, such as disease biomarkers [12].

(p21.5) Another unique feature of lincRNAs is the low sequence conservation. LincRNAs exhibit 22-25 % of conserved bases under purifying selection, compared to 77 % in protein coding sequences. However, they are considerably more conserved than introns, which have 7 % conservation [13]. Under the assumption that sequence conservation reflects biological significance, the high genomic sequence variability in lincRNAs was the initial basis to call them "junk RNAs". Unlike proteins, where evolutionary conservation correlates highly with functional importance, lincRNAs seem to be under different selective pressures. Many lincRNA are predicted to have secondary structure and may therefore act in a sequence independent manner [14]. Consequently, there may be a greater functional importance on molecular 3D conformation over the primary sequence. This is supported by a recent global study of genetic variants in human lincRNAs in association with diseases, where single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in evolutionarily conserved regions of lincRNAs had significant effects on predicted secondary structure [15].
## (s22) Genome-wide detection of lincRNAs
Number of References: 48

(p22.0) Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) is an NGS method that has allowed the discovery of global genomic binding sites of DNA-interacting proteins, such as transcription factors and histones. Using ChIP-Seq signatures of histone 3 lysine 4 tri-methylation (H3K4me3) and histone 3 lysine 36 tri-methylation (HK36me3), or so called "K4-K36" clusters, Guttman et al. detected approximately 1700 transcriptional units >5 kb among four mouse cell lines, which were confirmed by tiling microarrays, PCR and northern blots [16]. This type of chromatin signature was later applied to human cell lines to identify lincRNAs and was shown that along with HOTAIR, 20 % of lincRNAs were associated with the Polycomb repressive complexes 2 (PRC2) [4]. ChIP-Seq has also been applied to the detection of RNA pol II occupancy to identify lincRNAs in mouse macrophages upon endotoxin stimulation [17]. The authors found that 70 % of extragenic polymerase II peaks were associated with genomic regions with a canonical chromatin signature of enhancers.

(p22.1) Clearly, decisions made during the library preparation phase of an RNA-seq experiment will affect lincRNA measurements. Since many but not all lincRNA transcripts are poly-adenylated [18], the decision to select poly-adenylated RNAs or to use ribodepletion methods should be made with care. Yang et al. [19] state that approximately 20 % of transcripts are non-poly adenylated, suggesting that ribo-depletion methods are necessary to gain a more comprehensive picture of the transcriptome. In addition, Yang et al. find that some transcripts, such as the Malat1 lincRNA are bimorphic, meaning they exist in poly-A(+) and poly-A(−) configurations. Thus, ribo-depletion and poly-A selection methods could provide complementary information on the relative proportions of poly-adenylation of transcripts. Moreover, the adoption of strand-specific sequencing protocols provides a means of making more detailed annotations of lncRNAs, especially the antisense lncRNAs [20]. Nevertheless, even without strand information, RNA-seq has proven useful for the identification of lincRNAs. For example, Cabili et al. analysed lincRNAs in 24 tissues and mapped out nearly 9000 lincRNAs coupled to expression profile information [8].

(p22.2) Not all NGS methods are ideal for identifying the precise boundaries of lincRNAs. ChIP-Seq using antibodies against RNA polymerases can only provide a rough estimation of transcription location but not the precise boundaries of transcripts [17]. RNA-Seq may also have trouble to detect isoforms and their exact start and end sites, as the cDNA is randomly fragmented, and accumulated from all isoforms within a given genomic loci [21]. Moreover, if RNA-Seq is conducted by a poly-A enriched approach, the internal bias against 5′ ends make it difficult to map out the exact start sites of a transcript. However, some other NGS methods have been adopted to overcome this problem. For example, cap analysis gene expression (CAGE) tag sequencing has been used to aid the identification of transcription start sites in human cells [18], and 3′-end sequencing (3SEQ) has also been used in a zebrafish model to aid the determination of the 3′ bounds of lincRNA transcripts [22]. Additionally, tiling arrays that enable direct observation of lincRNAs transcript exons have been used to detect gene boundaries and alternative splicing. For example, Tahira et al. sampled intergenic and intronic ESTs from over one million ESTs from The Cancer Genome Project to develop a custom microarray, and subsequently identified lincRNAs differentially expressed between primary and metastatic pancreatic cancers [23].

(p22.3) Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) is an NGS method that has allowed the discovery of global genomic binding sites of DNA-interacting proteins, such as transcription factors and histones. Using ChIP-Seq signatures of histone 3 lysine 4 tri-methylation (H3K4me3) and histone 3 lysine 36 tri-methylation (HK36me3), or so called "K4-K36" clusters, Guttman et al. detected approximately 1700 transcriptional units >5 kb among four mouse cell lines, which were confirmed by tiling microarrays, PCR and northern blots [16]. This type of chromatin signature was later applied to human cell lines to identify lincRNAs and was shown that along with HOTAIR, 20 % of lincRNAs were associated with the Polycomb repressive complexes 2 (PRC2) [4]. ChIP-Seq has also been applied to the detection of RNA pol II occupancy to identify lincRNAs in mouse macrophages upon endotoxin stimulation [17]. The authors found that 70 % of extragenic polymerase II peaks were associated with genomic regions with a canonical chromatin signature of enhancers.

(p22.4) Clearly, decisions made during the library preparation phase of an RNA-seq experiment will affect lincRNA measurements. Since many but not all lincRNA transcripts are poly-adenylated [18], the decision to select poly-adenylated RNAs or to use ribodepletion methods should be made with care. Yang et al. [19] state that approximately 20 % of transcripts are non-poly adenylated, suggesting that ribo-depletion methods are necessary to gain a more comprehensive picture of the transcriptome. In addition, Yang et al. find that some transcripts, such as the Malat1 lincRNA are bimorphic, meaning they exist in poly-A(+) and poly-A(−) configurations. Thus, ribo-depletion and poly-A selection methods could provide complementary information on the relative proportions of poly-adenylation of transcripts. Moreover, the adoption of strand-specific sequencing protocols provides a means of making more detailed annotations of lncRNAs, especially the antisense lncRNAs [20]. Nevertheless, even without strand information, RNA-seq has proven useful for the identification of lincRNAs. For example, Cabili et al. analysed lincRNAs in 24 tissues and mapped out nearly 9000 lincRNAs coupled to expression profile information [8].

(p22.5) Not all NGS methods are ideal for identifying the precise boundaries of lincRNAs. ChIP-Seq using antibodies against RNA polymerases can only provide a rough estimation of transcription location but not the precise boundaries of transcripts [17]. RNA-Seq may also have trouble to detect isoforms and their exact start and end sites, as the cDNA is randomly fragmented, and accumulated from all isoforms within a given genomic loci [21]. Moreover, if RNA-Seq is conducted by a poly-A enriched approach, the internal bias against 5′ ends make it difficult to map out the exact start sites of a transcript. However, some other NGS methods have been adopted to overcome this problem. For example, cap analysis gene expression (CAGE) tag sequencing has been used to aid the identification of transcription start sites in human cells [18], and 3′-end sequencing (3SEQ) has also been used in a zebrafish model to aid the determination of the 3′ bounds of lincRNA transcripts [22]. Additionally, tiling arrays that enable direct observation of lincRNAs transcript exons have been used to detect gene boundaries and alternative splicing. For example, Tahira et al. sampled intergenic and intronic ESTs from over one million ESTs from The Cancer Genome Project to develop a custom microarray, and subsequently identified lincRNAs differentially expressed between primary and metastatic pancreatic cancers [23].
## (s25) Genomic assays to study lincRNA regulations
Number of References: 6

(p25.0) Methods to elucidate the functions of individual lincRNAs have made much slower progress compared to large-scale genomic assays. In this section we survey the increasing number of genome-scale molecular interaction studies to investigate the cellular functions of lincRNAs. Several genomic approaches have been reported to identify specific functions of lincR-NAs. One popular technique is the protein-centric RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP), which selects a particular protein or a group of proteins to co-precipitate RNAs and determines functional relationships based on physical interactions [41]. This allows one to ascribe functions of the protein(s) with co-precipitated lincRNAs. For example, Shi et al. used RIP to identify novel functional lincRNAs involved in the regulation of TNF expression through binding to PRC2 [42], and found that PRC2 binds to thousands of RNA species. Thus, protein-centric methods focusing on PRC2 have provided us critical insights into the genome-wide regulation by lincRNAs [43].
## (s26) Known functions and mechanisms of lincRNAs
Number of References: 12

(p26.0) Historically, lincRNAs have been shown to have a greater likelihood to be functionally associated with their nearest neighboring protein-coding genes. However, more recent analyses show that the expression correlation between a lincRNA and its closest coding gene is not statistically significant when compared to the correlation between two neighboring protein-coding genes [8,46]. While complementary base pairing may be the mechanism of action for some small RNAs such as microRNAs, lincRNAs by their nature are unlikely to exert their regulatory function solely through sequence pairing. Instead, lincRNAs have been shown to mediate the interplay between many molecular species simultaneously [47]. LincRNAs affect gene expression by many different mechanisms -from chromatin remodelling and epigenetic regulation, to transcriptional, posttranscriptional, and protein-level control. So far, no unifying genome-wide theme has been found to explain all the complexities of lincRNA regulation. We review the handful of competing theories that attempt to address this problem.

(p26.1) Historically, lincRNAs have been shown to have a greater likelihood to be functionally associated with their nearest neighboring protein-coding genes. However, more recent analyses show that the expression correlation between a lincRNA and its closest coding gene is not statistically significant when compared to the correlation between two neighboring protein-coding genes [8,46]. While complementary base pairing may be the mechanism of action for some small RNAs such as microRNAs, lincRNAs by their nature are unlikely to exert their regulatory function solely through sequence pairing. Instead, lincRNAs have been shown to mediate the interplay between many molecular species simultaneously [47]. LincRNAs affect gene expression by many different mechanisms -from chromatin remodelling and epigenetic regulation, to transcriptional, posttranscriptional, and protein-level control. So far, no unifying genome-wide theme has been found to explain all the complexities of lincRNA regulation. We review the handful of competing theories that attempt to address this problem.
## (s28) LincRNAs as transcription co-factors
Number of References: 20

(p28.0) Many lincRNAs are known to act as transcription co-factors. In some cases, the act of transcription of a lincRNA may positively or negatively affect expression of nearby genes [51]. Dimitrova et al. showed that lincRNA-p21 acts as a transcriptional coactivator and was required for recruitment of ribonucleoproteins to promoter elements associated with pre-mRNA [52]. MALAT1 is also known to act as a transcription co-factor. This lincRNA is well characterized as one of the most highly expressed mammalian lincRNAs. It is also known to significantly affect the metastasic process in lung adenocarcinoma, by enhancing the expression of cell motility genes [53]. It was found that MALAT1 acts as a molecular scaffold to allow gene expression by promoting the interaction among unmethylated PRC2, E2F1 transcription factor, histone markers, and the other transcriptional coactivator complexes [54]. Interestingly, this protein sequestration mechanism of ncRNA is not unique to eukaryotes, and it also occurs in bacteria [55].

(p28.1) Many lincRNAs are known to act as transcription co-factors. In some cases, the act of transcription of a lincRNA may positively or negatively affect expression of nearby genes [51]. Dimitrova et al. showed that lincRNA-p21 acts as a transcriptional coactivator and was required for recruitment of ribonucleoproteins to promoter elements associated with pre-mRNA [52]. MALAT1 is also known to act as a transcription co-factor. This lincRNA is well characterized as one of the most highly expressed mammalian lincRNAs. It is also known to significantly affect the metastasic process in lung adenocarcinoma, by enhancing the expression of cell motility genes [53]. It was found that MALAT1 acts as a molecular scaffold to allow gene expression by promoting the interaction among unmethylated PRC2, E2F1 transcription factor, histone markers, and the other transcriptional coactivator complexes [54]. Interestingly, this protein sequestration mechanism of ncRNA is not unique to eukaryotes, and it also occurs in bacteria [55].
## (s30) LincRNAs as evolutionary reservoirs
Number of References: 24

(p30.0) While lincRNAs have less sequence conservation than protein-coding genes, they have a greater degree of secondary motif conservation compared to mRNAs [62]. These elements may explain the origins of lincRNAs, which provide a reservoir of evolutionarily constrained RNA motifs [62,63] to supply extra genetic modules for evolutionary tinkering. It is also known that Retrotransposon and tandem repeat sequences are more common within lincRNAs compared to protein-coding genes [64]. Embedded microRNAs and the hypothesized ceRNA mechanism mentioned earlier may be accounted for by such duplication events, as modulating copy number of an embedded microRNA or target site would allow for fine-tuned regulation [56,65].

(p30.1) While lincRNAs have less sequence conservation than protein-coding genes, they have a greater degree of secondary motif conservation compared to mRNAs [62]. These elements may explain the origins of lincRNAs, which provide a reservoir of evolutionarily constrained RNA motifs [62,63] to supply extra genetic modules for evolutionary tinkering. It is also known that Retrotransposon and tandem repeat sequences are more common within lincRNAs compared to protein-coding genes [64]. Embedded microRNAs and the hypothesized ceRNA mechanism mentioned earlier may be accounted for by such duplication events, as modulating copy number of an embedded microRNA or target site would allow for fine-tuned regulation [56,65].
## (s32) Correlation with protein coding genes and biological processes
Number of References: 20

(p32.0) One of the simplest approaches to determine the function of lincRNAs is to examine their correlations with protein coding genes [66]. However, this is a "black box" approach that identifies neither causality nor lincRNA functions at the molecular level. Another naïve approach is to relate the function of lincRNAs to the nearby protein coding genes [67]. Many lincRNAs have been found to exert regulatory activity on protein coding genes in cis [45,52]. However, Khalil et al. found that knockdown of six different lincRNAs did not affect the expression of level of nearby genes [4]. This suggests that lincRNAs can work in trans as well, and that the correlation between a lincRNA and its nearby protein coding genes may not necessarily be a causative relationship, but rather a result of sharing a region of active transcription.

(p32.1) One of the simplest approaches to determine the function of lincRNAs is to examine their correlations with protein coding genes [66]. However, this is a "black box" approach that identifies neither causality nor lincRNA functions at the molecular level. Another naïve approach is to relate the function of lincRNAs to the nearby protein coding genes [67]. Many lincRNAs have been found to exert regulatory activity on protein coding genes in cis [45,52]. However, Khalil et al. found that knockdown of six different lincRNAs did not affect the expression of level of nearby genes [4]. This suggests that lincRNAs can work in trans as well, and that the correlation between a lincRNA and its nearby protein coding genes may not necessarily be a causative relationship, but rather a result of sharing a region of active transcription.
## (s33) Relation between lincRNAs with microRNAs and other small non-coding RNAs
Number of References: 12

(p33.0) Other more sophisticated tools have been developed to identify more succinct functions. Boerner and McGinnis constructed a pipeline to seek functions of lncRNAs in Zea Mays [33]. Using BLAST search, they found that the majority of lncRNAs have strong homology to small RNA molecules. They hypothesized that many lncRNAs are simply unprocessed pre-cursors to small non-coding RNAs, such as microRNA, shRNA and siRNA [33]. Based on the "ceRNA hypothesis" mentioned earlier, Liu et al. developed "linc2GO", a software for identifying mRNA and lincRNA pairs [57]. Using predicted microRNA targets from miRanda, TargetScan and PITA software, they predicted microRNA targets on both mRNAs and lincRNAs; The mRNAs and lincRNAs that had statistically significant target sites for a particular microRNA were proposed to have a "competing endogenous" relationship.

(p33.1) Other more sophisticated tools have been developed to identify more succinct functions. Boerner and McGinnis constructed a pipeline to seek functions of lncRNAs in Zea Mays [33]. Using BLAST search, they found that the majority of lncRNAs have strong homology to small RNA molecules. They hypothesized that many lncRNAs are simply unprocessed pre-cursors to small non-coding RNAs, such as microRNA, shRNA and siRNA [33]. Based on the "ceRNA hypothesis" mentioned earlier, Liu et al. developed "linc2GO", a software for identifying mRNA and lincRNA pairs [57]. Using predicted microRNA targets from miRanda, TargetScan and PITA software, they predicted microRNA targets on both mRNAs and lincRNAs; The mRNAs and lincRNAs that had statistically significant target sites for a particular microRNA were proposed to have a "competing endogenous" relationship.
## (s36) Conclusion
Number of References: 12

(p36.0) Statistical evaluation studies for lincRNAs are urgently needed, as datasets produced by these various methods have thus far shown only modest overlaps in their identified lincRNAs [14]. Besides lack of sequence conservation among lincRNAs, another major issue hindering functional prediction is the lack of validated data. While there are many well-studied lincRNAs, there are massively more unannotated lincRNAs. Machine learning methods often require a large training dataset to produce accurate results. Several functional lincRNA/lncRNA databases exist (such as lncrnaDB), however the number of entries are very low and do not categorize the function of the lncRNAs in a systematic manner [80]. As more and more lincRNAs become functionally validated, comprehensive and regularly updated databases would be a great source to build good prediction methods. Perhaps even more important is the advancement of experimental techniques to provide quality data required for the prediction. Currently, most experimental techniques focus on a single protein or a small number of proteins (protein-centric) or a single lincRNA or family of lincRNAs (RNA-centric) [41]. New methods are required that can provide high-throughput protein and RNA targets of thousands of lincRNAs in parallel.

(p36.1) Statistical evaluation studies for lincRNAs are urgently needed, as datasets produced by these various methods have thus far shown only modest overlaps in their identified lincRNAs [14]. Besides lack of sequence conservation among lincRNAs, another major issue hindering functional prediction is the lack of validated data. While there are many well-studied lincRNAs, there are massively more unannotated lincRNAs. Machine learning methods often require a large training dataset to produce accurate results. Several functional lincRNA/lncRNA databases exist (such as lncrnaDB), however the number of entries are very low and do not categorize the function of the lncRNAs in a systematic manner [80]. As more and more lincRNAs become functionally validated, comprehensive and regularly updated databases would be a great source to build good prediction methods. Perhaps even more important is the advancement of experimental techniques to provide quality data required for the prediction. Currently, most experimental techniques focus on a single protein or a small number of proteins (protein-centric) or a single lincRNA or family of lincRNAs (RNA-centric) [41]. New methods are required that can provide high-throughput protein and RNA targets of thousands of lincRNAs in parallel.
