# Continuous remote monitoring of COPD patients-justification and explanation of the requirements and a survey of the available technologies

CorpusID: 255314963 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/985586da6209d170ccfa02eb43e41a37bbae3540](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/985586da6209d170ccfa02eb43e41a37bbae3540)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s3) Physical activity in COPD
Number of References: 12

(p3.0) Regular physical activity (PA) is recommended for all patients with stable COPD [66]. Walking is generally accepted, but also stair-climbing, treadmill, or cycling exercises are beneficial. Pulmonary rehabilitation (supervised exercise) or a home exercise program can improve the lung's functional status.

(p3.1) PA in COPD patients decreases the risk of hospitalization [67], reduces the decline in lung function [67], but can also improve the general health status and decrease both disability and mortality [68,69].

(p3.2) PA is drastically reduced during and after hospitalization caused by exacerbation, but even patients with milder exacerbations, which do not require hospitalization, tend to stay indoors during the exacerbation period, which lowers PA levels [67]. It might take a number of weeks for patients to recover from exacerbation, during which time they lose muscle mass as a result of reduced activity.
## (s7) Cardiac electrical activity (ECG) remote monitoring
Number of References: 36

(p7.0) Holter monitors are traditionally used for ECG acquisitions in remote settings, but they are being superseded by wireless bipotential patch devices [78][79][80], whose development has been intensive in recent years (a representative example, a Savvy patch ECG sensor, is shown in Fig. 2). The patch ECG (PECG) sensors are already established as patient friendly, well tolerated, unobtrusive, wire free, and with recording capabilities that span from weeks to months (much longer than standard Holter monitors), which is beneficial for detecting potentially malignant arrhythmias that take a longer time to detect. They provide good adhesion to the skin, and some of them even claim to be waterproof.

(p7.1) The Savvy monitor has been certified as a medical device according to the directive MDD 93/42/EEC, and standards EN 60601 and EN ISO 14971, and has recently  [81,82], with two self-adhesive disposable electrodes, a lithium coin battery, micro-processor, BT4 radio, and printed circuit board antenna (up). Savvy sensor, the final product (down) become available on the market, while the ZIO® XT Patch by iRhythm Technologies, Inc. and SEEQ™ MCT patch device by Medtronic, Inc. have already been extensively evaluated. The evaluations show evidence of an increased diagnostic lead in both adult and pediatric patients compared to Holters [79]. There are also other PECGs available on the market, and the number is expected to increase in the future [78][79][80].

(p7.2) Holter monitors are traditionally used for ECG acquisitions in remote settings, but they are being superseded by wireless bipotential patch devices [78][79][80], whose development has been intensive in recent years (a representative example, a Savvy patch ECG sensor, is shown in Fig. 2). The patch ECG (PECG) sensors are already established as patient friendly, well tolerated, unobtrusive, wire free, and with recording capabilities that span from weeks to months (much longer than standard Holter monitors), which is beneficial for detecting potentially malignant arrhythmias that take a longer time to detect. They provide good adhesion to the skin, and some of them even claim to be waterproof.

(p7.3) The Savvy monitor has been certified as a medical device according to the directive MDD 93/42/EEC, and standards EN 60601 and EN ISO 14971, and has recently  [81,82], with two self-adhesive disposable electrodes, a lithium coin battery, micro-processor, BT4 radio, and printed circuit board antenna (up). Savvy sensor, the final product (down) become available on the market, while the ZIO® XT Patch by iRhythm Technologies, Inc. and SEEQ™ MCT patch device by Medtronic, Inc. have already been extensively evaluated. The evaluations show evidence of an increased diagnostic lead in both adult and pediatric patients compared to Holters [79]. There are also other PECGs available on the market, and the number is expected to increase in the future [78][79][80].
## (s8) Respiratory rate
Number of References: 6

(p8.0) One of the signs of COPD exacerbation is a respiratory rate (RR) over 25/min (see Sect. 4.7). Furthermore, there is evidence that a change in RR has a strong predictive power for exacerbation [83,84].

(p8.1) The respiratory effort can be captured by an impedance pneumograph, stretch sensors, and flow thermography, which captures breathing from the temperature difference between the inhaled and exhaled air. The impedance pneumogram is the most common method used in hospitals [85]. Its basic principle is to inject current into the tissue by employing two drive electrodes placed on the chest and to measure the potential difference between the two points. The potential difference is related to the impedance of the tissue, which varies with respiration.
## (s10) Nutrition and weight monitoring
Number of References: 12

(p10.0) Both obesity and loss of body mass are commonly encountered with COPD [76]. Malnutrition is associated with respiratory muscle dysfunction and increased mortality. Therefore, nutritional intervention should occur if a large loss of body mass is detected. Nutritional interventions aimed at achieving an ideal body weight are also recommended. Highcarbohydrate diets and an extremely high caloric intake should be minimized to reduce the risk of excess CO 2 production [76]. Furthermore, obesity contributes to breathlessness in some individuals due to affected diaphragm mobility. On the other hand, weight loss is associated with a more severe impairment of the lung function [76].

(p10.1) Both obesity and loss of body mass are commonly encountered with COPD [76]. Malnutrition is associated with respiratory muscle dysfunction and increased mortality. Therefore, nutritional intervention should occur if a large loss of body mass is detected. Nutritional interventions aimed at achieving an ideal body weight are also recommended. Highcarbohydrate diets and an extremely high caloric intake should be minimized to reduce the risk of excess CO 2 production [76]. Furthermore, obesity contributes to breathlessness in some individuals due to affected diaphragm mobility. On the other hand, weight loss is associated with a more severe impairment of the lung function [76].
## (s12) Spirometry
Number of References: 6

(p12.0) Diagnostic spirometry measures the volumes of air inspired and expired by the lungs to assess a patient's lung function for the purposes of comparison with a patient population or with previous measurements from the same patient. The presence of airflow limitation is recognized by a reduction in the ratio FEV 1 /VC or the ratio FEV 1 /FVC, where VC (vital lung capacity) is the maximum amount of air expired from the fully inflated lung, FVC (forced vital capacity) is the forced amount of air a person can exhale after the maximum inspiratory effort, and FEV 1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 s) is the fraction of the FVC expired during the first second (see Fig. 3). The presence of a post-bronchodilator FEV 1 /FVC of less than 0.7 confirms the presence of COPD [66]. The FEV 1 /VC ratio is a relatively sensitive index of mild COPD. In moderate-tosevere cases of the disease, however, the severity of the airflow limitation is best assessed by the FEV 1 in relation to reference values (also known as predicted values) [91].

(p12.1) Spirometry is used mainly in the diagnosis of COPD, as well as in the assessment of its severity, progression, and prognosis, but it is not suitable for acute states. Patients with acute severe exacerbations of COPD can be too breathless to undertake spirometry testing, but in any case, conducting spirometry in acute situations is not very informative [66].
## (s22) Monitoring medication application and adherence
Number of References: 40

(p22.0) An appropriate medicament therapy can reduce COPD symptoms, reduce the frequency and severity of exacerbations, and improve health status and exercise capacity, but Bexisting medications for COPD have not been shown conclusively to modify the long-term decline in lung function [ 66]. In particular, exacerbations are treated with bronchodilators, systemic corticosteroids, and antibiotics, and there are new drugs developed all the time [129]. The corticosteroids can cause hypertension, which calls for blood pressure measurements and ECG monitoring during corticosteroid therapy. Stopping regular medication, such as diuretics and/or bronchodilators, on the patient's own initiative might increase symptoms [7].

(p22.1) It has been suggested for more than 10 years now that remote monitoring should be used as the Bgold standard^for medication adherence measurements [130], but how to effectively monitor medication compliance and how to motivate patients to take their medicaments are challenges that still remain. PCD applications that provide reminders and feedback to patients could be useful as motivators. As for monitoring compliance, intelligent packaging for medicaments, equipped with electronics for collecting and transmitting the data about usage, can provide controlled access to medicaments in terms of keeping track of how many medicaments have been used and at which times. This enables monitoring of the adherence to the therapy, the evaluation of patterns of medicament use, and monitoring the dose-response relationship [130]. Obviously, smart packaging can be tricked into tracking adherence since it is not able to detect whether the pills are actually swallowed.

(p22.2) Perhaps the most impressive recent development in monitoring medication adherence, which cannot be easily tricked, is the Proteus Digital Health ingestible sensor that measures medication ingestion and adherence patterns in real time [131]. It is a system of a 1-mm digestible chip and a patch that picks up the signal from the chip and can also capture the HR [132]. Another example of recent developments that are particularly significant for COPD and asthma patients is AstraZeneca's inhaler device called Turbuhaler, which has recently been accompanied by a monitoring device to monitor the actuations of the inhaler [133].

(p22.3) A related problem is how to tailor medications to individual needs. According to the GOLD: BEach pharmacological treatment regime needs to be adapted to the patient (i.e., individualized), guided by the severity of the symptoms, the risk of exacerbations, comorbidities, drug availability, and the patient's response^ [66]. This can be at least partially achieved by using remote monitoring, for the purpose of titrating/ adjusting the treatment, or providing patients with personalized advice. For example, in stable COPD, an increase in FEV 1 following a therapeutic trial of corticosteroids for several days is often taken as an indication of regular use for these drugs [76].

(p22.4) An appropriate medicament therapy can reduce COPD symptoms, reduce the frequency and severity of exacerbations, and improve health status and exercise capacity, but Bexisting medications for COPD have not been shown conclusively to modify the long-term decline in lung function [ 66]. In particular, exacerbations are treated with bronchodilators, systemic corticosteroids, and antibiotics, and there are new drugs developed all the time [129]. The corticosteroids can cause hypertension, which calls for blood pressure measurements and ECG monitoring during corticosteroid therapy. Stopping regular medication, such as diuretics and/or bronchodilators, on the patient's own initiative might increase symptoms [7].

(p22.5) It has been suggested for more than 10 years now that remote monitoring should be used as the Bgold standard^for medication adherence measurements [130], but how to effectively monitor medication compliance and how to motivate patients to take their medicaments are challenges that still remain. PCD applications that provide reminders and feedback to patients could be useful as motivators. As for monitoring compliance, intelligent packaging for medicaments, equipped with electronics for collecting and transmitting the data about usage, can provide controlled access to medicaments in terms of keeping track of how many medicaments have been used and at which times. This enables monitoring of the adherence to the therapy, the evaluation of patterns of medicament use, and monitoring the dose-response relationship [130]. Obviously, smart packaging can be tricked into tracking adherence since it is not able to detect whether the pills are actually swallowed.

(p22.6) Perhaps the most impressive recent development in monitoring medication adherence, which cannot be easily tricked, is the Proteus Digital Health ingestible sensor that measures medication ingestion and adherence patterns in real time [131]. It is a system of a 1-mm digestible chip and a patch that picks up the signal from the chip and can also capture the HR [132]. Another example of recent developments that are particularly significant for COPD and asthma patients is AstraZeneca's inhaler device called Turbuhaler, which has recently been accompanied by a monitoring device to monitor the actuations of the inhaler [133].

(p22.7) A related problem is how to tailor medications to individual needs. According to the GOLD: BEach pharmacological treatment regime needs to be adapted to the patient (i.e., individualized), guided by the severity of the symptoms, the risk of exacerbations, comorbidities, drug availability, and the patient's response^ [66]. This can be at least partially achieved by using remote monitoring, for the purpose of titrating/ adjusting the treatment, or providing patients with personalized advice. For example, in stable COPD, an increase in FEV 1 following a therapeutic trial of corticosteroids for several days is often taken as an indication of regular use for these drugs [76].
## (s26) Detection of provoking and predictive factors
Number of References: 40

(p26.0) It is not clear which factors determine the development and severity of an exacerbation [7]:

(p26.1) & It is commonly thought that viral and bacterial infections of the tracheobronchial tree are the major causes of exacerbations in the later stages of disease [129]. The role of bacterial and viral infections in COPD exacerbations is still considered as controversial by some authors [7]. & Air pollution [66]. & There is some evidence that ozone concentration might be slightly associated with additional hospital admissions [146]. & Poor nutrition, i.e., malnutrition, in combination with respiratory muscle fatigue can aggravate the exacerbation. & Drugs (especially tranquilizers). & Stopping regular medication such as diuretics and/or bronchodilators on the patient's own initiative can increase Fig. 6 Overview of existing decision support systems. a Sensors used (Other: video/audio (five systems), physical activity (four systems), ECG (two systems), lung and heart sounds (one system), glucometer (one system)). b Patient action needed for data acquisition or automatic data acquisition. c Algorithms used. Total number of participant used in the studies is 1866, whereas the average duration of the studies was 6.4 months symptoms, which means that the monitoring of medication compliance is important (Sect. 4.6). & Inappropriate oxygen administration can aggravate an exacerbation because of a reduction in the hypoxic respiratory drive. & Conditions that can mimic or aggravate symptoms are pneumonia, pulmonary hypertension, heart failure or arrhythmias, pulmonary embolism, and pneumothorax. & The cause of about one third of severe exacerbations of COPD cannot be identified [66].

(p26.2) A study involving 64 patients with moderate-to-severe COPD showed evidence that chronic hypercapnic respiratory insufficiency (high PaCO 2 ) and pulmonary hypertension are predictive factors for hospitalization caused by COPD exacerbation [147]. Long-term oxygen therapy and perhaps even long-term noninvasive mechanical ventilation at home are possibly factors that reduce the risk of severe exacerbations, since there is evidence that they reduce hospital admission in COPD with chronic hypercapnia [148].

(p26.3) A study using the SGRQ showed that factors for predicting frequent exacerbations were daily cough, daily wheeze (clinical sign of exhaling difficulties caused by a narrowed tracheobronchial tree), and daily cough and sputum together, and frequent exacerbations in the previous year [149]. Another study showed that SGRQ scores and poor quality of life are associated with re-admission for COPD [150].

(p26.4) It is not clear which factors determine the development and severity of an exacerbation [7]:

(p26.5) & It is commonly thought that viral and bacterial infections of the tracheobronchial tree are the major causes of exacerbations in the later stages of disease [129]. The role of bacterial and viral infections in COPD exacerbations is still considered as controversial by some authors [7]. & Air pollution [66]. & There is some evidence that ozone concentration might be slightly associated with additional hospital admissions [146]. & Poor nutrition, i.e., malnutrition, in combination with respiratory muscle fatigue can aggravate the exacerbation. & Drugs (especially tranquilizers). & Stopping regular medication such as diuretics and/or bronchodilators on the patient's own initiative can increase Fig. 6 Overview of existing decision support systems. a Sensors used (Other: video/audio (five systems), physical activity (four systems), ECG (two systems), lung and heart sounds (one system), glucometer (one system)). b Patient action needed for data acquisition or automatic data acquisition. c Algorithms used. Total number of participant used in the studies is 1866, whereas the average duration of the studies was 6.4 months symptoms, which means that the monitoring of medication compliance is important (Sect. 4.6). & Inappropriate oxygen administration can aggravate an exacerbation because of a reduction in the hypoxic respiratory drive. & Conditions that can mimic or aggravate symptoms are pneumonia, pulmonary hypertension, heart failure or arrhythmias, pulmonary embolism, and pneumothorax. & The cause of about one third of severe exacerbations of COPD cannot be identified [66].

(p26.6) A study involving 64 patients with moderate-to-severe COPD showed evidence that chronic hypercapnic respiratory insufficiency (high PaCO 2 ) and pulmonary hypertension are predictive factors for hospitalization caused by COPD exacerbation [147]. Long-term oxygen therapy and perhaps even long-term noninvasive mechanical ventilation at home are possibly factors that reduce the risk of severe exacerbations, since there is evidence that they reduce hospital admission in COPD with chronic hypercapnia [148].

(p26.7) A study using the SGRQ showed that factors for predicting frequent exacerbations were daily cough, daily wheeze (clinical sign of exhaling difficulties caused by a narrowed tracheobronchial tree), and daily cough and sputum together, and frequent exacerbations in the previous year [149]. Another study showed that SGRQ scores and poor quality of life are associated with re-admission for COPD [150].
## (s33) Spirometry output
Number of References: 12

(p33.0) The presence of a post-bronchodilator FEV 1 /FVC of less than 0.70 confirms the presence of COPD [66]. The severity of COPD can be categorized based on FEV 1 (percent of predicted): mild ≥ 70, moderate 50-69, severe < 50 [76], or according to GOLD: mild ≥ 80, moderate 50-79, severe 30-48, very severe < 30. For the complete list of reference values in spirometry, see [91].

(p33.1) The presence of a post-bronchodilator FEV 1 /FVC of less than 0.70 confirms the presence of COPD [66]. The severity of COPD can be categorized based on FEV 1 (percent of predicted): mild ≥ 70, moderate 50-69, severe < 50 [76], or according to GOLD: mild ≥ 80, moderate 50-79, severe 30-48, very severe < 30. For the complete list of reference values in spirometry, see [91].
## (s42) Physical activity in COPD
Number of References: 12

(p42.0) Regular physical activity (PA) is recommended for all patients with stable COPD [66]. Walking is generally accepted, but also stair-climbing, treadmill, or cycling exercises are beneficial. Pulmonary rehabilitation (supervised exercise) or a home exercise program can improve the lung's functional status.

(p42.1) PA in COPD patients decreases the risk of hospitalization [67], reduces the decline in lung function [67], but can also improve the general health status and decrease both disability and mortality [68,69].

(p42.2) PA is drastically reduced during and after hospitalization caused by exacerbation, but even patients with milder exacerbations, which do not require hospitalization, tend to stay indoors during the exacerbation period, which lowers PA levels [67]. It might take a number of weeks for patients to recover from exacerbation, during which time they lose muscle mass as a result of reduced activity.
## (s46) Cardiac electrical activity (ECG) remote monitoring
Number of References: 36

(p46.0) Holter monitors are traditionally used for ECG acquisitions in remote settings, but they are being superseded by wireless bipotential patch devices [78][79][80], whose development has been intensive in recent years (a representative example, a Savvy patch ECG sensor, is shown in Fig. 2). The patch ECG (PECG) sensors are already established as patient friendly, well tolerated, unobtrusive, wire free, and with recording capabilities that span from weeks to months (much longer than standard Holter monitors), which is beneficial for detecting potentially malignant arrhythmias that take a longer time to detect. They provide good adhesion to the skin, and some of them even claim to be waterproof.

(p46.1) The Savvy monitor has been certified as a medical device according to the directive MDD 93/42/EEC, and standards EN 60601 and EN ISO 14971, and has recently  [81,82], with two self-adhesive disposable electrodes, a lithium coin battery, micro-processor, BT4 radio, and printed circuit board antenna (up). Savvy sensor, the final product (down) become available on the market, while the ZIO® XT Patch by iRhythm Technologies, Inc. and SEEQ™ MCT patch device by Medtronic, Inc. have already been extensively evaluated. The evaluations show evidence of an increased diagnostic lead in both adult and pediatric patients compared to Holters [79]. There are also other PECGs available on the market, and the number is expected to increase in the future [78][79][80].

(p46.2) Holter monitors are traditionally used for ECG acquisitions in remote settings, but they are being superseded by wireless bipotential patch devices [78][79][80], whose development has been intensive in recent years (a representative example, a Savvy patch ECG sensor, is shown in Fig. 2). The patch ECG (PECG) sensors are already established as patient friendly, well tolerated, unobtrusive, wire free, and with recording capabilities that span from weeks to months (much longer than standard Holter monitors), which is beneficial for detecting potentially malignant arrhythmias that take a longer time to detect. They provide good adhesion to the skin, and some of them even claim to be waterproof.

(p46.3) The Savvy monitor has been certified as a medical device according to the directive MDD 93/42/EEC, and standards EN 60601 and EN ISO 14971, and has recently  [81,82], with two self-adhesive disposable electrodes, a lithium coin battery, micro-processor, BT4 radio, and printed circuit board antenna (up). Savvy sensor, the final product (down) become available on the market, while the ZIO® XT Patch by iRhythm Technologies, Inc. and SEEQ™ MCT patch device by Medtronic, Inc. have already been extensively evaluated. The evaluations show evidence of an increased diagnostic lead in both adult and pediatric patients compared to Holters [79]. There are also other PECGs available on the market, and the number is expected to increase in the future [78][79][80].
## (s47) Respiratory rate
Number of References: 6

(p47.0) One of the signs of COPD exacerbation is a respiratory rate (RR) over 25/min (see Sect. 4.7). Furthermore, there is evidence that a change in RR has a strong predictive power for exacerbation [83,84].

(p47.1) The respiratory effort can be captured by an impedance pneumograph, stretch sensors, and flow thermography, which captures breathing from the temperature difference between the inhaled and exhaled air. The impedance pneumogram is the most common method used in hospitals [85]. Its basic principle is to inject current into the tissue by employing two drive electrodes placed on the chest and to measure the potential difference between the two points. The potential difference is related to the impedance of the tissue, which varies with respiration.
## (s49) Nutrition and weight monitoring
Number of References: 12

(p49.0) Both obesity and loss of body mass are commonly encountered with COPD [76]. Malnutrition is associated with respiratory muscle dysfunction and increased mortality. Therefore, nutritional intervention should occur if a large loss of body mass is detected. Nutritional interventions aimed at achieving an ideal body weight are also recommended. Highcarbohydrate diets and an extremely high caloric intake should be minimized to reduce the risk of excess CO 2 production [76]. Furthermore, obesity contributes to breathlessness in some individuals due to affected diaphragm mobility. On the other hand, weight loss is associated with a more severe impairment of the lung function [76].

(p49.1) Both obesity and loss of body mass are commonly encountered with COPD [76]. Malnutrition is associated with respiratory muscle dysfunction and increased mortality. Therefore, nutritional intervention should occur if a large loss of body mass is detected. Nutritional interventions aimed at achieving an ideal body weight are also recommended. Highcarbohydrate diets and an extremely high caloric intake should be minimized to reduce the risk of excess CO 2 production [76]. Furthermore, obesity contributes to breathlessness in some individuals due to affected diaphragm mobility. On the other hand, weight loss is associated with a more severe impairment of the lung function [76].
## (s51) Spirometry
Number of References: 6

(p51.0) Diagnostic spirometry measures the volumes of air inspired and expired by the lungs to assess a patient's lung function for the purposes of comparison with a patient population or with previous measurements from the same patient. The presence of airflow limitation is recognized by a reduction in the ratio FEV 1 /VC or the ratio FEV 1 /FVC, where VC (vital lung capacity) is the maximum amount of air expired from the fully inflated lung, FVC (forced vital capacity) is the forced amount of air a person can exhale after the maximum inspiratory effort, and FEV 1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 s) is the fraction of the FVC expired during the first second (see Fig. 3). The presence of a post-bronchodilator FEV 1 /FVC of less than 0.7 confirms the presence of COPD [66]. The FEV 1 /VC ratio is a relatively sensitive index of mild COPD. In moderate-tosevere cases of the disease, however, the severity of the airflow limitation is best assessed by the FEV 1 in relation to reference values (also known as predicted values) [91].

(p51.1) Spirometry is used mainly in the diagnosis of COPD, as well as in the assessment of its severity, progression, and prognosis, but it is not suitable for acute states. Patients with acute severe exacerbations of COPD can be too breathless to undertake spirometry testing, but in any case, conducting spirometry in acute situations is not very informative [66].
## (s61) Monitoring medication application and adherence
Number of References: 40

(p61.0) An appropriate medicament therapy can reduce COPD symptoms, reduce the frequency and severity of exacerbations, and improve health status and exercise capacity, but Bexisting medications for COPD have not been shown conclusively to modify the long-term decline in lung function [ 66]. In particular, exacerbations are treated with bronchodilators, systemic corticosteroids, and antibiotics, and there are new drugs developed all the time [129]. The corticosteroids can cause hypertension, which calls for blood pressure measurements and ECG monitoring during corticosteroid therapy. Stopping regular medication, such as diuretics and/or bronchodilators, on the patient's own initiative might increase symptoms [7].

(p61.1) It has been suggested for more than 10 years now that remote monitoring should be used as the Bgold standard^for medication adherence measurements [130], but how to effectively monitor medication compliance and how to motivate patients to take their medicaments are challenges that still remain. PCD applications that provide reminders and feedback to patients could be useful as motivators. As for monitoring compliance, intelligent packaging for medicaments, equipped with electronics for collecting and transmitting the data about usage, can provide controlled access to medicaments in terms of keeping track of how many medicaments have been used and at which times. This enables monitoring of the adherence to the therapy, the evaluation of patterns of medicament use, and monitoring the dose-response relationship [130]. Obviously, smart packaging can be tricked into tracking adherence since it is not able to detect whether the pills are actually swallowed.

(p61.2) Perhaps the most impressive recent development in monitoring medication adherence, which cannot be easily tricked, is the Proteus Digital Health ingestible sensor that measures medication ingestion and adherence patterns in real time [131]. It is a system of a 1-mm digestible chip and a patch that picks up the signal from the chip and can also capture the HR [132]. Another example of recent developments that are particularly significant for COPD and asthma patients is AstraZeneca's inhaler device called Turbuhaler, which has recently been accompanied by a monitoring device to monitor the actuations of the inhaler [133].

(p61.3) A related problem is how to tailor medications to individual needs. According to the GOLD: BEach pharmacological treatment regime needs to be adapted to the patient (i.e., individualized), guided by the severity of the symptoms, the risk of exacerbations, comorbidities, drug availability, and the patient's response^ [66]. This can be at least partially achieved by using remote monitoring, for the purpose of titrating/ adjusting the treatment, or providing patients with personalized advice. For example, in stable COPD, an increase in FEV 1 following a therapeutic trial of corticosteroids for several days is often taken as an indication of regular use for these drugs [76].

(p61.4) An appropriate medicament therapy can reduce COPD symptoms, reduce the frequency and severity of exacerbations, and improve health status and exercise capacity, but Bexisting medications for COPD have not been shown conclusively to modify the long-term decline in lung function [ 66]. In particular, exacerbations are treated with bronchodilators, systemic corticosteroids, and antibiotics, and there are new drugs developed all the time [129]. The corticosteroids can cause hypertension, which calls for blood pressure measurements and ECG monitoring during corticosteroid therapy. Stopping regular medication, such as diuretics and/or bronchodilators, on the patient's own initiative might increase symptoms [7].

(p61.5) It has been suggested for more than 10 years now that remote monitoring should be used as the Bgold standard^for medication adherence measurements [130], but how to effectively monitor medication compliance and how to motivate patients to take their medicaments are challenges that still remain. PCD applications that provide reminders and feedback to patients could be useful as motivators. As for monitoring compliance, intelligent packaging for medicaments, equipped with electronics for collecting and transmitting the data about usage, can provide controlled access to medicaments in terms of keeping track of how many medicaments have been used and at which times. This enables monitoring of the adherence to the therapy, the evaluation of patterns of medicament use, and monitoring the dose-response relationship [130]. Obviously, smart packaging can be tricked into tracking adherence since it is not able to detect whether the pills are actually swallowed.

(p61.6) Perhaps the most impressive recent development in monitoring medication adherence, which cannot be easily tricked, is the Proteus Digital Health ingestible sensor that measures medication ingestion and adherence patterns in real time [131]. It is a system of a 1-mm digestible chip and a patch that picks up the signal from the chip and can also capture the HR [132]. Another example of recent developments that are particularly significant for COPD and asthma patients is AstraZeneca's inhaler device called Turbuhaler, which has recently been accompanied by a monitoring device to monitor the actuations of the inhaler [133].

(p61.7) A related problem is how to tailor medications to individual needs. According to the GOLD: BEach pharmacological treatment regime needs to be adapted to the patient (i.e., individualized), guided by the severity of the symptoms, the risk of exacerbations, comorbidities, drug availability, and the patient's response^ [66]. This can be at least partially achieved by using remote monitoring, for the purpose of titrating/ adjusting the treatment, or providing patients with personalized advice. For example, in stable COPD, an increase in FEV 1 following a therapeutic trial of corticosteroids for several days is often taken as an indication of regular use for these drugs [76].
## (s65) Detection of provoking and predictive factors
Number of References: 40

(p65.0) It is not clear which factors determine the development and severity of an exacerbation [7]:

(p65.1) & It is commonly thought that viral and bacterial infections of the tracheobronchial tree are the major causes of exacerbations in the later stages of disease [129]. The role of bacterial and viral infections in COPD exacerbations is still considered as controversial by some authors [7]. & Air pollution [66]. & There is some evidence that ozone concentration might be slightly associated with additional hospital admissions [146]. & Poor nutrition, i.e., malnutrition, in combination with respiratory muscle fatigue can aggravate the exacerbation. & Drugs (especially tranquilizers). & Stopping regular medication such as diuretics and/or bronchodilators on the patient's own initiative can increase Fig. 6 Overview of existing decision support systems. a Sensors used (Other: video/audio (five systems), physical activity (four systems), ECG (two systems), lung and heart sounds (one system), glucometer (one system)). b Patient action needed for data acquisition or automatic data acquisition. c Algorithms used. Total number of participant used in the studies is 1866, whereas the average duration of the studies was 6.4 months symptoms, which means that the monitoring of medication compliance is important (Sect. 4.6). & Inappropriate oxygen administration can aggravate an exacerbation because of a reduction in the hypoxic respiratory drive. & Conditions that can mimic or aggravate symptoms are pneumonia, pulmonary hypertension, heart failure or arrhythmias, pulmonary embolism, and pneumothorax. & The cause of about one third of severe exacerbations of COPD cannot be identified [66].

(p65.2) A study involving 64 patients with moderate-to-severe COPD showed evidence that chronic hypercapnic respiratory insufficiency (high PaCO 2 ) and pulmonary hypertension are predictive factors for hospitalization caused by COPD exacerbation [147]. Long-term oxygen therapy and perhaps even long-term noninvasive mechanical ventilation at home are possibly factors that reduce the risk of severe exacerbations, since there is evidence that they reduce hospital admission in COPD with chronic hypercapnia [148].

(p65.3) A study using the SGRQ showed that factors for predicting frequent exacerbations were daily cough, daily wheeze (clinical sign of exhaling difficulties caused by a narrowed tracheobronchial tree), and daily cough and sputum together, and frequent exacerbations in the previous year [149]. Another study showed that SGRQ scores and poor quality of life are associated with re-admission for COPD [150].

(p65.4) It is not clear which factors determine the development and severity of an exacerbation [7]:

(p65.5) & It is commonly thought that viral and bacterial infections of the tracheobronchial tree are the major causes of exacerbations in the later stages of disease [129]. The role of bacterial and viral infections in COPD exacerbations is still considered as controversial by some authors [7]. & Air pollution [66]. & There is some evidence that ozone concentration might be slightly associated with additional hospital admissions [146]. & Poor nutrition, i.e., malnutrition, in combination with respiratory muscle fatigue can aggravate the exacerbation. & Drugs (especially tranquilizers). & Stopping regular medication such as diuretics and/or bronchodilators on the patient's own initiative can increase Fig. 6 Overview of existing decision support systems. a Sensors used (Other: video/audio (five systems), physical activity (four systems), ECG (two systems), lung and heart sounds (one system), glucometer (one system)). b Patient action needed for data acquisition or automatic data acquisition. c Algorithms used. Total number of participant used in the studies is 1866, whereas the average duration of the studies was 6.4 months symptoms, which means that the monitoring of medication compliance is important (Sect. 4.6). & Inappropriate oxygen administration can aggravate an exacerbation because of a reduction in the hypoxic respiratory drive. & Conditions that can mimic or aggravate symptoms are pneumonia, pulmonary hypertension, heart failure or arrhythmias, pulmonary embolism, and pneumothorax. & The cause of about one third of severe exacerbations of COPD cannot be identified [66].

(p65.6) A study involving 64 patients with moderate-to-severe COPD showed evidence that chronic hypercapnic respiratory insufficiency (high PaCO 2 ) and pulmonary hypertension are predictive factors for hospitalization caused by COPD exacerbation [147]. Long-term oxygen therapy and perhaps even long-term noninvasive mechanical ventilation at home are possibly factors that reduce the risk of severe exacerbations, since there is evidence that they reduce hospital admission in COPD with chronic hypercapnia [148].

(p65.7) A study using the SGRQ showed that factors for predicting frequent exacerbations were daily cough, daily wheeze (clinical sign of exhaling difficulties caused by a narrowed tracheobronchial tree), and daily cough and sputum together, and frequent exacerbations in the previous year [149]. Another study showed that SGRQ scores and poor quality of life are associated with re-admission for COPD [150].
## (s72) Spirometry output
Number of References: 12

(p72.0) The presence of a post-bronchodilator FEV 1 /FVC of less than 0.70 confirms the presence of COPD [66]. The severity of COPD can be categorized based on FEV 1 (percent of predicted): mild ≥ 70, moderate 50-69, severe < 50 [76], or according to GOLD: mild ≥ 80, moderate 50-79, severe 30-48, very severe < 30. For the complete list of reference values in spirometry, see [91].

(p72.1) The presence of a post-bronchodilator FEV 1 /FVC of less than 0.70 confirms the presence of COPD [66]. The severity of COPD can be categorized based on FEV 1 (percent of predicted): mild ≥ 70, moderate 50-69, severe < 50 [76], or according to GOLD: mild ≥ 80, moderate 50-79, severe 30-48, very severe < 30. For the complete list of reference values in spirometry, see [91].
