# A scoping review of survey research with gender minority adolescents and youth in low and middle-income countries

CorpusID: 255568744 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/215aad3c803f4f6f7f5488f7abf0ff8f1212e15d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/215aad3c803f4f6f7f5488f7abf0ff8f1212e15d)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s8) Sampling and administration
Number of References: 6

(p8.0) The majority of the studies (n = 22) employed nonrandom sampling, generally leveraging existing social networks to identify and recruit respondents. Some authors justified this approach by noting the more difficult to reach nature of transgender and LGBT populations more generally [37,38]. Rather than survey the general population, these studies tended to focus on gender minority populations, often alongside other specific populations, such as MSM. This more targeted approach perhaps helps to explain why the sample sizes of the studies reviewed were often relatively small; just under half of the studies (n = 15) had fewer than 500 respondents.

(p8.1) Of the articles that relied primarily on network-based sampling (n = 22), nearly all (n = 19) discussed collaborating with institutions to recruit respondents. It was most common (n = 10) to work with local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) or communitybased organizations (CBOs), which then helped through, for example, distributing online surveys and identifying seed respondents. Studies also worked with clinics (n = 3), schools and universities (n = 4) or a combination of these institutions (n = 2) to identify respondents. Two of the four articles that did not mention working with institutions at the sampling phase drew on the same survey in Brazil, which recruited participants through Facebook advertisements [39,40].

(p8.2) The remaining third (n = 11) of the studies employed some form of random sampling in their research design and nearly all of these (n = 9) worked through schools or colleges to recruit their participants. For example, a study in Thailand randomly selected provinces and then secondary schools to obtain a nationally-representative study of around 32,000 secondary school students, the largest number of respondents of any study included in this review [41]. Having asked about gender identity, the data could then be used to compare mental health, drug use, sexual health, and the experience of violence between cisgender and transgender students. Another study, focused on self-harm amongst LGBT youth in Accra, Ghana, recruited the majority of respondents through schools and then incorporated out-of-school youth via charity organizations and census street enumeration areas [42].
