# Clinical Medicine Subthreshold Micropulse Laser for Diabetic Macular Edema: A Review

CorpusID: 255338210 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54cd863d07f0c4f99440aacd34808926d72971dc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54cd863d07f0c4f99440aacd34808926d72971dc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 20

(p0.0) Diabetes mellitus (DM) has become a civilization disease associated with a sedentary lifestyle and the aging of the population in the contemporary world. It is estimated that DM affects around 10% of the global population [1]. The prevalence of diabetes is increasing rapidly, and the World Health Organization (WHO) has recognized diabetes as a noncommunicable disease which is causing an epidemic in the 21st century. An insufficiently controlled and long-term disease is associated with a high risk of multiorgan complications, including those involving eyes. One of the main retinal complications is diabetic macular edema (DME), which leads to gradual visual impairment, especially at working ages. DME occurs in 4% of patients diagnosed with DM, even at the early stage of diabetic retinopathy. The estimated number of adults worldwide in 2020 with clinically significant DME was 18.8 million, and this is projected to increase by half in 2045 [2].

(p0.1) According to the current international guidelines for the management of DME by the European Society of Retina Specialists (EURETINA), intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) was established as first-line therapy in DME with visual impairment [3]. After publishing the results of the DRCR.net Protocol I and Protocol S studies, laser therapy was regarded as being inferior to anti-VEGF treatments [4].

(p0.2) The availability of anti-VEGF injections has changed the standard of care for DME patients [5]. The agents improve both the functional and anatomical parameters of the retina. Currently, different anti-VEGF agents such as ranibizumab, aflibercept, brolucizumab, faricimab, and off-label bevacizumab have become the therapy of choice in DME treatments [6]. Intravitreal injections have a high efficacy and safety profile, however, on the phyll in the neurosensory retina. Commercially available devices can deliver conventional and micropulse shots at 577 nm that simultaneously enable the combination therapy of the grid micropulse laser and the direct photocoagulation of microaneurysms [18]. The 670 nm laser is less scattered and not absorbed by hemoglobin and xanthophyll, thus, it seems to be safe for the neurosensory retina [19]. There is no consensus on which wavelength is the most favorable for the treatment for DMEs, thus, all the above-described devices have a high safety profile and are recommended for micropulse use.

(p0.3) Currently, the specific indications for the application of MPLT have not been established. It is considered as an alternative treatment in macular disorders such as DME (Figure 1), central serous chorioretinopathy, and macular edemas that are secondary to retinal vein occlusion [20][21][22][23]. MPLT was proven to be efficient and free from adverse events in minor and moderate macular edemas with a central retinal thickness (CRT) below 400 µm and relatively good visual acuity [24]. As an adjuvant to anti-VEGF agents, it helps to stabilize the anatomic and functional retinal parameters with a lower required number of injections. of the micropulse was performed with a 810 nm laser modality, where the wavelength deeply penetrated the retina and, thus, it was not absorbed by the macular carotenoids. The 577 nm wavelength targets oxyhemoglobin and melanin, and it is not absorbed by xanthophyll in the neurosensory retina. Commercially available devices can deliver conventional and micropulse shots at 577 nm that simultaneously enable the combination therapy of the grid micropulse laser and the direct photocoagulation of microaneurysms [18]. The 670 nm laser is less scattered and not absorbed by hemoglobin and xanthophyll, thus, it seems to be safe for the neurosensory retina [19]. There is no consensus on which wavelength is the most favorable for the treatment for DMEs, thus, all the above-described devices have a high safety profile and are recommended for micropulse use.

(p0.4) Currently, the specific indications for the application of MPLT have not been established. It is considered as an alternative treatment in macular disorders such as DME (Figure 1), central serous chorioretinopathy, and macular edemas that are secondary to retinal vein occlusion [20][21][22][23]. MPLT was proven to be efficient and free from adverse events in minor and moderate macular edemas with a central retinal thickness (CRT) below 400 μm and relatively good visual acuity [24]. As an adjuvant to anti-VEGF agents, it helps to stabilize the anatomic and functional retinal parameters with a lower required number of injections. 
## (s6) Subthreshold Micropulse Laser Treatment and Intravitreal Therapy
Number of References: 10

(p6.0) Numerous studies compared MPLT with intravitreal treatment or investigated combination therapy (Table 5).    Most articles compared MLPT with bevacizumab, ranibizumab, and aflibercept. The treatment protocol for anti-VEGF monotherapy was three loading injections at a monthly interval followed by a pro re nata (PRN) scheme. The patients qualified for micropulse therapy after receiving three initial loading anti-VEGF doses and with a CRT below 400 µm. It was suggested that additional laser treatment could decrease the burden of agent injection frequency with similar functional and anatomical outcomes [75,[78][79][80]82,83,[85][86][87]. However, the study by Akhlaghi et al. [77] led to a different conclusion: adjuvant MPLT improved BCVA and CRT in eyes resistant to the bevacizumab therapy.
