# A Review of Deep Learning CT Reconstruction: Concepts, Limitations, and Promise in Clinical Practice

CorpusID: 251108432 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44459cb6071816427d618fe7a4c1196556303670](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44459cb6071816427d618fe7a4c1196556303670)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Physics

## (s2) Issues with Iterative and Model-Based Reconstruction
Number of References: 24

(p2.0) Iterative (IR) and model-based reconstruction (MBR) algorithms reduce image noise using nonlinear mathematical functions against variable signal intensities within a defined region of interest [19]. The assumptions described in the previous section are performed mathematically using a regularization term. Regularization terms in IR or MBR frameworks are needed to reduce noise and stabilize the solution during iterative noise reduction or image reconstruction. This stabilization essentially limits the space of possible solutions to solutions that match certain assumptions about the object to be reconstructed [29]. As discussed in the introduction, they accomplish noise reduction by assuming that ''flat'' regions of the patient can be smoothed thereby reducing noise which introduces nonlinearities into the reconstruction process. The degree of ''flatness'' involves estimating local image value changes (i.e., gradients in CT number) which inherently depend on contrast level and noise magnitude, making IR and MBR method performance depend on contrast level and noise/dose level [7][8][9][15][16][17]. We can intuitively understand that as dose level decreases noise increases. Increased noise makes it more difficult for the IR and MBR methods to identify uniform versus non-uniform regions; hence, their performance changes for the worse at lower dose levels. Another byproduct of the noise reduction methods employed by IR and MBR methods is that their noise textures tend to peak at lower spatial frequencies (i.e., leftward shift in the noise power spectrum (NPS)), a phenomenon not observed with FBP. The leftward shift in NPS visually translates to an artificially ''cartoony'' on ''plastic'' appearing noise texture which is displeasing characteristic for some radiologists as shown in Fig. 1. These methods assume there will be regions of the patient with low spatial frequency content over which aggressive noise reduction may be applied. This assumption means the noise reduction is higher in uniform regions relative to highly textured regions. This assumption means these methods are then nonlinear with object contrast, object background texture, and dose level Deep learning based The methods assume the scan data share feature characteristics with the data used to train the model. These methods assume one desires the output of the reconstruction to match the data used to train the model. Therefore, images reconstructed using DL will have image quality characteristics matching those of the training data

(p2.1) The nonlinear behavior of IR and MBR with respect to noise texture is a primary reason why these reconstruction methods exhibit contrast-dependent spatial resolution [26]. Contrast-dependent spatial resolution means that a lesion's spatial resolution is a function of its contrast with neighboring background tissue [30]. For many low-attenuation diagnostic tasks scanned at clinical doses (e.g., low-attenuation hypovascular metastases), contrast-dependent spatial resolution is not deleterious to a radiologist's diagnostic accuracy [31]. However, overaggressive dose reductions have shown to be detrimental to the diagnostic accuracy of low-contrast lesion detection tasks [32][33][34]. This effect has been studied in numerous phantom-based and human observer models [32,33,35]. Most recent literature shows that IR allows for only modest reductions (e.g., * 25%) in radiation dose to preserve low-contrast lesion detection accuracy.

(p2.2) In addition to noise texture changes when IR and MBR methods are applied, the spatial resolution may also change relative to FBP. Several studies have demonstrated the dose/noise and contrast-level dependencies of IR and MBR algorithms. For the majority of IR and MBR methods to date, their performance is better at high-contrast levels and higher doses. This unfortunately is exactly the opposite behavior that is clinically desired. This was demonstrated by Baker et al. who used a liver phantom with lesions decreasing in size and contrast, imaged at decreasing radiation dose, and reconstructed with a variety of IR strengths/techniques [31]. The Baker et al. study showed that at low radiation doses, small low-contrast objects can be invisible regardless of reconstruction technique. Multiple other phantom studies demonstrated similar findings, and these were confirmed in prospective human studies [31,32,36,37]. For example, Pooler et al. showed that very aggressive dose reduction (70% range) led to decreased diagnostic accuracy and confidence in identifying and characterizing metastatic liver lesions regardless of image reconstruction algorithm used [33]. A review of this literature was conducted by Mileto et al. who concluded ''Radiologists need to be aware that use of IR can result in a decline of spatial resolution for low-contrast structures and degradation of low-contrast detectability when radiation dose reductions exceed approximately 25%'' [35]. We can intuitively understand the degradation of spatial resolution with lower contrast levels as being due to IR and MBR methods being better able to identify higher contrast edges relative to lower contrast edges. Since IR and MBR methods seek to actively preserve edges by not filtering orthogonally to the edge gradients, the higher the edge contrast, the more likely that edge is to receive less noise reduction (i.e., spatial resolution blurring) and therefore a preserved edge detail.
## (s4) Technical Review of Deep Learning Performance
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) DLR promises to be fast and produce high-quality images (i.e., lower noise and higher spatial resolution) at lower doses [45]. As with previous generations of nonlinear reconstruction algorithms, the performance of DLR is not adequately quantified using classical image quality metrics such as noise, contrast-to-noise ratio, and signal-to-noise ratio. More advanced metrics such as the noise power spectrum (NPS), the task-based modulation transfer function, and model observer metrics are required [46]. Further, subjective image quality has been essential for characterizing the preferences of radiologists. However, this laborintensive assessment is now routinely automated with model observer studies and more recently artificial intelligence models have also been proposed toward this goal [47].
## (s5) Clinical Review of Deep Learning Performance
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) The majority of published clinical studies assess DLR algorithm performance with subjective image quality scores (IQ) typically assigned by radiologists and contrastto-noise measurements [54][55][56][57]. For instance, Bernard et al. assessed the performance of AiCE against IR (AIDR 3D) in a CT angiography acute stroke imaging protocol [55]. They concluded that a 40% reduced radiation dose resulted in a 50% increase in IQ scores. Although timely IQ study results are encouraging, their generalizability to diagnostic accuracy is limited. A CT imaging practice should be cautious in reducing exam doses when employing DRL solely based on IQ superiority alone.
