# UAV Traffic Management : A Survey On Communication Security

CorpusID: 253447399 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7931e5771beef1a7931c822480daae3bec610a5a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7931e5771beef1a7931c822480daae3bec610a5a)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s1) Unmanned aerial systems applications and traffic management
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) The most common application for a civil UAV in 2022 is the recreational use. However they have proven to be critical in operations that humans cannot carry out in a safe and timely efficient manner [56]. The number of UAVs around the world grows by 13% each year, and a lot of research focuses on improving their operating capabilities. Their performance is continuously improving and they are the best solution for a growing number of applications. For infrastructure monitoring, areas scanning as well as urgent delivery services and other applications, they are already the most relevant and cost-efficient solution. They can also be used for agriculture by monitoring and spraying the fields, for transport to help limiting the congestion in city centers, for the surveillance of areas where security camera are unusable or more expensive, for telecommunication purposes and for media and entertainment as cheap aerial cameras or to create new shows. They also can play a major role in smart cities and be used in Internet of Things (IoT) systems or Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) [25].
## (s3) UTM safety and security
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) UAS will need to meet a great number of security requirements in order to operate over populated areas. Among those a great deal will be focused on communication security. They will need to be included in a controlled airspace, managed by UTM systems synchronised with existing Air Traffic Management (ATM) system [40]. Most of the information exchanged by UAS and UTM systems is sensitive, if not critical for safe operations. A secure UTM requires solutions to protect communications. The research field has anticipated this and several works have focused on securing UAS communications [28,55,57].
## (s47) IoT research
Number of References: 4

(p47.0) In 2014, Turkanivic, Brumen and Höbl have proposed a lightweight authentication scheme based on hash functions and XOR operations [63]. It provides mutual authentication between parties, password protection, free password choice, password changing and dynamic node addition. It is a two-factor (user password and smart card) authentication scheme. Unfortunately, it has since been proven to be vulnerable to stolen smart card and MITM attacks [24]. It also does not provide properties such as forward and backwards secrecy and untraceability. [24] tries to correct these issues at the cost of some performance. Amin et al. [6] proved that some vulnerabilities remained and corrected them.
