# Protective effects and therapeutic applications of ellagic acid against natural and synthetic toxicants: A review article

CorpusID: 254925099 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5063daed4df87ae655993133e9bb13a268adb6de](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5063daed4df87ae655993133e9bb13a268adb6de)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s3) Cyclosporine A
Number of References: 7

(p3.0) Cyclosporine A (CsA) is a common immunosuppressive agent that is widely used in candidates for solid-organ transplantation (23). Besides the beneficial effect of CsA, several related toxicities have been reported including reproductive toxicity, nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, and cardiotoxicity through oxidative stress, autophagy, and depletion of antioxidant enzymes (23). In rats, CsA diminished the weights of testes and ventral prostate, epididymal sperm level, sperm motility, GSH, and CAT, and increased MDA level in testicular tissue, while EA (10 mg/kg, PO) treatment attenuated all the CsA-induced negative changes (24). Also, EA significantly ameliorated CsA-induced germinal cell necrosis, interstitial edema, spermatogenic arrest, and capillary congestion (24). EA treatment (10 mg/kg, PO) significantly increased the GSH level, GPx, and CAT activities and decreased the MDA content of the kidney, liver, and heart in rats exposed to CsA. Furthermore, CsA caused severe damage in the kidney, liver, and heart tissues which were noticeably ameliorated by EA supplementation (25). EA (10 mg/kg, subcutaneous (SC)) co-treatment with CsA improved CsA toxic side effects in testis and bone marrow tissues with a significant reduction in oxidative stress, LPO, and MDA levels. EA therapy elevated CAT and peroxidase activities and GSH concentration (26). CsA induced liver damage by increasing the serum hepatic enzymes such as AST, ALT, ALP, and LDH and elevating LPO markers such as thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) and hydroperoxides. Administrations of EA (50 mg/kg, PO) in rats significantly decreased the activities of hepatic marker enzymes and also reduced the levels of TBARS and hydroperoxides (27) (Table 1).
## (s4) Doxorubicin
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) Doxorubicin (Dox) is a valuable anticancer drug widely used in the treatment of various hematological and solid tumor malignancies. Although DOX is a very useful drug, its therapeutic use has been limited because of its acute and chronic cardiac toxicities and neurotoxicity (28). Exposure of rats to Dox declined testicular weight, testicular glycogen, sperm count and motility, and serum testosterone level. It increased the histopathological changes, oxidative stress, and TNF-α level, and administration of EA (10 mg/kg, PO) reversed these changes (29). Supplementation of Dox-treated mice with EA (1 g, PO) reduced ROS, interleukin-6 (IL-6), and IL-10 levels. Also, it decreased MDA and XO activity and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 and TNF-α levels, and it enhanced GSH content and GPx, SOD, and CAT activity in heart tissue (30). Furthermore, Dox exposure increased caspase-3, nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB), p50, and p65 protein content, and EA administration down-regulated these inflammatory and apoptotic proteins (30). A previous study indicated that DOX elevated MDA, TNF-, inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), caspase-3, and cholinesterase levels and significantly reduced GSH levels, monoamines including serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine in the brain; however, EA (10 mg/kg, PO) effectively protected rats against DOX-induced neurotoxicity by its antioxidant, antiinflammatory, and antiapoptotic properties (31) ( Table 1).
## (s7) Methotrexate
Number of References: 4

(p7.0) Methotrexate (MTX) as an antimetabolite agent for cancer treatment could induce many adverse effects including renal dysfunction, myelosuppression, mucositis, hepatotoxicity, and in severe cases multiorgan failure (37). Administration of MTX in rats induced oxidative stress, increased MDA levels, Bax/Bcl-2 ratio, cytochrome-c release, and caspase-3/9 level, and decreased mitochondrial outer membrane potential; furthermore, it elevated the concentration of pro-inflammatory factors such as NF-ĸB and IL-6 that were decreased by EA (10 mg/kg, PO) administration. EA therapy considerably up-regulated both Nrf2 and HO-1 which were down-regulated in MTX-treated rats (38). EA (10 mg/kg, PO) treatment in rats significantly reduced MDA, NO, and prostaglandin-E2 levels and diminished the activity of myeloperoxidase, XO, and AD, and also increased GSH content level in the intestinal tissue of rats treated with MTX; moreover, EA administration protected the intestinal tissue against histopathological changes caused by MTX (39). Moreover, EA (10 mg/kg, PO) protected the liver against MTX-induced damage through its antioxidant properties by reducing the serum liver enzymes, including AST, ALT, and ALP (40). Also, EA treatment prevented the elevation of MDA and LPO by activating the antioxidant enzymes such as SOD, CAT, and GST, and also restoring the GSH content level in the liver of rats exposed to MTX (40) ( Table 1).
## (s12) Aflatoxin B1
Number of References: 3

(p12.0) Aflatoxins belong to mycotoxins and are produced by Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus parasiticus. They are found in spoiled foodstuff, milk, meat, and eggs of animals who were fed aflatoxin-contaminated foods. Among them, AFB1 is the most hazardous type (48). Its exposure can cause nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and convulsion, and its chronic exposure can also lead to several health disorders like hepatotoxicity, immunotoxicity, and teratogenicity (49). EA (300 mg/kg, IP) prevented AFB1 genotoxicity in the bone marrow and lung cells (50). Treating Salmonella with AFB1 leads to mutagenicity and EA pretreatment diminished it by building an extracellular complex with AFB1 and reducing the interaction of AFB1 with the bacteria (51) ( Table 2).
## (s14) Glutamate
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) Glutamate, a non-essential amino acid, is a principal excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain. Animal experimental studies have shown it has the potential to induce testicular and neural toxicity (54). Monosodium glutamate which is used as a food additive in commercial foods could be considered an important source of exposure to the high level of glutamate (55), although, at the physiological level, the blood-brain barrier may restrict the passage of glutamate from the blood into the brain (56). Glutamate exposure in rats significantly reduced testicular antioxidant biomarkers including SOD, GPx, GRx, and CAT, and increased myeloperoxidase and XO activity. EA (20 mg/kg, PO) elevated testosterone hormone content, improved histological and ultrastructure testicular damages, and inhibited the redox state in male rats (57) ( Table 2).
## (s15) Lipopolysaccharide
Number of References: 3

(p15.0) Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is the main component of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria (58). It is the major reason for a severe systemic inflammatory response syndrome that is called sepsis (59). In the liver, it induced the activation of macrophages, the NF-κB pathway, and the production of inflammatory mediators including TNF-α and IL-6 which lead to hepatic failure (60). EA (20 mg/kg, PO) supplementation in mice exposed to LPS reduced hepatic MDA content, TNF-α, and serum ALT and AST levels. The inhibition of NF-κB with EA was found to be related to an increase in the activation of Nrf2/HO-1 signaling pathways in the liver tissue (60) ( Table 2).
## (s20) Phosalone
Number of References: 3

(p20.0) Phosalone is an organophosphate pesticide that is widely used around the world. Phosalone induced several toxicities in organs including the liver, brain, kidney, and heart by enhancing ROS and LPO which leads to DNA fragmentation (76). Phosalone in rat embryonic fibroblast (REF) cells decreased cell viability and increased oxidative stress markers (ROS and LPO) and inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and NF-κB) (77). However, EA (100 nM) pretreatment protected cells by suppressing free radicals and ROS formation, decreasing the expression and protein levels of p38 and p53, and reduction of inflammatory factors including TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and NF-κB (77). Induction of NF-κB leads to p53 activation which causes cell arrest in G1/S (78) ( Table 3).
## (s23) Arsenic
Number of References: 7

(p23.0) Arsenic (As) is a known toxic element that is present in the air, water, and soil. Based on the experimental studies, it has toxic effects on vital organs such as the kidney, brain, and liver (83,84). The toxicity of As significantly enhanced the generation of free hydroxyl radicals, superoxide anions, dimethyl arsenic peroxy radical, dimethyl arsenic radical, and nitric oxide (85). Treating rats with EA (40 mg/ kg, PO) during As exposure significantly decreased the inflammatory (IL-1β, TNF-α, and INF-γ) and apoptotic markers; EA attenuated MMP and ROS generation (86). Sodium arsenate (SA) in the rat brain increased oxidative stress elements (MDA, NO, and PC) level and inflammatory markers (IL-1β and TNF-α), and decreased the total antioxidant capacity, GPx, and GSH content; these symptoms were reversed following EA administration (30 mg/kg, PO) (87). EA administration also reduced the plasma cardiac markers levels (AST, CK-MB, LDH, and cTnI) in SA-treated rats. Moreover, the heart of rats treated with SA displayed Table 4. Summarized data of EA protection against heavy metals ALP: alkaline phosphatase; ALT: alanine aminotransferase; AST: aspartate aminotransferase; Bax: Bcl-2-associated X protein; Bcl-2: B-cell lymphoma 2; CAT: catalase; CK-MB: Creatine kinase-MB; GPx: glutathione peroxidase; GSH: Glutathione; IL-1β; interleukin-1β; INF-γ: Interferongamma; LDH: lactate dehydrogenase; MDA: malondialdehyde; MMP: mitochondrial membrane potential; NO; nitric oxide; p.o: oral; ROS: reactive oxygen species; SOD: superoxide dismutase; TAC: total antioxidant capacity; TNF-α: tumor necrosis factor-alpha an increase in MDA and NO levels with a reduction in GSH content and activity of CAT, SOD, and GPx that were reversed by EA (30 mg/kg, PO) administration (88). Moreover, SA treatment in rats significantly diminished white blood cells, red blood cells, hemoglobin, hematocrit, and platelets and increased mean corpuscular volume and mean corpuscular hemoglobin; these all were attenuated with EA therapy (88).

(p23.1) Pretreatment of the normal mammalian V79 cell lines with EA (75 µM) before As exposure significantly diminished the generation of ROS and DNA fragmentation (89). In rats, SA noticeably reduced levels of serum testosterone, total antioxidant capacity, GSH level, and the activity of antioxidant enzymes (SOD, CAT, and GPx) in testicular tissue which increased with EA (30 mg/kg, PO) supplementation. Furthermore, they showed SA enhanced the levels of MDA, IL-1β, TNF-α, and NO that were suppressed by EA (90).
## (s25) Iron
Number of References: 2

(p25.0) Iron is an important nutrient that is crucial for various functions such as oxygen transport, cell respiration, and DNA synthesis; however, extra iron accumulation in the liver leads to the generation of oxidative stress and hepatotoxicity (94). Iron overload in mice increased liver iron content, ROS, and levels of ALP, ALT, AST, and LDH. It decreased antioxidant enzyme activity (SOD, GST, and CAT), and induced liver damage, fibrosis, and hepatotoxicity (95). EA (8 mg/kg, PO) supplementation prevented iron overload toxicity and reversed these changes in the mice's liver tissue. Furthermore, EA protected the liver of mice against iron overload-induced apoptosis by a decrease in the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio and inhibiting caspase-3 activation (95) ( Table 4).
## (s26) Protective effect of ellagic acid against synthetic toxicants 6-Hydroxydopamine
Number of References: 3

(p26.0) 6-Hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) is a neurotoxic agent and plays an important role in preclinical research to induce Parkinson's disease model. 6-OHDA is uptaken by dopamine or noradrenaline membrane transporters due to its structural similarity with endogenous catecholamines (96). 6-OHDA causes neuronal damage by the generation of oxidative stress and ROS formation (96). EA (50 mg/ kg, PO) supplementation reduced 6-OHDA brain toxicity. It decreased MDA, ROS, and DNA fragmentation. Also, this study demonstrated the protective effect of EA against 6-OHDA via activation of the ERβ/Nrf2/HO-1 cascade (97). Moreover, Farbood Y et al. study showed that injection of 6-OHDA into the right medial forebrain bundle in rats increased levels of TNF-α and IL-1β, which ameliorated with EA (50 mg/kg, PO) treatment (98) ( Table 5).
## (s28) Carbon tetrachloride
Number of References: 3

(p28.0) Carbon tetrachloride (CCl 4 ), a known hepatotoxic agent, has been used as an effective solvent and cleaning agent in industrial manufacturers (101). Exposure to CCl 4 leads to liver injury and increases levels of GDH, ALP, ALT, and AST (101). EA (10 mg/kg, IP) protected the rat liver against CCl 4 toxicity (102). CCl 4 exposure induces cirrhosis through the activation of ROS formation and angiogenesis by expressing vascular endothelial growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2, and increasing caspase-3 activity. These aforementioned effects were noticeably reversed by EA administration (103). EA (15 mg/kg, PO) supplementation also effectively diminished the plasma levels of ALT, AST, and albumin, and significantly suppressed the gene expression of iNOS and collagen I in cirrhosis mice (103) ( Table 5).
## (s30) 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
Number of References: 4

(p30.0) 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) formed as an unwanted product in waste burning or as a side product in organic synthesis, is one of the most toxic and representative compounds of dioxins and its toxicity is mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (106). TCDD administration to rats meaningfully produced superoxide anion, LPO, and DNA single-strand breaks in the brain, and EA treatment (1 mg/kg, PO) reversed these changes (107). In the rat brain, EA (1 mg/kg, PO) significantly increased SOD and CAT activities (108). EA (100 mg/kg, PO) supplementation also protected against TCDD-induced nephrotoxicity in rats by improving antioxidant enzymes activity (SOD, GSH, GPx, and CAT), CYP1A1, and ATPase enzymes activity (Na + /K + -ATPase, and Mg 2+ -ATPase) with a significant decrease in Ca 2+ -ATPases activity (109). The membrane-bound enzymes such as Na + /K + -ATPase, Mg 2+ -ATPase, and Ca 2+ -ATPase are responsible for the transport of sodium/potassium, magnesium and calcium ions by inhibition of which TCDD causes nephrotoxicity (109). TCDD (100 ng/kg daily for 8 weeks, PO) induced testicular toxicity, decreased sperm concentration and motility, and the testis levels of SOD, CAT, and GSH. Also, it increased testicular MDA and LPO levels. EA (2 mg/kg daily for 8 weeks, PO) administration reversed all these defects (110). Moreover, EA supplementation protected testicular tissue against TCDD-induced histopathological changes such as degeneration, desquamation, disorganization, reduction in germinal cells, interstitial edema, and congestion (110) ( Table 5).
