# Croatian Journal of Food Science and Technology Complementary Foods and Its Processing Methods: A Review

CorpusID: 250997501 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/febc4e32cc82e567a0a3eca344046abf175d15ec](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/febc4e32cc82e567a0a3eca344046abf175d15ec)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s4) Recommended characteristics of complementary foods
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) The recommended characteristics of complementary food are summarized below according to Malleshi (1988). 1. The meals should be rich in calories, good quality protein, vitamins, and minerals. When the food is stirred with cold or warm water or milk, the food should form a slurry or semi solid mass of soft consistency to enable easy swallowing by the child. 2. The prepared meal should be low in dietary bulk. 3. The food should be processed in such a way that it requires minimum preparation prior to feeding and is easily digested. 4. The food should be free from anti-nutritional factors and low in not digestible fibre content.

(p4.1) The recommended characteristics of complementary food are summarized below according to Malleshi (1988). 1. The meals should be rich in calories, good quality protein, vitamins, and minerals. When the food is stirred with cold or warm water or milk, the food should form a slurry or semi solid mass of soft consistency to enable easy swallowing by the child. 2. The prepared meal should be low in dietary bulk. 3. The food should be processed in such a way that it requires minimum preparation prior to feeding and is easily digested. 4. The food should be free from anti-nutritional factors and low in not digestible fibre content.
## (s10) Animal sources as complementary food
Number of References: 6

(p10.0) Products from animals are rich sources of protein, vitamins, most especially vitamin A, and they are easily absorbed. Foods from animals, birds (egg) and fish are rich sources of many nutrients, but are often expensive. Products from meat and fish animals are best sources of zinc (Rabia et al., 2018;Sujita et al., 2019), while dairy products, such as milk, are rich in calcium (Simum et al., 2012). Meat, fish and sea food all promote the absorption of non-heme iron. Literature has shown that meat consumption is associated with a reduced prevalence of iron deficiency. However, animal products are often expensive and eating excess protein is uneconomic
## (s12) Processing method for improving the quality of complementary food
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) The processing method of some complementary food has shown to have some significant effects on the viscosity, dietary bulkiness and its nutrient density. The major food ingredient in cereal based complementary foods is the starch component. It is also regarded to be the major water-binding component in most complementary foods and to a large extent; it determines the dietary bulk properties according to Svanberg (1987) and . The processing of complementary food could be in the form of milling (dry and wet milling), thermal processing, germination, fermentation, roasting/cooking, soaking, autoclaving/sterilization and enzyme treatment.

(p12.1) The processing method of some complementary food has shown to have some significant effects on the viscosity, dietary bulkiness and its nutrient density. The major food ingredient in cereal based complementary foods is the starch component. It is also regarded to be the major water-binding component in most complementary foods and to a large extent; it determines the dietary bulk properties according to Svanberg (1987) and . The processing of complementary food could be in the form of milling (dry and wet milling), thermal processing, germination, fermentation, roasting/cooking, soaking, autoclaving/sterilization and enzyme treatment.
## (s26) Recommended characteristics of complementary foods
Number of References: 4

(p26.0) The recommended characteristics of complementary food are summarized below according to Malleshi (1988). 1. The meals should be rich in calories, good quality protein, vitamins, and minerals. When the food is stirred with cold or warm water or milk, the food should form a slurry or semi solid mass of soft consistency to enable easy swallowing by the child. 2. The prepared meal should be low in dietary bulk. 3. The food should be processed in such a way that it requires minimum preparation prior to feeding and is easily digested. 4. The food should be free from anti-nutritional factors and low in not digestible fibre content.

(p26.1) The recommended characteristics of complementary food are summarized below according to Malleshi (1988). 1. The meals should be rich in calories, good quality protein, vitamins, and minerals. When the food is stirred with cold or warm water or milk, the food should form a slurry or semi solid mass of soft consistency to enable easy swallowing by the child. 2. The prepared meal should be low in dietary bulk. 3. The food should be processed in such a way that it requires minimum preparation prior to feeding and is easily digested. 4. The food should be free from anti-nutritional factors and low in not digestible fibre content.
## (s32) Animal sources as complementary food
Number of References: 6

(p32.0) Products from animals are rich sources of protein, vitamins, most especially vitamin A, and they are easily absorbed. Foods from animals, birds (egg) and fish are rich sources of many nutrients, but are often expensive. Products from meat and fish animals are best sources of zinc (Rabia et al., 2018;Sujita et al., 2019), while dairy products, such as milk, are rich in calcium (Simum et al., 2012). Meat, fish and sea food all promote the absorption of non-heme iron. Literature has shown that meat consumption is associated with a reduced prevalence of iron deficiency. However, animal products are often expensive and eating excess protein is uneconomic
## (s34) Processing method for improving the quality of complementary food
Number of References: 4

(p34.0) The processing method of some complementary food has shown to have some significant effects on the viscosity, dietary bulkiness and its nutrient density. The major food ingredient in cereal based complementary foods is the starch component. It is also regarded to be the major water-binding component in most complementary foods and to a large extent; it determines the dietary bulk properties according to Svanberg (1987) and . The processing of complementary food could be in the form of milling (dry and wet milling), thermal processing, germination, fermentation, roasting/cooking, soaking, autoclaving/sterilization and enzyme treatment.

(p34.1) The processing method of some complementary food has shown to have some significant effects on the viscosity, dietary bulkiness and its nutrient density. The major food ingredient in cereal based complementary foods is the starch component. It is also regarded to be the major water-binding component in most complementary foods and to a large extent; it determines the dietary bulk properties according to Svanberg (1987) and . The processing of complementary food could be in the form of milling (dry and wet milling), thermal processing, germination, fermentation, roasting/cooking, soaking, autoclaving/sterilization and enzyme treatment.
