# Being a Dog: A Review of the Domestication Process

CorpusID: 258417725 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0e80df8d8abe45200fac9d7a15cfd380265be926](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0e80df8d8abe45200fac9d7a15cfd380265be926)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s2) Sources of Selective Pressure: The Environment and Humans
Number of References: 8

(p2.0) Regardless of the initial process, domestication took place for about 15,000-30,000 years [18,19]. Dogs firstly associated with hunter-gatherers, then humans organized themselves into small settlements, and finally, into larger villages. The analysis of the domestication process, which produced marked differences between wolves and dogs, individuated three types of selective pressures (natural and sexual, human-mediated and improved selection), as depicted by Range and Marshall-Pescini in 2022 (Figure 1) [20].  [20]. The figure summarizes the wolf domestication process and the respective selective pressures that are likely to have been active during the process. Abbreviation: FRD, free-ranging dogs.

(p2.1) At the beginning, the natural and sexual selection shaped, and continues to shape, the cognitive and behavioral spheres of dogs. Many studies highlight genetic adaptations to specific environments [19,21] and preferences in the mating of wild dogs [22]. Then, humans "negatively" selected some specific characteristics (consciously or not). This selection allowed coexistence between dogs and humans for many thousands of years (for example, overly aggressive animals were killed). In the end, humans deliberately and directly "positively" selected specific phenotypic traits, a process that began with selecting dogs for different functions, became popular during the Victorian era, and nowadays, is reflected in the multitudes of dog breeds [20].
## (s3) One Experimental Domestication Model: Belyaev's Foxes
Number of References: 9

(p3.0) In 1959, the Russian geneticist Dmitri Belyaev began a study to simulate the process of animal domestication. He aimed to create a selective regime that would reflect the conditions envisioned as "critical" for animal training and to understand the biological basis of the phenotypic changes produced by the domestication process, thus proposing that domestication was based essentially on "selection by tamability" [2]. The experiment was designed to record the effects of additionally intense selection for tameness and the correlated emergence of unexpected morphological and genetic traits [24]. To test this hypothesis, Belyaev used silver foxes, a melanistic variant of the red fox (Vulpes vulpes), from a Canadian population of farmed foxes selected over more than 50 generations for increased docility [25]. Then, he systematically bred and tested hundreds of these individuals to verify their "friendliness" toward humans [2,26]. Over a span of 60 years, Belyaev and collaborators documented phenotypic changes in "their" foxes that closely resembled those produced by canine domestication [27] and discovered a drastic reduction in blood cortisol concentrations and less adrenal cortex reactivity in foxes selected for tameness compared to wild-type controls [2,28,29] (Figure 2).
## (s5) Wolves vs. Dogs: A Socio-Ecological Clash
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) Wolves are cursorial predators capable of hunting in groups (pack-hunting specialists) that base their diet mainly on ungulates. Their social organization involves a monogamous pair, accompanied by their offspring, composed of adults, subadults and puppies (nuclear family organization), and sometimes, unrelated individuals join the pack [20]. The size of the pack has a fundamental role in the success rates of hunting and in the defense of the territory, and very often clashes between schools result in lethal aggressions. Overall, it seems that wolves are heavily dependent on their social structure as a cohesive and functional pack, which allows them to get enough food, breed their cubs, and defend the territory [23]. As for dogs, free-ranging dogs show a feeding ecology closely related to the occupied niche in the human environment. Their diet consists mainly of human food waste, and in many populations, hunting (including pack hunting) plays a minor role. They have been considered "optionally social", since the size of the group depends on the abundance of food. In contrast to wolves, they have a much more flexible pack structure, as members of one pack often join another. Regarding the care of the offspring, dogs differ much from wolves. The cubs of free-ranging dogs are bred mainly by mothers [20], while among wolves, the occurrence of cooperative breeding of cubs by the pack with alloparental care is now well known [70].
