# Human mini-blood-brain barrier models for biomedical neuroscience research: a review

CorpusID: 254784660 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2d91137ab0e0effe1315985bcf3ff2c6c746d6fc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2d91137ab0e0effe1315985bcf3ff2c6c746d6fc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 9

(p0.0) The blood-brain barrier (BBB) serves a crucial function in maintaining brain homeostasis by acting as a selective barrier that allows nourishment delivery while restricting the circulation of hazardous substances [1][2][3]. Owing to their unique structure, neurological drugs with enhanced BBB penetration are gaining popularity [4][5][6]. Additionally, recent clinical manifestations of neurodegeneration and cognitive decline are associated with vascular dysfunction, particularly BBB failure [5,7,8]. Regrettably, the mechanism linking BBB failure to neurodegenerative diseases remains unclear despite various experiments showing physiological and pathological processes. Therefore, an artificial framework for BBB culture systems has been constructed to increase our understanding of BBB physiopathology and the prerequisites for neuronal drug development. Indeed, artificial BBB models must recapitulate the dynamic, multi-component nature of neurovascular units (NVUs) and their unique anatomical and physiological characteristics, which are crucial for BBB physiopathogenesis and treatment response.
## (s2) Organization of the BBB layers
Number of References: 17

(p2.0) The central nervous system (CNS) plays a critical role in regulating survival, necessitating strict protection. Under physiological conditions, the BBB regulates the transformation of substances in the blood to protect the CNS from toxins and pathogens [15]. In the cerebrovascular structure, at the interior of the blood surface, mature endothelial cells (ECs) develop continuous junctional complexes to form the most significant interface between the blood and the CNS [ Fig. 1A]. At each intercellular cleft between cells, a variety of transmembrane proteins, including tight/occluding junctions (e.g., occludin and claudin), adherent junctions (e.g., cadherin), and gap/ communicating junctions (e.g., connexin), form a significant physical barrier that limits molecule transport [16] [ Fig. 1B]. In addition, luminal EC surfaces contain mechanosensor systems that can sense shear stress from blood flow and turn it into a biochemical signal for the alteration of proteome and transcriptome patterns associated with health and disease [17,18]. In contrast, abluminal ECs develop focal adhesions, a type of integrin that facilitates adhesion to ECM components [19,20]. In general, ECs represent dynamic interfaces that respond to the CNS microenvironment and regulatory signals emanating from the blood and brain.

(p2.1) Although the endothelium is a critical component of the BBB, ECs cannot perform all BBB functions independently. Additionally, complex components of NVUs, such as ECs, glial cells, mural cells, and basement membrane (BM) /ECM components, can communicate to support and maintain the integrity of the BBB [21] [ Fig. 1A]. In this case, pericytes (PCs) are embedded in the inner vascular BM lining on the abluminal surface of ECs, separating and connecting to ECs by gap junctions (connexin43) and direct peg-and-socket contacts (N-cadherin) that help maintain and stabilize the endothelium layer [22,23]. In the outer parenchymal BM, the astrocytic endfeet almost completely envelops the vascular tube that connects to the other BBB cell types by gap junctions (connexin43 and connexin30) [24,25]. Interestingly, astrocytes (ACs) are involved in ion and water regulation by showing enrichment of aquaporin 4, a regulatory water homeostasis protein in the CNS that regulates fluid flow throughout the CNS for clearance function [26]. In addition, ACs play a linkage function in the neurovascular coupling; ACs forward signals from neuronal activity to blood vessels for the regulation of cerebral blood flow [25]. The basal lamina, which includes the inner vascular BM (which connects ECs and PCs) and outer parenchymal BM (which extends from ACs to the vasculature), is another critical component of the BBB because it acts as an additional barrier and anchor for molecular signaling, of which the ECM is a major component [6,27]. ECM is a significant component, including type IV collagen, laminin, nidogen, and other glycoproteins that offer an additional barrier and an anchor for molecular signaling across the barrier [27,28]. These distinct components are well-organized to minimize the entry of unsafe molecules that contribute to a healthy CNS.
## (s3) Transportation pathways across BBB
Number of References: 15

(p3.0) Under physiological conditions, the BBB permits the supply of nutrients and regulates the influx of metabolites via both passive and active mechanisms [ Fig. 1C]. The endothelial membrane contains a high concentration of zwitterionic phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine, and cholesterol, contributing to tight lipid packing [29]. On the lipid bilayer side, the motion of phospholipid tails creates transient gaps that allow for the passage of gas molecules (CO 2 or O 2 ) or a trace amount of water [30]. Nonetheless, membranes are associated with various embedded proteins, including intercellular junctions and transporters for mediating transportation [31]. At the intercellular cleft site, small molecules (< 500 Da) can cross the BBB via free diffusion (paracellular route) [32]. Large molecules can be transported via carrier-mediated, receptor-mediated, or absorption-mediated transport (the transcellular route) [15,16,33]. Amino acid transporters (e.g., LAT1/2, CAT1/3, SNAT1/2/3/5), carbohydrate transporters (e.g., GLUT1), monocarboxylic acid transporters (e.g., MCT1), fatty acid transporters (e.g., FATP1/4, MFSD2A), nucleotide transporters (e.g., CNT2, ENT1/2), and organic anion and cation transporters (e.g., OAT3, OATTP1A4, OCTN2, OCT1/2/3) are increasingly being considered as potential carriers of influx blood [15]. The receptor-mediated transcytosis pathway requires binding a receptor such as insulin, insulin-like growth factor, or leptin to transport macromolecules through membranous vesicular machinery such as lipid rafts or membranous caveolae. In contrast, absorption-mediated transcytosis refers to macromolecules transported through membranous vesicular machinery via positively charged molecular carriers with non-receptor binding [33,34]. The BBB structure. Schematic diagram of the endothelial cells, pericytes, astrocytes, and basement membrane forming a lumen of brain capillary structures. B. Junctional complexes structure. Single endothelial cell connects by tight junctions (Claudin, Occludin, ZO-1/2/3), gap junctions (JAMs), and adherens junctions (PECAM, VE-cadherin). C. Several different routes of transport across the BBB. i. Paracellular diffusion of gas, water, and small molecules. Transcellular diffusion of high lipid solubility molecules, ii. active transport via carriers of nutrient transport such as glucose, peptide, fatty acid, and nucleic acid, iii. Receptor-mediated transcytosis pathway requires the binding of a receptor on membranous vesicular trafficking. iv. Absorption-mediated transcytosis involves transport through membranous vesicular trafficking via positively charged molecular carriers. v. Active efflux pump systems include ABC transporters, including P-gp, BCRP, and MRP4 inhibit the new metabolites into the brain, whereas Aβ clearance systems reintroduce endogenous metabolites into the bloodstream. ECs represents endothelial cells; PC, pericytes; ACs, astrocytes; BM, basement membrane; TJs, tight junction; GJs, gap junctions; AJs, adherens junction

(p3.1) In contrast, brain-to-blood efflux clearance transporters perform in parallel with blood-to-brain influx transporters, helping to reduce the uptake of metabolites into the brain. The predominant efflux transporters have been identified, including the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters, capable of limiting metabolite distribution to the brain and Aβ system, enabling the reintroduction of endogenous metabolites into the bloodstream [35,36]. ABC transporters, including P-gp, BCRP, and MRP4, are located at the luminal membrane of EC, which prohibits the brain distribution of metabolites by pumping them out of ECs toward circulating blood [35]. On the abluminal side, the clearance system of Aβ involves lipoprotein receptors, which mediate Aβ toxin clearance, resulting in lower cerebral Aβ deposition [37]. In addition, cytochrome P450 (CYP-450), located on the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, is well expressed in the BBB and plays a role in the metabolism of medication to inhibit and induce drug interactions in brain cells [38]. The brain-to-blood system provides insights into eliminating endogenous metabolites and neurotoxic compounds from the CNS. However, numerous reports describing a deficiency or disruption of the brain-to-blood system suggest that it contributes to the progression of neurological pathology, although the molecular components and regulatory mechanisms involved remain unclear. Therefore, additional research is required to understand this mechanism fully.
## (s4) Pathological properties of BBB
Number of References: 8

(p4.0) In terms of the pathological process, accumulating evidence indicates that BBB dysfunction or BBB breakdown is one of the early pathophysiological hallmarks in neurodegenerative disease such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), Huntington's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [7,39]. At the cellular level, the primary pathogenic feature is the migration of immune cells and mediators across the BBB. The disassembly of the intercellular junction allows for the entry of neurotoxic risk factors such as neurotoxic environmental factors, neurotoxic molecules into the brain, inflammatory factors, microbial pathogens, and immune cells [40], resulting in a variety of effects such as inflammatory and immune responses of glial cells to secrete neurotoxic cytokines (e.g., TNF-α, IL-1/6/12/18) and chemokines (e.g., CCL2, CXCR4), which contribute to the development of neurodegenerative disease [41]. Recent reports indicate that BBB breakdown is a risk factor for AD dementia, considered an early AD biomarker (Aβ deposition and phosphorylated tau) occurring before standard AD biomarkers. As a result, a permeable BBB creates unexpected hazards for neuronal cells.

(p4.1) At the molecular level, disruption of the BBB has been observed in several neurological diseases associated with genetic mutations. Genetic risk factors, such as mutations in ECs genes encoding TJ proteins, transporters, or ion channels (e.g., OCLN, SLC2A1, or MFSD2A) or external genetic factors (e.g., APOE E4, hypertension, or diabetes), may be influenced by BBB impairment, promoting the development of neuropathological disorders [3,15]. For example, mutations in the coding sequence of a gene encoding tight junction endothelial protein, such as OCLN, which codes for occluding, or TJP1, which codes for ZO-1, results in the breakdown of the intercellular junction barrier, thereby impairing the function of the BBB and contributing to the pathogenesis of cortical malformation [42]. Another mutation in a gene encoding an influx/efflux system (e.g., transporters, carriers, or ion channels) results in the absence of transport metabolites, which prevent essential components (e.g., nutrients and ions) from reaching their destination. For instance, mutations in the SLC2A gene, which encodes GLUT1 as a remarkable transporter of glucose in ECs, result in glucose deficiency syndrome that impairs brain metabolism [43]. Therefore, genetic mutations affect specific cell types, resulting in BBB abnormalities unique to these cell types. Despite this evidence, a mechanism to clarify the pathway of neurodegenerative diseases related to BBB dysfunction remains unclear. Therefore, it is critical to conduct additional research to understand neurodegeneration better to develop therapeutic curves.
## (s5) Current limitation
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) The preceding arguments underscore the importance of developing a better understanding of neurological disorders to develop pharmacological targets or evaluate therapeutic agents crossing the BBB. Therefore, comprehensive in vitro, in vivo, and ex vivo studies should be conducted. In general, observations from animal and clinical experiments provide critical information on the physiology and pathophysiology of the BBB. However, understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms is a significant challenge in these experiments. Although animal experimentation yields valuable results, ethical concerns have recently gained attention [44], and further incompatibilities between human and animal genomes cause several drug failures [45]. Consideration is given to the length of the experiment. On average, animal testing takes several months to a year, as do operational and consumable expenditures. Human in vitro BBB models are considered ideal for addressing limitations in animal investigations but require engineering methodologies that are both precise and cost-effective. Consequently, a strategic model that ensures physiological property similarity, cost-effectiveness, and operational speed is necessary.
## (s9) In vitro BBB engineering strategies
Number of References: 6

(p9.0) In vitro BBB models are critical and straightforward tools for various scientific applications, including investigating biological mechanisms, identifying therapeutic agents in neuroscience, and high throughput drug screening [10,86]. Recent attempts to develop in vitro BBB models have yielded unexpected results, including forming a tight layer in a two-dimensional monolayer, a two-dimensional tubular structure, and even a complex microvascular system [87]. Indeed, the BBB is a dynamic interface that serves as a barrier between the bloodstream and neuronal environment and is susceptible to shear stress induced by blood flow [88]. Recent advancements in human in vitro BBB models have also captured this feature by introducing fluid flow to simulate dynamic blood conditions. Thus, in vitro BBB models may be characterized as 'static' or 'dynamic' according to their fundamental fluid flow/shear stress application characteristics [ Fig. 2]. Static models maintain cells in the medium without applying flow or perfusion, allowing only minor environmental changes. In contrast, dynamic models maintain continuous flow in their culture using a pumping system to generate a specific pressure and flow rate, allowing for significant changes in the environment [89]. In vitro BBB models, in particular, demonstrate the critical role of fluid flow/shear stress in maintaining the BBB phenotype. Elbakary et al. showed a significant difference in response to shear stress between static and dynamic BBB models by boosting cell survival, barrier integrity through higher TEER values, and cell-cell connection [90]. Thus, dynamic culture models are significant because they can accurately represent human BBB.
## (s12) Reconfiguration of BBB with organoids
Number of References: 6

(p12.0) Human BBB organoids are three-dimensional structures generated by microvascular cells' migration, proliferation, and self-organization, in which NVU cells may selfreconstruct a three-dimensional form [101,102] [ Fig. 2A iii]. Recently, significant progress has been achieved in finding BBB organoids that exhibit BBB characteristics, such as high quantities of intercellular junction proteins, transporters, and carrier proteins, for future applications in research on BBB drug transport and toxicity studies. Cho et al. demonstrated a tight solid model with outer surface ECs and PCs wrapped around an ACs core linked by intercellular connection proteins by utilizing compacts of human ECs, human PCs, and ACs under low ECM adherence conditions (ZO-1 and VE-cadherin) [64,103]. Additionally, Nzou et al. described spheroids of human brain microvascular ECs (HBMECs), human PCs (HPs), human ACs (HAs), and human neuronal cells (HCN-2) [104]. Despite significant progress in developing BBB spheroid models, these models still have several limitations in depicting BBB activity [105]. For instance, the solid block in a spherical construction is a significant disadvantage in permeation monitors because of the difficulties in monitoring the internal core. Additionally, it imposes a size constraint on organoids while assessing their nutritional content, resulting in organoid fragmentation and survivability. Additionally, because the existing BBB organoid model acts in a static culture environment, the ECs interface does not experience natural fluid flow or shear stress. However, this may be adjusted by modifying the genotype and phenotype of the BBB. Consequently, the BBB spheroid model appears inappropriate for transportation studies.
## (s14) Depiction of the human in vivo-like model
Number of References: 7

(p14.0) The functioning of the BBB enables the selective delivery of nutrients and growth factors to neuronal cells. It acts as a protective barrier, separating the blood from other brain tissues. While this has been demonstrated in in vivo models, conventional in vitro culture techniques require the maintenance of neuronal cells in a solution containing nutrition and growth factors in the absence of blood flow. To further elucidate BBB function in in vitro models, many studies have demonstrated high barrier resistance and the tracer permeation limitation stated in the TEER measure to evaluate barrier performance, decrease, and the permeability test [123,124]. As barrier integrity exhibited, cell-cell interactions are demonstrated as specific protein localization [125]. Functional localization is observed for specific junctional proteins, and functional transporter proteins, including intercellular junction complexes, carriers, and transporters, are required for the BBB to operate properly [15]. For example, in an in vitro BBB model, the junctional localization of specific tight junction proteins (ZO-1/2/3, occludin, claudin-3, claudin-5), adherence junction proteins (PECAM-1, E-cadherin, N-cadherin, and VE-cadherin), and transporters (GLU-1 and transferrin) have been effectively established [126]. To further illustrate actual human BBB models, cellular gene expression in an in vitro model demonstrates the direction in which genes are typically expressed in the BBB in vivo [124]. Recently, Vatine et al. demonstrated a remarkable result in the development of a vertical microfluidic device using iBMECs to form a tightened tubular BBB monolayer by showing intercellular junctional complex proteins (e.g., ZO-1, occludin, PECAM-1), transporters (e.g., P-gp, BCRP, and MRPs), and mechanosensory proteins (e.g., caveolins), further enhancing BBB integrity by reducing molecule permeability (FITC-dextran at 3 kDa) while presenting a high resistance value (1,500 Ω.cm 2 in TEER), demonstrating the critical necessity of a functional BBB in the protection of cytotoxicity from whole blood perfusion while nutrients are filtering for brain cell development [127]. As a consequence of the present certification, microfluidic BBB models integrating human stem cells display an increased resemblance to in vivo BBB structures, which play an increasingly important role in the discovery of neurological science for further research on elucidating the BBB response to internal and external stimuli.
## (s16) Brain ischemia
Number of References: 7

(p16.0) BBB disruption has been identified as a significant feature in preclinical models of ischemic stroke, facilitating the advancement of brain injury [128,131,132]. The presence of stroke reveals the initial increase in BBB permeability, which is thought to occur partly because of a disrupted junctional protein function field [131]. Following this initial breakdown, a neuroinflammatory reaction likely results in a continuous increase in permeability. The initial disruption of junctional protein expression results in increased BBB permeability, which cannot be explained entirely in preclinical data owing to observational limitations at the cellular and molecular levels.

(p16.1) Otherwise, the clinical mimicking of stroke symptoms using a human BBB model convincingly demonstrates the course of harm. Recent findings in in vitro BBB models suggest that hypoxia-induced BBB malfunction has been linked to an increase in the expression of potentially damaging molecules such as vascular endothelial growth factor, hypoxia-induced factor 1-alpha (HIF-1-alpha), and heat shock proteins (HSP) [133]. Additionally, low oxygen conditions exhibit an antioxidant imbalance, which is linked to neuroinflammation through glial cell activation, resulting in pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as IL-2, MCP-1, IL-4, IL-1, TNF-α, and IL-6, in which pro-inflammatory factors dramatically influence the integrity of the BBB, resulting in high permeation. Another microfluidic BBB model demonstrated a leaky barrier under hypoglycemic and hypoxic conditions through mitochondrial malfunction, resulting in ATP deficiency [134] [Fig. 3A]. In contrast, hypoxic conditions enhance BBB functionality by boosting intracellular junctions (e.g., ZO-1, claudin, occludin, PECAM-1), transporters (e.g., GLUT-1 and AQP4), functioning efflux pumps (e.g., MDR-1, P-gp), and ECM components (e.g., collagen IV, laminin, perlecan, fibronectin, SPARC, and agrin) [94]. Thus, human BBB in vitro models is used under imitating conditions to establish physiological settings similar to those observed in stroke, elucidating the dominant influence of individual cell-induced BBB dysfunction and neurological disorders. However, the mechanisms of this disease have not yet been explained, and further evidence is needed.
## (s17) Alzheimer's disease (AD)
Number of References: 6

(p17.0) Amyloid-beta (Aβ) deposition along the cerebral vasculature is a characteristic of AD pathogenesis, indicating α-synuclein fibril in Parkinson's disease. D. Human BBB model for elucidating the course of SARS-CoV-2 infection into the brain, exhibiting the effect of EC-induced ECM dysfunction and BBB disruption on the S1 spite protein binding to the AEC2 receptor. E. Use of the human BBB model to explore intestinal pathogenic fungal infection into the brain, indicating Cryptococcosis neoformans penetration and formation of clusters in the endothelium abluminal site. F. A physiological human blood-brain tumor barrier model for investigating of tumor cell intravasation. ECs represents endothelial cells; PC, pericytes; ACs, astrocytes; MG, microglia; TJs, tight junction BBB endothelial cell failure to balance Aβ levels in the brain and plasma [15]. Numerous studies in animal models have revealed that Aβ disrupts the BBB by interfering with its transit [129]. However, a recent publication asserted that mouse and human cells have significantly differential Aβ clearance across the BBB [135]. Therefore, a human brain model simulating the AD state is required to investigate the pathways of Aβ buildup in the brain and its clearance via the BBB layer. Blanchard et al. recently described a three-dimensional human microvascular network model comprising ECs, PCs, and ACs encapsulated in matrigel, demonstrating that PCs and ACs operate as primary sources of genetic risk factor (APOE4) expression, thereby enhancing Aβ accumulation [136]. Other human BBB models have been used to examine the Aβ 40/42 uptake kinetics between the luminal and abluminal sides of the human endothelium layer, indicating that a high quantity of Aβ 42 on the luminal side improves BBB uptake capacity and subsequently induces BBB failure [137]. Shin et al. demonstrated the dysfunction of barrier function in AD disease models by showing Aβ buildup on the abluminal side of the endothelium, indicating an increase in BBB permeability via downregulation of tight junction expression (claudin-1, claudin-5, and VE-cadherin) and upregulation of MMP2 and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production [138]. Additionally, pro-inflammatory factors such as IFN-ɣ, IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α generated by AD neuronal cells are related to increase in BBB permeability [ Fig. 3B]. While numerous AD animal models have revealed early BBB disruption before the onset of AD pathology, the underlying mechanism remains unknown. Engineering-wise, the human BBB model displays the intricate physiological and pathological aspects of the BBB; nonetheless, the significance of the BBB in AD remains unknown. Thus, further applications of the in vitro BBB model to neurodegeneration should be constructed to understand the novel aspects of cell-cell interactions at the molecular level, which is a fundamental limitation of the in vivo model.
## (s18) Parkinson's disease (PD)
Number of References: 4

(p18.0) Insoluble α-synuclein (α-syn) deposition has been implicated in the etiology of PD by promoting synaptic failure and neuronal death [139]. Numerous studies have shown that the accumulation and aggregation of α-syn may cause neuronal damage [130]. Additionally, specific strains of α-syn are hypothesized to facilitate the spread of pathogenic features inside the brain through migration between brain cells and across BBB interfaces [140]. However, in vivo models cannot simulate the interactions between α-syn and NVU cells. Pediaditakis et al. demonstrated a vascular neuronal interface to investigate the effect of α-syn fibrils on the NVU in a PD brain model. This model showed that α-syn fibrils induced phospho-Syn129 pathology in neurons, astrocytes, microglia, and especially in ECs, resulting in mitochondrial damage, increased intracellular ROS production, glial cell activation, and increased secretion of pro-inflammatory factors (IL-6 and TNF-α). Additionally, α-syn fibrils directly impair the BBB by disrupting tight junctions (ZO-1) and increasing inflammatory factors in ECs (ICAM-1) [141]. Remarkably, fundamental disease processes are uncovered using the human brain model [Fig. 3C].
## (s20) Microbiota infection
Number of References: 3

(p20.0) The human CNS infects the gut microbiota. In this scenario, the BBB is regarded as the primary entry site of intestinal pathogens and their metabolites [149,150]. However, the influence of infection and entry routes through the BBB remains unclear. For this reason, a human mini-BBB or gut-brain model is needed to elucidate the effect of the pathogen on gut disorders and its subsequent impact on the brain. Kim et al. recently demonstrated a human brain-relevant on-a-chip that included a hollow BBB interconnected with a 3D matrix, with a tubular EC monolayer tubular structure lying next to implanted PCs, ACs, and neurons in the 3D hydrogel [151]. Fungal pathogens (C. neoformans) were introduced into the BBB lumen. Their attachment to the brain area was observed, showing host-derived neurotrophic factors (inositol, Stb4, Dak101, and Pka1) enhance C. neoformans recruitment through the BBB layer. Colonization underneath the EC layer is induced by the release of paracrine factors (PTX3, TSP-1, and IL-8), which may act as a neuroinflammation modulator [ Fig. 3E]. Thus, human BBB models are advantageous for deciphering host signaling pathways responding to microorganism infection and monitoring BBB-microorganism interactions. BBB models will provide insight into hitherto unexplored pathways linking gut pathogen effects to the brain in the next several years.
## (s21) Brain tumor
Number of References: 3

(p21.0) It is widely known that vascularity deteriorates as brain tumors develop [152]. However, recent findings in brain tumor vessels indicate that NVUs are distinct from other peripheries. They contain an intact BBB, which inhibits therapeutic agent entry and confers resistance to chemotherapy but is not an impenetrable barrier to metastasizing cancer cell transmigration. Recent advances in human blood-brain tumor models have yielded extraordinary results. Deligne et al. revealed that chemotherapeutic resistance might propagate across the BBB layer in the presence of pediatric diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma cells, resulting in altered CYP expression and drug transport failure across the blood-brain tumor barrier [153]. Additionally, the microfluidic lung-BBB-brain model recapitulates lung cancer metastasis to the brain via the BBB system, indicating that tumor cell expression of Aldoketo reductase family 1 B10 (AKR1B10) is tightly linked to BBB extravasation across the BBB, resulting in the upregulation of MMP2 and MMP9, and altering the ECM, which may facilitate inflammation [154] [Fig. 3F]. Thus, understanding brain tumors at the cellular and molecular levels is critical for developing an effective treatment strategy. In contrast, the human blood-brain tumor barrier model provides an alternative brain tumor environment.
## (s23) Models for drug delivery
Number of References: 14

(p23.0) Although considered a necessary component of CNS function, the BBB presents an impenetrable barrier to therapeutic medicines [155]. The preceding points emphasize the crucial significance of expanding our understanding of neurological diseases to penetrate the BBB, specifically targeting a specific injured region [15]. As a result of our knowledge of the structure and function of the BBB, we now have a variety of drug delivery strategies to bypass this barrier and reach the wounded brain areas. The intact human BBB model enables the visualization of pharmaceutical distribution channels, which aids in medication effectiveness and conjugation into tailored nanoparticles (NPs)/ nanocarriers (NCs) [156] [ Fig. 4A i]. The physical properties of NPs have a significant effect on their interaction with the brain endothelium, impacting their passage across the BBB [157,158]. The affinity of hard and microscopic particles for the endothelium is greater than that of soft and large particles. A recent study indicated that the ability of NPs to permeate the BBB is governed by their physiochemical properties, including their size, shape, and surface properties. NPs with a diameter of up to 200 nm can penetrate the human BBB layer, while those with a diameter of less than 4 nm can pass through paracellular routes. Additionally, the surface of NPs is critical in the transcellular transport route, where the physicochemical properties associated with decorated NPs containing ECs carriers or transporters facilitate transport across the BBB [157,159]. For example, transcytosis transportation channels are exemplified by high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-mimetic NPs containing apolipoprotein A1 or ionic surface modifications to enhance BBB penetration. Kumar et al. demonstrated the ability of rabies virus glycoprotein (RVG)-carrying small interfering ribonucleic acid (siRNA) transvascular delivery into brain cells, which opens a venue for siRNA encapsulation strategy, coated with RVG peptide as a targeting ligand for a CNS delivery model [160]. Another effective strategy for delivering therapeutic agents to targeted brain regions has been reported as exosome-endogenous nanovesicles, where the gene therapeutic agent siRNA was loaded into the RVG-surfaced modified exosome derived from immune cells. These engineered exosomes show specific transportation of siRNA into neurons, microglia, and oligodendrocytes in the brain for AD treatment [161]. As previously demonstrated, in vitro BBB models are advantageous for assessing the effectiveness of neuronal drugs.

(p23.1) Currently, high-intensity focused ultrasound (FUS) is deemed safe for opening the BBB to treat various neuronal disorders, most notably cancer [162,163]. As a result, ultrasonography has emerged as a viable tool for optimizing drug delivery to the brain. Although various animal models have been developed, the specific mechanism by which FUS induces BBB opening and reversal remains unclear, necessitating further studies on drug delivery targets and side effects of cell damage [164]. A synthetic intact human BBB model provides an unbiased assessment of the physical influence on the BBB [ Fig. 4A ii]. Recent research indicates that microbubbles generated by low-intensity focused ultrasonic waves alter the permeability of the BBB by mechanically disrupting tight BBB connections, thereby facilitating drug penetration into the abluminal side [165]. Another study revealed that therapeutic Alzheimer's antibodies could be successfully delivered across the human BBB using FUS without inducing cell death or inflammation [166]. This minimally invasive approach, which may be repeated numerous times, temporarily disrupts the BBB and enhances the efficacy of medicinal drugs.
