# Planning and Decision-making for Connected Autonomous Vehicles at Road Intersections: A Review

CorpusID: 254113548 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f31a9b2ba85893c4b02455e22d6e44b841e6cf8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f31a9b2ba85893c4b02455e22d6e44b841e6cf8)

Fields: Environmental Science, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s6) End-to-End Neural Network Approach
Number of References: 8

(p6.0) One common approach for the neural network (NN) approach is the end-to-end approach, that is, by feeding in the images and sensor information of expert drivers driving at intersections and the actual actions of the drivers at such scenarios, a NN network is trained so that when at a similar scenario, giving the original input from the sensors, the model will be able to directly provide actions as output. This mean that the logic in the decision-making from perception to action is embedded in the NNs. Ref. [64] uses end-to-end methods as the core of its proposed algorithm, however, they used 360-degree camera instead of only using front camera as classical end-to-end planners would do. The trained network has also been carefully modified to adapt to the new censoring format. Also, a route planner is added to help the driving task significantly. Which as result, this proposed method could decrease the chances of collision at intersections. Instead of only having camera input for classical end-to-end methods, Ref. [65] took LIDAR and HD maps as inputs which enables a 3D interpretation, the paper put the newly proposed method into real-world practice, and the learned cost volume could help the ego vehicle perform more safely at intersections, and the vehicle is able to handle traffic light while interacting with the surrounding traffic participants.

(p6.1) One common approach for the neural network (NN) approach is the end-to-end approach, that is, by feeding in the images and sensor information of expert drivers driving at intersections and the actual actions of the drivers at such scenarios, a NN network is trained so that when at a similar scenario, giving the original input from the sensors, the model will be able to directly provide actions as output. This mean that the logic in the decision-making from perception to action is embedded in the NNs. Ref. [64] uses end-to-end methods as the core of its proposed algorithm, however, they used 360-degree camera instead of only using front camera as classical end-to-end planners would do. The trained network has also been carefully modified to adapt to the new censoring format. Also, a route planner is added to help the driving task significantly. Which as result, this proposed method could decrease the chances of collision at intersections. Instead of only having camera input for classical end-to-end methods, Ref. [65] took LIDAR and HD maps as inputs which enables a 3D interpretation, the paper put the newly proposed method into real-world practice, and the learned cost volume could help the ego vehicle perform more safely at intersections, and the vehicle is able to handle traffic light while interacting with the surrounding traffic participants.
## (s18) Reliability of Communication
Number of References: 16

(p18.0) The rapid development of the V2X technology provides an opportunity to improve traffic mobility and safety in intersection management [133]. Through vehicle-tovehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication, a centralized controller is deployed at the intersection to coordinate the connected and automated vehicles (CAVs) to pass through the intersection. Same as the penetration rate of CAVs, many current studies assumed perfect communication environment to support the planning and decision-making method [157,158]. However, communication issues, such as latency [159], package loss [160], band-width [161,162], is highly affect the model performance at intersections. It is hard for a traffic engineer to understand what makes these issues occur. However, more efforts to develop a method with robustness to these issues need to be conducted. Liu et al. considered vehicle coordination at signal-free intersections with latency [163].
## (s19) Driver Behavior of CAVs at Intersections
Number of References: 12

(p19.0) Significant amount of research has been done on the driver behavior under homogeneous traffic conditions at intersections [164], however little or no research has been found on mixed traffic conditions, where vehicles do vary in physical and dynamic characteristics [165]. As for mixed traffic with CAVs and human-driven vehicles, fewer studies related to the area.

(p19.1) Since there are few CAVs in real-world, researchers mainly using simulation approach to analysis the driver behavior of CAVs under mixed traffic at intersections [166][167][168]. R Arvin et al., evaluated the safety performance of CAVs at intersections. A simulation framework was developed, and Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) and cooperative CACC car following models are used to mimic the behavior of CAVs [169].
## (s20) Multi Intersections Coordination and Optimization
Number of References: 4

(p20.0) The current planning and decision-making technologies using CAV mainly emphasized on isolated intersection. Few of them discussed coordination and optimization between two or more intersections. The main challenge of Multi intersections planning and decision-making is how to use CAVs and other communication devices to coordinate multiple intersections, and how to effectively solve the resulting large-scale problems. These issues require further specialized investigation. Bui et al. focused on optimizing traffic flow at multiple intersections using Cooperative game-theoretic approach [170]. Zhang et al. coordinated control of traffic signals between intersections using adaptive genetic algorithm based on cloud computing [171].
## (s21) Multi-objective Multi-agent Planning and Decision-making
Number of References: 10

(p21.0) The traffic condition at intersections very complicated. The geometry of the intersection is often inconsistent and participants are various. Therefore, the planning and decision-making objectives for each traffic participants at intersections are usually different. Current algorithms for optimizing traffic operations at an isolated intersection consider mostly one objective function [19,66,170]. For example, vehicle delay is main factor to impact traffic mobility. The approach to optimize vehicle delay can lead to long pedestrian waiting times as well as reducing safety conditions at the intersection. We know that some optimization goals cannot be achieved at the same time, and some are even contradictory. How to balance or adjust the final collaborative optimization according to different purposes is one of the research directions. Ref. [172] presented a multi-criteria optimization approach to the isolated intersection. The trade-off algorithm between vehicle and pedestrian delay is developed. The proposed approach is tested and showed that by worsening vehicle delays, pedestrian delays can be improved.

(p21.1) Ref. [173] developed a multi-objectives model that considered including guaranteeing CAV safety, alleviating traffic congestion, and improving the performance of fuel consumption.
## (s23) Energy Conservation
Number of References: 8

(p23.0) In the past decades, the transportation system has resulted in increased air pollution and energy waste issues. Passenger vehicles are a major pollution contributor, producing significant nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and other pollution. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that vehicles cause nearly 75 percent of the carbon monoxide pollution in the United States. China claims that the country would reach peak carbondioxide emissions by 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060. When vehicles pass through intersections, the complexity and uncertainty of the environment often lead to incomplete planning and decision-making, which causes congestion. Traffic congestion usually leads to high energy usage and air pollutant emissions. Therefore, the urgent need to reduce the transportation sector fuel consumption levels requires researchers and policymakers to develop various advanced energy conservation strategies for planning and decision-making at road intersections. There are two major types of research topics in this area. One focuses on the CAVs approaching process, and the other focuses on the CAVs leaving process. For CAVs approaching process, avoiding queuing and green wave driving are two common research topics. Ref. [117] developed an Eco-CACC algorithm that computes the fuel-optimum vehicle trajectory through a signalized intersection by ensuring that the vehicle arrives at the intersection stop bar just as the last queued vehicle is discharged. The result demonstrated that the proposed Eco-CACC system produces vehicle fuel savings up to 40%. Meanwhile, human driving error and mixed traffic are also discussed in some research to improve energy conservation further. As for CAVs leaving process, ecodeparture technologies draw researchers' attention to the CAV leaving process. Ref. [123] analyzed the ecodeparture of CAVs With V2X communication at signalized intersections. The results showed that eco-driving has the potential to save fuel for CAVs. However, its realization requires accurate control of the engine and transmission. Although there are several publications related to energy conservation at a road intersection, there is still lots of research and work that needs to be done in this area. The assumption of the existing papers is usually too idealistic. Maybe the research work's good starting point is to analyze the planning and decision-making under an unsignalized intersection environment.

(p23.1) In the past decades, the transportation system has resulted in increased air pollution and energy waste issues. Passenger vehicles are a major pollution contributor, producing significant nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and other pollution. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that vehicles cause nearly 75 percent of the carbon monoxide pollution in the United States. China claims that the country would reach peak carbondioxide emissions by 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060. When vehicles pass through intersections, the complexity and uncertainty of the environment often lead to incomplete planning and decision-making, which causes congestion. Traffic congestion usually leads to high energy usage and air pollutant emissions. Therefore, the urgent need to reduce the transportation sector fuel consumption levels requires researchers and policymakers to develop various advanced energy conservation strategies for planning and decision-making at road intersections. There are two major types of research topics in this area. One focuses on the CAVs approaching process, and the other focuses on the CAVs leaving process. For CAVs approaching process, avoiding queuing and green wave driving are two common research topics. Ref. [117] developed an Eco-CACC algorithm that computes the fuel-optimum vehicle trajectory through a signalized intersection by ensuring that the vehicle arrives at the intersection stop bar just as the last queued vehicle is discharged. The result demonstrated that the proposed Eco-CACC system produces vehicle fuel savings up to 40%. Meanwhile, human driving error and mixed traffic are also discussed in some research to improve energy conservation further. As for CAVs leaving process, ecodeparture technologies draw researchers' attention to the CAV leaving process. Ref. [123] analyzed the ecodeparture of CAVs With V2X communication at signalized intersections. The results showed that eco-driving has the potential to save fuel for CAVs. However, its realization requires accurate control of the engine and transmission. Although there are several publications related to energy conservation at a road intersection, there is still lots of research and work that needs to be done in this area. The assumption of the existing papers is usually too idealistic. Maybe the research work's good starting point is to analyze the planning and decision-making under an unsignalized intersection environment.
## (s35) End-to-End Neural Network Approach
Number of References: 8

(p35.0) One common approach for the neural network (NN) approach is the end-to-end approach, that is, by feeding in the images and sensor information of expert drivers driving at intersections and the actual actions of the drivers at such scenarios, a NN network is trained so that when at a similar scenario, giving the original input from the sensors, the model will be able to directly provide actions as output. This mean that the logic in the decision-making from perception to action is embedded in the NNs. Ref. [64] uses end-to-end methods as the core of its proposed algorithm, however, they used 360-degree camera instead of only using front camera as classical end-to-end planners would do. The trained network has also been carefully modified to adapt to the new censoring format. Also, a route planner is added to help the driving task significantly. Which as result, this proposed method could decrease the chances of collision at intersections. Instead of only having camera input for classical end-to-end methods, Ref. [65] took LIDAR and HD maps as inputs which enables a 3D interpretation, the paper put the newly proposed method into real-world practice, and the learned cost volume could help the ego vehicle perform more safely at intersections, and the vehicle is able to handle traffic light while interacting with the surrounding traffic participants.

(p35.1) One common approach for the neural network (NN) approach is the end-to-end approach, that is, by feeding in the images and sensor information of expert drivers driving at intersections and the actual actions of the drivers at such scenarios, a NN network is trained so that when at a similar scenario, giving the original input from the sensors, the model will be able to directly provide actions as output. This mean that the logic in the decision-making from perception to action is embedded in the NNs. Ref. [64] uses end-to-end methods as the core of its proposed algorithm, however, they used 360-degree camera instead of only using front camera as classical end-to-end planners would do. The trained network has also been carefully modified to adapt to the new censoring format. Also, a route planner is added to help the driving task significantly. Which as result, this proposed method could decrease the chances of collision at intersections. Instead of only having camera input for classical end-to-end methods, Ref. [65] took LIDAR and HD maps as inputs which enables a 3D interpretation, the paper put the newly proposed method into real-world practice, and the learned cost volume could help the ego vehicle perform more safely at intersections, and the vehicle is able to handle traffic light while interacting with the surrounding traffic participants.
## (s47) Reliability of Communication
Number of References: 16

(p47.0) The rapid development of the V2X technology provides an opportunity to improve traffic mobility and safety in intersection management [133]. Through vehicle-tovehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication, a centralized controller is deployed at the intersection to coordinate the connected and automated vehicles (CAVs) to pass through the intersection. Same as the penetration rate of CAVs, many current studies assumed perfect communication environment to support the planning and decision-making method [157,158]. However, communication issues, such as latency [159], package loss [160], band-width [161,162], is highly affect the model performance at intersections. It is hard for a traffic engineer to understand what makes these issues occur. However, more efforts to develop a method with robustness to these issues need to be conducted. Liu et al. considered vehicle coordination at signal-free intersections with latency [163].
## (s48) Driver Behavior of CAVs at Intersections
Number of References: 12

(p48.0) Significant amount of research has been done on the driver behavior under homogeneous traffic conditions at intersections [164], however little or no research has been found on mixed traffic conditions, where vehicles do vary in physical and dynamic characteristics [165]. As for mixed traffic with CAVs and human-driven vehicles, fewer studies related to the area.

(p48.1) Since there are few CAVs in real-world, researchers mainly using simulation approach to analysis the driver behavior of CAVs under mixed traffic at intersections [166][167][168]. R Arvin et al., evaluated the safety performance of CAVs at intersections. A simulation framework was developed, and Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) and cooperative CACC car following models are used to mimic the behavior of CAVs [169].
## (s49) Multi Intersections Coordination and Optimization
Number of References: 4

(p49.0) The current planning and decision-making technologies using CAV mainly emphasized on isolated intersection. Few of them discussed coordination and optimization between two or more intersections. The main challenge of Multi intersections planning and decision-making is how to use CAVs and other communication devices to coordinate multiple intersections, and how to effectively solve the resulting large-scale problems. These issues require further specialized investigation. Bui et al. focused on optimizing traffic flow at multiple intersections using Cooperative game-theoretic approach [170]. Zhang et al. coordinated control of traffic signals between intersections using adaptive genetic algorithm based on cloud computing [171].
## (s50) Multi-objective Multi-agent Planning and Decision-making
Number of References: 10

(p50.0) The traffic condition at intersections very complicated. The geometry of the intersection is often inconsistent and participants are various. Therefore, the planning and decision-making objectives for each traffic participants at intersections are usually different. Current algorithms for optimizing traffic operations at an isolated intersection consider mostly one objective function [19,66,170]. For example, vehicle delay is main factor to impact traffic mobility. The approach to optimize vehicle delay can lead to long pedestrian waiting times as well as reducing safety conditions at the intersection. We know that some optimization goals cannot be achieved at the same time, and some are even contradictory. How to balance or adjust the final collaborative optimization according to different purposes is one of the research directions. Ref. [172] presented a multi-criteria optimization approach to the isolated intersection. The trade-off algorithm between vehicle and pedestrian delay is developed. The proposed approach is tested and showed that by worsening vehicle delays, pedestrian delays can be improved.

(p50.1) Ref. [173] developed a multi-objectives model that considered including guaranteeing CAV safety, alleviating traffic congestion, and improving the performance of fuel consumption.
## (s52) Energy Conservation
Number of References: 8

(p52.0) In the past decades, the transportation system has resulted in increased air pollution and energy waste issues. Passenger vehicles are a major pollution contributor, producing significant nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and other pollution. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that vehicles cause nearly 75 percent of the carbon monoxide pollution in the United States. China claims that the country would reach peak carbondioxide emissions by 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060. When vehicles pass through intersections, the complexity and uncertainty of the environment often lead to incomplete planning and decision-making, which causes congestion. Traffic congestion usually leads to high energy usage and air pollutant emissions. Therefore, the urgent need to reduce the transportation sector fuel consumption levels requires researchers and policymakers to develop various advanced energy conservation strategies for planning and decision-making at road intersections. There are two major types of research topics in this area. One focuses on the CAVs approaching process, and the other focuses on the CAVs leaving process. For CAVs approaching process, avoiding queuing and green wave driving are two common research topics. Ref. [117] developed an Eco-CACC algorithm that computes the fuel-optimum vehicle trajectory through a signalized intersection by ensuring that the vehicle arrives at the intersection stop bar just as the last queued vehicle is discharged. The result demonstrated that the proposed Eco-CACC system produces vehicle fuel savings up to 40%. Meanwhile, human driving error and mixed traffic are also discussed in some research to improve energy conservation further. As for CAVs leaving process, ecodeparture technologies draw researchers' attention to the CAV leaving process. Ref. [123] analyzed the ecodeparture of CAVs With V2X communication at signalized intersections. The results showed that eco-driving has the potential to save fuel for CAVs. However, its realization requires accurate control of the engine and transmission. Although there are several publications related to energy conservation at a road intersection, there is still lots of research and work that needs to be done in this area. The assumption of the existing papers is usually too idealistic. Maybe the research work's good starting point is to analyze the planning and decision-making under an unsignalized intersection environment.

(p52.1) In the past decades, the transportation system has resulted in increased air pollution and energy waste issues. Passenger vehicles are a major pollution contributor, producing significant nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and other pollution. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that vehicles cause nearly 75 percent of the carbon monoxide pollution in the United States. China claims that the country would reach peak carbondioxide emissions by 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060. When vehicles pass through intersections, the complexity and uncertainty of the environment often lead to incomplete planning and decision-making, which causes congestion. Traffic congestion usually leads to high energy usage and air pollutant emissions. Therefore, the urgent need to reduce the transportation sector fuel consumption levels requires researchers and policymakers to develop various advanced energy conservation strategies for planning and decision-making at road intersections. There are two major types of research topics in this area. One focuses on the CAVs approaching process, and the other focuses on the CAVs leaving process. For CAVs approaching process, avoiding queuing and green wave driving are two common research topics. Ref. [117] developed an Eco-CACC algorithm that computes the fuel-optimum vehicle trajectory through a signalized intersection by ensuring that the vehicle arrives at the intersection stop bar just as the last queued vehicle is discharged. The result demonstrated that the proposed Eco-CACC system produces vehicle fuel savings up to 40%. Meanwhile, human driving error and mixed traffic are also discussed in some research to improve energy conservation further. As for CAVs leaving process, ecodeparture technologies draw researchers' attention to the CAV leaving process. Ref. [123] analyzed the ecodeparture of CAVs With V2X communication at signalized intersections. The results showed that eco-driving has the potential to save fuel for CAVs. However, its realization requires accurate control of the engine and transmission. Although there are several publications related to energy conservation at a road intersection, there is still lots of research and work that needs to be done in this area. The assumption of the existing papers is usually too idealistic. Maybe the research work's good starting point is to analyze the planning and decision-making under an unsignalized intersection environment.
