# Maintenance therapy for newly diagnosed epithelial ovarian cancer-a review

CorpusID: 251108929 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99f2f830f93d053159531598e2fd55b77c1b72e2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99f2f830f93d053159531598e2fd55b77c1b72e2)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) PARP inhibitors
Number of References: 13

(p4.0) The approval of PARP inhibitors in 2014 for the management of recurrent EOC resulted in a paradigm shift in the treatment landscape. PARP inhibitors are one of the new class of medications for EOC, targeting the DNA repair fragility of tumor cells. PARP inhibitors have been shown to trap enzymes PARP1 and PARP2 on DNA, leading to PARP-DNA complexes. This "trapping of PARP" potentiates synergism between PARP inhibition and both platinum-based chemotherapy and alkylating agents. However, there are remarkable differences in the PARP inhibitors ability to trap PARP, based on the size and structure of each molecule [50]. Among PARP inhibitors that have already been evaluated, olaparib, niraparib, and rucaparib trap PARP 100-fold more efficiently compared to veliparib, whereas talazoparib appears to be the most potent PARP trapper investigated so far. Increased PARP trapping is found to be associated with high myelosuppression, which possibly results in variation of the recommended doses across PARP inhibitors [51].

(p4.1) The phase III trials, Study-19 [52,53], SOLO-2 [24,25], NOVA [26,27] and ARIEL-3 [23] have demonstrated PFS benefit with PARP inhibitors maintenance therapy (olaparib, niraparib and rucaparib), in platinum-sensitive recurrent OC. Based on the positive results, the US FDA approved PARP inhibitors for the maintenance treatment of recurrent EOC, fallopian tube or primary peritoneal cancer, in patients who are in complete response (CR) or partial response (PR) to platinum-based chemotherapy. The role of PARP inhibitors as maintenance therapy was evaluated in frontline setting in four phase III trials (SOLO-1 [54], PRIMA [55], PAOLA-1 [56] and VELIA [57]). The details of clinical trials with PARP inhibitors maintenance in OC management are summarised in Table 2.
## (s12) Cost implications
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) Generally, individuals with cancer need to pay a greater percentage of their treatment costs through coinsurance and deductibles [93]. In most of the cancer patients out-of-pocket cost is a main barrier in starting and adhering to suggested advanced treatments [94]. PARP inhibitors are expensive compared with other available therapies. The out-of-pocket charges may differ depending on the insurance coverage of the patient and the local reimbursement policies. Although most insurance companies arrange for some coverage for PARP inhibitors, the patient's co-payment may remain unaffordable. The cost of coverage and the size of copayment may vary geographically. The cost-effective analyses study conducted by Gonzalez et al., reported that universal PARP inhibitor maintenance treatment is cost-effective compared with a biomarker-directed PARP inhibitor strategy [95]. The economic analyses conducted by Tan et al., demonstrated that olaparib has a high potential (87% probability) of being a cost-effective maintenance treatment in Singapore than routine surveillance among patients with advanced OC with BRCA mutations after response to first-line chemotherapy at a willingness-to-pay of Singapore dollar 60,000 per quality-adjusted life-year gained [96].
