# A review on the achievement of enzymatic glycerol carbonate production

CorpusID: 252791188 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/804dcb3d78ea843ae7c81779a198354bfd59d125](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/804dcb3d78ea843ae7c81779a198354bfd59d125)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Chemistry, Engineering

## (s5) Effect of raw material amount
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) GlyC can be produced from the reactants Gly/vegetable oil (waste oil, microalgae oil) with DMC [76]. In this transesterification reaction, the Gly/vegetable oil is used as an acyl donor and DMC is used as a carbon source and acyl acceptor. The transesterification reaction of GlyC from DMC and Gly is the most commonly used and direct method and this reaction is irreversible. Theoretically, according to stoichiometry, to produce 1 mol of GlyC an equimolar mixture of substrates is needed; 1 mol of DMC and 1 mol of Gly. On this reaction, 2 mol of methanol is produced as a by-product as shown in Figure 4. High Gly concentration can lead to the coat onto the surface of the immobilized enzyme [77], which limits substrate and product diffusion [78], and subsequently, negatively affects the lipase activity [79] and process stability [80]. To shift this chemical equilibrium to the right side, towards GlyC, a high molar ratio of DMC to Gly is required [33].
## (s9) Effect of reaction time
Number of References: 9

(p9.0) In an enzymatic transesterification reaction, a short reaction time is desired. With long reaction time, the operating cost increases and the GlyC yield decreases because of side products building with time [39]. Kim et al. investigated the enzymatic GlyC production with Novozym 435 within 28 h in THF solvent and obtained a 99% Gly conversion under reaction conditions: 60 °C reaction temperature, 1:1 DMC:Gly molar ratio, 27% biocatalyst (w/w based on Gly). Here molecular sieve was also used as a scavenger [57]. Du et al. investigated enzymatic GlyC production from magnetic organosilica nanoflowers immobilized CalB lipase. A high selectivity of 94.13% was obtained, and optimum reaction time was 27 h under the following reaction conditions: 20:1 DMC:Gly molar ratio, 10 g/L enzyme amount, 50 °C reaction temperature and in solvent-free medium [54]. Waghmare et al. performed the ultrasonic-assisted stirring enzymatic GlyC production from Gly and DMC with the Novozym 435. In a short reaction time of 4 h, there was a high Gly conversion (99.75%) at 3:1 DMC:Gly molar ratio, 13% Novozym 435 (w/w), 60 °C reaction temperature. With the ultrasound, the reaction time was dropped down to 4 h from 14 h. During the conventional stirring, the Gly conversion was 30% in 4 h, the ultrasound without stirring was given a Gly conversion of 54.30% at the same time. Not only with using ultrasound but also ultrasound combined with stirring, the reaction time was drastically reduced by 10 h [58]. The ultrasonic-assisted process leads to cavitation bubbles collapse between phase borderline from two immiscible solutions so that both layers can be mixed efficiently, the mass transfer limitations reduce, and the reaction rate increases [107,[110][111][112]. Lee et al. performed enzymatic GlyC production with silica gel-coated Gly and DMC by Novozym 435. The advantage of the silica-coated Gly was increase of reaction rate up to 10-fold and reduction of reaction time from 100 h to 48 h [74].
## (s12) Reusability of enzyme
Number of References: 20

(p12.0) Reusability plays an important role in the economic aspect as the profitability of enzymatic reaction. The immobilized enzyme offers the possibility of reusability. This property of immobilized enzyme leads to cost-reduction and simplified downstream processing. The immobilized enzyme is preferred more than the free enzyme because of its greater operational stability and easier separation from the product [96]. The reusability of related immobilized enzymes was analyzed with the retention of the initial activity of the enzyme. The initial activity of the enzyme for the first round was taken as 100% [90,116]. The lipase activity can be determined with different methods such as p-nitrophenyl butyrate assay [55] or the esterification activity with oleic acid and 1-butanol to butyl oleate [49,119]. To confirm lipase activity, Gly conversion was also measured after every cycle [49,74]. After the reaction, the immobilized enzyme should be washed to remove substrate/product or solvent residue. In the literature, it was reported that the commercial Novozym 435 was washed with acetone several times and the washed enzyme was dried out in a desiccator [116,119]. Novozym 435 maintained 80% of this initial activity after seven times recycling so that this enzyme can be used more than seven times [116]. In Table 7, the reusability of enzyme, its washed chemicals, and the residual activity are presented. A literature review in the reusability of immobilized enzyme, which is used in GlyC production reveals that the reusability of Novozyme 435 is given mostly 4-7 times [54,64,76,87,90,111]. Cushing et al. investigated the reusability of Novozyme 435 with using of tert-butanol as washed chemicals. After 5 times reusability of Novozyme 435, the residual activity was 85% [90]. Min and Lee researched the reusability of Novozyme 435 until 7 times with a residual activity of 80%, which was washed with acetone as solvent [116]. Tudorache et al. found a reusability up to 20 times during GlyC production without loss of catalytic activity [120]. 
