# Citation: Wearable Continuous Blood Pressure Monitoring Devices Based on Pulse Wave Transit Time and Pulse Arrival materials Wearable Continuous Blood Pressure Monitoring Devices Based on Pulse Wave Transit Time and Pulse Arrival Time: A Review

CorpusID: 257411187 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bf4433867a8015faf66e0a7f852dc15beeaf989](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bf4433867a8015faf66e0a7f852dc15beeaf989)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s2) Definition of Pulse Transit Time (PTT) and Pulse Arrival Time (PAT)
Number of References: 16

(p2.0) Pulse transit time (PTT) is the time it takes for a pulse wave to travel between two places in the cardiovascular system, also known as the time it takes for a pulse wave to travel along a fixed arterial segment of length [34]. PTT is a powerful physiological parameter that has been widely used in various clinical applications, such as sleep quality monitoring [35], the evaluation of arterial stiffness [9], myocardial ischemia [36], etc. However, with the continuous development of research, more and more studies have demonstrated that changes in PTT can reliably track changes in BP and indirectly measure BP [37][38][39]. Generally, if the BP is higher, the blood will travel faster, and the PTT will be shorter over the same distance; if the BP is lower, the blood will travel slower, and the PTT will be longer for the same distance, which means that there is a conversion relationship between BP and PTT. Therefore, PTT becomes an indicator for estimating BP, and a linear or nonlinear regression model can be established according to PTT to calculate BP [9].

(p2.1) The definitions of Pulse Arrival Time (PAT) and PTT are similar, but there are also significant differences. PAT usually refers to the interval between the R peak of the ECG signal and the peak of the PPG signal, and PAT is the sum of the PTT and the pre-ejection time (PEP). PEP is the time between the electrical systole (ECG Q wave) and the initial opening of the aortic valve [40], and it is usually negligible and relatively constant. The R-wave is typically used instead of the Q-Wave [41]. In many references, researchers refer to PAT simply as PTT, such as in Figure 1d and Wang et al. [22].

(p2.2) Among various regression models, the linear regression model using only PTT is the simplest BP estimation model. In addition to the linear regression model based on PTT, there are many nonlinear regression models, such as reciprocal type [42], exponential type [43], logarithmic type [9], and so on. All of these models can complete the estimation of BP based on PTT, but there are differences in the calculation accuracy and computational complexity. In addition, PTT can also be combined with other physiological indicators (heart rate [44], age and gender [22], etc.) to form a multiple regression model, which can reflect human physiological information more comprehensively, thus improving the accuracy of continuous BP estimation. In actual research, appropriate physiological indicators and calculation models should be selected according to the characteristics of individuals.
## (s3) Acquisition of PTT/PAT
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) PAT is the interval between the peak value of the R wave of the ECG signal and the peak value of the PPG signal; researchers usually calculate PAT by identifying these two peaks, and some researchers treat PAT as PTT. Therefore, the ECG and PPG signals must be obtained through the ECG sensor and the PPG sensor first. However, the quality of the ECG and PPG signals directly affects the accuracy of the PTT and, thus, the accuracy of the BP estimation model. Thus, the quality of the ECG sensor and PPG sensor is crucial, and the measuring principles, design methods, preparation processes, and properties of many ECG sensors and PPG sensors are discussed below to provide a reference and guidance for the design of future ECG sensors and PPG sensors. In addition, there are also other ways to calculate PAT; J. Sola et al. proposed a method for estimating PAT based only on the characteristic point of the pressure pulse waveform, without the ECG signal [45]. We can also estimate PTT instead of measuring it; J. Sola et al. established a lumped model of the segments of the arterial tree involved in Pulse Wave Velocity (PWV) measurements [46], so PTT can be estimated by the formula PTT = distance/PWV.
