# Clinical Ethics Support for Healthcare Personnel: An Integrative Literature Review

CorpusID: 254503754 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3986633ee71503b81c9cf8a8e80c7ae07f7c8131](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3986633ee71503b81c9cf8a8e80c7ae07f7c8131)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Nursing Ethics
Number of References: 8

(p6.0) Ethics support Quantitative, online questionnaires n = 2. Responses in total n = 354 To study outcomes of ethics activities and examine which factors promote or inhibit significance and sustainability of activities The participants of this study found the ethics project to be highly significant for their daily professional practice. Outcomes include better handling of ethical challenges, better employee cooperation, better service quality, and better relations with patients and next of kin. Factors associated with sustainability and/or significance of the activities were sufficient support from stakeholders, sufficient available time, and ethics facilitators having sufficient knowledge and skills in ethics and access to supervision. The facilitators who are responsible for the activities must receive sufficient follow-up and training in ethics deliberation methods and relevant topics in health care ethics. how it is interwoven with practice A threefold account of the relationship between theory and practice based on narrative and hermeneutical approaches were discussed. The relationship between theory and practice took the form of a ''hermeneutic circle.'' Using theories to interpret experiences makes theoretical concepts clearer. It indicates our basic attitudes to our daily work by summarizing: (1) that we acknowledge our dependencies and responsibilities within the social sphere, and (2) that we believe that all human identities are constructed by means of narratives as (3) we perceive human beings as story-telling agents. In addition, (4) we emphasized our focus on fostering mutual understanding; (5) we acknowledge that understanding is mediated by language, words and concepts; and (6) we opt for taking personal and professional experiences seriously, making them accessible in dialogues, and learn from each other in changing perspectives. Schildmann et al. (2013) (Sandelowski et al. 2006), such as different approaches to CES.

(p6.1) Ethics support Quantitative, online questionnaires n = 2. Responses in total n = 354 To study outcomes of ethics activities and examine which factors promote or inhibit significance and sustainability of activities The participants of this study found the ethics project to be highly significant for their daily professional practice. Outcomes include better handling of ethical challenges, better employee cooperation, better service quality, and better relations with patients and next of kin. Factors associated with sustainability and/or significance of the activities were sufficient support from stakeholders, sufficient available time, and ethics facilitators having sufficient knowledge and skills in ethics and access to supervision. The facilitators who are responsible for the activities must receive sufficient follow-up and training in ethics deliberation methods and relevant topics in health care ethics. how it is interwoven with practice A threefold account of the relationship between theory and practice based on narrative and hermeneutical approaches were discussed. The relationship between theory and practice took the form of a ''hermeneutic circle.'' Using theories to interpret experiences makes theoretical concepts clearer. It indicates our basic attitudes to our daily work by summarizing: (1) that we acknowledge our dependencies and responsibilities within the social sphere, and (2) that we believe that all human identities are constructed by means of narratives as (3) we perceive human beings as story-telling agents. In addition, (4) we emphasized our focus on fostering mutual understanding; (5) we acknowledge that understanding is mediated by language, words and concepts; and (6) we opt for taking personal and professional experiences seriously, making them accessible in dialogues, and learn from each other in changing perspectives. Schildmann et al. (2013) (Sandelowski et al. 2006), such as different approaches to CES.
## (s9) Clinical Ethics Committees
Number of References: 136

(p9.0) A clinical ethics committee is typically a standing committee which functions as an independent institution or authority to provide a formal mechanism for dealing with ethical issues in clinical settings (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Aulisio and Arnold 2008). Generally, the members of clinical ethics committees have various professional backgrounds such as: bioethicists/ethics consultants, clergy, social workers, lawyers, nurses, physicians, psychologists, therapists and community representatives (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Schick and Guo 2001). The goals and responsibilities of the clinical ethics committee are to protect the rights, safety and well-being of the patient in the health care setting or human subjects in research projects (Borovecki et al. 2010;Gaudine et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2011). In addition, they are to identify and analyze ethical issues in clinical practice (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2001), promote training and education of health personnel, and provide guidance upon request (Caminiti et al. 2011). They commonly respond to requests to address ethical issues related to ongoing as well as retrospective patient cases; identify ethical needs within clinical settings; support healthcare personnel, patients and next-of-kin (Førde and Pedersen 2011), find agreements and make decisions; and review research protocols (Fukuyama et al. 2008;Gaudine et al. 2010). Clinical ethics committees are involved in responding to ethical issues, such as informed consent to treatment (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011). Sometimes they provide decision-making support (Pedersen et al. 2009) in end-of-life situations or the continuation of life support (Slowther et al. 2004b). Clinical ethics committees can also provide education, seminars, workshops and training in ethics for hospital employees (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011;Pedersen et al. 2009). They can review research protocols (except in the United States, where separate committees deal with this process), provide ethical input into hospital policies (Pedersen et al. 2009) and create guidelines (Slowther et al. 2001). Additionally, they can give an ''expert'' opinion regarding issues, such as the provision of treatment against a patient's will and the disclosure of medical information against a patient's wishes when it might be deemed necessary (Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees promote an ethical dimension to health care and generate possibilities for improvement in care quality (Caminiti et al. 2011;Czarkowski et al. 2015).

(p9.1) There is no formal legal or regulatory governing framework for clinical ethics committees, which is in contrast to research ethics committees worldwide (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2004b;Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees vary in function, structure and goals worldwide, but there are some commonalities in terms of the provision of advice (Slowther et al. 2001) and recommendations concerning the best course of action or discussions that lead to a good decisionmaking process (Schick and Guo 2001;Slowther et al. 2004b). Some committees themselves assume the responsibility to develop and improve guidelines and policies regarding prospective ethical challenges in clinical practice, and others are mandated by the health care institutions to do so (Aulisio and Arnold 2008;Slowther et al. 2001). Clinical ethics committees seem to have formal authority and legitimacy (without generalizing) to provide advice and recommendations concerning ethical issues arising in healthcare institutions (Slowther et al. 2004b).

(p9.2) A clinical ethics committee is typically a standing committee which functions as an independent institution or authority to provide a formal mechanism for dealing with ethical issues in clinical settings (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Aulisio and Arnold 2008). Generally, the members of clinical ethics committees have various professional backgrounds such as: bioethicists/ethics consultants, clergy, social workers, lawyers, nurses, physicians, psychologists, therapists and community representatives (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Schick and Guo 2001). The goals and responsibilities of the clinical ethics committee are to protect the rights, safety and well-being of the patient in the health care setting or human subjects in research projects (Borovecki et al. 2010;Gaudine et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2011). In addition, they are to identify and analyze ethical issues in clinical practice (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2001), promote training and education of health personnel, and provide guidance upon request (Caminiti et al. 2011). They commonly respond to requests to address ethical issues related to ongoing as well as retrospective patient cases; identify ethical needs within clinical settings; support healthcare personnel, patients and next-of-kin (Førde and Pedersen 2011), find agreements and make decisions; and review research protocols (Fukuyama et al. 2008;Gaudine et al. 2010). Clinical ethics committees are involved in responding to ethical issues, such as informed consent to treatment (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011). Sometimes they provide decision-making support (Pedersen et al. 2009) in end-of-life situations or the continuation of life support (Slowther et al. 2004b). Clinical ethics committees can also provide education, seminars, workshops and training in ethics for hospital employees (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011;Pedersen et al. 2009). They can review research protocols (except in the United States, where separate committees deal with this process), provide ethical input into hospital policies (Pedersen et al. 2009) and create guidelines (Slowther et al. 2001). Additionally, they can give an ''expert'' opinion regarding issues, such as the provision of treatment against a patient's will and the disclosure of medical information against a patient's wishes when it might be deemed necessary (Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees promote an ethical dimension to health care and generate possibilities for improvement in care quality (Caminiti et al. 2011;Czarkowski et al. 2015).

(p9.3) There is no formal legal or regulatory governing framework for clinical ethics committees, which is in contrast to research ethics committees worldwide (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2004b;Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees vary in function, structure and goals worldwide, but there are some commonalities in terms of the provision of advice (Slowther et al. 2001) and recommendations concerning the best course of action or discussions that lead to a good decisionmaking process (Schick and Guo 2001;Slowther et al. 2004b). Some committees themselves assume the responsibility to develop and improve guidelines and policies regarding prospective ethical challenges in clinical practice, and others are mandated by the health care institutions to do so (Aulisio and Arnold 2008;Slowther et al. 2001). Clinical ethics committees seem to have formal authority and legitimacy (without generalizing) to provide advice and recommendations concerning ethical issues arising in healthcare institutions (Slowther et al. 2004b).
## (s13) Strengths and Limitations
Number of References: 4

(p13.0) A strength of this study is that the conclusions are based on literature that allowed an analysis of the established clinical ethics support approaches worldwide. In this integrative review, both qualitative and quantitative studies as well as theoretical papers were included. An integrated review allows the inclusion of several methodologies and can take into account a broader range of studies to develop a more comprehensive understanding of a phenomenon (Whittemore and Knafl 2005). Another strength is that we have searched data systematically with Mesh terms as well as manually. There are limitations as well. It was difficult to decide which articles to exclude since there are no real definitions as to what clinical ethics consultation really is. We included articles that described a clinical ethics support approach empirically, or theoretical papers that discussed an established approach. It was difficult to decide where to draw the line between approaches aimed only at supporting healthcare personnel with ethically difficult situations and approaches that support healthcare personnel as well as patients and next-of-kin. For example, some clinical ethics committees do support the patients and their next-of-kin, while other clinical ethics committees do not involve patients and next-of-kin in their annual meetings or when considering different situations. Even though there are similarities in the ''top-down'' perspective of the clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees, it does not mean they are similar worldwide. Clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees in different countries can differ in their role and function as well. In addition, in this review we considered only English-language papers and it is possible that other methods of ethics support have been developed in other language cultures. Future studies need to focus on defining and characterizing what clinical ethics support actually is, how it should function and if it should function differently in different countries; and if so, what are the possible reasons since many of the ethical issues are similar globally. Lastly, an additional interesting avenue for future research would be to perform a large-scale study of what types of ethical support practitioners are receiving, if they are satisfied with it and their perceptions regarding any effects on patient outcomes.

(p13.1) A strength of this study is that the conclusions are based on literature that allowed an analysis of the established clinical ethics support approaches worldwide. In this integrative review, both qualitative and quantitative studies as well as theoretical papers were included. An integrated review allows the inclusion of several methodologies and can take into account a broader range of studies to develop a more comprehensive understanding of a phenomenon (Whittemore and Knafl 2005). Another strength is that we have searched data systematically with Mesh terms as well as manually. There are limitations as well. It was difficult to decide which articles to exclude since there are no real definitions as to what clinical ethics consultation really is. We included articles that described a clinical ethics support approach empirically, or theoretical papers that discussed an established approach. It was difficult to decide where to draw the line between approaches aimed only at supporting healthcare personnel with ethically difficult situations and approaches that support healthcare personnel as well as patients and next-of-kin. For example, some clinical ethics committees do support the patients and their next-of-kin, while other clinical ethics committees do not involve patients and next-of-kin in their annual meetings or when considering different situations. Even though there are similarities in the ''top-down'' perspective of the clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees, it does not mean they are similar worldwide. Clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees in different countries can differ in their role and function as well. In addition, in this review we considered only English-language papers and it is possible that other methods of ethics support have been developed in other language cultures. Future studies need to focus on defining and characterizing what clinical ethics support actually is, how it should function and if it should function differently in different countries; and if so, what are the possible reasons since many of the ethical issues are similar globally. Lastly, an additional interesting avenue for future research would be to perform a large-scale study of what types of ethical support practitioners are receiving, if they are satisfied with it and their perceptions regarding any effects on patient outcomes.
## (s28) Nursing Ethics
Number of References: 8

(p28.0) Ethics support Quantitative, online questionnaires n = 2. Responses in total n = 354 To study outcomes of ethics activities and examine which factors promote or inhibit significance and sustainability of activities The participants of this study found the ethics project to be highly significant for their daily professional practice. Outcomes include better handling of ethical challenges, better employee cooperation, better service quality, and better relations with patients and next of kin. Factors associated with sustainability and/or significance of the activities were sufficient support from stakeholders, sufficient available time, and ethics facilitators having sufficient knowledge and skills in ethics and access to supervision. The facilitators who are responsible for the activities must receive sufficient follow-up and training in ethics deliberation methods and relevant topics in health care ethics. how it is interwoven with practice A threefold account of the relationship between theory and practice based on narrative and hermeneutical approaches were discussed. The relationship between theory and practice took the form of a ''hermeneutic circle.'' Using theories to interpret experiences makes theoretical concepts clearer. It indicates our basic attitudes to our daily work by summarizing: (1) that we acknowledge our dependencies and responsibilities within the social sphere, and (2) that we believe that all human identities are constructed by means of narratives as (3) we perceive human beings as story-telling agents. In addition, (4) we emphasized our focus on fostering mutual understanding; (5) we acknowledge that understanding is mediated by language, words and concepts; and (6) we opt for taking personal and professional experiences seriously, making them accessible in dialogues, and learn from each other in changing perspectives. Schildmann et al. (2013) (Sandelowski et al. 2006), such as different approaches to CES.

(p28.1) Ethics support Quantitative, online questionnaires n = 2. Responses in total n = 354 To study outcomes of ethics activities and examine which factors promote or inhibit significance and sustainability of activities The participants of this study found the ethics project to be highly significant for their daily professional practice. Outcomes include better handling of ethical challenges, better employee cooperation, better service quality, and better relations with patients and next of kin. Factors associated with sustainability and/or significance of the activities were sufficient support from stakeholders, sufficient available time, and ethics facilitators having sufficient knowledge and skills in ethics and access to supervision. The facilitators who are responsible for the activities must receive sufficient follow-up and training in ethics deliberation methods and relevant topics in health care ethics. how it is interwoven with practice A threefold account of the relationship between theory and practice based on narrative and hermeneutical approaches were discussed. The relationship between theory and practice took the form of a ''hermeneutic circle.'' Using theories to interpret experiences makes theoretical concepts clearer. It indicates our basic attitudes to our daily work by summarizing: (1) that we acknowledge our dependencies and responsibilities within the social sphere, and (2) that we believe that all human identities are constructed by means of narratives as (3) we perceive human beings as story-telling agents. In addition, (4) we emphasized our focus on fostering mutual understanding; (5) we acknowledge that understanding is mediated by language, words and concepts; and (6) we opt for taking personal and professional experiences seriously, making them accessible in dialogues, and learn from each other in changing perspectives. Schildmann et al. (2013) (Sandelowski et al. 2006), such as different approaches to CES.
## (s31) Clinical Ethics Committees
Number of References: 136

(p31.0) A clinical ethics committee is typically a standing committee which functions as an independent institution or authority to provide a formal mechanism for dealing with ethical issues in clinical settings (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Aulisio and Arnold 2008). Generally, the members of clinical ethics committees have various professional backgrounds such as: bioethicists/ethics consultants, clergy, social workers, lawyers, nurses, physicians, psychologists, therapists and community representatives (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Schick and Guo 2001). The goals and responsibilities of the clinical ethics committee are to protect the rights, safety and well-being of the patient in the health care setting or human subjects in research projects (Borovecki et al. 2010;Gaudine et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2011). In addition, they are to identify and analyze ethical issues in clinical practice (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2001), promote training and education of health personnel, and provide guidance upon request (Caminiti et al. 2011). They commonly respond to requests to address ethical issues related to ongoing as well as retrospective patient cases; identify ethical needs within clinical settings; support healthcare personnel, patients and next-of-kin (Førde and Pedersen 2011), find agreements and make decisions; and review research protocols (Fukuyama et al. 2008;Gaudine et al. 2010). Clinical ethics committees are involved in responding to ethical issues, such as informed consent to treatment (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011). Sometimes they provide decision-making support (Pedersen et al. 2009) in end-of-life situations or the continuation of life support (Slowther et al. 2004b). Clinical ethics committees can also provide education, seminars, workshops and training in ethics for hospital employees (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011;Pedersen et al. 2009). They can review research protocols (except in the United States, where separate committees deal with this process), provide ethical input into hospital policies (Pedersen et al. 2009) and create guidelines (Slowther et al. 2001). Additionally, they can give an ''expert'' opinion regarding issues, such as the provision of treatment against a patient's will and the disclosure of medical information against a patient's wishes when it might be deemed necessary (Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees promote an ethical dimension to health care and generate possibilities for improvement in care quality (Caminiti et al. 2011;Czarkowski et al. 2015).

(p31.1) There is no formal legal or regulatory governing framework for clinical ethics committees, which is in contrast to research ethics committees worldwide (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2004b;Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees vary in function, structure and goals worldwide, but there are some commonalities in terms of the provision of advice (Slowther et al. 2001) and recommendations concerning the best course of action or discussions that lead to a good decisionmaking process (Schick and Guo 2001;Slowther et al. 2004b). Some committees themselves assume the responsibility to develop and improve guidelines and policies regarding prospective ethical challenges in clinical practice, and others are mandated by the health care institutions to do so (Aulisio and Arnold 2008;Slowther et al. 2001). Clinical ethics committees seem to have formal authority and legitimacy (without generalizing) to provide advice and recommendations concerning ethical issues arising in healthcare institutions (Slowther et al. 2004b).

(p31.2) A clinical ethics committee is typically a standing committee which functions as an independent institution or authority to provide a formal mechanism for dealing with ethical issues in clinical settings (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Aulisio and Arnold 2008). Generally, the members of clinical ethics committees have various professional backgrounds such as: bioethicists/ethics consultants, clergy, social workers, lawyers, nurses, physicians, psychologists, therapists and community representatives (Akabayashi et al. 2008;Schick and Guo 2001). The goals and responsibilities of the clinical ethics committee are to protect the rights, safety and well-being of the patient in the health care setting or human subjects in research projects (Borovecki et al. 2010;Gaudine et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2011). In addition, they are to identify and analyze ethical issues in clinical practice (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2001), promote training and education of health personnel, and provide guidance upon request (Caminiti et al. 2011). They commonly respond to requests to address ethical issues related to ongoing as well as retrospective patient cases; identify ethical needs within clinical settings; support healthcare personnel, patients and next-of-kin (Førde and Pedersen 2011), find agreements and make decisions; and review research protocols (Fukuyama et al. 2008;Gaudine et al. 2010). Clinical ethics committees are involved in responding to ethical issues, such as informed consent to treatment (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011). Sometimes they provide decision-making support (Pedersen et al. 2009) in end-of-life situations or the continuation of life support (Slowther et al. 2004b). Clinical ethics committees can also provide education, seminars, workshops and training in ethics for hospital employees (Borovecki et al. 2010;Caminiti et al. 2011;Pedersen et al. 2009). They can review research protocols (except in the United States, where separate committees deal with this process), provide ethical input into hospital policies (Pedersen et al. 2009) and create guidelines (Slowther et al. 2001). Additionally, they can give an ''expert'' opinion regarding issues, such as the provision of treatment against a patient's will and the disclosure of medical information against a patient's wishes when it might be deemed necessary (Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees promote an ethical dimension to health care and generate possibilities for improvement in care quality (Caminiti et al. 2011;Czarkowski et al. 2015).

(p31.3) There is no formal legal or regulatory governing framework for clinical ethics committees, which is in contrast to research ethics committees worldwide (Larcher et al. 2010;Slowther et al. 2004b;Wenger et al. 2002). Clinical ethics committees vary in function, structure and goals worldwide, but there are some commonalities in terms of the provision of advice (Slowther et al. 2001) and recommendations concerning the best course of action or discussions that lead to a good decisionmaking process (Schick and Guo 2001;Slowther et al. 2004b). Some committees themselves assume the responsibility to develop and improve guidelines and policies regarding prospective ethical challenges in clinical practice, and others are mandated by the health care institutions to do so (Aulisio and Arnold 2008;Slowther et al. 2001). Clinical ethics committees seem to have formal authority and legitimacy (without generalizing) to provide advice and recommendations concerning ethical issues arising in healthcare institutions (Slowther et al. 2004b).
## (s35) Strengths and Limitations
Number of References: 4

(p35.0) A strength of this study is that the conclusions are based on literature that allowed an analysis of the established clinical ethics support approaches worldwide. In this integrative review, both qualitative and quantitative studies as well as theoretical papers were included. An integrated review allows the inclusion of several methodologies and can take into account a broader range of studies to develop a more comprehensive understanding of a phenomenon (Whittemore and Knafl 2005). Another strength is that we have searched data systematically with Mesh terms as well as manually. There are limitations as well. It was difficult to decide which articles to exclude since there are no real definitions as to what clinical ethics consultation really is. We included articles that described a clinical ethics support approach empirically, or theoretical papers that discussed an established approach. It was difficult to decide where to draw the line between approaches aimed only at supporting healthcare personnel with ethically difficult situations and approaches that support healthcare personnel as well as patients and next-of-kin. For example, some clinical ethics committees do support the patients and their next-of-kin, while other clinical ethics committees do not involve patients and next-of-kin in their annual meetings or when considering different situations. Even though there are similarities in the ''top-down'' perspective of the clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees, it does not mean they are similar worldwide. Clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees in different countries can differ in their role and function as well. In addition, in this review we considered only English-language papers and it is possible that other methods of ethics support have been developed in other language cultures. Future studies need to focus on defining and characterizing what clinical ethics support actually is, how it should function and if it should function differently in different countries; and if so, what are the possible reasons since many of the ethical issues are similar globally. Lastly, an additional interesting avenue for future research would be to perform a large-scale study of what types of ethical support practitioners are receiving, if they are satisfied with it and their perceptions regarding any effects on patient outcomes.

(p35.1) A strength of this study is that the conclusions are based on literature that allowed an analysis of the established clinical ethics support approaches worldwide. In this integrative review, both qualitative and quantitative studies as well as theoretical papers were included. An integrated review allows the inclusion of several methodologies and can take into account a broader range of studies to develop a more comprehensive understanding of a phenomenon (Whittemore and Knafl 2005). Another strength is that we have searched data systematically with Mesh terms as well as manually. There are limitations as well. It was difficult to decide which articles to exclude since there are no real definitions as to what clinical ethics consultation really is. We included articles that described a clinical ethics support approach empirically, or theoretical papers that discussed an established approach. It was difficult to decide where to draw the line between approaches aimed only at supporting healthcare personnel with ethically difficult situations and approaches that support healthcare personnel as well as patients and next-of-kin. For example, some clinical ethics committees do support the patients and their next-of-kin, while other clinical ethics committees do not involve patients and next-of-kin in their annual meetings or when considering different situations. Even though there are similarities in the ''top-down'' perspective of the clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees, it does not mean they are similar worldwide. Clinical ethics consultation and clinical ethics committees in different countries can differ in their role and function as well. In addition, in this review we considered only English-language papers and it is possible that other methods of ethics support have been developed in other language cultures. Future studies need to focus on defining and characterizing what clinical ethics support actually is, how it should function and if it should function differently in different countries; and if so, what are the possible reasons since many of the ethical issues are similar globally. Lastly, an additional interesting avenue for future research would be to perform a large-scale study of what types of ethical support practitioners are receiving, if they are satisfied with it and their perceptions regarding any effects on patient outcomes.
