# Advances and strategies for capillary electrophoresis in the characterization of traditional Chinese medicine: A review of the past decade (2011-2021)

CorpusID: 257120179 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5fa537093553509d18d65f0d44a3b17330c29d9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5fa537093553509d18d65f0d44a3b17330c29d9)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 6

(p0.0) Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) is a health and wellness approach that the Chinese have practiced for thousands of years. Since ancient times, TCM has been recognized and is currently used in many countries worldwide for many reasons. The benefits of TCM suggest its potential as a therapeutic option for patients with various diseases. Recently, TCM has attracted increased attention and acceptance due to its better therapeutic effects, lower toxicity, and affordability. Hence, analyzing bioactive components in TCMs must be reviewed and enhanced to promote the development and use of TCMs worldwide Leong et al., 2020). As reported by DrugBank, 97 FDA-approved drugs are derived from TCMs (Fang et al., 2020). One example is ephedrine, which is obtained from the TCM herb Ma Huang (Herba Ephedrae) and is now used as an anti-asthmatic drug . Another example is artemisinin (qinghaosu), derived from the Chinese herb qinghao (Herba Artemisiae annuae), which is now considered the first-line drug for the treatment of malaria (Tu, 2011). Nevertheless, the knowledge of Chinese herbs and their combinations as prescriptions is built upon many years of testing and identifying their clinical efficacy for disease treatment. Therefore, isolating the active ingredients in TCM will allow the dissection of their mechanisms of action, opening new therapeutic possibilities (Harvey et al., 2015;Xu et al., 2019). However, due to their propensity to provide immediate therapeutic outcomes while also carrying considerable safety risks, TCMs have recently been termed "two sides of the coin" (Tu et al., 2021). Also, due to their extensive worldwide, TCM quality issues might lead to medical mishaps in practice. Hence, quality control is critical in TCM.
## (s2) Identification of studies on TCM analysis by capillary electrophoresis
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) Studies in the last decade have examined and reviewed the status of capillary electrophoresis (CE) for the separation, subsequent determination, quantitation, and quality control of TCMs (Table 1). CE and CE-mass spectrometry (MS) have attracted research attention (Ma et al., 2018;Gackowski et al., 2021;Przybylska et al., 2021), as detailed in our search discussed in the following sentences. In particular, CE has played a vital role in TCM analysis as a reliable and sensitive analytical tool; thus, CE is a suitable platform for TCM identification, separation, and quality control. Additionally, CE has gained prominence in recent years due to its high separation efficiency, minimal solvent consumption, small sample volume, low running cost, repeatability, and adaptability of various separation modes. Moreover, CE has recently been classified as an eco-friendly, powerful tool for analyzing different types of active constituents present in TCM, medicinal plants, and natural products used in TCM .
## (s9) Flavonoids
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Cacumen platycladi Rutin; Quercitrin, kaempferol, and quercetin SLE 2 g sample was dispersed in 50 mL of methanol, kept in a 60°C water bath for 3 h, cooled, sonicated, filtered, and the residue was dissolved in 10 mL methanol. The obtained solution was diluted using 50 mM sodium borate buffer (pH 9.2) at a volume ratio of 10 (1-10) prior to CE analysis CZE-AD: A fused-silica capillary (25 μm I.D. x 50 cm length); BGE: 50 mM sodium borate buffer (pH 9.2); graphene/poly (ethylene-co-vinyl acetate); voltage: 12 kV; a three-electrode electrochemical cell consisting of a disc detection electrode, a platinum auxiliary electrode, and an Ag/AgCl wire as the reference electrode Sheng et al. (2013) Anthraquinones  Gao et al. (2015) Frontiers in Analytical Science frontiersin.org a capillary column (coated or packed with particles or a monolith) to generate EOF. Due to its high efficiency, high selectivity, and low sample consumption, the use of CEC has been reported for complex TCM samples (Table 4, rows 27-31). Additionally, the reverse-phase mechanism of HPLC makes this method reliable and adaptable for variable structural classes of TCM compounds, as shown in Figure 1. Moreover, CEC is entirely suitable for pharmaceutical analysis and can replace other less selective techniques for complex mixtures of compounds in TCM .
## (s16) Far infrared-assisted extraction (FIAE)
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) Infrared (IR) radiation is a type of electromagnetic radiation that exists in the electromagnetic spectrum between visible light and microwaves. Fu et al. applied FIAE to isolate flavones and phenolic acids in the dried leaves of Rhododendron mucronulatum Turcz by MEKC with amperometric detection (AD). The extraction duration was significantly decreased to 6 min with FIAE compared to hot solvent extraction (HSE) time of 3 h . Carbohydrates are abundant in herbal medicines as major watersoluble components. The extraction time was reduced to 7 min with the help of far-IR radiation, compared to 3 h for HSE (Fu et al., 2011). Furthermore, the extraction efficacy of the FIAE method was higher than that of the heat-reflux extraction method (Tang et al., 2012). Mao et al. developed a far IR solvent removal system for the methanolic extract of the dried root of Belamcanda chinensis (Mao and Chen, 2019).
## (s23) CZE analysis of flavonoids, anthraquinones, and terpenoids
Number of References: 13

(p23.0) As shown in Table 2, substantial research has been carried out on flavonoids, anthraquinones, and terpenoids by CZE in the last decade. CZE has become a progressively important method for the fingerprint characterization and biomarker determination of complex medicine and natural medicinal materials. For example, CZE is used for quality control and the quantitation of flavonoids in Rhizoma Smilacis Glabrae (Zhang and Cheung, 2011), Pollen Typhae (Han et al., 2012), and Coreopsis tinctoria  with simple UV detection. CZE-UV provides high specificity for the selective determination of flavanones and phenolic acids such as scutellarein and caffeic acid in Abelia triflora leaves using a simple SLE and 40 mM borate buffer (Alzoman et al., 2018). Other studies have also reported the efficient analysis of flavonoids and isoflavones by CZE-UV analysis using sodium borate as a BGE (Zhang and Cheung, 2011;Deng et al., 2017;Alzoman et al., 2018;Wang et al., 2018).

(p23.1) A rapid and straightforward CE-UV method also has applications for the chiral separation of isomers of triterpene acids (oleanolic acid, ursolic acid, and betulinic acid) by the addition of β-CD (Ren and Xu, 2018). Another literature report noted that CZE-UV with BGE containing 5 mM β-CD as a modifier showed enhanced selectivity for analyzing flavonoids and triterpenes in TCMs (Gao et al., 2015). Recently, a CZE approach coupling ultrasound extraction with FASS was used to separate five flavonoids in reverse polarity mode using only 30 mM borate buffer . Based on a dual CD system of 30 mM α-CD and 9 mM sulfobutylether β-CD, isoflavonoids were analyzed in several herbal tablets and capsules  of TCMs with enhanced sensitivity.

(p23.2) Because of the excellent sensitivity, selectivity, and miniaturization of the AD system, researchers have great expectations for its application as a detector for CE. A combination of CE-AD, with FIAE, SLE, and ultrasonic extraction was evaluated by Gan et al. (2012), Sheng et al. (2013), and Wang et al. (2020) for the rapid extraction of rutin and quercetin and other flavonoids with a short analysis time. Li et al. proposed a CE-AD method to inherently exemplify the content of each electrochemically active ingredient (acacetin, diosmetin, chlorogenic acid, kaempferol, apigenin, luteolin, p-hydroxy benzoic, and caffeic acids) in Valeriana plant samples, with detection limits ranging from 0.01 to 0.12 μg/mL (Li et al., 2014). However, Mao et al. showed further improvement in CE-AD by using carbon nanotubes and polylactic acid composite electrodes constructed by melt compounding to detect tectoridin and irigenin in the commonly used Belamcandae Rhizoma TCM . This advanced CE-AD method showed enhanced sensitivity, with LODs of 0.24 and 0.21 µM for tectoridin and irigenin, respectively.
## (s26) CZE analysis of glycoside, saponins, and organic and amino acids
Number of References: 3

(p26.0) Several studies have proposed that CZE coupled with UV or AD in alkaline pH is a desirable method for analyzing glycoside, saponins, and organic and amino acids in TCMs and natural medicinal plant materials used as TCMs (Table 3). A BGE mixture of borate and phosphate with 5 mM β-CD as a complexing agent enhanced the separation of glycosides and aglycones (homovanillyl alcohol, caffeic acid, hydroxytyrosol, and 3,4-dimethoxycinnamic acid) in two TCM (Lamiophlomis rotata and Cistanche) (Dong et al., 2014). Saponin β escin from Aesculus hippocastanum was quantified without any matrix interference with high accuracy ranging from 98% to 105% within 6 min using an optimized CZE-UV method (Dutra et al., 2013). A mixture of organic acid and amino acids was separated into three TCM extracts obtained by ultrasonication. To improve the CE-UV detection sensitivity, a suitable FESS method with a reverse electrode polarity-stacking was used for sample preconcentration before separating organic acids to achieve detection limits at the ng/mL level (Zhu et al., 2012).
