# Interactions between the neuromodulatory systems and the amygdala: exploratory survey using the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas

CorpusID: 253970592 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e57e8a9669874840e27ef39271198bc458e3c616](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e57e8a9669874840e27ef39271198bc458e3c616)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) Neuromodulatory systems, composed of relatively small nuclei of neurons, are located in the sub-cortical region of the brain and control fundamental behaviors through interactions with broad areas of the nervous system (Briand et al. 2007;Krichmar 2008). These systems have distinct neurotransmitters, which include norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, and acetylcholine, and distinct sources of those neurotransmitters. When a biological organism experiences an important event in the environment, the activation of the neuromodulatory system contributes to the organism's ability to commit an action accordingly. These actions include mitigating responses to risks, rewards, attentional effort, and novelty. Thus, it is important to understand the underlying structure of these neuromodulatory systems as it plays a role in higher-order cognition and in an organism's survival.
## (s3) Neuromodulatory genes
Number of References: 32

(p3.0) We performed a search in the ABA, using the Gene API, for all known neuromodulatory receptor genes, which included 5 dopaminergic, 16 serotonergic, 19 cholinergic, and 9 adrenergic receptors for a total of 49 different receptor types (Dani and Bertrand 2007;Hoyer et al. 2002;Ishii and Kurachi 2006;Lan et al. 2006;Nicholas et al. 1996). Of these 49, only 38 receptors were available for evaluation (Table 1). For example, some receptor genes, such as Drd4 and Drd5, were not available in the ABA, and thus, were not included in the present study. Although ABA data may extend from mouse brain tissue, all genes listed in Table 1 are orthologous to rat and human genes according to the Mouse Genome Informatics database (http://www.informatics.jax.org).

(p3.1) While the detection sensitivity for different probes may vary across mRNA species, the ABA has performed validation experiments to ensure consistent data quality and internal reproducibility Lee et al. 2008). In every ISH run, a positive control slide was incubated with a Drd1a riboprobe and a negative control was ImageSeriesID is an identification number for the experiment used to analyze gene expression incubated in hybridization buffer without that riboprobe ). These slides were then used to determine whether data from the run would advance into their data analysis pipeline by qualitatively scoring the run as 'Pass' or 'Fail'. In addition, an experiment was performed to replicate data across a series of days, using riboprobes generated in parallel through in vitro translation, which include Calb1, Calb2, Cst3, Dkk3, Gad1, Man1a, Plp1, Pvalb, and Nov (Lee et al. 2008). For each gene, an independently synthesized probe was hybridized on consecutive serial sections from the same brains over the span of 4 days, which maximizes comparability over time while minimizing other biological variability, including differential hapten incorporation in riboprobes, and batch reagent preparation variability. The results reported in Lee et al. (2008) demonstrate consistency of the ABA ISH platform. In cases when multiple experiments (image series IDs) for a particular gene were found, we compared existing gene expression with the same search string and used the experiment that contained the highest expression energy data within brain regions of interest.

(p3.2) We performed a search in the ABA, using the Gene API, for all known neuromodulatory receptor genes, which included 5 dopaminergic, 16 serotonergic, 19 cholinergic, and 9 adrenergic receptors for a total of 49 different receptor types (Dani and Bertrand 2007;Hoyer et al. 2002;Ishii and Kurachi 2006;Lan et al. 2006;Nicholas et al. 1996). Of these 49, only 38 receptors were available for evaluation (Table 1). For example, some receptor genes, such as Drd4 and Drd5, were not available in the ABA, and thus, were not included in the present study. Although ABA data may extend from mouse brain tissue, all genes listed in Table 1 are orthologous to rat and human genes according to the Mouse Genome Informatics database (http://www.informatics.jax.org).

(p3.3) While the detection sensitivity for different probes may vary across mRNA species, the ABA has performed validation experiments to ensure consistent data quality and internal reproducibility Lee et al. 2008). In every ISH run, a positive control slide was incubated with a Drd1a riboprobe and a negative control was ImageSeriesID is an identification number for the experiment used to analyze gene expression incubated in hybridization buffer without that riboprobe ). These slides were then used to determine whether data from the run would advance into their data analysis pipeline by qualitatively scoring the run as 'Pass' or 'Fail'. In addition, an experiment was performed to replicate data across a series of days, using riboprobes generated in parallel through in vitro translation, which include Calb1, Calb2, Cst3, Dkk3, Gad1, Man1a, Plp1, Pvalb, and Nov (Lee et al. 2008). For each gene, an independently synthesized probe was hybridized on consecutive serial sections from the same brains over the span of 4 days, which maximizes comparability over time while minimizing other biological variability, including differential hapten incorporation in riboprobes, and batch reagent preparation variability. The results reported in Lee et al. (2008) demonstrate consistency of the ABA ISH platform. In cases when multiple experiments (image series IDs) for a particular gene were found, we compared existing gene expression with the same search string and used the experiment that contained the highest expression energy data within brain regions of interest.
## (s10) Network visualization and connectivity
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) In order to better analyze complex systems of interaction, Pajek, a software package designed for examining large networks (Batagelj and Mrvar 1998), was used to visualize potential connectivity relationships between brain regions based on expression data from the ABA. We make the assumption that given a neuromodulatory source, such as VTA, we can infer the strength of a projection to a target area from that source based on the receptor expression energy (e.g., by looking at the overall dopaminergic expression energy in a target region). Figure 7 shows the overall relationship among the neuromodulatory systems along with its interactions with the amygdala. Nodes corresponded to either a class of neurotransmitter source (e.g., ACh from SI, MA, and PPN) or the different regions of the amygdala, which were recipients of neuromodulation. Directional arcs represented inferred projections from a neuromodulatory system to a target brain area. The thickness of each arc was proportional to the amount of receptor expression energy found in the target region. The diameter of each node represented the total amount of receptor expression energy in that brain region. For example, the cholinergic receptor expression energy in MEA was much higher than serotonergic, as can be seen in Fig. 7 by the thickness of the arc (compare the arc extending from green node to MEA with the arc extending from the red node to MEA). All networks from Pajek were rendered using the circular layout; all other parameters were set to default. For ease of visualization, the amounts of receptor expression energy were scaled down, dividing the amount of receptor energy expression by 100.
## (s18) Introduction
Number of References: 4

(p18.0) Neuromodulatory systems, composed of relatively small nuclei of neurons, are located in the sub-cortical region of the brain and control fundamental behaviors through interactions with broad areas of the nervous system (Briand et al. 2007;Krichmar 2008). These systems have distinct neurotransmitters, which include norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, and acetylcholine, and distinct sources of those neurotransmitters. When a biological organism experiences an important event in the environment, the activation of the neuromodulatory system contributes to the organism's ability to commit an action accordingly. These actions include mitigating responses to risks, rewards, attentional effort, and novelty. Thus, it is important to understand the underlying structure of these neuromodulatory systems as it plays a role in higher-order cognition and in an organism's survival.
## (s21) Neuromodulatory genes
Number of References: 32

(p21.0) We performed a search in the ABA, using the Gene API, for all known neuromodulatory receptor genes, which included 5 dopaminergic, 16 serotonergic, 19 cholinergic, and 9 adrenergic receptors for a total of 49 different receptor types (Dani and Bertrand 2007;Hoyer et al. 2002;Ishii and Kurachi 2006;Lan et al. 2006;Nicholas et al. 1996). Of these 49, only 38 receptors were available for evaluation (Table 1). For example, some receptor genes, such as Drd4 and Drd5, were not available in the ABA, and thus, were not included in the present study. Although ABA data may extend from mouse brain tissue, all genes listed in Table 1 are orthologous to rat and human genes according to the Mouse Genome Informatics database (http://www.informatics.jax.org).

(p21.1) While the detection sensitivity for different probes may vary across mRNA species, the ABA has performed validation experiments to ensure consistent data quality and internal reproducibility Lee et al. 2008). In every ISH run, a positive control slide was incubated with a Drd1a riboprobe and a negative control was ImageSeriesID is an identification number for the experiment used to analyze gene expression incubated in hybridization buffer without that riboprobe ). These slides were then used to determine whether data from the run would advance into their data analysis pipeline by qualitatively scoring the run as 'Pass' or 'Fail'. In addition, an experiment was performed to replicate data across a series of days, using riboprobes generated in parallel through in vitro translation, which include Calb1, Calb2, Cst3, Dkk3, Gad1, Man1a, Plp1, Pvalb, and Nov (Lee et al. 2008). For each gene, an independently synthesized probe was hybridized on consecutive serial sections from the same brains over the span of 4 days, which maximizes comparability over time while minimizing other biological variability, including differential hapten incorporation in riboprobes, and batch reagent preparation variability. The results reported in Lee et al. (2008) demonstrate consistency of the ABA ISH platform. In cases when multiple experiments (image series IDs) for a particular gene were found, we compared existing gene expression with the same search string and used the experiment that contained the highest expression energy data within brain regions of interest.

(p21.2) We performed a search in the ABA, using the Gene API, for all known neuromodulatory receptor genes, which included 5 dopaminergic, 16 serotonergic, 19 cholinergic, and 9 adrenergic receptors for a total of 49 different receptor types (Dani and Bertrand 2007;Hoyer et al. 2002;Ishii and Kurachi 2006;Lan et al. 2006;Nicholas et al. 1996). Of these 49, only 38 receptors were available for evaluation (Table 1). For example, some receptor genes, such as Drd4 and Drd5, were not available in the ABA, and thus, were not included in the present study. Although ABA data may extend from mouse brain tissue, all genes listed in Table 1 are orthologous to rat and human genes according to the Mouse Genome Informatics database (http://www.informatics.jax.org).

(p21.3) While the detection sensitivity for different probes may vary across mRNA species, the ABA has performed validation experiments to ensure consistent data quality and internal reproducibility Lee et al. 2008). In every ISH run, a positive control slide was incubated with a Drd1a riboprobe and a negative control was ImageSeriesID is an identification number for the experiment used to analyze gene expression incubated in hybridization buffer without that riboprobe ). These slides were then used to determine whether data from the run would advance into their data analysis pipeline by qualitatively scoring the run as 'Pass' or 'Fail'. In addition, an experiment was performed to replicate data across a series of days, using riboprobes generated in parallel through in vitro translation, which include Calb1, Calb2, Cst3, Dkk3, Gad1, Man1a, Plp1, Pvalb, and Nov (Lee et al. 2008). For each gene, an independently synthesized probe was hybridized on consecutive serial sections from the same brains over the span of 4 days, which maximizes comparability over time while minimizing other biological variability, including differential hapten incorporation in riboprobes, and batch reagent preparation variability. The results reported in Lee et al. (2008) demonstrate consistency of the ABA ISH platform. In cases when multiple experiments (image series IDs) for a particular gene were found, we compared existing gene expression with the same search string and used the experiment that contained the highest expression energy data within brain regions of interest.
## (s28) Network visualization and connectivity
Number of References: 2

(p28.0) In order to better analyze complex systems of interaction, Pajek, a software package designed for examining large networks (Batagelj and Mrvar 1998), was used to visualize potential connectivity relationships between brain regions based on expression data from the ABA. We make the assumption that given a neuromodulatory source, such as VTA, we can infer the strength of a projection to a target area from that source based on the receptor expression energy (e.g., by looking at the overall dopaminergic expression energy in a target region). Figure 7 shows the overall relationship among the neuromodulatory systems along with its interactions with the amygdala. Nodes corresponded to either a class of neurotransmitter source (e.g., ACh from SI, MA, and PPN) or the different regions of the amygdala, which were recipients of neuromodulation. Directional arcs represented inferred projections from a neuromodulatory system to a target brain area. The thickness of each arc was proportional to the amount of receptor expression energy found in the target region. The diameter of each node represented the total amount of receptor expression energy in that brain region. For example, the cholinergic receptor expression energy in MEA was much higher than serotonergic, as can be seen in Fig. 7 by the thickness of the arc (compare the arc extending from green node to MEA with the arc extending from the red node to MEA). All networks from Pajek were rendered using the circular layout; all other parameters were set to default. For ease of visualization, the amounts of receptor expression energy were scaled down, dividing the amount of receptor energy expression by 100.
