# Cybersecurity and Privacy Cybersecurity for AI Systems: A Survey

CorpusID: 258546177 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d612c593d4094626843f99d7f10ea192c7778cdc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d612c593d4094626843f99d7f10ea192c7778cdc)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s16) Dataset Poisoning Attacks
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) The major scenarios of data poisoning attacks are error-agnostic poisoning attacks and error-specific poisoning attacks. In the error-agnostic type of poisoning attack the hacker aims to cause a Denial of Service (DOS) kind of attack. The hacker causes the system to produce errors, but it does not matter what type of error it is. For example, in a multi-class classification task a hacker could poison the data leading to misclassification of the data points irrespective of the class type, thus maximizing the loss function of the learning algorithm. To launch this kind of attack, the hacker needs to manipulate both the features and the labels of the data points. On the other hand, in error-specific poisoning attacks, the hacker causes the system to produce specific misclassification errors, resulting in security violation of both integrity and availability. Here, the hacker aims at misclassifying a small sample of chosen data points in a multi-class classification task. The hacker aims to minimize the loss function of the learning algorithm to serve the purpose, i.e., to force the system into misclassifying specific instances without compromising the normal system operation, ensuring that the attack is undetected [38,39].
## (s27) Attack on Federated Learning
Number of References: 5

(p27.0) In the federated learning scenario, each and every individual device has its own model to train, securing the privacy of the data stored in that device [47]. Federated learning algorithms are susceptible to model poisoning if the owner of the device becomes malicious. Research [111,112] introduced a premise for federated learning, where a single adversary attacks the learning by changing the gradient updates to arbitrary values, instead of introducing the backdoor property into the model. The objective of the attacker is to obstruct the convergence of the execution of the distributed Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithm. In a similar study, Bagdasaryan et al. [48] proposed a multi-agent framework, where multiple adversaries jointly conspired to replace the model during model covergence. Bhagoji et al. [41] worked on targeted misclassification by introducing a sequence of attacks induced by a single adversary: (1) explicit boosting, and (2) alternating minimization. The underlying algorithm is SGD.
## (s28) Model Inversion Attack
Number of References: 8

(p28.0) The model inversion attack is a way to reconstruct the training data, given the model parameters. This type of attack is a concern for privacy, because there are a growing number of online model repositories. Several studies related to this attack hve been under both the blackbox and whitebox settings. Yang et al. [121] discussed the model inversion attack in the blackbox setting, where the attacker wants to reconstruct an input sample from the confidence score vector determined by the target model. In their study, they demonstrated that it is possible to reconstruct specific input samples from a given model. They trained a model (inversion) on an auxiliary dataset, which functioned as the inverse of the given target model. Their model then took the confidence scores of the target model as input and tried to reconstruct the original input data. In their study, they also demonstrated that their inversion model showed substantial improvement over previously proposed models. On the other hand, in a whitebox setting, Fredrikson et al. [122] proposed a model inversion attack that produces only a representative sample of a training data sample, instead of reconstructing a specific input sample, using the confidence score vector determined by the target model. Several related studies were proposed to infer sensitive attributes [122][123][124][125] or statistical information [126] about the training data by developing an inversion model. Hitaj et al. [71] explored inversion attacks in federated learning where the attacker had whitebox access to the model.
## (s30) Inference Attack
Number of References: 5

(p30.0) Machine learning models have a tendency to leak information about the individual data records on which they were trained. Shokri et al. [49] discussed the membership inference attack, where one can determine if the data record is part of the model's training dataset or not, given the data record and blackbox access to the model. According to them, this is a concern for privacy breach. If the advisory can learn if the record was used as part of the training, from the model, then such a model is considered to be leaking information. The concern is paramount, as such a privacy beach not only affects a single observation, but the entire population, due to high correlation between the covered and the uncovered dataset [135]. This happens particularly when the model is based on statistical facts about the population.

(p30.1) Studies in [136][137][138] focused on attribute inference attacks. Here an attacker gets access to a set of data about a target user, which is mostly public in nature, and aims to infer the private information of the target user. In this case, the attacker first collects information from users who are willing to disclose it in public, and then uses the information as a training dataset to learn a machine learning classifier which can take a user's public data as input and predict the user's private attribute values.
