# Overview of the Role of Spatial Factors in Indoor SARS-CoV-2

CorpusID: 252143778 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1c0a5402491b7f50b2b63f0e01ca24e7637b3997](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1c0a5402491b7f50b2b63f0e01ca24e7637b3997)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s4) The Emission of Infectious Respiratory Fluids
Number of References: 5

(p4.0) SARS-CoV-2 is the virus that causes COVID-19, and its genetic material is packaged in an outer layer (envelope) of proteins and lipids. The virions are spherical in outline, with diameters ranging from 60 to 140 nm [26]. SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted by exposure to infectious respiratory fluids, which are generated in the human respiratory system, and is the main carriers of respiratory infectious pathogens. Respiratory fluids can be produced in four parts of the respiratory tract, namely lungs [27], trachea [28], larynx [29] (close and open the vocal cords), and oral/nasal passages [30] (close and open the mouth/breath). People release respiratory fluids in the form of droplets across a spectrum of sizes along with the airflow during exhalation (breathing, speaking, singing, coughing, and sneezing). Severe expiratory events (coughing and sneezing) produce more large and 
## (s19) . (S O -E A -V S ) Opening Design Determines Airflow Field Due to Natural Ventilation
Number of References: 2

(p19.0) Spatial openings generally refer to windows and doors, both of which are related to indoor-airflow organization caused by natural ventilation. The position of the window openings in the horizontal and vertical directions is the main factor affecting the airflow pattern, which is usually studied through field measurements and numerical simulations. Zhou et al. [91] investigated the influence of the position of the window opening on the effective ventilation of the room and found that ventilation rates reached the minimum when the window opening was located at the centre of the windward face. Vertically, the further the window is from the centre of the windward side, the greater the ventilation [91].
## (s20) (S L -E A -V S ) Physical Layout Affects the Distribution of Virus Concentration
Number of References: 2

(p20.0) Changing the physical layout at room level has been shown to cause changes in indoorairflow fields, which, in turn, induce changes in ventilation effectiveness and distribution of pollutants in the air. Zhuang et al. [96] simulated the airflow fields of three furniture layouts of the office room ( Figure 15) and calculated their ventilation effectiveness under four ventilation modes according to changes in volatile organic compound concentrations ( Table 9). The results show that changing the position of the furniture can significantly improve the air quality in the breathing area under either mixed ventilation or displacement ventilation. Layout B has the best overall ventilation by keeping occupants away from pollution sources and closer to the air inlets [96]. path is established under VP1, providing ample fresh air to every room from inlet to outlet. In VP2, the four rooms are all ventilated on one side, and the indoor-airflow is very weak, which is the most likely to cause uneven air mixing. Under VP3, air flows from R4 to R3 and R2 with inflow rates of 62.2% and 37.8%, respectively. The higher velocity of the VP4 air outlet than VP5 is due to the opening of R1, which, in turn, leads to the difference in the airflow distribution of R3.  
