# Paget's disease: a review of the epidemiology, etiology, genetics, and treatment OPEN ACCESS EDITED BY

CorpusID: 258313825 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/09db12eff7f07a0c542808497d1d3b50b7b18d3d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/09db12eff7f07a0c542808497d1d3b50b7b18d3d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Biochemical assessment of PDB
Number of References: 20

(p3.0) Paget's disease of bone (PDB) can be diagnosed through clinical, radiographic, and biochemical assessments. Biochemical assessment involves measuring serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and urinary N-telopeptide (NTx) levels. ALP is an enzyme produced by osteoblasts, responsible for bone formation. In PDB, bone formation increases, leading to elevated ALP levels . However, ALP levels can also be elevated in other conditions, such as liver disease or during pregnancy, making additional tests necessary for diagnosis confirmation (Seton, 2013;Gennari et al., 2019). In contrast, NTx is a specific marker of bone resorption, where osteoclasts break down bone tissue. In PDB, there is an increase in both bone formation and resorption, leading to elevated NTx levels. However, NTx levels can be affected by other factors, such as age, gender, and menopausal status, necessitating interpretation in the context of clinical findings (Delmas, 1999). Additional tests, including bone scans and Illustrates the major skeletal locations affected by PDB: "The disorder predominantly affects the axial skeleton, with the highest incidence observed in the pelvis (70%), femur (55%), lumbar spine (53%), cranium (42%), and tibia (32%). To provide a visual representation of the most commonly affected areas in PDB, these locations are highlighted in red."

(p3.1) Frontiers in Genetics frontiersin.org 02 imaging studies, may also be useful in PDB diagnosis to assess the extent of the disease and risk of fractures. Serum procollagen type 1 amino-terminal peptide (P1NP), osteocalcin, and bone-specific ALP (BALP) are more sensitive biochemical markers for bone production, while peptides of the collagen type I cross-linking domains, including NTx or CTX, are more specific for bone resorption. Despite the characteristic elevations in ALP and NTx levels in individuals with PDB, these markers are not specific to the condition (Cook and Wall, 2021). Thus, diagnostic confirmation and treatment response monitoring require interpretation in the context of clinical findings and other diagnostic tests (Alonso et al., 2017).

(p3.2) Paget's disease of bone (PDB) can be diagnosed through clinical, radiographic, and biochemical assessments. Biochemical assessment involves measuring serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and urinary N-telopeptide (NTx) levels. ALP is an enzyme produced by osteoblasts, responsible for bone formation. In PDB, bone formation increases, leading to elevated ALP levels . However, ALP levels can also be elevated in other conditions, such as liver disease or during pregnancy, making additional tests necessary for diagnosis confirmation (Seton, 2013;Gennari et al., 2019). In contrast, NTx is a specific marker of bone resorption, where osteoclasts break down bone tissue. In PDB, there is an increase in both bone formation and resorption, leading to elevated NTx levels. However, NTx levels can be affected by other factors, such as age, gender, and menopausal status, necessitating interpretation in the context of clinical findings (Delmas, 1999). Additional tests, including bone scans and Illustrates the major skeletal locations affected by PDB: "The disorder predominantly affects the axial skeleton, with the highest incidence observed in the pelvis (70%), femur (55%), lumbar spine (53%), cranium (42%), and tibia (32%). To provide a visual representation of the most commonly affected areas in PDB, these locations are highlighted in red."

(p3.3) Frontiers in Genetics frontiersin.org 02 imaging studies, may also be useful in PDB diagnosis to assess the extent of the disease and risk of fractures. Serum procollagen type 1 amino-terminal peptide (P1NP), osteocalcin, and bone-specific ALP (BALP) are more sensitive biochemical markers for bone production, while peptides of the collagen type I cross-linking domains, including NTx or CTX, are more specific for bone resorption. Despite the characteristic elevations in ALP and NTx levels in individuals with PDB, these markers are not specific to the condition (Cook and Wall, 2021). Thus, diagnostic confirmation and treatment response monitoring require interpretation in the context of clinical findings and other diagnostic tests (Alonso et al., 2017).
## (s4) Radiological presentations in PDB
Number of References: 12

(p4.0) Radiographic changes can help diagnose Paget's disease of bone (PDB). Indicators of increased bone resorption include a decrease in bone density, wedge-shaped bone resorption in long bones, and significant osteolytic regions in the skull. Early-stage PDB may show primarily lytic lesions, while older lesions tend to have a mixed sclerotic and lytic appearance. Late-stage PDB is characterized by sclerotic lesions, enlarged and distorted bones, and distinct radiographic patterns . The damaged bone enlargement in diameter is a distinguishing feature of PDB. A set of plain X-rays and bone scintigraphy are used to evaluate PDB, but bone scintigraphy may be negative in some cases. The presence of aberrant trabeculae, irregular cementation lines, increased vascularity, and an increase in the number and size of osteoclasts are the most distinctive findings (Alonso et al., 2017). Since genetic or bone biomarkers alone may lack sensitivity, combining many diagnostic markers is preferable to detect PDB at early stages and in asymptomatic cases. The PDB phenotype may be detected more accurately by integrating a screen for SQSTM1 gene mutations, followed by either a gene panel or a combination of genetic and biochemical tests (Guay-Bélanger et al., 2016). Approximately 70% of PDB patients have no symptoms, making early diagnosis challenging (Merchant et al., 2009).

(p4.1) Radiographic changes can help diagnose Paget's disease of bone (PDB). Indicators of increased bone resorption include a decrease in bone density, wedge-shaped bone resorption in long bones, and significant osteolytic regions in the skull. Early-stage PDB may show primarily lytic lesions, while older lesions tend to have a mixed sclerotic and lytic appearance. Late-stage PDB is characterized by sclerotic lesions, enlarged and distorted bones, and distinct radiographic patterns . The damaged bone enlargement in diameter is a distinguishing feature of PDB. A set of plain X-rays and bone scintigraphy are used to evaluate PDB, but bone scintigraphy may be negative in some cases. The presence of aberrant trabeculae, irregular cementation lines, increased vascularity, and an increase in the number and size of osteoclasts are the most distinctive findings (Alonso et al., 2017). Since genetic or bone biomarkers alone may lack sensitivity, combining many diagnostic markers is preferable to detect PDB at early stages and in asymptomatic cases. The PDB phenotype may be detected more accurately by integrating a screen for SQSTM1 gene mutations, followed by either a gene panel or a combination of genetic and biochemical tests (Guay-Bélanger et al., 2016). Approximately 70% of PDB patients have no symptoms, making early diagnosis challenging (Merchant et al., 2009).
## (s27) Biochemical assessment of PDB
Number of References: 20

(p27.0) Paget's disease of bone (PDB) can be diagnosed through clinical, radiographic, and biochemical assessments. Biochemical assessment involves measuring serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and urinary N-telopeptide (NTx) levels. ALP is an enzyme produced by osteoblasts, responsible for bone formation. In PDB, bone formation increases, leading to elevated ALP levels . However, ALP levels can also be elevated in other conditions, such as liver disease or during pregnancy, making additional tests necessary for diagnosis confirmation (Seton, 2013;Gennari et al., 2019). In contrast, NTx is a specific marker of bone resorption, where osteoclasts break down bone tissue. In PDB, there is an increase in both bone formation and resorption, leading to elevated NTx levels. However, NTx levels can be affected by other factors, such as age, gender, and menopausal status, necessitating interpretation in the context of clinical findings (Delmas, 1999). Additional tests, including bone scans and Illustrates the major skeletal locations affected by PDB: "The disorder predominantly affects the axial skeleton, with the highest incidence observed in the pelvis (70%), femur (55%), lumbar spine (53%), cranium (42%), and tibia (32%). To provide a visual representation of the most commonly affected areas in PDB, these locations are highlighted in red."

(p27.1) Frontiers in Genetics frontiersin.org 02 imaging studies, may also be useful in PDB diagnosis to assess the extent of the disease and risk of fractures. Serum procollagen type 1 amino-terminal peptide (P1NP), osteocalcin, and bone-specific ALP (BALP) are more sensitive biochemical markers for bone production, while peptides of the collagen type I cross-linking domains, including NTx or CTX, are more specific for bone resorption. Despite the characteristic elevations in ALP and NTx levels in individuals with PDB, these markers are not specific to the condition (Cook and Wall, 2021). Thus, diagnostic confirmation and treatment response monitoring require interpretation in the context of clinical findings and other diagnostic tests (Alonso et al., 2017).

(p27.2) Paget's disease of bone (PDB) can be diagnosed through clinical, radiographic, and biochemical assessments. Biochemical assessment involves measuring serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and urinary N-telopeptide (NTx) levels. ALP is an enzyme produced by osteoblasts, responsible for bone formation. In PDB, bone formation increases, leading to elevated ALP levels . However, ALP levels can also be elevated in other conditions, such as liver disease or during pregnancy, making additional tests necessary for diagnosis confirmation (Seton, 2013;Gennari et al., 2019). In contrast, NTx is a specific marker of bone resorption, where osteoclasts break down bone tissue. In PDB, there is an increase in both bone formation and resorption, leading to elevated NTx levels. However, NTx levels can be affected by other factors, such as age, gender, and menopausal status, necessitating interpretation in the context of clinical findings (Delmas, 1999). Additional tests, including bone scans and Illustrates the major skeletal locations affected by PDB: "The disorder predominantly affects the axial skeleton, with the highest incidence observed in the pelvis (70%), femur (55%), lumbar spine (53%), cranium (42%), and tibia (32%). To provide a visual representation of the most commonly affected areas in PDB, these locations are highlighted in red."

(p27.3) Frontiers in Genetics frontiersin.org 02 imaging studies, may also be useful in PDB diagnosis to assess the extent of the disease and risk of fractures. Serum procollagen type 1 amino-terminal peptide (P1NP), osteocalcin, and bone-specific ALP (BALP) are more sensitive biochemical markers for bone production, while peptides of the collagen type I cross-linking domains, including NTx or CTX, are more specific for bone resorption. Despite the characteristic elevations in ALP and NTx levels in individuals with PDB, these markers are not specific to the condition (Cook and Wall, 2021). Thus, diagnostic confirmation and treatment response monitoring require interpretation in the context of clinical findings and other diagnostic tests (Alonso et al., 2017).
## (s28) Radiological presentations in PDB
Number of References: 12

(p28.0) Radiographic changes can help diagnose Paget's disease of bone (PDB). Indicators of increased bone resorption include a decrease in bone density, wedge-shaped bone resorption in long bones, and significant osteolytic regions in the skull. Early-stage PDB may show primarily lytic lesions, while older lesions tend to have a mixed sclerotic and lytic appearance. Late-stage PDB is characterized by sclerotic lesions, enlarged and distorted bones, and distinct radiographic patterns . The damaged bone enlargement in diameter is a distinguishing feature of PDB. A set of plain X-rays and bone scintigraphy are used to evaluate PDB, but bone scintigraphy may be negative in some cases. The presence of aberrant trabeculae, irregular cementation lines, increased vascularity, and an increase in the number and size of osteoclasts are the most distinctive findings (Alonso et al., 2017). Since genetic or bone biomarkers alone may lack sensitivity, combining many diagnostic markers is preferable to detect PDB at early stages and in asymptomatic cases. The PDB phenotype may be detected more accurately by integrating a screen for SQSTM1 gene mutations, followed by either a gene panel or a combination of genetic and biochemical tests (Guay-Bélanger et al., 2016). Approximately 70% of PDB patients have no symptoms, making early diagnosis challenging (Merchant et al., 2009).

(p28.1) Radiographic changes can help diagnose Paget's disease of bone (PDB). Indicators of increased bone resorption include a decrease in bone density, wedge-shaped bone resorption in long bones, and significant osteolytic regions in the skull. Early-stage PDB may show primarily lytic lesions, while older lesions tend to have a mixed sclerotic and lytic appearance. Late-stage PDB is characterized by sclerotic lesions, enlarged and distorted bones, and distinct radiographic patterns . The damaged bone enlargement in diameter is a distinguishing feature of PDB. A set of plain X-rays and bone scintigraphy are used to evaluate PDB, but bone scintigraphy may be negative in some cases. The presence of aberrant trabeculae, irregular cementation lines, increased vascularity, and an increase in the number and size of osteoclasts are the most distinctive findings (Alonso et al., 2017). Since genetic or bone biomarkers alone may lack sensitivity, combining many diagnostic markers is preferable to detect PDB at early stages and in asymptomatic cases. The PDB phenotype may be detected more accurately by integrating a screen for SQSTM1 gene mutations, followed by either a gene panel or a combination of genetic and biochemical tests (Guay-Bélanger et al., 2016). Approximately 70% of PDB patients have no symptoms, making early diagnosis challenging (Merchant et al., 2009).
