# R E V I E W Antibacterial Pathways in Transition Metal-Based Nanocomposites: A Mechanistic Overview

CorpusID: 255335223 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ec53bbf3a4b6b45acfae7f3067f7a9e565dcbf27](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ec53bbf3a4b6b45acfae7f3067f7a9e565dcbf27)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s7) DovePress
Number of References: 19

(p7.0) International Journal of Nanomedicine 2022:17 6826 revealed that the photodynamic behavior of Ti 3 C 2 /PF 1 O 2 generation was similar to that of black phosphorus and graphene quantum dots. Under light illumination, Ti 3 C 2 /PF generates photoinduced electrons and subsequently transfers energy to the ground-state oxygen, 3 O 2 , to generate 1 O 2 species. Similarly, because of the SPR effect, AuNPs can generate ROS when exposed to light. The Au/Ti 3 C 2 photoactive membrane also showed good photoactive antibacterial capabilities, inactivating 6.7 log10 colony-forming units (CFU) mL -1 E. coli K-12 in 20 min and 7.1 log10 CFU mL -1 Sphingopyxis sp. BM1-1 in 10 min. [78][79][80][81][82][83] To achieve an effective antibacterial effect, a new photocatalytic antibacterial material was developed, and its mechanism of action is shown in Figure 5B. Titanium carbide (Ti 3 C 2 T x )@copper sulfide (CuS) composites were created using a straightforward hydrothermal technique in which CuS NPs were attached to the surface of Ti 3 C 2 Tx to significantly improve its photocatalytic and antibacterial properties. Ti 3 C 2 T x @CuS had 99.6% bactericidal activity against E. coli and 99.1% bactericidal activity against S. aureus. CuS is a p-type semiconductor that is stimulated by a light source to cause hybridization. Excited electrons exit, forming electron-hole pairs. When electrons and holes are separated, they can interact with O 2 and H 2 O to form ROS such as superoxide and hydroxyl radicals. The transfer of excited electrons to the conductive Ti 3 C 2 T x after CuS is compounded with it enhances the separation of electrons and holes and boosts the ROS-generating ability. The Ti 3 C 2 T x @CuS heterojunction offers a wide range of potential applications in the decontamination and antimicrobial domains. [84][85][86] Photothermal Antibacterial Therapy Mechanistic Overview of Photothermal Therapy PTT is one of several ways developed as an innovative strategy to tackle infectious diseases in response to resistance to antibiotics. 87 When photoresponsive nanomaterials are activated with a suitable NIR laser, the plasmon resonance band causes the conversion of electromagnetic energy to heat. The resultant heat can reach levels high enough to kill bacterial cells. The photothermal effect causes membrane damage, which leads to protein inactivation and/or leakage, ultimately leading to bacterial mortality ( Figure 6). [88][89][90] PTT is effective against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, independent of bacterial resistance. It is rapid, non-intrusive, and accurate, and can be regulated by the incident light and duration of irradiation. PTT, moreover, can be used with other therapies like PDT, chemotherapy, radiation, and so on to improve treatment outcomes. As a result, numerous photothermal NPs or nanostructures are being produced to treat bacterial diseases. Photothermal therapy agents are photothermal NPs that are classified as metallic materials, metal sulfides, oxides, carbon-based nanostructured materials, small molecule-based nanomaterials, and polymeric NPs. When compared to inorganic or organic photothermal therapy agents, a group of transition metals and their oxide and sulfide forms can absorb more laser energy. [91][92][93][94][95][96] Furthermore, PTT is considered as one of the most promising methods when combined with transition metals for disinfection and effective antimicrobial activity. 
