# A Literature Review: ECG-Based Models for Arrhythmia Diagnosis Using Artificial Intelligence Techniques

CorpusID: 256802997 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/edcee80a688a18e34e3ba34ba459c4c0e78ab2ef](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/edcee80a688a18e34e3ba34ba459c4c0e78ab2ef)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s12) Prediction methods
Number of References: 5

(p12.0) As shown in Table 4, CNN and LSTM network are the most used techniques, followed by the SVM in 22% of the studies. Indeed, more than half of the studies used DL techniques to improve the accuracy. CNNs are used with different variants in the convolutional blocks as in literature. [44][45][46] Some studies reported the computation time in the learning phase; Yang et al 22 recorded the lowest training time with a value equal to 68.8 seconds using leads II and V1. The use of CCANet in the feature extraction phase has definitely reduced the computation cost and improved the accuracy and specificity which reached, respectively, 99.4% and 99.6%.

(p12.1) Shahin et al 40 reported a very interesting DL technique; the architecture of the adversarial multi-task model consists of 3 networks: the generator network, the heartbeat-type discriminator which discriminates between 5 types of heartbeats, and the subject discriminator which discriminates between 39 different subjects. This design has increased the performance allowing double discrimination and forcing the system to take into account only the heartbeat variations. Yet, it can be improved by changing the method of synthetic data generation; generating new data with GAN network or SMOTE technique instead of upsampling which generates duplicated data. Sabut et al 42 used a fusion of 2 CNN branches with different scales and an Attention module to mine the discriminative features. In fact, the attention mechanism boosts the classification performance as shown in Hu et al 45 where the attention helped to capture the inter-beat dependencies.
## (s13) Evaluation and performances
Number of References: 10

(p13.0) First, we compare the studies that used the same datasets. We sort 7 different datasets available on the PhysioNet repository: 23 Figure 4, the model combining MIT-BIH and SV databases achieved a high accuracy of 99.8%, whereas the model relying only on SV database achieved an accuracy of 97.6% (Figure 7). Nevertheless, both the results were promising. Studies 19,22,37 enrolled the learning phase using INCART database for 4-class, 7-class, and 5-class prediction, respectively. The highest accuracy of 99.8% was achieved by the first study where they used 12-lead ECG recording format vs an accuracy of 98.76% with 2-lead format and 97.57% for the 2 other studies. For the rest of the studies where they used MIT-BIH arrhythmia database, all of them reached an accuracy above 90%.

(p13.1) Second, we carry on a comparison between studies using the same prediction methods. Regarding the studies applying SVM, they used different kernel functions and some of them were combined with other ML algorithms, but most of them yielded an accuracy greater than 94%. This can be explained by the powerful methods used for feature extraction and data pre-processing, including the use of DL techniques, 20,22,38 in these studies. When comparing the studies that applied CNN, all of them attained high accuracy rates above 94%. The lowest metrics (accuracy, specificity, and sensitivity) were obtained by Qin et al 34 that performed SVM on record-based training scheme where the classifier was trained and tested on separate records from different individuals.

(p13.2) Regarding the studies with smaller signal durations (between 7 and 30 seconds), they achieved good F1-score values but the highest scores were obtained by 30-minute duration studies. And yet, the increase in ECG signal length does not guarantee the highest accuracy rates. Indeed, in this review, the studies with the lowest signal duration 15,16,30 could perform better, especially when they applied deep CNNs; however, they either did not proceed data pre-processing 16 or they used imbalanced data 30 for the classification.
