# Application of named entity recognition method for Indonesian datasets: a review

CorpusID: 255024417 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/941c79b384bc652cca8e8fe5b0e406ae971af713](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/941c79b384bc652cca8e8fe5b0e406ae971af713)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 24

(p0.0) Named entity (NE) was introduced at the sixth message understanding conference (MUC-6). With the introduction of NE, the MUC conference has helped to advance the field of information extraction [1]. NE refers to a proper name that designates a person, location, or organization. For example, there are three NE in the following sentence: "James is a doctoral student in the Faculty of Computer Science at the University of Indonesia." James an NE insofar as it is the name of a person (P); Indonesia refers to a location (L); and the Faculty of Computer Science refers to the organization (O). Named entity recognition (NER) is a procedure that finds, extracts, and automatically classifies named entities from open domains and unstructured texts such as newspaper articles. It then categorizes these NE into predefined types [2]. There are four approaches to NER: i) a rule-based approach, which does not require annotated data because it relies on artificial rules; ii) an unsupervised learning approach; iii) a feature-based supervised learning approach that relies on supervised learning algorithms with careful feature engineering; and iv) a deep-learning-based approach, which automatically finds the required representation for detecting or classifying raw input in an end-to-end manner [3], [4]. NER is a straightforward process for humans because many named entities are self-names, and most of them have initial capital letters and can be easily recognized, but for machines, it is very difficult [5]. Information extraction often uses data available on social media, online news, and e-commerce [3]. Much information can thereby be obtained, including product reviews, analysis, and information extraction. For example, NER research is used for Indonesian news articles [6]. The use of NER is also carried out for the extraction of comments related to flood monitoring and traffic monitoring [7], [8]. On the other hand, the use of this method is also useful for quote identification [9]. The role of language in text-analysis often determines which model is used [10], because not all libraries are available for specific tasks [2].
## (s5) SLR results
Number of References: 64

(p5.0) After investigating the VOSViewer results, we examined 20 articles collected from the ACM, IEEE, ScienceDirect, and SCOPUS portals. The articles were then extracted and mapped according on author, task,  Table 3). It is clear from the table above that several NER studies with Indonesian datasets have been carried out for the following tasks: complaint classification [19], quote identification [9], [20], flood monitoring extraction [7], traffic monitoring [8], [21], tourist attractions [22], zakat [23], lipstick product reviews [24], and various model combination tests for twitter [25]- [28], online news [6], [29]- [31], and Wikipedia [32], [33]. 

(p5.1) After investigating the VOSViewer results, we examined 20 articles collected from the ACM, IEEE, ScienceDirect, and SCOPUS portals. The articles were then extracted and mapped according on author, task,  Table 3). It is clear from the table above that several NER studies with Indonesian datasets have been carried out for the following tasks: complaint classification [19], quote identification [9], [20], flood monitoring extraction [7], traffic monitoring [8], [21], tourist attractions [22], zakat [23], lipstick product reviews [24], and various model combination tests for twitter [25]- [28], online news [6], [29]- [31], and Wikipedia [32], [33]. 
## (s8) Recommendations for illegal Fintech supervision strategies with the NER approach based on social media data and online news
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) Based on the SLR, new ideas emerge to utilize this method in the era of technological and social media transformation. The digital economy can change society and business's economic activities, from what was originally manual to fully automated. This impacts the provision of financial services by startups and Fintech companies. Currently, Fintech practices in Indonesia are very developed, starting from payments, funding, and Robo-advisors. However, in its implementation, Fintech lending (online lending) received special attention because it caused several problems, namely the emergence of illegal fintech. Unreasonable billing processes, issues of personal data protection, and even moral hazards are the focus of the supervision. In Indonesia, a government website channel is available for illegal Fintech complaints, but people tend to use social media to submit their complaints [15]. With the NER concept described in the previous section and the basics of libraries, POS tagging, and named entities, this research becomes the basis for developing ML models in the early identification of platform names on social media. Figure 6 is our proposed Fintech supervision model with social media data and online news that can be used for further research. 

(p8.1) Based on the SLR, new ideas emerge to utilize this method in the era of technological and social media transformation. The digital economy can change society and business's economic activities, from what was originally manual to fully automated. This impacts the provision of financial services by startups and Fintech companies. Currently, Fintech practices in Indonesia are very developed, starting from payments, funding, and Robo-advisors. However, in its implementation, Fintech lending (online lending) received special attention because it caused several problems, namely the emergence of illegal fintech. Unreasonable billing processes, issues of personal data protection, and even moral hazards are the focus of the supervision. In Indonesia, a government website channel is available for illegal Fintech complaints, but people tend to use social media to submit their complaints [15]. With the NER concept described in the previous section and the basics of libraries, POS tagging, and named entities, this research becomes the basis for developing ML models in the early identification of platform names on social media. Figure 6 is our proposed Fintech supervision model with social media data and online news that can be used for further research. 
## (s21) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 24

(p21.0) Named entity (NE) was introduced at the sixth message understanding conference (MUC-6). With the introduction of NE, the MUC conference has helped to advance the field of information extraction [1]. NE refers to a proper name that designates a person, location, or organization. For example, there are three NE in the following sentence: "James is a doctoral student in the Faculty of Computer Science at the University of Indonesia." James an NE insofar as it is the name of a person (P); Indonesia refers to a location (L); and the Faculty of Computer Science refers to the organization (O). Named entity recognition (NER) is a procedure that finds, extracts, and automatically classifies named entities from open domains and unstructured texts such as newspaper articles. It then categorizes these NE into predefined types [2]. There are four approaches to NER: i) a rule-based approach, which does not require annotated data because it relies on artificial rules; ii) an unsupervised learning approach; iii) a feature-based supervised learning approach that relies on supervised learning algorithms with careful feature engineering; and iv) a deep-learning-based approach, which automatically finds the required representation for detecting or classifying raw input in an end-to-end manner [3], [4]. NER is a straightforward process for humans because many named entities are self-names, and most of them have initial capital letters and can be easily recognized, but for machines, it is very difficult [5]. Information extraction often uses data available on social media, online news, and e-commerce [3]. Much information can thereby be obtained, including product reviews, analysis, and information extraction. For example, NER research is used for Indonesian news articles [6]. The use of NER is also carried out for the extraction of comments related to flood monitoring and traffic monitoring [7], [8]. On the other hand, the use of this method is also useful for quote identification [9]. The role of language in text-analysis often determines which model is used [10], because not all libraries are available for specific tasks [2].
## (s26) SLR results
Number of References: 64

(p26.0) After investigating the VOSViewer results, we examined 20 articles collected from the ACM, IEEE, ScienceDirect, and SCOPUS portals. The articles were then extracted and mapped according on author, task,  Table 3). It is clear from the table above that several NER studies with Indonesian datasets have been carried out for the following tasks: complaint classification [19], quote identification [9], [20], flood monitoring extraction [7], traffic monitoring [8], [21], tourist attractions [22], zakat [23], lipstick product reviews [24], and various model combination tests for twitter [25]- [28], online news [6], [29]- [31], and Wikipedia [32], [33]. 

(p26.1) After investigating the VOSViewer results, we examined 20 articles collected from the ACM, IEEE, ScienceDirect, and SCOPUS portals. The articles were then extracted and mapped according on author, task,  Table 3). It is clear from the table above that several NER studies with Indonesian datasets have been carried out for the following tasks: complaint classification [19], quote identification [9], [20], flood monitoring extraction [7], traffic monitoring [8], [21], tourist attractions [22], zakat [23], lipstick product reviews [24], and various model combination tests for twitter [25]- [28], online news [6], [29]- [31], and Wikipedia [32], [33]. 
## (s29) Recommendations for illegal Fintech supervision strategies with the NER approach based on social media data and online news
Number of References: 4

(p29.0) Based on the SLR, new ideas emerge to utilize this method in the era of technological and social media transformation. The digital economy can change society and business's economic activities, from what was originally manual to fully automated. This impacts the provision of financial services by startups and Fintech companies. Currently, Fintech practices in Indonesia are very developed, starting from payments, funding, and Robo-advisors. However, in its implementation, Fintech lending (online lending) received special attention because it caused several problems, namely the emergence of illegal fintech. Unreasonable billing processes, issues of personal data protection, and even moral hazards are the focus of the supervision. In Indonesia, a government website channel is available for illegal Fintech complaints, but people tend to use social media to submit their complaints [15]. With the NER concept described in the previous section and the basics of libraries, POS tagging, and named entities, this research becomes the basis for developing ML models in the early identification of platform names on social media. Figure 6 is our proposed Fintech supervision model with social media data and online news that can be used for further research. 

(p29.1) Based on the SLR, new ideas emerge to utilize this method in the era of technological and social media transformation. The digital economy can change society and business's economic activities, from what was originally manual to fully automated. This impacts the provision of financial services by startups and Fintech companies. Currently, Fintech practices in Indonesia are very developed, starting from payments, funding, and Robo-advisors. However, in its implementation, Fintech lending (online lending) received special attention because it caused several problems, namely the emergence of illegal fintech. Unreasonable billing processes, issues of personal data protection, and even moral hazards are the focus of the supervision. In Indonesia, a government website channel is available for illegal Fintech complaints, but people tend to use social media to submit their complaints [15]. With the NER concept described in the previous section and the basics of libraries, POS tagging, and named entities, this research becomes the basis for developing ML models in the early identification of platform names on social media. Figure 6 is our proposed Fintech supervision model with social media data and online news that can be used for further research. 
