# Food Science of Animal Resources A Review on Processing Opportunities for the Development of Camel Dairy Products

CorpusID: 257976200 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c0947c361933ca72a115c22a8fb593e864a9e992](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c0947c361933ca72a115c22a8fb593e864a9e992)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s2) Yogurt as a Fermented Dairy Product
Number of References: 4

(p2.0) Yogurt is one of the oldest and most important fermented dairy product, it remains very popular in modern world due to its image as a functional food with superior nutritional value and its growing diversification associated to the manufacturing at industrial scale. Yogurt are the fermented dairy product obtained from lactic acid fermentation of milk by two species of LAB. Yogurt is also known as a healthy food and people like to consume all around the world due to its superior digestibility than milk, provide health-promoting nutrients and restore the pathophysiological disorders associated to the gastrointestinal tract (GIT; Temerbayeva et al., 2018). Yogurt can be obtained by fermentation of milk from various species of dairy animals like sheep, goat, cow buffalo, mare and camel however, the last two is not considered for the production of fermented dairy product on commercial level (Akanova et al., 2017). The nutritional quality of yogurt can be influenced by numerous factors including; (1) the amount of lactic acid (LA) production, which is crucial for the lactose intolerant consumers owing to safe the peoples by minimizing the production of methane, hydrogen, organic acid and carbon dioxide in GIT; (2) bioavailability of macro-minerals including potassium, calcium and phosphorus, which was improved in yogurt than non-fermented milk due to non-fat solid adjustment (Corrieu and Béal, 2016); (3) quantity of folic acid content which was higher in yogurt in compression to the milk (Corrieu and Béal, 2016).
## (s4) Opportunities for Yogurt Making from Camel Milk (CM)
Number of References: 11

(p4.0) Several attempts have been reported in literature to improve the organoleptic and rheological characteristics of CM yogurt however, there is no clear technological solution is available to meet the commercial production of camel yogurt (Ibrahim and Khalifa, 2015;Mohsin et al., 2019;Mudgil et al., 2018). Normally, the coagulation process of CM required long time than other bovine milk due to exceptionally larger size of casein micelles and presence of antibacterial compounds leading to decrease the functionality of starter culture bacteria (Ibrahem and El Zubeir, 2016). The fortification of CM with other milk significantly decrease the inherent functional properties, and subsequently addition of hydrocolloid and single stabilizer or their combination has been studied to enhance the consistency and physicochemical properties of CM yogurt as indicated in Table 1. The method of CM yogurt preparation and way to overcome processing challenges are presented in Fig. 1. The addition of 0.08% Na 2 EDTA or 2.5% bovine no-fat milk powder had no positive effect on the quality parameters of CM yogurt. The unacceptable organoleptic quality (taste and flavor) of yogurt has been observed in response to the application of either carboxymethyl cellulose or pectin 0.6%, as a stabilizing agent (Al-Zoreky and Al-Otaibi, 2015). Furthermore, Hashim et al. (2009), suggested that carboxymethyl cellulose (0.5%-1.0%) fortified CM had no significant impact on the texture of CM yogurt. It has also reported that the transformation of CM into yogurt did not achieved by supplementation of milk with samphire molasses (3%), bovine whey protein isolate (3%) and k-carrageenan (0.1%; Kavas and Kavas, 2016). Results also showed that the manufactured yogurt had inferior quality of yogurt (sensory, rheological, physicochemical and microbiological). Moreover, these parameter was improved significantly and increase consumer acceptability by replacing the k-carrageenan with xanthan gum at the concentration of (0.5%) by using same methodology. Another study, demonstrated that adding 0.75% biosynthesized xanthan to CM yogurt significantly improved the firmness, texture and organoleptic attributes of manufactured product (Mohsin et al., 2019). Additionally, the added biosynthesized xanthan build the compact and uniform microstructure along with dense network of casein micelles. Likewise, Mudgil et al. (2018) suggested that the appearance, rheological properties and texture of CM yogurt could be improved and comparable characteristics to those of cow milk by adding the gelatin as a stabilizing agent at the level of 0.75%-0.1%. Conversely the sensory attributes of CM yogurt (flavour and taste) was insignificantly influenced when compare with cow milk yogurt. The study of Jasim et al. (2018) demonstrated that adding arabic gum (1%-2%) significantly enhance the texture, appearance and viscosity while decline the syneresis however, the higher concentration of arabic gum led to the off-taste in CM yogurt.

(p4.1) Another approach has been applied to address the processing challenges associated to the production of CM yogurt by mixing the CM with other mammalian milk such as sheep, goat, cow and buffalo milk (Ibrahem and El Zubeir, 2016). The author reported that the CM fortified with sheep milk (40%-60%), showed higher nutritional value with better quality attributes and consumer acceptability than yogurt produced from CM alone. Similarly, another study reported that the mixing of CM with sheep, goat and cow milk produce better quality yogurt owing to enhance the total solid contens and neutralize or reduce the inharent funtionality of CM (Park et al., 2007). This approach not only improve the weak texture and thin consistanct of CM yougurt but also increases the nutritional properties of end product by replacing the deficient 
