# Using Wearable Sensors to Estimate Mechanical Power Output in Cyclical Sports Other than Cycling-A Review

CorpusID: 255044078 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2b967699d808b324e39f9486fe86624d47157d4e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2b967699d808b324e39f9486fe86624d47157d4e)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s7) Overview
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) An overview of the literature that estimated mechanical power using wearable devices is provided in Tables 1 and 2. To identify the acting forces on a rigid body, drawing a free body diagram of that rigid body is a useful tool. The column 'rigid body definition' clarifies the boundaries of the rigid body that is used and therefore designating the forces and torques to consider. The studies of interest mainly estimate mechanical power as output (see Table 1). However, some studies in Table 2 estimated only subparts of the power equation, such as the acceleration of the center of mass [10] or push-off force [11,12]. These subparts are useful for future estimation of mechanical power and need to be accurately estimated as a first step towards mechanical power estimation in, respectively, rowing, speed skating, and cross-country skiing. Whichever term is estimated is displayed in the 'estimated term' column. Force or torque from a source acting on an object is displayed as , or , in the column 'force measurement'. The kinematics of an object relative to a reference frame such as the linear velocity or angular velocity is displayed as / or / , respectively, in the column 'kinematic measurement'. If known, the type of sensor used to measure the force and/or velocity component is given between brackets. If the type of sensor used to measure the force and/or velocity component is unknown, it is displayed as (-). In Table 1, if a measuring system is commercially available, the name of the system is given.
## (s9) Overview
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) An overview of the literature that estimated mechanical power using wearable devices is provided in Tables 1 and 2. To identify the acting forces on a rigid body, drawing a free body diagram of that rigid body is a useful tool. The column 'rigid body definition' clarifies the boundaries of the rigid body that is used and therefore designating the forces and torques to consider. The studies of interest mainly estimate mechanical power as output (see Table 1). However, some studies in Table 2 estimated only subparts of the power equation, such as the acceleration of the center of mass [10] or push-off force [11,12]. These subparts are useful for future estimation of mechanical power and need to be accurately estimated as a first step towards mechanical power estimation in, respectively, rowing, speed skating, and cross-country skiing. Whichever term is estimated is displayed in the 'estimated term' column. Force or torque from a source acting on an object is displayed as F source,object or M source,object in the column 'force measurement'. The kinematics of an object relative to a reference frame such as the linear velocity or angular velocity is displayed as v object/re f or ω object/re f , respectively, in the column 'kinematic measurement'. If known, the type of sensor used to measure the force and/or velocity component is given between brackets. If the type of sensor used to measure the force and/or velocity component is unknown, it is displayed as (-). In Table 1, if a measuring system is commercially available, the name of the system is given.
## (s12) Transportation Object as the Rigid Body
Number of References: 37

(p12.0) Nine studies estimated mechanical power by multiplying what is considered as the main propulsion force or torque with the corresponding linear or angular velocity (see Table 1) [14][15][16][17][18][19][20][21][22][23].

(p12.1) For kayaking and rowing, the paddle or oar, respectively, were chosen as the rigid body (see Figure A1) [14][15][16][17][18]. These studies considered the propulsive force as the force of the hands on the paddle or oar perpendicular to the oar or paddle (F hand, paddle or F hand, oar ) and multiplied this with the corresponding linear velocity of the hand relative to the world (v hand/world ) to obtain mechanical power. In rowing, F hand, oar can directly be measured at the hand placement on the oar [16,18]. Alternatively, it can be derived from the normal force in the oarlock (F oar,oarlock ), combined with the inboard and outboard length of the oar (respectively, l in and l out ) [16,17]. By assuming that the blade is a stationary point and the oar mass is negligible, this results in the following relation:

(p12.2) The linear hand velocity (v hand/world ) was derived by multiplying the inboard length with either the change in angle of the oar relative to the oar pin on the boat (φ oar/boat ) divided by the corresponding change in time or the angular velocity of the oar relative to the oar pin on the boat (ω oar/boat ) [16][17][18]. Holt et al. [18] did not specify how the statemeasured variables were derived. Since the PowerLine (Peach Innovations, Cambridge, UK) and EmPower (Nielsen-Kellerman, Boothwyn, PA, USA) measure F oarlock,oar [18], it is most likely that F hands, oar is derived using Equation (3), whereas v hand/world was derived similar to [16,17]. For the OarPowerMeter (Weba Sport, Wien, Austria), F hands,oar was directly measured and ω oar/boat is likely multiplied with inboard length to obtain linear hand velocity [18]. 

(p12.3) Ohtonen et al. [12] Skier In kayaking, the normal force of the hand on the paddle (F hand,paddle ) was measured at the hand placement on the oar [14,15]. The hand velocity was derived using shaft acceleration (a sha f t/world ), angular velocity of the shaft (ω sha f t/world ), and the hand placements [14,15].

(p12.4) In wheelchair propulsion, the wheel is chosen as a rigid body and the main propulsive force is considered the force of the hands on the rim tangential to the rim (F hand,rim ), resulting in a torque around the rear wheel axis (M F hand,rim ) [19][20][21][22][23]. This torque is then multiplied with the angular velocity of the rear wheel around the rear wheel axis (ω rearwheel/WC ) to obtain mechanical power.
