# Journal of Engineering An Extensive Literature Review on Risk Assessment Models (Techniques and Methodology) for Construction Industry ‫االنشاء‬ ‫لصناعة‬ ‫المنهجية)‬ ‫و‬ ‫(التقنيات‬ ‫المخاطر‬ ‫تقييم‬ ‫نماذج‬ ‫حول‬ ‫لألدبيات‬ ‫شامل‬ ‫اض‬ ‫استعر‬ ‫رنا‬ ‫جلهوم‬ ‫جباركاصد‬ ‫محجوب‬ ‫رؤوف‬ ‫محمد‬ ‫احمد‬ ،*،

CorpusID: 260408491 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d0754566ee09c9c9fc767148cc9c3e6ba217cfb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d0754566ee09c9c9fc767148cc9c3e6ba217cfb)

Fields: Engineering

## (s1) RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Number of References: 5

(p1.0) Results from an extensive review of risk documentation modeling and assessment in building projects are presented in this study based on the analysis of basic studies starting with the 1990s, in which the most prominent studies are (Mustafa and Al-Bahar, 1991; Williams, 1995;Ward, 1999) and other studies extending to the twentieth century such as (Tah and Carr, 2000;Xu and Tiong, 2001;Dikmen and Birgonul, 2006; Nieto-Morote and Ruz-Vila, 2011) and many other important studies. The dangers of building projects, such as highways, roads, and building construction, are the primary subject of this research. The focus is on academic papers written in English that have been through a strict peer review process. Numerous documents on building risk assessment have been published over the past two decades. First, use keyword searches to find relevant research papers from different online sources and collect them. Some sources are the Emerald database, such as (Science Direct, Taylor & Francis, Springer Link, Google Scholar, ProQuest, ABI/Inform; IEEE; Ingenta Connect; and Web of Science). Various phrases like "risks in construction projects," "risk quantification in construction projects," "risk analysis in construction projects," "risk quantification and analysis in construction," and "modeling project risks" are appropriate for this function. The thoroughness of the search was verified using several different permutations, however. The study examined articles published in databases over the past 20 years to determine how risk modeling and assessment have changed. More than 208 scholarly articles emerged from the investigation. In the end, though, only 68 papers were significantly more critical after a long refining process. Reading these publications allowed us to extract crucial data from them. The authors' names, the year the paper was published, the study's title, the journal's name, native country, research and analyzing data methods, manufacturing, the intention, and the aims are all included. The presented publications in Table 1 cover two decades of project risk modeling and evaluation. Later, paper analyses and literature review results will be discussed to elicit themes and patterns. Finally, the study concludes with a summary of the most important findings and a discussion of their significance.
