# Hypoxia-mediated activation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1α in triple-negative breast cancer A review

CorpusID: 264662047 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2bd821acd48aa1d66dae85866bcc56b7eda98f2d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2bd821acd48aa1d66dae85866bcc56b7eda98f2d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Structure of HIF-1
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) HIF-1 (Fig. 1) is a heterodimer made up of 2 subunits: HIF-1α, which is expressed constitutively, and HIF-1b is a member of the protein family known as basic helixloop-helix-Per-ARNT-Sim. [16]HIF-1α is composed of the oxygen-dependent degradation domain (ODDD), which confers oxygen-dependent regulation, the bHLH and PAS domains (PAS-A and PAS-B), which are necessary for dimerization and DNA binding, as well as 2 independent transcriptional activation domains, the N-and C-terminal transactivation domains (N-TAD and C-TAD), which are separated by an inhibitory domain. [17]nuclear localization signals -N(N-NLS) and nuclear localization signals -C (CNLS), 2 nuclear localization signals, are also present in HIF-1α.Whereas the N-terminal NLS appears to be less significant, the C-terminal NLS is essential for the nuclear import of HIF-1α.Due to its structural similarity, the HIF-1b component plays a crucial role in a number of transcriptional processes and is essential for HIF-1 DNA binding and transactivation. [18]
## (s4) 2.2.1.
Number of References: 19

(p4.0) Inflammatory mediators and oxygen levels to regulate HIF-1α.HIF-1α activity can be regulated by proinflammatory mediators produced by TNBC cells and the hypoxic tumor microenvironment.Inflammatory cells can release chemicals, especially reactive oxygen species, which can actively mutate surrounding cancer cells and accelerate their transformation into highly malignant tumors.TNBC is a very hypoxic solid tumor. [19]The development of the hypoxic microenvironment inside the tumor is accelerated by the increased oxygen consumption of the tumor cells and the insufficient oxygen delivery provided by the tumor microvasculature. [20]TNBC cells produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO) in response to acute and ongoing inflammation as well as the upkeep of chronic hypoxia. [21]nflammatory mediators are produced as a result of tumor-intrinsic gene mutations, inactivation, and antitumor therapy for TNBC.In clinical practice, commonly used chemotherapeutic medicine for TNBC of treatment, such as cyclic medication, alkylating agents, platinum, irradiation, and other treatment approaches, could cause a considerable quantity of ROS and NO generation, creating a hypoxic microenvironment through an initial inflammatory response in turn regulates the activity of HIF-1. [22,23]Additionally, TNBC-specific gene mutations and inactivations result in significant quantities of ROS production, for example, BRCA1 inactivation, TP53 alterations, and stem Figure 1.Schematic representation of structure of HIF-1a.The figure has been adapted, with some modifications, from Li and Ye. [15]Numbers indicate the amino-acid residues of each domain or special amino sites.cell-like characteristics. [24]Particularly, TP53 mutations cause elevated NO levels.Under typical circumstances, P53 builds up, triggers apoptosis in response to NO-mediated DNA damage, and inhibits iNOS via a regulatory route of negative feedback.The negative feedback regulatory system is broken when TP53 is altered, which causes iNOS to be stimulated to create more NO. [25,26]he TNBC's hypoxic microenvironment preserves HIF-1's stability and activity.Prolyl hydroxylase-2 (PHD-2) hydroxylates proline residues on the N-TAD of HIF-1 in normoxic circumstances, causing HIF-1α to interact with the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein.Ubiquitination ligase then binds to HIF-1, which is then ubiquitinated and destroyed by 26 seconds protease. [27]Additionally, factor block HIF regulates HIF-1's factor inhibit (FIH) transcriptional activity.HIF-1's asparagine residue is inhibited by FIH, which also blocks the transcriptional coactivator p300/CBP from binding to HIF-1. [28]hen the oxygen concentration is <21%, PHD-2's hydroxylation function malfunctions, which causes HIF-1α to build up in the cells. [29]A transcription initiation complex, which also detects flaws in the target gene promoters, is formed when accumulated HIF-1α shifts to the nucleus, forms a dimer with HIF-1 and binds with the transcriptional coactivator p300/CBP.Transcription is induced by the hypoxia response element. [30]It is important to note that FIH continues to perform its transcriptional role by suppressing HIF-1α even in the hypoxic condition (1% O 2 ). [31]Additionally, under chronic hypoxia, low ROS levels control HIF-1α activity.Recent research has revealed that ROS in the cytoplasm mostly limits PHD-2 and FIH activity while promoting HIF-1α stabilization [31] (Fig. 2)

(p4.1) Unsurprisingly, a recent study also found that the protein level of HIF-1 in TNBC increased under normoxic conditions. [32]NO plays an important role in controlling inflammatory mediators by maintaining the stability of HIF-1 and increasing the protein level of HIF-1.The potential mechanism of PHD-2 involves the binding of NO to the iron atom in the catalytic core, which prevents PHD-2 from being active. [33]In addition, NO causes S-nitrosylation of the Cys533 location of the HIF-1 ODDD domain, which stops HIF-1 from degrading. [34]Moreover, NO blocks FIH enzyme activity prevents FIH from hydroxylating HIF-1's asparagine and stimulates the gene transcription that is downstream of HIF-1. [35]
## (s6) JAK-STAT signaling pathway. The development of TNBC is tightly associated with the JAK-STAT signaling pathway.
Number of References: 4

(p6.0) Recent study has shown that the JAK-STAT signaling pathway component STAT3, which is highly expressed in TNBC, is linked to the genesis of tumors, their progression, and the development of treatment resistance. [49]Some scholars had found that STAT3 expression is increased in doxorubicin-resistant TNBC stem cells. [50]According to late research, STAT3 signaling regulates HIF-1 upstream, and when STAT3 is activated, it binds to the HIF-1α promoter and increases HIF-1α transcription. [39]Other scholars found that in MDA-MB-231 cells, IL-6 activated STAT3, and increased HIF-1 expression. [51]Therefore, targeting this pathway can inhibit the expression of HIF-1α.
