# Methods for determination of biomethane potential of feedstocks: a review

CorpusID: 26425201 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5491973efaea54653e95d8503685816d9b7649d0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5491973efaea54653e95d8503685816d9b7649d0)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry

## (s4) Sewage sludge
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) Worldwide the anaerobic stabilization of sewage sludge is probably the most prevalent AD activity. Sewage sludge is produced in large quantities in urban areas all over the world. It is a vast resource that has high  biodegradability. Wastewater treatment facilities use anaerobic digesters to break down sewage sludge and eliminate pathogens in wastewater (Scaglia et al., 2014). The AD of sewage sludge provides significant benefits as it leads to the production of energy in the form of biogas and help waste management. In the Europe, typically between 30% and 70% of sewage sludge is treated by AD (IEA, 2009). Most developing countries lack sanitation facilities, therefore, AD is in most cases the only treatment of wastewater (Noyola et al., 2006).
## (s11) A gronomic practices
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) Nowadays there are efforts to improve the biomethane yield from cropbased feedstocks. In order to optimise biomethane yield from crops, factors that influence BMP and biomass yield should be identified and managed (Mayer et al., 2014). Factors such as agro-climatic conditions, soil characteristics, plant varieties, and agronomic practices influence both the composition and yield of crops. The biomass composition then influences the ABP and the methane content in the biogas leading to various BMP values (Schittenhelm, 2008 The utility of Equation 1 will be shown later with regard to use of ABP values to calculate BMP values as presented by Mayer et al. (2014).
## (s24) Chemical composition analyses
Number of References: 4

(p24.0) The feedstock chemical characteristics such as the chemical composition (lignin, cellulose, hemicelluloses, starch, total soluble sugars, proteins, and lipids) can determine the gas generation by AD (Godin et al., 2015). The method is applicable in cases where elemental composition of the substrate is unknown. This can be done economically within a short period of time. The chemical composition analysis is a more rapid and cheaper method than the BMP test, provided appropriate models are developed and applied (Godin et al., 2015). Rath et al. (2013) has provided empirical evidence to show that the chemical composition of corn (lignin, total soluble sugars, hemicelluloses, and lipids) gives a consistent model for estimation of BMP. At least two variables are required to build a reliable model (Godin et al., 2015). The chemical composition of fruit and vegetable wastes, sorghum and napier grass (carbohydrate, protein, acid detergent fibre, lignin and cellulose contents of substrate) were used to predict the ultimate methane yield (Gunaseelan, 2007).
