# Pathogenic viruses of the respiratory tract -A review Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Disease

CorpusID: 2678576 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/515cd2abd2ee20487987dc6caf02342f4ee15f33](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/515cd2abd2ee20487987dc6caf02342f4ee15f33)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s4) Influenza virus
Number of References: 5

(p4.0) Human influenza viruses are enveloped, single-stranded, negative-strand, segmented RNA viruses that belong to the family Orthomyxoviridae. Influenza virus infections may lead to febrile respiratory illnesses and annual epidemics prevailing for about 3-8 weeks [37,38]. Influenza infection can spread globally in the pandemic form through the spread of novel virus types. These novel types of influenza viruses emerge following genetic reassortment of the haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) genes [39].

(p4.1) Although three subtypes: H1N1, H2N2 and H3N2 were found to be associated with seasonal variations in the last 100 years, a new variant of H1N1 transferred from swine to humans was responsible for a pandemic (worldwide) outbreak in 2009 [40]. In addition, the transfer of subtype H5N1 from birds to humans triggered the severe outbreak in Southeast Asia in 2003 and caused significant mortality and morbidity in humans [41]. Although clinicians sometimes use laboratory diagnosis, they often diagnose patients solely based on the presence of influenza-like symptoms. Identification of influenza virus in a hospital environment is important for appropriate control of the spread of infection for example, by droplet isolation. The spread of influenza infection in a hospital can be disastrous for immunocompromised patients for example, transplant recipients or cancer patients, and can cause serious complications leading to death. Transplant recipients may acquire viruses through the donorderived infections, reactivation of endogenous latent viruses or from the community. Due to the immunocompromised states of these patients, they are susceptible to infections from any opportunistic pathogens. Administration of specific antiviral agents for example, M2 channel inhibitors (amantadine and rimantidine) can be effective in controlling the spread of infections between patients. However, for effective treatment of patients M2 channel inhibitors need to be given within first 24 h of infection. Therefore, a rapid and accurate laboratory diagnosis of influenza virus is of prime importance.
## (s8) Rhinovirus
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Rhinoviruses are single-stranded positive-sense RNA viruses of the Picornaviridae family of which more than 200 serotypes have been identified. Rhinoviruses cause approximately two-third of cases of common cold in humans and have been found associated with asthma exacerbations in chronic lung disease [54]. Rhinoviruses and enteroviruses belong to the same family Picornaviridae and often detected using primers specific for the highly conserved 5'-noncoding region (NCR). However, designing a second set of primers targeting the VP1 or VP4 genes can be useful to differentiate between rhinoviruses and enteroviruses. RT-PCR, nucleic acid sequence based amplification (NASBA) have been found to be more sensitive than conventional culture techniques for the detection of rhinoviruses [55].
## (s9) Enterovirus and Parechovirus
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) Enterovirus and Parechovirus are single-stranded positive-sense RNA viruses of the Picornaviridae family. The genus Enterovirus and Parechovirus have been shown to have 63 and 4 distinct members, respectively. Enteroviruses are prevalent worldwide infecting an estimated 1 billion people each year. These infections are common in infants and young children especially under the age of 1 year [56]. Enterovirus infections can cause a range of disease conditions starting from mild respiratory symptoms [57] to serious forms such as poliomyelitis and aseptic meningitis. Although Parechoviruses mainly cause respiratory tract and gastrointestinal infections [56] human parechoviruses can cause acute flaccid paralysis and severe encephalitis.
## (s12) Human bocavirus (hBoV)
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) Human bocavirus is a single-stranded DNA virus of the Parvoviridae family. Human bocavirus was discovered by Allander et al. using a large-scale molecular viral screening and DNase Sequence Independent Single Primer Amplification (SISPA) technique [8]. Based on several studies it was found that about 2%-19% of respiratory tract infections were caused by hBoV. Bocavirus infections are detected mainly by molecular techniques [63] as it is not yet possible to grow isolates in cell culture.
## (s13) Parvovirus Type 4 and 5 and Mimivirus
Number of References: 4

(p13.0) Parvovirus type 4 and 5 were found in the serum or plasma samples of 70% of HIV infected patients [64]. Parvoviruses were also found in 4% of manufactured plasma and in healthy blood donors [65]. These types of viruses are considered as potential pathogens of the respiratory tract as are two other parvoviruses, parvovirus B19 and HBoV that are associated with respiratory tract infections.

(p13.1) Mimivirus is a large DNA virus considered as a potential pathogen of the respiratory tract. Antibodies to mimivirus could be detected in 9.7% of community-acquired pneumonia cases compared to 2.3% of healthy controls. Mimivirus DNA was also found in bronchoalveolar lavage specimens from intensive care unit patients [66]. However, in another study mimivirus sequence could not be detected by real-time PCR in 496 pneumonia patients [67]. Further research is necessary in order to establish the true pathogenicity of these viruses.
