# Using Data Mining Techniques to Predict Chronic Kidney Disease: A Review Study Review Article

CorpusID: 264286224 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b441d0e939562b4d741919d2642e98a92a8e46c6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b441d0e939562b4d741919d2642e98a92a8e46c6)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 24

(p0.0) One of the growing global health problems is chronic kidney disease.Chronic kidney disease is associated with an increased mortality and risk of many diseases.More than two million people worldwide undergo dialysis or kidney transplants to survive, but it may represent only 10% of those who need treatment to survive.Every year, more than one million people in 112 low-income countries die from untreated kidney failure.That is why the cost of dialysis or kidney transplant treatment is high. [1,2]In 2017, the number of people with chronic kidney disease worldwide was 69.75 million, causing 1.2 million deaths. [3], early diagnosis, control, and management of chronic kidney disease are very important. [2]One of the best ways to reduce this mortality is early treatment. [4]ut in developing countries, patients are treated in critical conditions.It is possible to build an automated system to identify patients with chronic kidney disease before reaching the final stage.To achieve this goal, patients' clinical data such as age, sex, and blood pressure can be used. [5]Much research has been done on the development of artificial intelligence systems that have solutions to the disease.Data mining or machine learning models play a vital role in predicting disease.Data mining models extract patterns by creating some mathematical approaches.8] Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland presented a case study to predict chronic kidney disease at a local hospital in the UK.The study checks two new data mining algorithms that provide a basis for identifying high-risk patients.It assesses more accurate track closer for reducing the risk of disease. [9]angri et al. developed prediction models using demographic, clinical, and laboratory data.The model consists of age, sex, glomerular filtration rate, albuminuria, serum calcium, serum phosphate, serum bicarbonate, and serum albumin. [10]ny studies have applied different data mining techniques to predict chronic kidney disease.Here are some commonly used techniques.Artificial neural network (ANN) is a mathematical model that works like human neurons.Neural networks are non-linear statistical data modeling tools. [11]The perceptron neural network is the simplest neural network and exists as a single-layer and multilayer perceptron (MLP).The single-layer perceptron can only classify discrete linear problems, and for more complex problems, it is necessary to use more layers.A multilayer perceptron consists of components of layers and weights.In general, in multilayer perceptron, there are three types of neural layers which are input layer, hidden layer(s), and output layer. [12]The neurons of the input layer receive the data and transmit it to the neurons of the first hidden layer through weight links.

(p0.1) Here, the data are processed and the result is transmitted to the neurons in the next layer.Finally, the neurons of the last layer provide the output of the network. [13]onvolutional neural network (CNN) is a mathematical structure that usually consists of three types of layers (or building blocks): convolution, pooling, and fully connected layers.The first two layers, the convolution and pooling layers, perform feature extraction, while the third layer, a fully connected layer, maps the extracted features to the final output, such as classification. [14]Support vector machine (SVM) technique is an efficient method for classification of linear and non-linear data.This method first uses a non-linear mapping to convert the initial data to high dimensions and then searches for the best separating hyperplane in the new dimension. [15]In fact, the purpose of the support vector machine is to create a decision boundary between two classes that allows the prediction of labels from one or more feature vectors and creates the maximum possible distance for the two classes of support vectors. [16]Random forest (RF) is an ensemble learning method for classification and regression problems that builds several decision trees during training.The random forest algorithm injects a subset of randomly selected data into each of the decision trees.Each of the algorithms performs the learning operation.When a new dataset is given to the algorithm for prediction, each of these trained algorithms predicts a result.Finally, the random forest algorithm can select the category with the most votes by voting and place it as the final category for the classification operation. [17]The decision tree algorithm can predict qualitative variables in addition to quantitative variables.The result of implementing the decision tree algorithm is a set of logical conditions with a tree structure that is used to predict a feature.So that the data placed in the last leaves of this tree are labeled by one of the values of the target attribute.The decision tree algorithm works in such a way that it tries to minimize diversity (in terms of target features) in the nodes.This non-uniformity in the nodes can be measured using impurity measures, the most important and widely used of which is the Gini index.Often, the difference between the types of decision trees is the measurement of impurity, splitting and pruning of tree nodes.Two examples of decision tree algorithms include classification and regression tree (CART) and C4.5. [18,19]is research reviewed and analyzed studies that have applied data mining techniques for predicting the disease.20 Ekanayake, et al. [21] 2020 UCI CKD Dataset 400 instances of CKD patients Decision tree, random forest, XGB 3 extra tree, AdaBoost 4 , KNN 5 , NN 6 , linear SVC 7 , LR 8 , RBF 9 , Gaussian NB 10 Accuracy Sensitivity
## (s1) Classification and Association
Number of References: 5

(p1.0) Rule Mining Technique for Predicting Chronic Kidney Disease Alaiad, et al. [22] 2020 Ayodele, et al. [24] 2020 UCI CKD Dataset 400 instances of CKD patients NB KNN decision tree Accuracy Sensitivity Specificity Data Mining to Predict Early-Stage Chronic Kidney Disease Pintoa, et al. [25] 2020 UCI CKD Dataset 400 instances of CKD patients SVM, KNN, J48 Accuracy Sensitivity Specificity Optimization of C4.5 Algorithm using Meta Learning in diagnosing of Chronic Kidney Diseases Nurzahputra, et al. [26] 2019 UCI CKD Dataset 400 instances of CKD patients C4.Akben. [28]018 UCI CKD Dataset 400 instances of CKD patients K-means, KNN, NB, SVM
