# Citation: Review on Multiple I-III-VI Quantum materials A Review on Multiple I-III-VI Quantum Dots: Preparation and Enhanced Luminescence Properties

CorpusID: 260052378 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/43f2a21c621361fc8f547b38615a0c086d5d94d8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/43f2a21c621361fc8f547b38615a0c086d5d94d8)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Physics

## (s7) Doping of I-III-VI Type QDs
Number of References: 7

(p7.0) Multiple QDs are widely used in catalysis, charge storage and thermoelectric conversion because their emission peak range and intensity can be tuned by changing their size and cationic composition [101,102]. However, due to the different ionic activities of multiple QDs, the crystal structure is more prone to defects, resulting in a lower PLQY of multiple QDs than the traditional binary QDs. This can be improved by doping transition metal ions or rare metal ions (e.g., Mn 2+ , Cu + , Co 2+ , Ni 2+ , Ag + , Au 3+ , etc.). The doped QDs not only retain optical properties, but also have the advantages of a high PL intensity, broad luminescence range and large Stokes shift. However, the doping mechanism is complex and certain doping structures are difficult to obtain. For example, Mn 2+ can be doped into CdS and ZnSe QDs, but it is difficult to dope into CdSe QDs [103][104][105][106]. In view of this phenomenon, Erwin et al. [107] attributed it to the "self-purification" theory, that is, impurities will be discharged by QDs. Meanwhile, doping efficiency is determined by three main factors: surface morphology, nanocrystal shape and surfactant.
## (s13) Co-Doped I-III-VI Type QDs
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) In addition to single metal ion doping multiple QDs, multi-ion improve the optical properties of multiple QDs. Zhou et al. [137] co-doped with Zn 2+ and Mn 2+ . The excitation peak slightly red-shifte at half maximum (FWHM) decreased gradually with the increase o the doped samples fluoresced red light, and the fluorescence intens that of the undoped samples. Galiyeva et al. [138] prepared AIS QDs and Mn 2+ using a one-step method. The PL luminescence peak of with the increase of the Mn 2+ concentration, which may be due to a state. Co-doped AIS QDs also exhibit ferromagnetic and paramag well as long PL lifetimes, which enable them to distinguish signals 
## (s14) Co-Doped I-III-VI Type QDs
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) In addition to single metal ion doping multiple QDs, multi-ion co-doping can also improve the optical properties of multiple QDs. Zhou et al. [137] prepared CIS QDs codoped with Zn 2+ and Mn 2+ . The excitation peak slightly red-shifted and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) decreased gradually with the increase of reaction time. All the doped samples fluoresced red light, and the fluorescence intensity was higher than that of the undoped samples. Galiyeva et al. [138] prepared AIS QDs co-doped with Zn 2+ and Mn 2+ using a one-step method. The PL luminescence peak of the QDs red-shifted with the increase of the Mn 2+ concentration, which may be due to an Mn 2+ -related trap state. Co-doped AIS QDs also exhibit ferromagnetic and paramagnetic properties, as well as long PL lifetimes, which enable them to distinguish signals from rapidly decaying background PL and biological system PL, and have great potential for development in bioimaging applications.
## (s18) Solar Cells
Number of References: 20

(p18.0) The excessive use of fossil energy causes global energy exhaustion and environmental pollution. It is urgently necessary to develop renewable and clean energy. Among them, quantum sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) have attracted attention for their outstanding advantages such as high conversion rate and low cost, and their theoretical power conversion efficiency (PCE) is as high as 44%, making them promising candidates for the next generation of solar cells [148]. The band gap width of I-III-VI type QDs (AIS, CIS, CISe, etc.) can be adjusted by changing their components, which overcomes the disadvantage of binary QDs only relying on size adjustment. Therefore, they greatly increase the adjustable range of optical properties, and are an ideal substitute material for highly toxic cadmium-based QDs. Cheng et al. [149] synthesized AIS QDs using the hot injection method. The PLQY of the AIS QDs was about 7~10%, and they were connected to a mesopore TiO 2 surface by dual-functional linking molecules. Due to the excessive charge recombination of the AIS QDs, the assembled solar cells had a short circuit current of 0.49 mA/cm 2 and an open circuit voltage of 0.24 V, and the PCE was only 0.05%. In addition, the long and heavy hydrocarbon chain covering AIS QDs prevents its maximum coverage on the TiO 2 surface, resulting in a low conversion performance of devices. Based on this, Kadlag et al. [150] synthesized ligand-free AIS QDs using formamide as an organic solvent, and the open circuit voltage and PCE were 0.45 V and 0.8%, respectively. Wang et al. [151] synthesized AIS/In 2 S 3 /ZnS in the aqueous phase. The In 2 S 3 and ZnS inhibited charge recombination, and the assembled solar cells had a PCE of 0.7%. Zhang et al. [60] synthesized AIS QDs using oleamine as a surfactant using a simple and green method. The PCE of the assembled solar cells was 2.46%. The introduction of Zn 2+ into AIS QDs can optimize the defect state and inhibit charge recombination, and the PCE of solar cells assembled by AIZS QDs reaches 4.50%. Yue et al. [152] compared the PCE of solar cells assembled with CIZS, CIS/ZnS and CIS QDs as photosensitized materials, as shown in Figure 8. The PCE of QDSSCs using CIZS QDs as the photosensitizer was 8.47%. Compared with CIS/ZnS and CIS-based QDSSCs, the PCE of the CIZS-based QDSSCs increased by 21% and 82%, respectively, under AM 1.5 G simulated sunlight irradiation. The core-shell structure has a certain inhibition effect on charge recombination and a shell with a wide band gap will also slow down the charge extraction rate, resulting in the deterioration of photovoltaic performance [153,154]. In contrast, alloying structures is conducive to inhibiting charge recombination loss and accelerating electron injection of QDs into TiO 2 electron acceptors due to uniform electronic structures [154,155].  Figure 8. The PCE of QDSSCs using CIZS QDs as the photosensitizer was 8.47%. Compared with CIS/ZnS and CIS-based QDSSCs, the PCE of the CIZS-based QDSSCs increased by 21% and 82%, respectively, under AM 1.5 G simulated sunlight irradiation. The core-shell structure has a certain inhibition effect on charge recombination and a shell with a wide band gap will also slow down the charge extraction rate, resulting in the deterioration of photovoltaic performance [153,154]. In contrast, alloying structures is conducive to inhibiting charge recombination loss and accelerating electron injection of QDs into TiO2 electron acceptors due to uniform electronic structures [154,155]. Compared to AIS and CIS QDs, CISe QDs have a larger exciton Bohr radius (10.6 nm) and a narrower band gap (1.04~1.5 eV), which can extend the light absorption range to the near-infrared (NIR) region, so it has widely attracted the attention of researchers in recent years [156]. Du et al. [157] synthesized high quality Cu-In-Zn-Se (CIZSe) QDs, and Compared to AIS and CIS QDs, CISe QDs have a larger exciton Bohr radius (10.6 nm) and a narrower band gap (1.04~1.5 eV), which can extend the light absorption range to the near-infrared (NIR) region, so it has widely attracted the attention of researchers in recent years [156]. Du et al. [157] synthesized high quality Cu-In-Zn-Se (CIZSe) QDs, and the average PCE of QDSSCs based on these QDs was 11.66%. Zhang et al. [158] synthesized CIZSe QDs with high quality and controlled components. The PCE of the prepared QDSSCs could reach 12.57% under the irradiation of 1.5 G simulated sunlight with a Cu/In molar ratio of 0.7. Zhang et al. [159] synthesized CIZSe QDs using ascorbic acid (AA) as the ligand. The addition of AA increases the band gap and thus the charge recombination process is inhibited. The efficiency of CIZSe cells with copper and titanium electrodes reached 10.44% and 13.85%, respectively.
## (s19) White Light-Emitting Diodes
Number of References: 5

(p19.0) Since the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol in 1997, energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions have become major global challenges, and the public, government, industry and academia have paid great attention to energy-saving technologies. Lighting is the second largest energy source used in buildings. In the United States, lighting accounts for 22% of electricity use and 8% of all energy use [163]. In the UK, different types of lighting consumed around 8 TWh of energy in 2018 [163]. It is well known that traditional lighting devices lead to energy waste due to low power conversion efficiency. WLEDs, as solid-state lighting devices, have attracted wide attention for their advantages of high efficiency, environmental protection and energy saving [164]. At present, the common white light emission is realized by coating yellow phosphor on the blue LED. However, due to the lack of red light emission, the color rendering index of the WLEDs device is relatively low [165]. At the same time, the traditional phosphor particles are too large to cause the self-scattering effect. Therefore, it is necessary to develop new fluorescent materials to further improve the performance of WLEDs [166].
## (s20) Electroluminescence Devices
Number of References: 3

(p20.0) The QDs have the characteristics of good tunability, high luminous efficiency and strong optical stability. Therefore, they can be integrated into electroluminescent devices after simple solution processing, i.e., spin coating or inkjet printing. The luminescence mechanism of EL devices is usually explained by an injection luminescence model, i.e., holes and electrons are injected into the semiconductor device through the anode and cathode, respectively, and they are combined to emit light in the luminescent layer through the carrier transport layer [172,173]. In 1994, Alivisatos et al. [174] proposed an ITO/PPV/CdSe/Mg-structure EL device. Due to unbalanced carrier injection in the device, its external quantum efficiency (EQE) was lower than 0.01%. Subsequently, Peng et al. 
## (s21) Electroluminescence Devices
Number of References: 5

(p21.0) The QDs have the characteristics of good tunability, high luminous efficiency and strong optical stability. Therefore, they can be integrated into electroluminescent devices after simple solution processing, i.e., spin coating or inkjet printing. The luminescence mechanism of EL devices is usually explained by an injection luminescence model, i.e., holes and electrons are injected into the semiconductor device through the anode and cathode, respectively, and they are combined to emit light in the luminescent layer through the carrier transport layer [172,173]. In 1994, Alivisatos et al. [174] proposed an ITO/PPV/CdSe/Mgstructure EL device. Due to unbalanced carrier injection in the device, its external quantum efficiency (EQE) was lower than 0.01%. Subsequently, Peng et al. [175] solved the problem of imbalance between positive and negative carrier injection by inserting a PMMA insulation layer between the luminous layer and ZnO layer. The EQE was up to 20.5%, which could work continuously for more than 100,000 h at 100 mA/cm 2 . Chen et al. [176] inserted a ZnMgO/Al/HATCN/MoO 3 internal connection layer into the device to effectively improve the generation and injection ability of carriers in the functional layer, and successfully prepared high-performance red, green and blue EL devices with the EQE upped to 23.1%, 27.6% and 21.4%, respectively.
## (s23) Conclusions
Number of References: 2

(p23.0) In the past decades, II-VI (CdSe, ZnS), III-V (InAs, InP) and IV-VI type (PbS, PbTe) binary QDs have attracted attention due to their excellent optical properties. However, most of them contain toxic ions, which restricts their commercial applications. Therefore, the preparation of environmentally friendly QD materials with excellent optical performance has become a current hot issue. The I-III-VI type QDs (such as CuInS 2 , CuInSe 2 , AgInS 2 , AgInSe 2 , etc.) have excellent physical and chemical properties (e.g., strong absorption, broad excitation, wide and symmetrical emission peaks, controllable fluorescence size, good photobleaching stability and high quantum yield). Meanwhile, their optical properties can be tuned by controlling their shape, size, composition and surface functionalization, and thus have great application potential in the fields of solar cells, light-emitting diodes and electroluminescence devices, etc. At present, the preparation of multiple QDs can be divided into two ways, i.e., organic phase synthesis and aqueous phase synthesis. The photoluminescence intensity, luminescence range and Stokes shift of multiple QDs can be effectively improved by doping metal ions (Zn 2+ , Mn 2+ and Cu + ) or surface coating. However, there are still some important scientific and technical problems that need to be solved in the preparation and application of I-III-VI type QDs: (1) The mechanism related to Cu doping and its oxidation state in the QDs is still controversial. Two valence states may exist after Cu doping into QDs, i.e., the Cu + and Cu 2+ oxidation states. Therefore, how to establish the mechanism of Cu doping QDs and determine the oxidation state of Cu have become the primary problems to be solved for Cu-based multiple QDs. (2) By changing the dominant factors such as dopant concentration and preparation method, the doped QDs appear as single emission or multiple emission. However, the emission spectrum of co-doped QDs is difficult to regulate delicately, and the photoluminescence intensity of QDs is still low due to the various ions involved in the synthesis process. Therefore, the surface defect emission is very sensitive to the surrounding environment. The preparation and the interaction mechanism of I-III-VI type QDs with a high PLQY co-doped by transition metal ions have become the main trend for the development of QDs [182]. (3) When the concentration of QDs is higher or converted from colloid to powder, the aggregation-induced effect leads to an increase in QD size and a fluorescence quenching phenomenon, resulting in a decrease in the luminous efficiency of the assembled WLED devices. Moreover, the insolubility between the organic ligand on the surface of QDs and the polymer matrix and the aging of the matrix due to the heat of the chip cause the optical conversion efficiency to inevitably decreases [183]. Therefore, it is still a challenge to select suitable ligands and substrates to obtain high performance WLEDs. (4) The parameters of EQE, LE and luminance of EL devices are still far behind those of cadmium and perovskite QD-based EL devices. It is necessary to further study the working mechanism of the devices and rationally design the structure of each functional layer in order to achieve a charge injection balance. In conclusion, the development of I-III-VI type QDs with high performance and stability has a profound impact on scientific research and commercial applications. 
