# A Survey on Heterogeneous Face Recognition: Sketch, Infra-red, 3D and Low-resolution

CorpusID: 262021782 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f355e54ca94a2d8bbc598e06e414a876eb62ef99](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f355e54ca94a2d8bbc598e06e414a876eb62ef99)

Fields: Law, Computer Science

## (s4) Cross-modal bridge strategy
Number of References: 23

(p4.0) The key HFR challenge of cross-modality heterogeneity typically necessitates an explicit strategy to deal with the cross-modal gap.This component uniquely distinguishes HFR systems from conventional within-modality face recognition.Most HFR studies focus their effort on developing improved strategies for this step.Common strategies broadly fall into the categories: feature design, cross-modal synthesis and subspace projection.These strategies are not exclusive, and many studies employ or contribute to more than one [Klare and Jain 2010b;Wang and Tang 2009].

(p4.1) Feature design strategies [Galoogahi and Sim 2012b;Kiani Galoogahi and Sim 2012;Klare and Jain 2010b;Bhatt et al. 2012] focus on engineering or learning features that are invariant to the modalities in question, while simultaneously being discriminative for person identity.Typical strategies include variants on SIFT [Klare and Jain 2010b] and LBP [Bhatt et al. 2012].Synthesis approaches focus on synthesizing one modality based on the other [Tang and Wang 2002;Wang and Tang 2009].Typical methods include eigentransforms [Tang and Wang 2002;Tang and Wang 2003], MRFs [Wang and Tang 2009], and LLE [Liu et al. 2005].The synthesized image can then be used directly for homogeneous matching.Of course, matching performance is critically dependent on the fidelity and robustness of the synthesis method.Projection approaches aim to project both modalities of face images to a common subspace in which they are more comparable than in the original representations [Lin and Tang 2006;Klare and Jain 2010b;Yi et al. 2007].Typical methods include linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [Wang and Tang 2009], canonical components analysis (CCA) [Yi et al. 2007;Yang et al. 2008], partial least squares (PLS) and common basis [Klare and Jain 2010b] encoding.A noteworthy special case of projection-based strategies is those approaches that perform feature selection.Rather than mapping all input dimensions to a subspace, these approaches simply discover which subset of input dimensions are the most useful (modality invariant) to compare across domains, and ignore the others [Liu et al. 2012;Liao et al. 2009], for example using Adaboost.
## (s5) Matching strategy
Number of References: 11

(p5.0) Once an effective representation has been chosen, and the best effort made to bridge the cross-modal heterogeneity, the final component of a HFR system is the matching strategy.Matching-strategies may be broadly categorized as multi-class classifiers (one class corresponding to each identity in the gallery), or model-based verifiers.Multi-class classifiers pose the HFR task as a multi-class-classification problem.The probe image (after the cross-modal transform in the previous section) is classified into one of the gallery classes/identities.Typically simple classifiers are preferred because there are often only one or a few gallery image(s) per identity, which is too sparse to learn sophisticated classifiers.Thus Nearest-Neighbor (NN) [Tang and Wang 2002;Lin and Tang 2006;Klare and Jain 2010b;Yi et al. 2007] is most commonly used to match against the gallery [Tang and Wang 2002].NN classifiers can be defined with various distance metrics, and many studies found χ 2 [Galoogahi and Sim 2012b;Kiani Galoogahi and Sim 2012] or cosine [Yang et al. 2008] to be most effective than vanilla euclidean distance.An advantage of NN-based approaches is that they do not require an explicit training step or training data.However, they can be enhanced with metric-learning [Bhatt et al. 2012] if annotated cross-domain training data is available.Model-based verification strategies pose HFR as a binary, rather than multiclass, classification problem [Liao et al. 2009;Klare et al. 2012].These take a pair of heterogeneous images as input, and output one or zero according to if they are estimated to be the same person.An advantage of verification over classification strategies is robustness and data sufficiency.In many scenarios there is only one cross-modal face pair per person.Thus classification strategies have one instance per class (person), and risk over fitting.In contrast, by transforming the problem into a binary one, all true pairs of faces form the positive class and all false pairs form the negative class, resulting in a much larger training set, and hence a stronger and more robust classifier.
## (s29) Projection-based approaches
Number of References: 2

(p29.0) Li et al. [Li et al. 2010] proposed a method that projects face images with different resolutions into a common feature space for classification.Coupled mappings that minimize the difference between the correspondences (i.e., low-resolution and its corresponding high-resolution image) are learned.The online phase of this algorithm is a simple linear transformation, so it is more efficient than many alternatives that perform explicit synthesis/super-resolution.Zhou et al. [Zhou et al. 2011] proposed an approach named Simultaneous Discriminant Analysis (SDA).In this method, LR and HR images are projected into a common subspace by the mappings learned respectively by SDA.The mapping is designed to preserve the most discriminative information.Conventional classification methods can then be applied in the common space.
## (s35) Conclusions and discussion
Number of References: 4

(p35.0) The key challenge of heterogeneity due to plastic surgery, is of course the intra-class variability introduced by the surgical process.Some previous cases of heterogeneity discussed in this survey such as sketch and NIR have more or less uniform and nongeometry distorting transformations (assuming good frontal poses).In contrast, surgical modifications can take a variety of forms including: similarly global but non structural/geometric modifications (e.g., skin resurfacing), global and structure/geometry distorting transforms (e.g., face lift), and highly localized transformations (e.g., nose surgery) [Singh et al. 2010;Bhatt et al. 2013].The multi-modality and non-uniformity of surgical transformations may explain why all of the studies so far have primarily been feature based approaches, rather than the synthesis and projection based approaches commonly seen in other HFR contexts.The prevalence of localized transformations also explains the heavier reliance in this area on component-based representations compared to other HFR settings.If a single facial component is modified, then the matching noise introduced is limited to the score of a single component.

(p35.1) Databases.An interesting issue is whether HFR systems for plastic surgery should be trained on non-surgery, or surgery databases.In the latter case, significantly more training data is likely to be available, but discriminatively trained models [Bhatt et al. 2013] have then not been exposed to the variations which they will be tested on, and will thus under-perform.In the latter case the reverse is true, models will have been exposed to appropriate cross-modal variations at training time, but the amount of training data in HFR databases is less.These approaches were compared in [Singh et al. 2010], where training with 360 surgical pairs was reported to give better results than on 900 non-surgical pairs.This issue in somewhat analogous to the previously mentioned question of whether to train on viewed or forensic sketches for forensic sketch recognition.
