# Biological Properties of Polyherbal Formulations: A Review of their Antimicrobial, Anti-Inflammatory, Antioxidant, and Toxicological Activities

CorpusID: 265004995 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b0ee8755285b3a26d28a256aedcc4c773988bc55](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b0ee8755285b3a26d28a256aedcc4c773988bc55)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 16

(p0.0) Throughout history, natural remedies made from herbs have been used to treat various physiological disorders, and are generally considered safe.According to the World Health Organization, around 80% of the global population relies on herbal-based products to treat different ailments. 1he global market for herbal formulations is currently estimated at $1.5 billion and it is expected to expand significantly as demand for natural remedies used for preventing and curing different diseases increases. 1rbs/herbal products are vital sources of novel pharmaceuticals because they contain a significant amount of secondary metabolites, such as alkaloids, flavonoids, isoflavonoids, lignans, quinones, catechols, coumarins, polyphenols, lectins, monoterpenes, and triterpenes which are accountable for the positive effects of the herbal products. 1,2The quality and quantity of these bioactive compounds determine the therapeutic effectiveness of herbal formulations. 1For instance, due to the abundance and diversity of the flavonoid and phenolic content of Datura stramonium, it has been reported to exhibit significant antiinflammatory and antimicrobial activities. 3rgemone mexicana, on the other hand, contains a lot of alkaloids and has traditionally been used to treat various dermatological disorders, warts, and inflammatory complications. 3 When monotherapy is inadequate to combat a clinical condition, traditional medicine employs polyherbal approaches. 4lyherbal medicines, which contain two or more herbal ingredients are often more effective than single drugs because of their complementary and/ or potentiating activities.The combination of two or more herbal extracts brings about increased therapeutic efficiency, enhanced pharmacological actions, faster relief, and reduced adverse effects as compared to conventional medicine due to a lower dose of administration. 1,2,4,5Polyherbal medicines are now widely preferred and used around the world because of their high effectiveness, ready availability, low toxicity, and environmentally friendly nature, and it reduces the time of treatment or the individual cost of anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial drugs, resulting in lower prescription costs. 3,5The concept of polyherbal combination has been well established and has achieved remarkable success in allopathic medicine, providing patients with new hope. 6esistant to antimicrobials.Therefore, plant-derived products can regulate microbial growth in a variety of circumstances.Despite the development of new antibiotics over the last three decades, the problem of microbial resistance to these drugs has increased.Bacteria are known to have the genetic ability to transmit and acquire resistance to drugs used as therapeutic agents, 8 which underscores the importance of discovering and developing novel pharmaceuticals.
