# Promising Highly Targeted Therapies for Cholangiocarcinoma: A Review and Future Perspectives

CorpusID: 260035251 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c96243a4c2f155a405f81ae2d35d4c47fa27d733](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c96243a4c2f155a405f81ae2d35d4c47fa27d733)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Light Sources for PDT
Number of References: 5

(p6.0) Light sources for PDT have evolved over time. Initially, non-laser light sources such as conventional lamps were used, which involved water-cooled incandescent lamps with output defined by filters. However, these light sources had limitations, such as a significant thermal component, making it challenging to accurately calculate the delivered light dose [71]. In recent years, there has been a shift towards more efficient lasers that can produce monochromatic light of a known wavelength and easily perform light dosimetry. Laser light can also be supplied via an optical fiber for localized treatment. The appropriate wavelength for PDT is determined according to the photosensitizer used: 630 nm for HpD, 635 nm for 5-ALA-induced protoporphyrin IX, and 652 nm for tetra (m-hydroxyphenyl) chlorin (Table 2). Moreover, recent advances in semiconductor diode technology have enabled laser systems to be more compact and cheaper [45]. Thus, at present, lasers might be the first choice for a PDT light source. Meanwhile, it has been reported that the use of light emitting diodes (LEDs) of specific wavelengths (610 nm) is effective for PDT of CCA [72,73] and gastrointestinal cancers [74]. Therefore, LEDs can be another light source because of their smaller batteries and lower cost compared to conventional lasers.
## (s7) Human Clinical Studies on PDT
Number of References: 19

(p7.0) Despite ingenuity and improvements in the above-mentioned modalities, PDT monotherapy has limitations, such as incomplete tumor killing or recurrence, and has not replaced existing antitumor therapies. In the field of biliary tract cancer, PDTs mainly for ECC have been clinically performed worldwide since the 1990s (Table 2) [75][76][77]. However, since the 2000s, some RCTs and one meta-analysis have revealed that PDT could yield significantly longer survival/higher survival rates than supportive care with biliary drainage [78][79][80][81][82][83][84]. The 1-year survival rate of the PDT with stent group was 56% (range: 39-75%), and that of the control group was 25% (range: 12-38%). The 2-year survival rate of the PDT with stent group was 16% (range: 14-21%), and that of the control group was 7% (range: 3-10%). Meanwhile, PDT has not shown superiority over conventional systemic chemotherapy in many clinical trials [85,86].

(p7.1) Alternatively, some PDTs combined with systemic chemotherapy (chemophototherapy, CPT) have been shown to be effective treatment options preclinically and clinically [86,87]. During in vitro and in vivo experiments, PDT with novel cancer drugs, such as DMXAA (ASA404: flavone acetic acid analog with TNF-α synthesis), PD166285 (synthetic RTK inhibitors), and TNP-470 (synthetic anti-angiogenesis agent), has demonstrated good outcomes for murine sarcoma, breast, colon, and prostate cancer cells, although CCA cells were not included [85].

(p7.2) There have been several clinical comparative studies that have examined the effectiveness of PDT vs. CPT or chemotherapy vs. CPT for CCA. [86,87]. Regarding PDT vs. CPT, two studies, including one RCT, revealed that CPT had superior outcomes (median overall survival  [87]. Meanwhile, according to a meta-analysis of chemotherapy versus CPT or PDT vs. CPT, CPT had significantly better overall survival than chemotherapy or PDT alone (CPT vs. chemotherapy, hazard ratio (HR): 0.69, p = 0.02; CPT vs. PDT, HR: 0.36, p < 0.01) [86]. Therefore, for unresectable CCA, PDT with systemic chemotherapy (CPT) is expected to yield the most favorable outcomes, although the standard PDT or combined chemotherapy regimen is yet to be determined.  
## (s9) Antibody and Low Molecular Weight (LMW) Compound for Targeting Cancer Cells with IR700
Number of References: 9

(p9.0) IR700 can covalently bind to any kind of antibody (IR700:antibody = approximately 3:1), forming a highly flexible theranostic platform [90]. The selected antibody or low-weight molecule for PIT depends on the cell surface antigen or molecules on the target cancer cell. Various agents, including many APCs and some LMW compound-IR700 conjugates, have been reported in preclinical and clinical settings. EGFR is a representative target on cancer cells for antibodies, followed by HER2, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), VEGFR2, cadherin-17, and ICAM-1 in PIT [97]. In addition to the antibody, a partner of IR700 for a conjugate of PIT that has been reported so far includes an affibody (a small protein mimetic [6-7 kDa]) for HER2-overexpressing breast cancer [92], an LMW ligand composed of Glu-Urea-Lys for prostate cancer with prostate-specific membrane antigen [98], and a lection for CEA-expressing pancreatic cancer [99,100]. For CEA, a novel approach with affimer proteins and cubosomes has also been reported in colorectal cancer cell lines [89]. For PIT of CCA, there have been two preclinical reports: one used anti-EGFR and HER2 antibodies [88], while another used an antibody against trophoblast cell surface antigen 2/tumor-associated calcium signal transducer 2 (TROP2), which is overexpressed in trophoblast cancer and many epithelial cancers, including pancreatic cancer and CCA [101]. In both studies, PIT specifically killed the target-expressing CCA cells in vitro and significantly suppressed the growth of CCA in murine xenograft models after NIR irradiation.
