# A Literature Review of Nurses Challenges and Barriers in Assisting Patients and Families Facing Breaking Bad News

CorpusID: 261502087 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4738902082e01e726ecdc91916102c054b3b0413](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4738902082e01e726ecdc91916102c054b3b0413)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Before BBN
Number of References: 11

(p6.0) [16] Therefore, the nurse must be able to establish a trusting and meaningful relationship with the patient and find out the patient's wishes. [17,18]In addition, the nurse also has a role in anticipating the patient's and family's reactions to the bad news that will be delivered. [19]ring the BBN The role of the nurse during the BBN is to be present during the breaking of bad news. [15,16,19]During the BBN process, the nurse must recognise and pay attention to the special emotional needs of patients and caregivers. [17,20]Studies report that nurses also break bad news directly to patients and families. [15,21]
## (s10) Barriers
Number of References: 17

(p10.0) The most reported barriers by nurses were a lack of communication skills. [16,18,21,24,25]Nurses also had concerns about the patient's emotional reactions and how to manage them. [16,17,21,24,25]In addition, nurses also had barriers in building trusting relationships with patients due to lack of time, lack of knowledge about the patient's illness, and lack of experience. [15,16,18,21,25]Nurses also did not always feel prepared when asked by patients or patients' families. [20,22]
## (s12) Barriers in delivering BBN
Number of References: 15

(p12.0) Ineffective communication skills pose the greatest barrier for nurses in imparting bad news.Weak communication can lead to high levels of stress. [14,29]Carers may carry the added burden of feeling because they conceal information from patients to protect them from further distress. [30,31]Many factors influence the delivery of bad news such as complex communication and managing negative patient reactions, [32] tailoring delivery to meet individual patient preferences and cultural needs, [33,34] managing their own emotional reactions [35] and working within the time and resource demands of their workplace. [16][38][39] Hence, the nurse is often the first point of contact when the patient is transitioning to death. [40]The nurse's method is to deliver bad news when the patient is alone or with a partner. [25,41]The provision of effective BBN can also be prepared since patients receive early palliative care, [42] not only improving their quality of life but also preparing them to face the worst conditions.However, it is important to note that this is the finding of a single study and further research is needed to draw more definitive conclusions.
