# Influence Maximization in Social Networks: A Survey

CorpusID: 261682643 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3e44da9a4615702857f23e329e12595c238ae137](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3e44da9a4615702857f23e329e12595c238ae137)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s13) Voter Model.
Number of References: 6

(p13.0) In the original Voter model [32,65], every node in a social network has two states, active and inactive, denoted as 0 and 1, respectively. Given an undirected social network = ( , ), which may contain self-loops, for a node ∈ , we denote by N ( ) the set of neighbors of in (which includes itself since has loops). Starting from an arbitrary 0/1 assignment to the nodes of , at each step ≥ 1, each node picks its neighbor uniformly at random and adopts its opinion. Formally, starting form any initial node assignment X 0 = , we inductively define

(p13.1) The Voter model is a random process whose behavior depends on the initial assignment X 0 . For the IM problem under the Voter model, ∈ X indicates that the node has adopted the information we wish to advertise. An example of influence propagation under the Voter model is shown in Fig. 2c. At = 0:   [135]. In the SIR model, a node has three states, namely susceptible, infected, and recovered, and only infected individuals can infect susceptible individuals, while recovered individuals can neither infect nor be infected by others. That is, an individual is never infected by a disease multiple times. In the SIS model [54,64,83], once a node has been activated as susceptible at time , it will remain susceptible or become infected at + 1. One infected node could become susceptible from infected status. Fig. 2d is an example of information propagation under the SIS model. Here, at = 0:
## (s14) Heat Diffusion Model.
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) In social networks, early users (seed nodes) of products act as heat sources. Early users spread the influence to others as if a heat source continuously radiates heat, and the affected people will adopt the product. Ma et al. [102] proposed the Heat Diffusion Model (HDM), which models the process of information diffusion as a physical phenomenon, heat diffusion. The HDM-based IM problem is defined as selecting a seed set and setting the initial heat for each node at the beginning of the thermal diffusion process. [27,102] proposed heuristic algorithms to solve IM problem under HDM.
## (s17) Approximate Algorithms
Number of References: 2

(p17.0) Kempe et al. [72] presented the first approximate algorithm based on hill-climbing strategy. Since then most of the existing IM algorithms follow the hill-climbing framework, which is illustrated in Algorithm 1. The algorithm is initialized with an empty seed set . It iteratively selects a node into if provides the maximum marginal gain to the influence function ( ) w.r.t. the partial solution . The algorithm terminates when there are distinct nodes in . The theoretical guarantee of this greedy framework depends on whether ( ) is a non-negative, monotone, submodular function. In particular, [72] proved that (·) is indeed so under some classical diffusion models such as IC and LT.
