# IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 1 A Survey on Multi-Behavior Sequential Recommendation

CorpusID: 261339556 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca9f41ad1c3f0ed51781eef6cfcd035bf4d01d1a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca9f41ad1c3f0ed51781eef6cfcd035bf4d01d1a)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s14) Works
Number of References: 6

(p14.0) Data Perspective Model Perspective Features RLBL [14] A sequence of (item, behavior) pairs Local Capture the influence of heterogeneous behaviors by utilizing a behavior transition matrix. RIB [26] A sequence of (item, behavior) pairs Local Leverage GRU and attention mechanism simultaneously.

(p14.1) BINN [22] A sequence of (item, behavior) pairs Local Design the CLSTM and the Bi-CLSTM, where the behavior vector is as context in LSTM. CBS [63] Some behavior-specific subsequences of items Local Design of models with and without shared parameters for behaviors simultaneously; towards the next-basket recommendation. DIPN [64] Some behavior-specific subsequences of items Local Leverage GRU and attention mechanism simultaneously; behaviors are specific, including swipe, touch and browse interactive behavior. HUP [27] A sequence of (item, behavior) pairs
## (s19) Works
Number of References: 6

(p19.0) Data Perspective Model Perspective Features DMT [23] Some behavior-specific subsequences of items Local + Global Use target item as query; Consider implicit feedback bias by a bias deep neural network. DFN [84] Some behavior-specific subsequences of items Local + Global Use target item as query; Consider implicit negative feedback noise by an attention network . DUMN [88] Some behavior-specific subsequences of items Local Consider implicit feedback noise; Use memory network to obtain the long-term user preference. FeedRec [25] Some behavior-specific subsequences of items and a sequence of (item, behavior) pairs Local + Global Consider implicit feedback noise by an attention network; Consider multiple patterns of the multi-behavior sequences.

(p19.1) NextIP [86] Some behavior-specific subsequences of items and a sequence of (item, behavior) pairs Local + Global Treat the problem as the item prediction task and the purchase prediction task; Consider multiple patterns of the multibehavior sequences. MB-STR [87] A sequence of (item, behavior) pairs
