# Role of Nanotechnology in Cosmeceuticals: A Review of Recent Advances

CorpusID: 29160171 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e984b775edc55485335763abe34a84279d854651](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e984b775edc55485335763abe34a84279d854651)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s6) Dendrimers. The term "dendrimer" arises from two
Number of References: 4

(p6.0) Greek words: namely, "Dendron" that means tree and "Meros" meaning part. Dendrimers are highly branched, unimolecular, globular, micellar nanostructure, and multivalent nanoparticles whose synthesis theoretically affords monodisperse compounds. A dendrimer is typically built from a core on which one or a number of successive series of branches are engrafted in an arborescent way and often adopts a spherical three-dimensional morphology [108]. Generation of the dendrimer is determined by total number of series of branches: if it has one series of branches, then it is first-generation dendrimer; if it has two series, then it is second generation and so on. They are extremely small in size, having diameters in the range of 2-20 nm [109]. Its other properties like monodispersity, polyvalence, and stability make it an ideal carrier for drug delivery with precision and selectivity. To attach biologically active substances for targeting purpose terminal groups are modified. Dendrimers provide controlled release from the inner core and drugs are incorporated in interior as well as being attached on the surface [110]. Dendrimers are new class of macromolecular architecture and are also being used as nanotechnology based cosmeceuticals for various applications like in hair care, skin care, and nail care. Dendrimers have utility in various cosmetic products like shampoos, sunscreen, hair-styling gels, and antiacne products [111]. Companies like L'Oreal, The Dow Company, Wella, and Unilever have several patents for application of dendrimers in cosmeceuticals. Descriptions of advantages of dendrimers are represented in Figure 11.
## (s11) Skin
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Care. Cosmeceuticals for skin care products ameliorate the skin texture and functioning by stimulating the growth of collagen by combating harmful effect of free radicals. They make the skin healthier by maintaining the structure of keratin in good condition. In sunscreen products zinc oxide and titanium dioxide nanoparticles are most effective minerals which protect the skin by penetrating into the deep layers of skin and make the product less greasy, less smelly, and transparent [129]. SLNs, nanoemulsions, liposomes, and niosomes are extensively used in moisturizing formulations as they form thin film of humectants and retain moisture for prolonged span. Marketed antiaging nanocosmeceutical products assimilating nanocapsules, liposomes, nanosomes, and nanospheres manifest benefits such as collagen renewal, skin rejuvenation, and firming and lifting the skin [130].
## (s12) Hair
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) Care. Hair nanocosmeceutical products include shampoos, conditioning agents, hair growth stimulants, coloring, and styling products. Hair follicle, shaft targeting, and increased quantity of active ingredient are achieved by intrinsic properties and unique size of nanoparticles. Nanoparticles subsuming in shampoos seals moisture within the cuticles by optimizing resident contact time with scalp and hair follicles by forming protective film [131]. Conditioning nanocosmeceuticals agents have purposive function of imparting softness, shine, silkiness, and gloss and enhance disentangling of hair. Novel carriers like niosomes, microemulsion, nanoemulsion, nanospheres, and liposomes have major function of repairing damaged cuticles, restoring texture and gloss, and making hair nongreasy, shiny, and less brittle [132].
## (s15) Toxicity of Nanoparticles Used in Cosmeceuticals
Number of References: 4

(p15.0) Number of workforce and customers exposed to nanoparticles are escalating because of increasing production and application of the wide diversity of cosmeceuticals products that contain nanomaterials. Despite their huge potential benefit, little is known about the short-term and long-term health effects in the environment and organisms. Due to health hazards, product functionality, and environmental concerns, there may be possible constrains. Concerns have been raised on the possible dangers which may arise on the skin penetration of nanomaterials after their application to the skin [136]. Toxicity of nanoparticles immensely depends on variety of factors like surface properties, coating, structure, size, and ability to aggregate and these factors can be altered and manipulated in the manufacturing process. Nanoparticles having poor solubility have been shown to cause cancer and can exhibit more pronounced toxicity [137]. Health hazard may arise due to the surface area of nanoparticles when compared with the same mass concentration of large particles. Toxicity also depends on the chemical composition of nanoparticles which is absorbed on the skin [138]. There is a relationship between particle size and toxicity: the smaller the size of the nanoparticles, the greater the surface area to volume ratio, due to which there is higher chemical and biological reactivity. Health hazard caused by nanoparticles to the humans depends on the degree of exposure and the route through which they access the body. Inhalation, ingestion, and dermal routes are the possible routes by which humans can get exposure to the nanoparticles [139]. Routes of exposure of nanoparticles are given in Figure 13.
## (s18) Dermal
Number of References: 5

(p18.0) Routes. Intracellular, transcellular, and transfollicular are the three pathways by which infiltration across the skin occurs. The dermal exposure of lesser size particles <10 nm can penetrate more easily and are disastrous than greater ones >30 nm. There are possibilities that nanoparticle penetration could be affected by skin barrier alterations such as scrapes, wounds, and dermatitis conditions [148]. Prolonged erythema, eschar formation, and oedema were reported with nanoparticles less than 10 nm. Fullerenes are currently being used in cosmeceuticals like moisturizers and face creams but the toxicity related to them remains poorly understood. Report by Professor Robert F. has identified that face creams which have fullerenes incorporated are found to cause damage in the brain of the fish and have toxic effects in the liver cells in humans [149]. Some studies demonstrated that fullerene-based peptides had the capability of penetrating intact skin and their traversal into dermis could be easy due to mechanical stressor. Quantum dots taken intradermally could penetrate regional lymph nodes and lymphatics. There are proven studies that engineered nanoparticles like single or multiwall carbon nanotubes, quantum dots with surface coating, and nanoscale titania are able to alter gene or protein expression and have lethal effects on epidermal keratinocytes and fibroblast [150]. Currently there are few issues regarding the impact of nanoparticles of titanium dioxide and zinc oxide in sunscreens on health, safety, and environment. Increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), including free radicals, is due to greater surface area, greater chemical reactivity, and smaller size. Free radical and reactive oxygen species production is the primary mechanism for toxicity of nanoparticles. Titanium dioxide and zinc oxide generate ROS and free radical when exposed to ultraviolet (UV) radiations, which have potential in inflammation and oxidative stress and can significantly damage membranes, proteins, RNA, DNA, and fats within cells [151]. A research on TiO 2 nanoparticles toxicity demonstrated that when these nanoparticles subcutaneously given to the pregnant mice, they were transferred to the offspring and there was a reduced sperm production in male offspring and brain damage as well. Nanoparticles of cobalt-chromium have potential that they can cross the skin barrier and damage fibroblast in humans [152].
