# A Survey on the Application of Evolutionary Algorithms for Mobile Multihop Ad Hoc Network Optimization Problems

CorpusID: 33413610 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9444234623466118dfae0512bbb58de591a27929](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9444234623466118dfae0512bbb58de591a27929)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s2) MANETs.
Number of References: 7

(p2.0) MANETs represent the original idea of the multihop paradigm [1]. That is, the establishment of an ad hoc network formed by wireless devices without requiring a central system. The original idea was to replicate the wired communications such as TCP/UDP and IP based protocols in MANETs. However, this original idea was not possible due to the intrinsic characteristics of MANETs in terms of mobility and limited node's transmission ranges. Both features make the topology of MANETs extremely changeable. Consequently, the protocols originally designed for static network like the Internet cannot be easily adapted to MANETs. This fact led to a high research on new protocols tailored for MANETs [2]. The routing layer has been by far the most studied one [8]. There are some good surveys on routing protocols in the literature [8,9]. The basic objective is to find the suitable communication path between a mobile source node and one or several mobile destination nodes. In addition, a good routing protocol must be able to deal with route and link breakages. The basic mechanism to find routes is, namely, broadcasting. This is an all-to-all communication procedure by which each node in the network retransmits the incoming packets at least once. Broadcasting algorithms for MANETs have also been widely studied [10,11].
## (s3) VANETs.
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) VANETs represent an evolution of multihop paradigm [17]. The idea is to incorporate wireless transceiver into vehicles so that they can communicate with each other. These types of communication are named Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V) communications and they represent the main communications in VANETs. However, there exist communications between the vehicle and the road infrastructure that are called Vehicle to Infrastructure (V2I) communications. In VANETs both routing protocols and broadcasting algorithm have been widely studied [18]. Broadcasting algorithms have attracted more attention due to the fact that collision avoidance is one of the main applications of VANETs. In this scenario, a car tries to inform another incoming car by transmitting a broadcast packet. Therefore, an efficient broadcasting algorithm is primordial in VANETs. Another important feature of VANETs is that power consumption is not a design parameter in VANETs since vehicles can recharge their batteries on the fly.
## (s14) Broadcasting Algorithms.
Number of References: 12

(p14.0) Broadcasting is basic all-toall communication mechanism widely used in MANETs [69]. The main objective of a broadcasting algorithm is to efficiently disseminate a message throughout the network. Despite its simplicity, the design of broadcasting algorithms has drawn the attention of the ad hoc community for the last two decades [69,70]. The simplest broadcasting algorithm called flooding has been demonstrated many times to be inefficient, causing the well-known broadcast storm problem [71]. Many broadcasting algorithms mostly based on topological parameters can be found in the literature [69,70] such as the density of nodes, relative distance, and counterbased mechanisms. Recently, evolutionary algorithms like genetic algorithms have been used to optimize the design of broadcasting algorithms. In [31], the authors solve the wellknown minimum energy broadcast NP-hard problem using a hybrid evolutionary algorithm. The idea determines the set of forwarder nodes in a MANET that guarantees maximum dissemination with the minimum energy consumption.

(p14.1) In [32], the authors use the widely used NSGA-II multiobjective algorithm [72] to optimize the design of a broadcasting algorithm based on similarity/dissimilarity coefficients. They maximize the reachability and minimize the number of retransmissions and the delay of the broadcasting algorithm. They simulate their approach in a realistic disaster scenario like the disaster area mobility model [73].

(p14.2) In [33], the design of the AEDB broadcasting algorithm [74] is optimized by using parallel multiobjective optimization algorithm. The AEDB algorithm is based on the relative Euclidean distance between the sender and the receiver of the packet. The idea is to favor nodes located at higher distances from the sender to reduce the number of retransmissions. The objectives for the broadcasting algorithm are to maximize the reachability and to minimize the energy used, the retransmissions, and the delay. They use AEDB-MLS, a multistart population-based local search algorithm that maintains several distributed populations. It is a massively parallel algorithm in which every solution in every population is simultaneously improved by the parallel application of an iterative local search procedure.
## (s21) 4.3.
Number of References: 6

(p21.0) DTNs. DTN research has been gaining steam in recent years, due to the great increase in the number of existing mobile devices and their ubiquitousness. A thorough analysis of DTNs was done by Conti et al. [81], where functions such as message forwarding, security, data dissemination, and mobility models are analyzed. Several dissemination algorithms are also reviewed, among them BUBBLE Rap [82], PROPICMAN [83], or HIBOp [84]. A taxonomy for data dissemination algorithms [21] splits them based on network infrastructure, node properties, content characteristics, and social awareness. In [85] the authors classify routing protocols in DTNs as context-oblivious, partially context-aware, and fully context-aware protocols. In this classification, the level of context information that nodes have available is the key component to make the distinction among the routing approaches.
