# Optical Fiber Grating Hydrogen Sensors: A Review

CorpusID: 3376811 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8925542009d703b4d8e44505cf1936cfd87d2afa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8925542009d703b4d8e44505cf1936cfd87d2afa)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s3) Optical Fiber Grating Hydrogen Sensor Based on Exothermic Reaction and Gasochromic Effect of Sensitive Materials
Number of References: 5

(p3.0) At present the fastest response FBG hydrogen sensor is based on Pt-loaded WO3 undergoing an exothermic reaction in hydrogen atmosphere [36,37]. The chemical reaction can be expressed as the following equation [40]: In the following year, FBG with a spiral groove sputtered with Pd/Ag film (in Figure 7), which was proposed by the same group, was used for hydrogen detection [35]. At room temperature, double spiral micro-structured FBG exhibits 51.5 pm/% responding to hydrogen in air, which is 7.5 times higher that of unprocessed FBG. In addition, the hydrogen sensor can detect 0.2% hydrogen in air. These results indicate the sensitivity of the sensor can be greatly improved by increasing the area for film deposition. fiber, followed by sputtering 520 nm of Pd/Ag composite film on their grating section (Figure 6b). At room temperature (25 째C), the maximum sensitivity of the micro-machined FBG was increased more than 350% when compared with the standard FBG, which can be attributed to the larger surface area of fiber coated with Pd/Ag composite film. A similar phenomenon was observed when the ambient temperature was increased to 35 째C. Notably, the sensitivity the hydrogen sensor can be increased more 10 times at the higher operating temperature. For instance, the wavelength shift of 75-mW micro-machined FBG coated with 520 nm of Pd/Ag composite film was only 47 pm towards 4% hydrogen at 25 째C, while at 35 째C this was increased to nearly 700 pm. More attention should be concentrated on this phenomenon, which demonstrated that much higher sensitivity can be achieved by increasing the operating temperature of hydrogen-sensitive film. In the following year, FBG with a spiral groove sputtered with Pd/Ag film (in Figure 7), which was proposed by the same group, was used for hydrogen detection [35]. At room temperature, double spiral micro-structured FBG exhibits 51.5 pm/% responding to hydrogen in air, which is 7.5 times higher that of unprocessed FBG. In addition, the hydrogen sensor can detect 0.2% hydrogen in air. These results indicate the sensitivity of the sensor can be greatly improved by increasing the area for film deposition. 
