# A Survey of Localization in Wireless Sensor Network

CorpusID: 34657644 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/176741595faeaec7d056b13dfa415224502fc329](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/176741595faeaec7d056b13dfa415224502fc329)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s2) Single-Target/Source Localization in Wireless Sensor
Number of References: 11

(p2.0) Network. The source localization methods have a wide range of possible applications. The outdoor application includes vehicle or aircraft localization. In an indoor environment, this method could track the human speakers. In underwater environment, it can be used to locate the large sea animals and ships. There are several ways to estimate the source location: energy-based, angle of arrival (AOA) [2], time difference of arrival (TDOA) [3][4][5][6]. As an inexpensive approach, energy-based method is an attractive method because it requires low hardware configuration. In this survey, we focus on the energy-based source localization. Single-source localization can be further divided into: energy decay model-based localization algorithm and modelindependent localization algorithms.

(p2.1) (1) Decay Model-Based Localization Algorithm. Equation (1) shows the decay model in [7][8][9]. The received signal strength at ith sensor during time interval t can be written as

(p2.2) where g i represents the gain factor of the ith sensor. We assume that g i = 1. S(t) is the signal energy at 1 meter away. And d ik is the Euclidean distance between the ith sensor and the source. In addition n i is the measurement noise modeled as zero mean white Gaussian with variance σ 2 i , namely, n i ∼ N (0, σ 2 i ). Although this energy decay model appears quite simplistic, it is the one commonly used in the literature. Since the objective function of single-source localization method has multiple local optima and saddle points [7], the authors formulated the problem as a convex feasibility problem and proposed a distributed version of the projection onto convex sets method. A weighted nonlinear least squares and weighted linear least squares methods [8] were proposed to estimate the location of the target. In [9], the authors proposed normalized incremental subgradient algorithm to solve the energy-based sensor network source localization problem where the decay factor of the energy decay method is unknown.
## (s6) Range-Based Localization.
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) The classic methods to estimate the indoor location are time of arrival (TOA), time difference of arrival (TDOA), angle of arrival (AOA), and received signal strength (RSS). TOA method measures travel times of signals between nodes. TDOA method locates by measuring the signals' arrival time difference between anchor nodes and unknown node. It is able to achieve high ranging accuracy, but requires extra hardware and consumes more energy. As an inexpensive approach, RSS has established the mathematical model on the basis of path loss attenuation with distance [22,23], and it requires relatively low configuration and energy. We can obtain the distance between the beacon node and unknown node through the above three measurement methods. We set the position of beacon node is (x 1 , y 1 ), . . . , (x N , y N ), and the position of unknown node is X = [x, y] T . d i is the estimated distance between ith beacon node and unknown node. We can obtain the coordinate matrix of the unknown node as follows:
## (s9) Pattern Matching Method.
Number of References: 6

(p9.0) Pattern matching localization, also called map-based or Fingerprint algorithm, is one of the most viable solutions for range-free localization methods recently. The fingerprint localization involves two phases. During the first phase, the received signals at selected locations are recorded in an offline database called radio map. Then, the second phase, it works at the online state. The pattern matching algorithms are used to infer the location of unknown node by matching the current observed signal features to the prerecorded values on the map [38,39]. Fang et al. [40] proposed a novel method to extract the feature of robust signals to efficiently mitigate the multipath effect. This method enhances the robustness under a multipath fading condition and is commonly used for the indoor environments. Swangmuang and Krishnamurthy [41] presented a new analytical model that applies proximity graphs for approximating the probability distribution of error distance, which recorded a location fingerprint database by using the received signals. In addition, there are many problems under the indoor positioning environment as following: how to capture the character of propagation signal in the complex dynamic environment and how to accommodate the receiver gain difference of different mobile devices and so on. Wang et al. [42] solved these problems by modeling them as common mode noise and then developed a location algorithm based on a novel differential radio map. Gogolak et al. [43] proposed fingerprint localization methodology based on neural network which is applied in the real experimental indoor environment. It provided the necessary measurement results to the fingerprint localization.
## (s12) NLOS Identification/Classification. As shown in
Number of References: 3

(p12.0) Wylie and Holtzman [45] proposed a method based on parameter hypothesis test which determines the measurements whether belong to NLOS by comparing the NLOS variance with the LOS variance. It has a simple criterion but needs the detailed environment parameter and a prior knowledge. Borras et al. [46] investigated NLOS identification by using binary hypothesis test and generalized likelihood ratio for identifying NLOS error. It proposed a proper decision criteria and its premise is that the NLOS error is Gaussian distributed with a large variance. Based on Wylie-Holtzman algorithm, Mazuelas et al. [47] proposed an improvement by using NLOS ratio estimation and it will be able to correct the NLOS measurements from the previous knowledge of this ratio.
