# The comparative pathology of severe acute respiratory syndrome and avian influenza A subtype H5N1-a review

CorpusID: 34320905 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f6158fddb2b1d9ab4bcb748a3539d2280e380712](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f6158fddb2b1d9ab4bcb748a3539d2280e380712)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Review of the pathology of avian influenza A H5N1
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) There were very few reports on the pathology of H5N1 infection. Three autopsied cases were reported from Hong Kong [4,26]. For the outbreak in Southeast Asia, pathologic findings were reported on 5 fatal cases from Thailand [27][28][29][30]. Thus, this review consisted of only 8 patients, which are summarized in Table 2. The pathologic material used in the illustration was from cases 1 and 3, which were examined by the authors. Thus, there is a severe limitation on the pathologic data available for H5N1. The gross pulmonary findings showed extensive consolidation with varying degree of hemorrhage. In a fatal case on day 10 (case 3), the lungs were reddish brown, solid, and weighed more than 1000 g (right, 1170 g; left, 1020 g). There was also bilateral lightly blood-stained effusion (right, 700 mL; left, 900 mL). The pulmonary pathology was diffuse alveolar damage plus interstitial lymphoplasmacytic infiltration and fibrosis. The DAD was in the acute exudative phase ( Fig. 3A and B) for patients dying in the first 2 weeks and was in organizing phase ( Fig. 3D and E) for patients dying in the third week or later. In the acute phase, the major cell types in the alveoli were macrophages, neutrophil, and activated lymphocyte (Fig. 3C). Necrotizing alveoli were noted in the acute phase (Fig. 3B), and the destruction of alveoli explained the patchy fibrosis without regenerating pneumocytes ( Fig. 3D and F). There was also interstitial fibrosis. The fibrosis appeared hyaline and paucicellular. Specifically, intra-alveolar fibrosis with a BOOP-like pattern was not observed, in contrast to that of SARS (Fig. 1C, D, and F). Reactive hyperplasia of pneumocytes was present in the organizing phase (Fig. 3F) and viral inclusion was absent. Multinucleated cells were not described. Bronchiolitis with squamous metaplasia was seen. Honeycomb dilatation was noted in a patient dying at 1 month (case 1). Superinfection by aspergillosis was noted in 1 patient (case 5). The authors studied the immunophenotypes of the lymphoid cells in the lungs of case 3. CD3-reactive T cells were more numerous than CD20-reactive B cells. CD4reactive T helper-inducer cells appeared more than CD8reactive T suppressor-cytotoxic cells. Some of the larger activated lymphoid cells were reactive with the activation marker CD30. These cells were also observed in the lymphoreticular system including the spleen (Fig. 4C), tonsil, and lymph node. In the lung, CD56-reactive natural killer cells were rare.
