# A review of human sensory dynamics for application to models of driver steering and speed control

CorpusID: 3578825 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/954c95c6af0a9ab215755667c7f9f0c424b1cb98](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/954c95c6af0a9ab215755667c7f9f0c424b1cb98)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s6) Vestibular system
Number of References: 22

(p6.0) There is some disagreement in the literature as to the relative importance of the vestibular system in nonvisual motion perception. Studies measuring thresholds of human motion perception in the dark often assume that the influence of the vestibular system is much larger than that of the somatosensors (Benson et al. 1986(Benson et al. , 1989Grabherr et al. 2008;Soyka et al. 2012Soyka et al. , 2009Soyka et al. , 2011Kingma 2005). However, Gianna et al. (1996) found that perception thresholds for subjects with vestibular deficiencies were not significantly higher than for normal subjects, and Bronstein and Hood (1986) found that neck proprioception largely replaced vestibular function in vestibular deficient subjects for head rotations relative to the body. In contrast, Mallery et al. (2010) found that a subject with vestibular deficiencies had rotational velocity thresholds an order of magnitude higher than those of normal subjects and Valko et al. (2012) found that vestibular deficient subjects had significantly higher perception thresholds in four different motion axes. The relative importance of the vestibular and somatosensory systems may depend on the precise nature of the stimuli; however, it does appear that the vestibular system is an important source of information for drivers.
## (s14) Time delays
Number of References: 4

(p14.0) As shown in Fig. 3, there are various ways in which delays are introduced between sensory stimuli being applied to a driver and the driver's control response being measured. Delay sources include receptor dynamics, nerve conduction, neural processing and neuromuscular dynamics. Various techniques have been used in the literature to measure delays in human response to sensory stimulation. The simplest of these is to apply a stimulus and measure the time taken for a physical response (such as pressing a button) to be recorded. Some studies have used more sophisticated methods of applying stimuli, such as galvanic vestibular stimulation (GVS) which bypasses the vestibular organs by applying an electrical stimulus directly to the nerves (Fitzpatrick and Day 2004). Other methods have been used to detect responses at other points in the process, such as measuring the VOR to identify the reflexive delay, using magnetoencephalography (MEG, Hämäläinen et al. 1993) or electroencephalography (EEG) to measure electrical impulses within the brain or using electromyography (EMG) to record electrical activity in the muscles. When interpreting sensory time delays measured in different studies using different techniques, it is important to consider which of the delay components shown in Fig. 3 are included in the measurement in each case. The aim of this section is to use results from the literature to estimate the total delay between stimulus and response for each sensory system. However, it can be difficult to separate the effects of pure time delays from lags due to the dynamics of the sensors and muscles and the time taken for signals to rise above noise levels . Nevertheless, results from the literature can be used to find an approximate estimate of the order of magnitude of time delays in human sensory systems.
## (s18) Visual thresholds
Number of References: 24

(p18.0) Various studies have measured perception thresholds and JNDs for the visual perception of self-motion. A difficulty in interpreting these results with any certainty is that they may well be dependent on the characteristics of the visual scene, such as the relative motion of stationary reference objects in the visual field, so it is not clear how generally applicable the results are. However, it may still be possible to find some useful information about the performance limits of the visual system. A driving simulator display was used by Bigler (2013) to measure yaw angle and lateral displacement thresholds. The display was not calibrated to give full-scale visual feedback so the absolute values of the measured thresholds may not be at the correct scale; however, the frequency response should not depend on the display scaling. The results are shown in Fig. 10. The visual transfer function given in Eq. 1 was used with the model of Soyka et al. (2011Soyka et al. ( , 2012 to give predicted thresholds, shown by the solid lines in Fig. 10. The model fits the thresholds very well, which is not surprising considering that the visual transfer function was found by fitting parameters to these results. The additive noise levels found are 0.0011 rad/s* for the yaw angular velocity and 0.032 m/s* for the lateral velocity.

(p18.1) A fit to the data was also found for a simple model of the visual system dynamics, with unity transfer functions between actual and perceived yaw and sway velocities. The fit using this model is shown by the dotted lines in Fig. 10, and the noise values found were 0.0013 rad/s* for the yaw angular velocity and 0.035 m/s* for the sway velocity. Visual JNDs have been measured for a range of yaw velocities, and Weber fractions of 7 % (de Bruyn and Orban 1988), 10 % A few studies have investigated the limits of visual perception of motion in the longitudinal direction. Reinterpretation of the data collected by Bremmer and Lappe (1999) gives a JND in displacement in the longitudinal direction of 450 mm, with a reference displacement of 4 m. This gives a Weber fraction of 10 %; however, extrapolating from measurements taken for this relatively short displacement of 4 m may be inaccurate. Monen and Brenner (1994) determined the smallest step increase in forward velocity necessary for the difference to be perceived within half a second and found a large Weber fraction of around 50 %.

(p18.2) Thresholds of visual perception involved in feedforward control have not been measured explicitly. Authié and Mestre (2012) measured JNDs in path curvature, finding a Weber fraction of approximately 11 %. Bigler (2013) used the results of Legge and Campbell (1981), who found the angular resolution of the retina to be around 1.5 arc min, to calculate additive and multiplicative noise variances for visual perception of road path geometry ahead of the vehicle. However, these results were found by asking subjects to indicate when they could detect a change in position of a small dot, which is likely to be significantly easier than picking out the full road geometry from a complicated visual scene.

(p18.3) Various studies have measured perception thresholds and JNDs for the visual perception of self-motion. A difficulty in interpreting these results with any certainty is that they may well be dependent on the characteristics of the visual scene, such as the relative motion of stationary reference objects in the visual field, so it is not clear how generally applicable the results are. However, it may still be possible to find some useful information about the performance limits of the visual system. A driving simulator display was used by Bigler (2013) to measure yaw angle and lateral displacement thresholds. The display was not calibrated to give full-scale visual feedback so the absolute values of the measured thresholds may not be at the correct scale; however, the frequency response should not depend on the display scaling. The results are shown in Fig. 10. The visual transfer function given in Eq. 1 was used with the model of Soyka et al. (2011Soyka et al. ( , 2012 to give predicted thresholds, shown by the solid lines in Fig. 10. The model fits the thresholds very well, which is not surprising considering that the visual transfer function was found by fitting parameters to these results. The additive noise levels found are 0.0011 rad/s* for the yaw angular velocity and 0.032 m/s* for the lateral velocity.

(p18.4) A fit to the data was also found for a simple model of the visual system dynamics, with unity transfer functions between actual and perceived yaw and sway velocities. The fit using this model is shown by the dotted lines in Fig. 10, and the noise values found were 0.0013 rad/s* for the yaw angular velocity and 0.035 m/s* for the sway velocity. Visual JNDs have been measured for a range of yaw velocities, and Weber fractions of 7 % (de Bruyn and Orban 1988), 10 % A few studies have investigated the limits of visual perception of motion in the longitudinal direction. Reinterpretation of the data collected by Bremmer and Lappe (1999) gives a JND in displacement in the longitudinal direction of 450 mm, with a reference displacement of 4 m. This gives a Weber fraction of 10 %; however, extrapolating from measurements taken for this relatively short displacement of 4 m may be inaccurate. Monen and Brenner (1994) determined the smallest step increase in forward velocity necessary for the difference to be perceived within half a second and found a large Weber fraction of around 50 %.

(p18.5) Thresholds of visual perception involved in feedforward control have not been measured explicitly. Authié and Mestre (2012) measured JNDs in path curvature, finding a Weber fraction of approximately 11 %. Bigler (2013) used the results of Legge and Campbell (1981), who found the angular resolution of the retina to be around 1.5 arc min, to calculate additive and multiplicative noise variances for visual perception of road path geometry ahead of the vehicle. However, these results were found by asking subjects to indicate when they could detect a change in position of a small dot, which is likely to be significantly easier than picking out the full road geometry from a complicated visual scene.
## (s19) Otolith thresholds
Number of References: 4

(p19.0) Perception thresholds have been measured extensively for translational accelerations in the horizontal plane. Measurements have been carried out in the longitudinal (X) and lateral (Y) directions, and the thresholds have been seen to be simi-lar in both directions (Benson et al. 1986); therefore, they are considered together. Thresholds have also been measured in the vertical (Z) direction (Nesti et al. 2014a); however, this is not so relevant for the car driver's control task.
## (s24) Coherence zones
Number of References: 2

(p24.0) The term 'coherence zone' was coined by van der Steen (1998) to describe the range of amplitudes of inputs to two sensory systems (such as visual and vestibular systems) which are perceived as consistent with each other, as shown in Fig. 14 Fig. 14 Coherence zone between visual and vestibular stimuli. For a given visual stimulus, there will be an upper and lower limit of vestibular stimulus amplitude which is perceived as coherent with the visual stimulus. The coherence zone width (CZW) is the difference between these two limits, and the point of mean coherence (PMC) is defined as the point halfway between the limits. The gain of mean coherence (GMC) is defined as the ratio of the vestibular amplitude to the visual amplitude at the PMC and represents the preferred gain between the visual and vestibular cues the point of mean coherence (PMC), coherence zone width (CZW) and gain of mean coherence (GMC) as shown.
## (s43) Vestibular system
Number of References: 22

(p43.0) There is some disagreement in the literature as to the relative importance of the vestibular system in nonvisual motion perception. Studies measuring thresholds of human motion perception in the dark often assume that the influence of the vestibular system is much larger than that of the somatosensors (Benson et al. 1986(Benson et al. , 1989Grabherr et al. 2008;Soyka et al. 2012Soyka et al. , 2009Soyka et al. , 2011Kingma 2005). However, Gianna et al. (1996) found that perception thresholds for subjects with vestibular deficiencies were not significantly higher than for normal subjects, and Bronstein and Hood (1986) found that neck proprioception largely replaced vestibular function in vestibular deficient subjects for head rotations relative to the body. In contrast, Mallery et al. (2010) found that a subject with vestibular deficiencies had rotational velocity thresholds an order of magnitude higher than those of normal subjects and Valko et al. (2012) found that vestibular deficient subjects had significantly higher perception thresholds in four different motion axes. The relative importance of the vestibular and somatosensory systems may depend on the precise nature of the stimuli; however, it does appear that the vestibular system is an important source of information for drivers.
## (s51) Time delays
Number of References: 4

(p51.0) As shown in Fig. 3, there are various ways in which delays are introduced between sensory stimuli being applied to a driver and the driver's control response being measured. Delay sources include receptor dynamics, nerve conduction, neural processing and neuromuscular dynamics. Various techniques have been used in the literature to measure delays in human response to sensory stimulation. The simplest of these is to apply a stimulus and measure the time taken for a physical response (such as pressing a button) to be recorded. Some studies have used more sophisticated methods of applying stimuli, such as galvanic vestibular stimulation (GVS) which bypasses the vestibular organs by applying an electrical stimulus directly to the nerves (Fitzpatrick and Day 2004). Other methods have been used to detect responses at other points in the process, such as measuring the VOR to identify the reflexive delay, using magnetoencephalography (MEG, Hämäläinen et al. 1993) or electroencephalography (EEG) to measure electrical impulses within the brain or using electromyography (EMG) to record electrical activity in the muscles. When interpreting sensory time delays measured in different studies using different techniques, it is important to consider which of the delay components shown in Fig. 3 are included in the measurement in each case. The aim of this section is to use results from the literature to estimate the total delay between stimulus and response for each sensory system. However, it can be difficult to separate the effects of pure time delays from lags due to the dynamics of the sensors and muscles and the time taken for signals to rise above noise levels . Nevertheless, results from the literature can be used to find an approximate estimate of the order of magnitude of time delays in human sensory systems.
## (s55) Visual thresholds
Number of References: 24

(p55.0) Various studies have measured perception thresholds and JNDs for the visual perception of self-motion. A difficulty in interpreting these results with any certainty is that they may well be dependent on the characteristics of the visual scene, such as the relative motion of stationary reference objects in the visual field, so it is not clear how generally applicable the results are. However, it may still be possible to find some useful information about the performance limits of the visual system. A driving simulator display was used by Bigler (2013) to measure yaw angle and lateral displacement thresholds. The display was not calibrated to give full-scale visual feedback so the absolute values of the measured thresholds may not be at the correct scale; however, the frequency response should not depend on the display scaling. The results are shown in Fig. 10. The visual transfer function given in Eq. 1 was used with the model of Soyka et al. (2011Soyka et al. ( , 2012 to give predicted thresholds, shown by the solid lines in Fig. 10. The model fits the thresholds very well, which is not surprising considering that the visual transfer function was found by fitting parameters to these results. The additive noise levels found are 0.0011 rad/s* for the yaw angular velocity and 0.032 m/s* for the lateral velocity.

(p55.1) A fit to the data was also found for a simple model of the visual system dynamics, with unity transfer functions between actual and perceived yaw and sway velocities. The fit using this model is shown by the dotted lines in Fig. 10, and the noise values found were 0.0013 rad/s* for the yaw angular velocity and 0.035 m/s* for the sway velocity. Visual JNDs have been measured for a range of yaw velocities, and Weber fractions of 7 % (de Bruyn and Orban 1988), 10 % A few studies have investigated the limits of visual perception of motion in the longitudinal direction. Reinterpretation of the data collected by Bremmer and Lappe (1999) gives a JND in displacement in the longitudinal direction of 450 mm, with a reference displacement of 4 m. This gives a Weber fraction of 10 %; however, extrapolating from measurements taken for this relatively short displacement of 4 m may be inaccurate. Monen and Brenner (1994) determined the smallest step increase in forward velocity necessary for the difference to be perceived within half a second and found a large Weber fraction of around 50 %.

(p55.2) Thresholds of visual perception involved in feedforward control have not been measured explicitly. Authié and Mestre (2012) measured JNDs in path curvature, finding a Weber fraction of approximately 11 %. Bigler (2013) used the results of Legge and Campbell (1981), who found the angular resolution of the retina to be around 1.5 arc min, to calculate additive and multiplicative noise variances for visual perception of road path geometry ahead of the vehicle. However, these results were found by asking subjects to indicate when they could detect a change in position of a small dot, which is likely to be significantly easier than picking out the full road geometry from a complicated visual scene.

(p55.3) Various studies have measured perception thresholds and JNDs for the visual perception of self-motion. A difficulty in interpreting these results with any certainty is that they may well be dependent on the characteristics of the visual scene, such as the relative motion of stationary reference objects in the visual field, so it is not clear how generally applicable the results are. However, it may still be possible to find some useful information about the performance limits of the visual system. A driving simulator display was used by Bigler (2013) to measure yaw angle and lateral displacement thresholds. The display was not calibrated to give full-scale visual feedback so the absolute values of the measured thresholds may not be at the correct scale; however, the frequency response should not depend on the display scaling. The results are shown in Fig. 10. The visual transfer function given in Eq. 1 was used with the model of Soyka et al. (2011Soyka et al. ( , 2012 to give predicted thresholds, shown by the solid lines in Fig. 10. The model fits the thresholds very well, which is not surprising considering that the visual transfer function was found by fitting parameters to these results. The additive noise levels found are 0.0011 rad/s* for the yaw angular velocity and 0.032 m/s* for the lateral velocity.

(p55.4) A fit to the data was also found for a simple model of the visual system dynamics, with unity transfer functions between actual and perceived yaw and sway velocities. The fit using this model is shown by the dotted lines in Fig. 10, and the noise values found were 0.0013 rad/s* for the yaw angular velocity and 0.035 m/s* for the sway velocity. Visual JNDs have been measured for a range of yaw velocities, and Weber fractions of 7 % (de Bruyn and Orban 1988), 10 % A few studies have investigated the limits of visual perception of motion in the longitudinal direction. Reinterpretation of the data collected by Bremmer and Lappe (1999) gives a JND in displacement in the longitudinal direction of 450 mm, with a reference displacement of 4 m. This gives a Weber fraction of 10 %; however, extrapolating from measurements taken for this relatively short displacement of 4 m may be inaccurate. Monen and Brenner (1994) determined the smallest step increase in forward velocity necessary for the difference to be perceived within half a second and found a large Weber fraction of around 50 %.

(p55.5) Thresholds of visual perception involved in feedforward control have not been measured explicitly. Authié and Mestre (2012) measured JNDs in path curvature, finding a Weber fraction of approximately 11 %. Bigler (2013) used the results of Legge and Campbell (1981), who found the angular resolution of the retina to be around 1.5 arc min, to calculate additive and multiplicative noise variances for visual perception of road path geometry ahead of the vehicle. However, these results were found by asking subjects to indicate when they could detect a change in position of a small dot, which is likely to be significantly easier than picking out the full road geometry from a complicated visual scene.
## (s56) Otolith thresholds
Number of References: 4

(p56.0) Perception thresholds have been measured extensively for translational accelerations in the horizontal plane. Measurements have been carried out in the longitudinal (X) and lateral (Y) directions, and the thresholds have been seen to be simi-lar in both directions (Benson et al. 1986); therefore, they are considered together. Thresholds have also been measured in the vertical (Z) direction (Nesti et al. 2014a); however, this is not so relevant for the car driver's control task.
## (s61) Coherence zones
Number of References: 2

(p61.0) The term 'coherence zone' was coined by van der Steen (1998) to describe the range of amplitudes of inputs to two sensory systems (such as visual and vestibular systems) which are perceived as consistent with each other, as shown in Fig. 14 Fig. 14 Coherence zone between visual and vestibular stimuli. For a given visual stimulus, there will be an upper and lower limit of vestibular stimulus amplitude which is perceived as coherent with the visual stimulus. The coherence zone width (CZW) is the difference between these two limits, and the point of mean coherence (PMC) is defined as the point halfway between the limits. The gain of mean coherence (GMC) is defined as the ratio of the vestibular amplitude to the visual amplitude at the PMC and represents the preferred gain between the visual and vestibular cues the point of mean coherence (PMC), coherence zone width (CZW) and gain of mean coherence (GMC) as shown.
