# Organizations Driving Positive Social Change: A Review and an Integrative Framework of Change Processes

CorpusID: 3500344 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00bdc92e5259414c4a8a993abc955c4b4bdac7a8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00bdc92e5259414c4a8a993abc955c4b4bdac7a8)

Fields: Sociology, Business

## (s2) Research Streams in Management
Number of References: 34

(p2.0) Three largely separate streams of management research, CSR, social entrepreneurship, and BoP, refer implicitly or explicitly to PSC. Research on CSR is broadly concerned with the organizational policies and actions that take societal expectations into account. See Aguinis and Glavas (2012) for a comprehensive review. CSR research has largely focused on (1) the instrumental, especially financial, returns of CSR activities for the firm and relating CSR to its competitive advantage (Carroll & Shabana, 2010;Wood, 2010); and (2) the individual, organizational, and institutional antecedents of firms' engagement in CSR (Aguilera, Rupp, Williams, & Ganapathi, 2007;J. L. Campbell, 2007). More recently, research on the political activity of firms started to examine how firms' activities influence policy making with the specific objective of benefiting society (Scherer & Palazzo, 2011). This trend importantly expands the scope of analysis beyond the firm. Yet empirical research exploring potential positive effects of organizations' CSR activities on targets outside the firm and on society remains scant. For exceptions identified in our review, see for example, Carrigan, Moraes, and Leek (2011) and Muller, Vermeulen, and Glasbergen (2012).

(p2.1) Research on social enterprises-organizations that leverage market-based activities as a means to address societal challenges (Mair & Marti, 2006)-often remains stuck in conceptual debates (see Dacin, Dacin, & Matear, 2010, for a review). Empirical contributions typically focus on understanding the emergence of social enterprises (Renko, 2013;Seelos, Mair, Battilana, & Dacin, 2011;Stephan, Uhlaner, & Stride, 2015) or on intraorganizational aspects such as governance, identity management, and organizing processes (Battilana, Sengul, Pache, & Model, 2015;Mair et al., 2015;Pache & Santos, 2013). Fewer studies link social enterprise activities to PSC (examples in our review are L. Jones & Snelgrove, 2006;Perrini, Vurro, & Costanzo, 2010;Seelos & Mair, 2005).
## (s4) Review Method and Overview of Reviewed Studies
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) We followed the systematic review procedure (Tranfield, Denyer, & Smart, 2003) and conducted broad searches of the academic and practitioner literature for empirical evidence linking organizational activities to PSC covering 20 years . Details can be found in the appendix. We screened 10,509 sources for inclusion and retained 118 sources, corresponding to 144 studies or pieces of evidence. We included qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-method research (51%, 21%, and 19%, respectively), primary research and reviews (90% and 10%), and published and unpublished research (see the appendix). Three researchers coded these studies, identifying how specific actions lead to PSC with the goal of understanding change mechanisms. This process also uncovered organizational practices. We worked iteratively, going back and forth between independently coding studies and team discussions until consensus was reached. We identified 17 mechanisms and 12 practices. The studies contained on average 2.6 mechanisms and 1.7 practices; 89% of studies contained mechanisms and 56% practices. We used the studies as data to generate our framework through induction, although we derived the PSC levers through abduction.
## (s19) Research Streams in Management
Number of References: 34

(p19.0) Three largely separate streams of management research, CSR, social entrepreneurship, and BoP, refer implicitly or explicitly to PSC. Research on CSR is broadly concerned with the organizational policies and actions that take societal expectations into account. See Aguinis and Glavas (2012) for a comprehensive review. CSR research has largely focused on (1) the instrumental, especially financial, returns of CSR activities for the firm and relating CSR to its competitive advantage (Carroll & Shabana, 2010;Wood, 2010); and (2) the individual, organizational, and institutional antecedents of firms' engagement in CSR (Aguilera, Rupp, Williams, & Ganapathi, 2007;J. L. Campbell, 2007). More recently, research on the political activity of firms started to examine how firms' activities influence policy making with the specific objective of benefiting society (Scherer & Palazzo, 2011). This trend importantly expands the scope of analysis beyond the firm. Yet empirical research exploring potential positive effects of organizations' CSR activities on targets outside the firm and on society remains scant. For exceptions identified in our review, see for example, Carrigan, Moraes, and Leek (2011) and Muller, Vermeulen, and Glasbergen (2012).

(p19.1) Research on social enterprises-organizations that leverage market-based activities as a means to address societal challenges (Mair & Marti, 2006)-often remains stuck in conceptual debates (see Dacin, Dacin, & Matear, 2010, for a review). Empirical contributions typically focus on understanding the emergence of social enterprises (Renko, 2013;Seelos, Mair, Battilana, & Dacin, 2011;Stephan, Uhlaner, & Stride, 2015) or on intraorganizational aspects such as governance, identity management, and organizing processes (Battilana, Sengul, Pache, & Model, 2015;Mair et al., 2015;Pache & Santos, 2013). Fewer studies link social enterprise activities to PSC (examples in our review are L. Jones & Snelgrove, 2006;Perrini, Vurro, & Costanzo, 2010;Seelos & Mair, 2005).
## (s21) Review Method and Overview of Reviewed Studies
Number of References: 2

(p21.0) We followed the systematic review procedure (Tranfield, Denyer, & Smart, 2003) and conducted broad searches of the academic and practitioner literature for empirical evidence linking organizational activities to PSC covering 20 years . Details can be found in the appendix. We screened 10,509 sources for inclusion and retained 118 sources, corresponding to 144 studies or pieces of evidence. We included qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-method research (51%, 21%, and 19%, respectively), primary research and reviews (90% and 10%), and published and unpublished research (see the appendix). Three researchers coded these studies, identifying how specific actions lead to PSC with the goal of understanding change mechanisms. This process also uncovered organizational practices. We worked iteratively, going back and forth between independently coding studies and team discussions until consensus was reached. We identified 17 mechanisms and 12 practices. The studies contained on average 2.6 mechanisms and 1.7 practices; 89% of studies contained mechanisms and 56% practices. We used the studies as data to generate our framework through induction, although we derived the PSC levers through abduction.
