# Variable selection -A review and recommendations for the practicing statistician

CorpusID: 36995051 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19f95708abff60963d78f0d34934ff1b09112a56](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19f95708abff60963d78f0d34934ff1b09112a56)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) Statistical models are useful tools applied in many research fields dealing with empirical data. They connect an outcome variable to one or several so-called independent variables (IVs; a list of abbreviations can be found in the Supporting Information Table  S1) and quantify the strength of association between IVs and outcome variable. By expressing these associations in simple, interpretable quantities, statistical models can provide insight to the way how multiple drivers cooperate to cause a specific outcome. In life sciences, many such mechanisms are still not well understood but it is often plausible to assume that they are multifactorial. Therefore, empirical data collection and multivariable analysis are important contributors to knowledge generation. experience, we assume that the statistician is responsible for statistical study design and analysis, but is working in an interdisciplinary environment with the possibility to discuss questions on the meaning of variables with applied life scientists, who often act as the principal investigators (PI). We will first review various statistical prerequisites for variable selection, and will subsequently use this toolbox to describe the most important variable selection methods that are applied in life sciences. We will discuss the impact of variable selection methods on properties of regression coefficients, confidence intervals, and p-values. Recommendations for practitioners and software developers are then given, and their application exemplified in analysis of a real study. Shmueli (2010) identified three main purposes of statistical models. Within predictive research questions, predictive (or prognostic) models have the aim to accurately predict an outcome value from a set of predictors. Explanatory models are used in etiological research and should explain differences in outcome values by differences in explanatory variables. Finally, descriptive models should "capture the association between dependent and independent variables" (Shmueli, 2010). In the life sciences, models of all three types are needed. Still, they differ in the way they are used and interpreted. While prognostic models focus on predictions, explanatory models are used to estimate (causal) effects of risk factors or exposures by means of adjusted effect estimation, and descriptive models can have elements of both.
## (s16) Model stability
Number of References: 7

(p16.0) A very important, but often ignored problem of data-driven variable selection is model stability, that is the robustness of the selected model to small perturbations of the data set (Sauerbrei, Buchholz, Boulesteix, & Binder, 2015). Bootstrap resampling with replacement or subsampling without replacement are valuable tools to investigate and quantify model stability of selected models (De Bin, Janitza, Sauerbrei, & Boulesteix, 2016;Sauerbrei & Schumacher, 1992). The basic idea is to draw resamples from the original data set and to repeat variable selection in each of the resamples. Important types of quantities that this approach can provide are (i) bootstrap inclusion frequencies to quantify how likely an IV is selected, (ii) sampling distributions of regression coefficients, (iii) model selection frequencies to quantify how likely a particular set of IVs is selected, and (iv) pairwise inclusion frequencies, evaluating whether pairs of (correlated) IVs are competing for selection.

(p16.1) Inclusion frequencies of any type will always depend on the chosen selection criteria, for example the significance level for including effects in a model, or the criterion for evaluating changes-in-estimate. The dependence of these quantities on the selection criterion can be visualized by model stability paths, as exemplified by Dunkler et al. (2014), Sauerbrei et al. (2015), or Meinshausen and Bühlmann (2010). The use of such resampling methods often leads to simpler final models (Sauerbrei, 1999).
