# Imaging modalities in head and neck cancer patients- overview

CorpusID: 40342612 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/395177140752475fef96facc64388f820cdfd770](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/395177140752475fef96facc64388f820cdfd770)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Detection of distant metastases
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) The reported incidence of clinically identified distant metastases in HNSCC at presentation varies from 2 to 18% (Bree et al., 2000). This incidence is directly related to the stage of disease, particularly to the presence and extension of lymph node metastases and loco-regional control and depends on the applied diagnostic methods (Bree et al., 2000). FDG-PET is a sensitive whole-body technique which has shown potential for the detection of distant metastases (Brouwer et al., 2006). Most studies that used FDG-PET in screening for distant metastases lack fair and controlled comparison between PET and other standard conventional imaging such as chest CT and/or an adequate gold standard such as reasonable follow up (Senft et al., 2008). FDG-PET had a higher sensitivity and had higher predictive positive value. One concern of using FDG-PET for screening is its cost. On the one hand FDG-PET is an expensive diagnostic technique, but on the other hand detection of distant metastases avoids futile expensive treatment. FDG-PET lacks precise anatomical resolution and may over diagnose some inflammatory conditions. By virtue of its high spatial resolution, multi-detector row CT( MDCT) may serve as a cross sectional imaging tool complementary to FDG-PET in evaluation of distant metastases in HNSCC patients and help to characterized FDG abnormalities (Remco de Bree, 2009). Combination of PET and CT in PET-CT is an attractive option, potentially combining the best of both worlds, and providing a onestop shop for the patient .In recent years, dual modality PET-CT has been used to provide accurately fused functional PET and morphological CT in a single examination (Remco de Bree, 2009).
