# Plantibodies in human and animal health: a review

CorpusID: 43630448 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bb42dfce1b5b42eeb4304e027159bbe0d1339a7e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bb42dfce1b5b42eeb4304e027159bbe0d1339a7e)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s1) Plantibodies: antibodies produced in plants
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) Around 1990, plants were first considered as a potential host for producing antibodies and the word "plantibody" was coined 8 . The term "plantibodies" describes the products of plants that have been genetically engineered to express antibodies and antibody fragments. With this technology, plants are being used as antibody factories (bioreactors), utilizing their endomembrane and secretory systems to produce large amounts of clinically viable proteins which can later be purified from the plant tissue. Antibodies can be expressed in plants as either full-length molecules or as smaller fragments. In essence, a plantibody is an antibody produced by genetically modified plants. Antibodies, originally derived from animals, are produced in plants by transforming the latter with animal antibody genes. Although plants do not naturally make antibodies, plantibodies have been shown to function in the same way as normal antibodies 10 . This concept of using plants as heterologous expression system for recombinant antibodies (plantibodies) is now more than two decades old.

(p1.1) Around 1990, plants were first considered as a potential host for producing antibodies and the word "plantibody" was coined 8 . The term "plantibodies" describes the products of plants that have been genetically engineered to express antibodies and antibody fragments. With this technology, plants are being used as antibody factories (bioreactors), utilizing their endomembrane and secretory systems to produce large amounts of clinically viable proteins which can later be purified from the plant tissue. Antibodies can be expressed in plants as either full-length molecules or as smaller fragments. In essence, a plantibody is an antibody produced by genetically modified plants. Antibodies, originally derived from animals, are produced in plants by transforming the latter with animal antibody genes. Although plants do not naturally make antibodies, plantibodies have been shown to function in the same way as normal antibodies 10 . This concept of using plants as heterologous expression system for recombinant antibodies (plantibodies) is now more than two decades old.
## (s2) Advantages of using plants for antibody production
Number of References: 24

(p2.0) Plantibodies work in a similar fashion to mammalian antibodies; however, compared to conventional methods using mammalian cells, the use of plants for antibody production offers several unique advantages. Firstly, plants are widespread, abundant, and grow quickly; they usually mature after one season of growth and it is possible to bring the product to the market within a short time. Therefore, the cost of antibodies produced by plants is substantially less than that from their animal counterparts 11 . Secondly, plants are less likely to introduce adventitious human or animal pathogens compared to mammalian cells or transgenic animals, thus reducing screening costs for viruses, prions and bacterial toxins. Unlike bacterial and other prokaryotic systems, plants share a similar endomembrane system and secretory pathway with human cells 9,12 . They do not trigger immune responses which animal antibodies are prone to doing when exposed to foreign/non-self agents and they also produce a relatively high yield of antibodies in a comparatively shorter time 13 . Additionally, plants are capable of synthesizing and assembling virtually any kind of antibody molecule, ranging from the smallest antigen-binding domains and fragments to full-length and even, multimeric antibodies 14 . Plants can be engineered to produce proteins efficiently, with significantly lower manufacturing costs than mammalian cell cultures 15 . Moreover, large-scale processing infrastructure is already in place for most crops. Hence, scale-up is rapid and efficient, requiring only the cultivation of additional land 13 . Also, plants that generate large biomass like corn and tobacco can produce large amounts of genetically engineered products while proteins can be indefinitely stored on seeds with little reduction in biological activity 11 .

(p2.1) Plantibodies work in a similar fashion to mammalian antibodies; however, compared to conventional methods using mammalian cells, the use of plants for antibody production offers several unique advantages. Firstly, plants are widespread, abundant, and grow quickly; they usually mature after one season of growth and it is possible to bring the product to the market within a short time. Therefore, the cost of antibodies produced by plants is substantially less than that from their animal counterparts 11 . Secondly, plants are less likely to introduce adventitious human or animal pathogens compared to mammalian cells or transgenic animals, thus reducing screening costs for viruses, prions and bacterial toxins. Unlike bacterial and other prokaryotic systems, plants share a similar endomembrane system and secretory pathway with human cells 9,12 . They do not trigger immune responses which animal antibodies are prone to doing when exposed to foreign/non-self agents and they also produce a relatively high yield of antibodies in a comparatively shorter time 13 . Additionally, plants are capable of synthesizing and assembling virtually any kind of antibody molecule, ranging from the smallest antigen-binding domains and fragments to full-length and even, multimeric antibodies 14 . Plants can be engineered to produce proteins efficiently, with significantly lower manufacturing costs than mammalian cell cultures 15 . Moreover, large-scale processing infrastructure is already in place for most crops. Hence, scale-up is rapid and efficient, requiring only the cultivation of additional land 13 . Also, plants that generate large biomass like corn and tobacco can produce large amounts of genetically engineered products while proteins can be indefinitely stored on seeds with little reduction in biological activity 11 .
## (s5) Methods of plantibody production
Number of References: 20

(p5.0) Various techniques have been developed to exploit plants as bioreactors for the production of pharmaceutical antibodies. One of the several methods for synthesizing plantibody is conventional method which uses transfor-mation and transient expression vector to introduce new genes into a host cell. The transformant cell is then introduced into the plant embryo and propagation of the plant in the open field allows large-scale production of antibodies 10 . Plant tissue culture is the most economic and time-saving method for production of antibodies from plants. To achieve this, plant cells in differentiated states are grown in bioreactors with foreign proteins harvested from either the biomass or culture liquid. Cell cultures contain fewer biological proteins or molecules (along with herbicides and pesticides) than open field plants or bacterial/yeast cell cultures, which may contaminate the product 20 . An experiment on tobacco plant established its breeding and sexual crossing as a method for production of plantibody. In this experiment, transformation was used to introduce kappa type of light chain into tobacco plants.

(p5.1) The same was done with gamma heavy chains. Upon crossing one plant with kappa-chains and another plant with gamma-chains, an antibody was produced that expressed both chains 14,18 .

(p5.2) Some researches suggest use of transgenic seeds in place of green plant tissue as plants cannot store antibodies for an extended period of time. Seeds contain a low level of proteases that allows proteins to be stored without degradation 22,23 .

(p5.3) Various techniques have been developed to exploit plants as bioreactors for the production of pharmaceutical antibodies. One of the several methods for synthesizing plantibody is conventional method which uses transfor-mation and transient expression vector to introduce new genes into a host cell. The transformant cell is then introduced into the plant embryo and propagation of the plant in the open field allows large-scale production of antibodies 10 . Plant tissue culture is the most economic and time-saving method for production of antibodies from plants. To achieve this, plant cells in differentiated states are grown in bioreactors with foreign proteins harvested from either the biomass or culture liquid. Cell cultures contain fewer biological proteins or molecules (along with herbicides and pesticides) than open field plants or bacterial/yeast cell cultures, which may contaminate the product 20 . An experiment on tobacco plant established its breeding and sexual crossing as a method for production of plantibody. In this experiment, transformation was used to introduce kappa type of light chain into tobacco plants.

(p5.4) The same was done with gamma heavy chains. Upon crossing one plant with kappa-chains and another plant with gamma-chains, an antibody was produced that expressed both chains 14,18 .

(p5.5) Some researches suggest use of transgenic seeds in place of green plant tissue as plants cannot store antibodies for an extended period of time. Seeds contain a low level of proteases that allows proteins to be stored without degradation 22,23 .
## (s7) ii. Vaccination
Number of References: 4

(p7.0) The production of proteins in plants is a major task in producing pharmaceutical polypeptides. Potential proteins produced include cytokines, hormones, enzymes, epidermal growth factors, interferons, human protein C, and pharmaceutical food stuff which are considered for oral immunization. Transgenic plants that express antigens in their edible tissue might be used as an inexpensive oral vaccine production and delivery system. Thus, immunization might be possible through consumption of an "edible vaccine" 19 , to provide active immunization. Also, plants produce different classes of proteins which are inexpensive and have increased pharmaceutical value. Due to these reasons, transgenic plants are better alternatives. Oral vaccines offer convenient immunization strategies for implementing universal vaccination programs throughout the world 28 . However, compared to vaccines, plantibodies have one major demerit -the introduced an-tibodies are flushed through a person's system relatively quickly, in a matter of hours or days, before the host's immune system has adapted to producing antibodies. Furthermore, vaccines elicit antibody production so that one or a few doses can protect the individual for year(s). By contrast, if a plantibody is being used to prevent a disease, the patient would need to take doses indefinitely. Other disadvantages of adoption of antibody expression in plants include gene silencing in some instances, different patterns of glycosylation, insufficient expression in some plants, allergies or allergic reactions to plant glycoproteins and other plant antigens 29 .

(p7.1) The production of proteins in plants is a major task in producing pharmaceutical polypeptides. Potential proteins produced include cytokines, hormones, enzymes, epidermal growth factors, interferons, human protein C, and pharmaceutical food stuff which are considered for oral immunization. Transgenic plants that express antigens in their edible tissue might be used as an inexpensive oral vaccine production and delivery system. Thus, immunization might be possible through consumption of an "edible vaccine" 19 , to provide active immunization. Also, plants produce different classes of proteins which are inexpensive and have increased pharmaceutical value. Due to these reasons, transgenic plants are better alternatives. Oral vaccines offer convenient immunization strategies for implementing universal vaccination programs throughout the world 28 . However, compared to vaccines, plantibodies have one major demerit -the introduced an-tibodies are flushed through a person's system relatively quickly, in a matter of hours or days, before the host's immune system has adapted to producing antibodies. Furthermore, vaccines elicit antibody production so that one or a few doses can protect the individual for year(s). By contrast, if a plantibody is being used to prevent a disease, the patient would need to take doses indefinitely. Other disadvantages of adoption of antibody expression in plants include gene silencing in some instances, different patterns of glycosylation, insufficient expression in some plants, allergies or allergic reactions to plant glycoproteins and other plant antigens 29 .
## (s8) iii. Immunomodulation
Number of References: 20

(p8.0) Immunomodulation is a molecular technique that allows the interference with cellular metabolism or pathogen infectivity by the ectopic expression of genes encoding antibodies or antibody fragments 30 . Applications relying on modulating antigen levels in vivo are dependent on expression and accumulation of antibodies in specific subcellular compartments and tissues. Passive immunization of plants reduces infection and symptoms caused by viruses and mollicutes, and significant progress has been made towards engineering resistance against insects 30,31 . Additionally, agro-infiltration of tobacco has been used to produce a diabody against carcinoembryonic antigen 32 . Other than applications in human healthcare, plantibodies may also prove useful as feed additives or for phytoremediation 19 .

(p8.1) Immunomodulation is a molecular technique that allows the interference with cellular metabolism or pathogen infectivity by the ectopic expression of genes encoding antibodies or antibody fragments 30 . Applications relying on modulating antigen levels in vivo are dependent on expression and accumulation of antibodies in specific subcellular compartments and tissues. Passive immunization of plants reduces infection and symptoms caused by viruses and mollicutes, and significant progress has been made towards engineering resistance against insects 30,31 . Additionally, agro-infiltration of tobacco has been used to produce a diabody against carcinoembryonic antigen 32 . Other than applications in human healthcare, plantibodies may also prove useful as feed additives or for phytoremediation 19 .
## (s13) Plantibodies: antibodies produced in plants
Number of References: 4

(p13.0) Around 1990, plants were first considered as a potential host for producing antibodies and the word "plantibody" was coined 8 . The term "plantibodies" describes the products of plants that have been genetically engineered to express antibodies and antibody fragments. With this technology, plants are being used as antibody factories (bioreactors), utilizing their endomembrane and secretory systems to produce large amounts of clinically viable proteins which can later be purified from the plant tissue. Antibodies can be expressed in plants as either full-length molecules or as smaller fragments. In essence, a plantibody is an antibody produced by genetically modified plants. Antibodies, originally derived from animals, are produced in plants by transforming the latter with animal antibody genes. Although plants do not naturally make antibodies, plantibodies have been shown to function in the same way as normal antibodies 10 . This concept of using plants as heterologous expression system for recombinant antibodies (plantibodies) is now more than two decades old.

(p13.1) Around 1990, plants were first considered as a potential host for producing antibodies and the word "plantibody" was coined 8 . The term "plantibodies" describes the products of plants that have been genetically engineered to express antibodies and antibody fragments. With this technology, plants are being used as antibody factories (bioreactors), utilizing their endomembrane and secretory systems to produce large amounts of clinically viable proteins which can later be purified from the plant tissue. Antibodies can be expressed in plants as either full-length molecules or as smaller fragments. In essence, a plantibody is an antibody produced by genetically modified plants. Antibodies, originally derived from animals, are produced in plants by transforming the latter with animal antibody genes. Although plants do not naturally make antibodies, plantibodies have been shown to function in the same way as normal antibodies 10 . This concept of using plants as heterologous expression system for recombinant antibodies (plantibodies) is now more than two decades old.
## (s14) Advantages of using plants for antibody production
Number of References: 24

(p14.0) Plantibodies work in a similar fashion to mammalian antibodies; however, compared to conventional methods using mammalian cells, the use of plants for antibody production offers several unique advantages. Firstly, plants are widespread, abundant, and grow quickly; they usually mature after one season of growth and it is possible to bring the product to the market within a short time. Therefore, the cost of antibodies produced by plants is substantially less than that from their animal counterparts 11 . Secondly, plants are less likely to introduce adventitious human or animal pathogens compared to mammalian cells or transgenic animals, thus reducing screening costs for viruses, prions and bacterial toxins. Unlike bacterial and other prokaryotic systems, plants share a similar endomembrane system and secretory pathway with human cells 9,12 . They do not trigger immune responses which animal antibodies are prone to doing when exposed to foreign/non-self agents and they also produce a relatively high yield of antibodies in a comparatively shorter time 13 . Additionally, plants are capable of synthesizing and assembling virtually any kind of antibody molecule, ranging from the smallest antigen-binding domains and fragments to full-length and even, multimeric antibodies 14 . Plants can be engineered to produce proteins efficiently, with significantly lower manufacturing costs than mammalian cell cultures 15 . Moreover, large-scale processing infrastructure is already in place for most crops. Hence, scale-up is rapid and efficient, requiring only the cultivation of additional land 13 . Also, plants that generate large biomass like corn and tobacco can produce large amounts of genetically engineered products while proteins can be indefinitely stored on seeds with little reduction in biological activity 11 .

(p14.1) Plantibodies work in a similar fashion to mammalian antibodies; however, compared to conventional methods using mammalian cells, the use of plants for antibody production offers several unique advantages. Firstly, plants are widespread, abundant, and grow quickly; they usually mature after one season of growth and it is possible to bring the product to the market within a short time. Therefore, the cost of antibodies produced by plants is substantially less than that from their animal counterparts 11 . Secondly, plants are less likely to introduce adventitious human or animal pathogens compared to mammalian cells or transgenic animals, thus reducing screening costs for viruses, prions and bacterial toxins. Unlike bacterial and other prokaryotic systems, plants share a similar endomembrane system and secretory pathway with human cells 9,12 . They do not trigger immune responses which animal antibodies are prone to doing when exposed to foreign/non-self agents and they also produce a relatively high yield of antibodies in a comparatively shorter time 13 . Additionally, plants are capable of synthesizing and assembling virtually any kind of antibody molecule, ranging from the smallest antigen-binding domains and fragments to full-length and even, multimeric antibodies 14 . Plants can be engineered to produce proteins efficiently, with significantly lower manufacturing costs than mammalian cell cultures 15 . Moreover, large-scale processing infrastructure is already in place for most crops. Hence, scale-up is rapid and efficient, requiring only the cultivation of additional land 13 . Also, plants that generate large biomass like corn and tobacco can produce large amounts of genetically engineered products while proteins can be indefinitely stored on seeds with little reduction in biological activity 11 .
## (s17) Methods of plantibody production
Number of References: 20

(p17.0) Various techniques have been developed to exploit plants as bioreactors for the production of pharmaceutical antibodies. One of the several methods for synthesizing plantibody is conventional method which uses transfor-mation and transient expression vector to introduce new genes into a host cell. The transformant cell is then introduced into the plant embryo and propagation of the plant in the open field allows large-scale production of antibodies 10 . Plant tissue culture is the most economic and time-saving method for production of antibodies from plants. To achieve this, plant cells in differentiated states are grown in bioreactors with foreign proteins harvested from either the biomass or culture liquid. Cell cultures contain fewer biological proteins or molecules (along with herbicides and pesticides) than open field plants or bacterial/yeast cell cultures, which may contaminate the product 20 . An experiment on tobacco plant established its breeding and sexual crossing as a method for production of plantibody. In this experiment, transformation was used to introduce kappa type of light chain into tobacco plants.

(p17.1) The same was done with gamma heavy chains. Upon crossing one plant with kappa-chains and another plant with gamma-chains, an antibody was produced that expressed both chains 14,18 .

(p17.2) Some researches suggest use of transgenic seeds in place of green plant tissue as plants cannot store antibodies for an extended period of time. Seeds contain a low level of proteases that allows proteins to be stored without degradation 22,23 .

(p17.3) Various techniques have been developed to exploit plants as bioreactors for the production of pharmaceutical antibodies. One of the several methods for synthesizing plantibody is conventional method which uses transfor-mation and transient expression vector to introduce new genes into a host cell. The transformant cell is then introduced into the plant embryo and propagation of the plant in the open field allows large-scale production of antibodies 10 . Plant tissue culture is the most economic and time-saving method for production of antibodies from plants. To achieve this, plant cells in differentiated states are grown in bioreactors with foreign proteins harvested from either the biomass or culture liquid. Cell cultures contain fewer biological proteins or molecules (along with herbicides and pesticides) than open field plants or bacterial/yeast cell cultures, which may contaminate the product 20 . An experiment on tobacco plant established its breeding and sexual crossing as a method for production of plantibody. In this experiment, transformation was used to introduce kappa type of light chain into tobacco plants.

(p17.4) The same was done with gamma heavy chains. Upon crossing one plant with kappa-chains and another plant with gamma-chains, an antibody was produced that expressed both chains 14,18 .

(p17.5) Some researches suggest use of transgenic seeds in place of green plant tissue as plants cannot store antibodies for an extended period of time. Seeds contain a low level of proteases that allows proteins to be stored without degradation 22,23 .
## (s19) ii. Vaccination
Number of References: 4

(p19.0) The production of proteins in plants is a major task in producing pharmaceutical polypeptides. Potential proteins produced include cytokines, hormones, enzymes, epidermal growth factors, interferons, human protein C, and pharmaceutical food stuff which are considered for oral immunization. Transgenic plants that express antigens in their edible tissue might be used as an inexpensive oral vaccine production and delivery system. Thus, immunization might be possible through consumption of an "edible vaccine" 19 , to provide active immunization. Also, plants produce different classes of proteins which are inexpensive and have increased pharmaceutical value. Due to these reasons, transgenic plants are better alternatives. Oral vaccines offer convenient immunization strategies for implementing universal vaccination programs throughout the world 28 . However, compared to vaccines, plantibodies have one major demerit -the introduced an-tibodies are flushed through a person's system relatively quickly, in a matter of hours or days, before the host's immune system has adapted to producing antibodies. Furthermore, vaccines elicit antibody production so that one or a few doses can protect the individual for year(s). By contrast, if a plantibody is being used to prevent a disease, the patient would need to take doses indefinitely. Other disadvantages of adoption of antibody expression in plants include gene silencing in some instances, different patterns of glycosylation, insufficient expression in some plants, allergies or allergic reactions to plant glycoproteins and other plant antigens 29 .

(p19.1) The production of proteins in plants is a major task in producing pharmaceutical polypeptides. Potential proteins produced include cytokines, hormones, enzymes, epidermal growth factors, interferons, human protein C, and pharmaceutical food stuff which are considered for oral immunization. Transgenic plants that express antigens in their edible tissue might be used as an inexpensive oral vaccine production and delivery system. Thus, immunization might be possible through consumption of an "edible vaccine" 19 , to provide active immunization. Also, plants produce different classes of proteins which are inexpensive and have increased pharmaceutical value. Due to these reasons, transgenic plants are better alternatives. Oral vaccines offer convenient immunization strategies for implementing universal vaccination programs throughout the world 28 . However, compared to vaccines, plantibodies have one major demerit -the introduced an-tibodies are flushed through a person's system relatively quickly, in a matter of hours or days, before the host's immune system has adapted to producing antibodies. Furthermore, vaccines elicit antibody production so that one or a few doses can protect the individual for year(s). By contrast, if a plantibody is being used to prevent a disease, the patient would need to take doses indefinitely. Other disadvantages of adoption of antibody expression in plants include gene silencing in some instances, different patterns of glycosylation, insufficient expression in some plants, allergies or allergic reactions to plant glycoproteins and other plant antigens 29 .
## (s20) iii. Immunomodulation
Number of References: 20

(p20.0) Immunomodulation is a molecular technique that allows the interference with cellular metabolism or pathogen infectivity by the ectopic expression of genes encoding antibodies or antibody fragments 30 . Applications relying on modulating antigen levels in vivo are dependent on expression and accumulation of antibodies in specific subcellular compartments and tissues. Passive immunization of plants reduces infection and symptoms caused by viruses and mollicutes, and significant progress has been made towards engineering resistance against insects 30,31 . Additionally, agro-infiltration of tobacco has been used to produce a diabody against carcinoembryonic antigen 32 . Other than applications in human healthcare, plantibodies may also prove useful as feed additives or for phytoremediation 19 .

(p20.1) Immunomodulation is a molecular technique that allows the interference with cellular metabolism or pathogen infectivity by the ectopic expression of genes encoding antibodies or antibody fragments 30 . Applications relying on modulating antigen levels in vivo are dependent on expression and accumulation of antibodies in specific subcellular compartments and tissues. Passive immunization of plants reduces infection and symptoms caused by viruses and mollicutes, and significant progress has been made towards engineering resistance against insects 30,31 . Additionally, agro-infiltration of tobacco has been used to produce a diabody against carcinoembryonic antigen 32 . Other than applications in human healthcare, plantibodies may also prove useful as feed additives or for phytoremediation 19 .
## (s23) Conclusion
Number of References: 8

(p23.0) Transgenic plants have been shown to be the most productive and economical system for making antibodies for human use as they play a key role in providing therapeutics and edible vaccines, which are cheap and easy to administer. This is true considering that not only tobacco, but also many other common plants such as corn, moss and soybeans have become hosts for antibodies and have the capacity to cure, treat or lessen the detrimental effects of multiple diseases. The low-cost, high-scalability, and safety characteristics of a plant-based production system offer an attractive alternative for both commercial pharmaceutical production and for manufacturing products for the developing world 9 . Furthermore, adoption of plants as bioreactors on a larger scale would reduce the cost of antibody therapy and increase the number of patients with access to these treatments 11 . In light of their numerous advantages, it seems likely that plantibodies are the potential panacea for human and animal health challenges in the foreseeable future. As their use in solving human health problems seem to be increasing, we advocate that their application should also be exploited in the field of veterinary medicine. Lastly, this important biotechnological breakthrough should be embraced in Africa where there is great diversity of crops and plants that can be readily explored by the pharmaceutical industry for therapeutic, immunoprophylactic, improved livestock productivity and other purposes.

(p23.1) Transgenic plants have been shown to be the most productive and economical system for making antibodies for human use as they play a key role in providing therapeutics and edible vaccines, which are cheap and easy to administer. This is true considering that not only tobacco, but also many other common plants such as corn, moss and soybeans have become hosts for antibodies and have the capacity to cure, treat or lessen the detrimental effects of multiple diseases. The low-cost, high-scalability, and safety characteristics of a plant-based production system offer an attractive alternative for both commercial pharmaceutical production and for manufacturing products for the developing world 9 . Furthermore, adoption of plants as bioreactors on a larger scale would reduce the cost of antibody therapy and increase the number of patients with access to these treatments 11 . In light of their numerous advantages, it seems likely that plantibodies are the potential panacea for human and animal health challenges in the foreseeable future. As their use in solving human health problems seem to be increasing, we advocate that their application should also be exploited in the field of veterinary medicine. Lastly, this important biotechnological breakthrough should be embraced in Africa where there is great diversity of crops and plants that can be readily explored by the pharmaceutical industry for therapeutic, immunoprophylactic, improved livestock productivity and other purposes.
