# Recent Developments in Cancer Treatment: A Review

CorpusID: 44794049 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/800938b5c26d55ce2f3476aa6f50fb89dfda6991](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/800938b5c26d55ce2f3476aa6f50fb89dfda6991)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 8

(p0.0) Cancer was first described by Hippocrates using the Greek word "karkinos" (crab or crayfish) [1]. This name came from the appearance of the cut surface of a solid malignant tumor, with "the veins stretched on all sides as the crab has its feet, whence it derives its name" [2]. According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that worldwide there will be almost 22.2 million new cancer cases diagnosed annually by 2030. The overall survival times of patients with many types of malignancies remain low. The above findings underline the urgent need for the development of new therapeutic models, and the improvement of the existing ones, to inhibit cancer progression and deliver improved therapeutic outcomes.

(p0.1) Cancer was first described by Hippocrates using the Greek word "karkinos" (crab or crayfish) [1]. This name came from the appearance of the cut surface of a solid malignant tumor, with "the veins stretched on all sides as the crab has its feet, whence it derives its name" [2]. According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that worldwide there will be almost 22.2 million new cancer cases diagnosed annually by 2030. The overall survival times of patients with many types of malignancies remain low. The above findings underline the urgent need for the development of new therapeutic models, and the improvement of the existing ones, to inhibit cancer progression and deliver improved therapeutic outcomes.
## (s4) ADCs
Number of References: 8

(p4.0) The ADCs that are also called immunoconjugates belong to the moab family. The difference between moabs and ADCs is that the ADC molecule consists of an antibody that is linked with a small compound such as a plant or bacterial toxin, a chemotherapy drug, or a radioactive molecule. The mechanism of action is based on the fact that the moab drives the toxin into the cancer cell where it will manifest its cytotoxic activity. In fact, the process is more complex. When the ADC travels into the circulation, the linker that conjugates the moab with the toxin must be stable in order not to be damaged. However, the moab must have the ability to bind specifically to the target and be internalized by the cell to facilitate improved drug release (in an active form). Finally, the high efficacy of the ADC against the selected target is because of its toxicity [22]. 90Y-ibritumomab tiuxetan, which is an FDA-approved ADC, targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive yttrium-90 to B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. Another ADC is 131I-tositumomab, which targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive iodine-131 to non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. MLN0264 is an experimental ADC designed to selectively deliver a highly potent cytotoxic payload to tumors that express guanyl cyclase C (GCC). MLN0264 consists of the highly toxic agent monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE) attached to an antibody that recognizes GCC via a cleavable linker [23].

(p4.1) In the case of ADCs, there are some disadvantages that still have to be overcome. For ADCs to be used in cancer treatment, the tumor needs to be tested for the expression of the target antigen. In addition, the payload of the ADC may become toxic as a result of premature release. Additionally, as was mentioned above, toxicity may be produced as a consequence of non-specific binding to healthy tissues and heterogeneous solid tumors [24].

(p4.2) The ADCs that are also called immunoconjugates belong to the moab family. The difference between moabs and ADCs is that the ADC molecule consists of an antibody that is linked with a small compound such as a plant or bacterial toxin, a chemotherapy drug, or a radioactive molecule. The mechanism of action is based on the fact that the moab drives the toxin into the cancer cell where it will manifest its cytotoxic activity. In fact, the process is more complex. When the ADC travels into the circulation, the linker that conjugates the moab with the toxin must be stable in order not to be damaged. However, the moab must have the ability to bind specifically to the target and be internalized by the cell to facilitate improved drug release (in an active form). Finally, the high efficacy of the ADC against the selected target is because of its toxicity [22]. 90Y-ibritumomab tiuxetan, which is an FDA-approved ADC, targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive yttrium-90 to B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. Another ADC is 131I-tositumomab, which targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive iodine-131 to non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. MLN0264 is an experimental ADC designed to selectively deliver a highly potent cytotoxic payload to tumors that express guanyl cyclase C (GCC). MLN0264 consists of the highly toxic agent monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE) attached to an antibody that recognizes GCC via a cleavable linker [23].

(p4.3) In the case of ADCs, there are some disadvantages that still have to be overcome. For ADCs to be used in cancer treatment, the tumor needs to be tested for the expression of the target antigen. In addition, the payload of the ADC may become toxic as a result of premature release. Additionally, as was mentioned above, toxicity may be produced as a consequence of non-specific binding to healthy tissues and heterogeneous solid tumors [24].
## (s6) Other Recent Treatments
Number of References: 8

(p6.0) The development of nanopolymer drug delivery systems is another type of treatment for cancer. Liposomal and lipid-based products have entered the mainstream as sustained-release drug delivery systems. Marqibo (Talon) with the generic name vincristine sulfate is used for the treatment of patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL); Myocet (Cephalon), a liposome -encapsulated form of doxorubicin ,is used for the treatment of breast cancer. These are two examples of the many FDA-approved drugs in this category [33,34]. Additionally, treatment methods that include combinations of therapeutic models already in use, have been investigated.

(p6.1) The development of nanopolymer drug delivery systems is another type of treatment for cancer. Liposomal and lipid-based products have entered the mainstream as sustained-release drug delivery systems. Marqibo (Talon) with the generic name vincristine sulfate is used for the treatment of patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL); Myocet (Cephalon), a liposome -encapsulated form of doxorubicin ,is used for the treatment of breast cancer. These are two examples of the many FDA-approved drugs in this category [33,34]. Additionally, treatment methods that include combinations of therapeutic models already in use, have been investigated.
## (s8) Introduction
Number of References: 8

(p8.0) Cancer was first described by Hippocrates using the Greek word "karkinos" (crab or crayfish) [1]. This name came from the appearance of the cut surface of a solid malignant tumor, with "the veins stretched on all sides as the crab has its feet, whence it derives its name" [2]. According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that worldwide there will be almost 22.2 million new cancer cases diagnosed annually by 2030. The overall survival times of patients with many types of malignancies remain low. The above findings underline the urgent need for the development of new therapeutic models, and the improvement of the existing ones, to inhibit cancer progression and deliver improved therapeutic outcomes.

(p8.1) Cancer was first described by Hippocrates using the Greek word "karkinos" (crab or crayfish) [1]. This name came from the appearance of the cut surface of a solid malignant tumor, with "the veins stretched on all sides as the crab has its feet, whence it derives its name" [2]. According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that worldwide there will be almost 22.2 million new cancer cases diagnosed annually by 2030. The overall survival times of patients with many types of malignancies remain low. The above findings underline the urgent need for the development of new therapeutic models, and the improvement of the existing ones, to inhibit cancer progression and deliver improved therapeutic outcomes.
## (s12) ADCs
Number of References: 8

(p12.0) The ADCs that are also called immunoconjugates belong to the moab family. The difference between moabs and ADCs is that the ADC molecule consists of an antibody that is linked with a small compound such as a plant or bacterial toxin, a chemotherapy drug, or a radioactive molecule. The mechanism of action is based on the fact that the moab drives the toxin into the cancer cell where it will manifest its cytotoxic activity. In fact, the process is more complex. When the ADC travels into the circulation, the linker that conjugates the moab with the toxin must be stable in order not to be damaged. However, the moab must have the ability to bind specifically to the target and be internalized by the cell to facilitate improved drug release (in an active form). Finally, the high efficacy of the ADC against the selected target is because of its toxicity [22]. 90Y-ibritumomab tiuxetan, which is an FDA-approved ADC, targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive yttrium-90 to B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. Another ADC is 131I-tositumomab, which targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive iodine-131 to non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. MLN0264 is an experimental ADC designed to selectively deliver a highly potent cytotoxic payload to tumors that express guanyl cyclase C (GCC). MLN0264 consists of the highly toxic agent monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE) attached to an antibody that recognizes GCC via a cleavable linker [23].

(p12.1) In the case of ADCs, there are some disadvantages that still have to be overcome. For ADCs to be used in cancer treatment, the tumor needs to be tested for the expression of the target antigen. In addition, the payload of the ADC may become toxic as a result of premature release. Additionally, as was mentioned above, toxicity may be produced as a consequence of non-specific binding to healthy tissues and heterogeneous solid tumors [24].

(p12.2) The ADCs that are also called immunoconjugates belong to the moab family. The difference between moabs and ADCs is that the ADC molecule consists of an antibody that is linked with a small compound such as a plant or bacterial toxin, a chemotherapy drug, or a radioactive molecule. The mechanism of action is based on the fact that the moab drives the toxin into the cancer cell where it will manifest its cytotoxic activity. In fact, the process is more complex. When the ADC travels into the circulation, the linker that conjugates the moab with the toxin must be stable in order not to be damaged. However, the moab must have the ability to bind specifically to the target and be internalized by the cell to facilitate improved drug release (in an active form). Finally, the high efficacy of the ADC against the selected target is because of its toxicity [22]. 90Y-ibritumomab tiuxetan, which is an FDA-approved ADC, targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive yttrium-90 to B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. Another ADC is 131I-tositumomab, which targets the CD20 antigen to deliver radioactive iodine-131 to non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. MLN0264 is an experimental ADC designed to selectively deliver a highly potent cytotoxic payload to tumors that express guanyl cyclase C (GCC). MLN0264 consists of the highly toxic agent monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE) attached to an antibody that recognizes GCC via a cleavable linker [23].

(p12.3) In the case of ADCs, there are some disadvantages that still have to be overcome. For ADCs to be used in cancer treatment, the tumor needs to be tested for the expression of the target antigen. In addition, the payload of the ADC may become toxic as a result of premature release. Additionally, as was mentioned above, toxicity may be produced as a consequence of non-specific binding to healthy tissues and heterogeneous solid tumors [24].
## (s14) Other Recent Treatments
Number of References: 8

(p14.0) The development of nanopolymer drug delivery systems is another type of treatment for cancer. Liposomal and lipid-based products have entered the mainstream as sustained-release drug delivery systems. Marqibo (Talon) with the generic name vincristine sulfate is used for the treatment of patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL); Myocet (Cephalon), a liposome -encapsulated form of doxorubicin ,is used for the treatment of breast cancer. These are two examples of the many FDA-approved drugs in this category [33,34]. Additionally, treatment methods that include combinations of therapeutic models already in use, have been investigated.

(p14.1) The development of nanopolymer drug delivery systems is another type of treatment for cancer. Liposomal and lipid-based products have entered the mainstream as sustained-release drug delivery systems. Marqibo (Talon) with the generic name vincristine sulfate is used for the treatment of patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL); Myocet (Cephalon), a liposome -encapsulated form of doxorubicin ,is used for the treatment of breast cancer. These are two examples of the many FDA-approved drugs in this category [33,34]. Additionally, treatment methods that include combinations of therapeutic models already in use, have been investigated.
