# Critical Reviews in Oral Biology & Medicine A Review of the Impact of Implant Biomaterials on Osteocytes

CorpusID: 46929501 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92b27c6ad80703b9f5488c140f05da97da47d88e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92b27c6ad80703b9f5488c140f05da97da47d88e)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Chemistry, Engineering

## (s0) Osteocytes Are Key Determinants of Bone Structure and Function
Number of References: 13

(p0.0) The osteocyte is a central component within the complex hierarchical architecture of bone ( Fig. 1). Approximately 42 billion osteocytes reside within the average human skeleton, of which ~9 million are replaced throughout the skeleton every day (Buenzli and Sims 2015). Distributed throughout the mineralized extracellular matrix (ECM), osteocytes play critical roles in bone formation and remodeling, where osteocyte-driven control of bone formation is through the SOST/sclerostin mechanism (Robling et al. 2008), while osteocyte-driven control of bone remodeling is through the signaling mechanism involving RANKL (receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand), RANK, and OPG (osteoprotegerin; Nakashima et al. 2011). The RANKL/OPG ratio correlates with histomorphometric indices for physiologic bone remodeling (i.e., eroded surface and osteoid surface; Fazzalari et al. 2001). Sema3A (semaphorin 3A) binding to Nrp1 (neuropilin 1) has been shown to simultaneously suppress osteoclastic bone resorption and promote osteoblastic bone formation through modulation of RANKL and the canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, respectively (Hayashi et al. 2012). Furthermore, osteocytes may control perilacunar/canalicular remodeling through transforming growth factor β signaling (Dole et al. 2017).

(p0.1) Alignment of the lacuno-canalicular network closely follows the pattern of bone formation (Kerschnitzki et al. 2011) and correlates directly with mineral particle thickness and orientation (Kerschnitzki et al. 2013). In human osteonal bone, the average length of the canalicular network is ~0.074 ± 0.015 μm/μm 3 (Repp et al. 2017). Formation of organized lamellar tissue is preceded by the formation of disordered woven bone (Liu et al. 2010). The process is assisted by the presence of a substrate layer on to which osteoblasts can assemble, align, and produce an ordered tissue where collagen fibrils are arranged in parallel over distances beyond the range of a single cell (Kerschnitzki et al. 2013). The secretory territory of rat osteoblasts on the parietal bone is only 154 µm 2 per osteoblast (Jones 1974). Therefore, spatial organization of the ECM over a length scale corresponding to the size of many matrixproducing cells requires coordinated activity of bone-forming cells, further highlighting that the initial spatial arrangement of these cells is a critical determinant (Kerschnitzki et al. 2013).
## (s1) Osteocytes and Implant Biomaterials
Number of References: 13

(p1.0) Through the presence of osteocytes adjacent to the implant surface after prolonged healing periods, early investigators demonstrated that peri-implant bone around metals is indeed a living tissue (Serre et al. 1994). The inner wall of the osteocyte lacuna exhibits basophilic staining properties similar to the osteoid-like matrix interposed between mineralized bone and the implant surface (Piattelli et al. 1994). Bioactive coatings such as hydroxyapatite enhance the biological response to not only metal implants (Ti6Al4V; Merolli et al. 2000) but also polymer implants (polyether ether ketone; Johansson et al. 2016), giving rise to tightly interlocked lamellar bone, with osteocytes in close apposition to the coating. Also supporting the formation of osteocyte-containing mineralized tissue are thin (≈10 nm) graphene oxide coatings on cp-Ti (Jung et al. 2016); multilayer coatings consisting of chitosan and hydroxyapatite, with the capacity for controlled release of bone morphogenetic protein 2 (Shah et al. 2013); degradable particulates such as synthetically produced α-tricalcium phosphate/ octacalcium phosphate (Elgali et al. 2014); deproteinized bovine bone (Elgali et al. 2014); and autogenous bone fragments generated during implant site preparation (Shah and Palmquist 2017). This may be an important parameter to conclusively demonstrate whether newly formed tissue adjacent to a given biomaterial is bone or calcified cartilage-although the 2 processes are not mutually exclusive, since chondrocytes may contribute to the overall osteocyte pool (Hinton et al. 2017).

(p1.1) Preparation of the implant site with drilling tools creates a zone of apoptotic osteocytes around the osteotomy (Chen et al. 2017), the extent of which correlates directly with the drilling speed and the resulting thermal injury (Wang et al. 2017). Evidence suggests that, being mechanosensors, osteocyte-like MLO-Y4 cells induce osteoclastic differentiation under supraphysiologic loading (Fahlgren et al. 2018). The argument, therefore, is that at intermediate and/or long healing periods, osteocytes play an active role in the continued maintenance of osseointegration of (dental) implants. Here, we review the current knowledge regarding the adaptations of the osteocyte lacuno-canalicular network in the vicinity of implant biomaterials (Table).
## (s2) Direct Attachment to the Implant Surface
Number of References: 6

(p2.0) More recent evidence of osteocyte attachment has been provided with resin cast etching (Fig. 2). However, certain artifacts (e.g., tissue shrinkage attributable to sample preparation routines) induce the development of a narrow space between the implant surface and bone, which is subsequently filled by a thin film of the embedding medium, thus obscuring the direct osteocyte-implant contact (Shah, Stenlund, et al. 2016). Such artifacts are more frequent in relation to relatively smooth machined surfaces that afford little mechanical interlocking. With increasing complexity of the implant surface, osteocytes adjacent to topologically modified but micrometersmooth (S a = 456 nm) implants tend to become aligned with their long axes parallel to the implant surface, extending up to 20-µm-long canaliculi toward it (Shah, Stenlund, et al. 2016). Adjacent to microrough implants (R a = 1.55 µm), osteocytes form an interconnected lacuno-canalicular system and attach to the implant surface through canaliculi . Direct attachment of osteocytes to minimally rough (S a = 519 nm) and microrough (S a = 906 nm) implants has also been demonstrated in ovariectomized and sham-operated conditions . Where the dimensions of implant surface features are appropriate (e.g., submicron topography achieved through acid etching), canaliculi may become closely interdigitated with the topographic features (Shah, Stenlund, et al. 2016).

(p2.1) In the case of laser-ablated implants, where a thick-surface TiO 2 layer (~50 nm) is superimposed over globules (2 to 10 µm) of resolidified metal, canaliculi extend several micrometers, branch, and remain attached to the implant surface in spite of removal torque measurements (generally performed in a preclinical model; Shah, Johansson, et al. 2016). Adjacent to functionally loaded, laser-ablated dental implants in human, osteocytes closest to the implant surface are aligned parallel to both the lamellar direction and the microscale contour of the implant surface (Shah et al. 2014). Their associated canaliculi, directed perpendicularly, extend toward the implant surface and branch in close proximity to the ~200-nm-thick channellike surface TiO 2 layer and extend for tens of micrometers toward Haversian canals (Shah et al. 2015).
## (s6) Current Concepts
Number of References: 6

(p6.0) In the vicinity of implant biomaterials, osteocytes respond to local environmental factors in a variety of ways (Fig. 5). Similar to normal bone, the osteocyte lacuno-canalicular network in the vicinity of osseointegrated implants represents the bone formation patterns and, in particular, the origins of lamellar structure of bone adjacent to the implant surface (Shah, Stenlund, et al. 2016). Certain morphologic parameters of osteocytes (e.g., size, alignment with respect to bone lamellae, density, proximity to small and large blood vessels, lacunocanalicular interconnectivity between neighboring and distant osteocytes) disclose vital clues regarding the status of bone, as tissue regeneration occurs in the vicinity of, and in response to, implanted biomaterials (Shah et al. 2014;Shah, Stenlund, et al. 2016).

(p6.1) An increased number of osteoblasts and, consequently, higher osteocyte density in response to mechanical loading indicate that not only recruitment but also survival of cells may be externally controlled (Uto et al. 2017). This effect is particularly exaggerated where implant design features include grooves directed +60° (downward) to a plane perpendicular to the long axis of the implant , which is considered optimal for achieving an anisotropic principal stress distribution and preferential alignment of collagen and the crystallographic c-axis of bone apatite, parallel to the groove direction (Noyama et al. 2013). However, osteocyte apoptosis induced by mechanical forces results in extensive bone remodeling and minimal new bone formation (Cha et al. 2015).
## (s7) Future Perspectives
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) In addition to being indicators of bone quality, osteocytes are important structural markers of osseointegration and can prove exceptionally valuable in characterizing the biological response to currently available and novel materials for loadbearing applications in dental rehabilitation and orthopedics. Despite a clinical success rate >95%, knowing the status of the host bed prior to implant placement may be advantageous in certain situations. In compromised conditions, for instance, could radiologic assessment be accompanied by another parameter? Recent developments in third harmonic generation microscopy have made label-free (Genthial et al. 2017), intravital (Tokarz et al. 2017) imaging of the osteocyte lacunocanalicular network possible. We therefore propose that evaluation of peri-implant osteocytes should be a necessary component in future investigations of osseointegration. Particular emphasis must be placed on investigating the physical and chemical interactions among osteocytes and more recently developed bioceramics, polymers, and composites. Specifically, questions to address include the following: 1) How do osteocytes respond to stimuli other than mechanical loading (e.g., bacteria) on the molecular level? 2) Could sudden high-impact trauma lead to a cascade of structural deterioration and implant loosening? 3) What is the role of osteocytes in bone maintenance around biomedical implants in disease states? 4) Is peri-implantitis associated with changes in the osteocyte lacuno-canalicular network?
