# Overview of the detection methods for equilibrium dissociation constant K D of drug-receptor interaction

CorpusID: 49292514 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34c0c45377debf4e5c2ca3daf4ab08e095ab15d7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34c0c45377debf4e5c2ca3daf4ab08e095ab15d7)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 11

(p0.0) The type of drug target is divided into receptor, enzyme, nucleic acid, and so on. There are about 40% drugs which interact with the corresponding receptors in order to exert their pharmacological effects. When the ligands (first messenger) combine with the corresponding receptor, a signal cascade reaction occurs through the second messenger in the cell, resulting in a series of biological effects, such as immune response and cell proliferation [1][2][3]. Therefore, it is very necessary to study the interaction between drugs and receptors, which contributes to understanding the mechanisms of drugs [4][5][6][7][8]. The equilibrium dissociation constant (K D ) is the basic parameter to evaluate the binding properties of the drug-receptor [9][10][11]. Thus, it is of great importance to determine the K D values of the drugs.
## (s5) Isothermal titration calorimetry
Number of References: 8

(p5.0) ITC is a technique based on the reaction heat to quantify the interactions of various biomolecules. As a kind of rapid and direct tool without markers, ITC can detect any heat changes of biochemical reaction process. ITC is widely used in molecular biology research, drug design and structure optimization, and drug mechanism studies [94,95].

(p5.1) Micro calorimeter with high sensitivity and high automation is used to monitor and record the calorimetric curve of the reaction process continuously and accurately. ITC, an in situ, on-line and non-destructive method, provides the thermodynamic and kinetic information (eg, binding constant (K D ), reaction stoichiometry (n), enthalpy (ΔH) and entropy (ΔS) [96,97]. ITC can be also used to study the properties of drug-receptor interaction by directly detecting the heat changes during the process of biochemical reaction [98,99].

(p5.2) By means of the ITC method, Li et al. [16] studied the interaction of neomycin and tobramycin with MLL protein, and found that the K D values are18.8 for neomycin and 59.9 μM for tobramycin, respectively. Daddaoua group found that only 2-ketoglutarate could act on PtxS with an affinity constant K D of 15 μM from glucose, ketoglucose and 2-ketoglucose by ITC technology [100].
