# Machine Learning in Orthopedics: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 49428358 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a44b5cfc5223e88977667b07e68ce3371f50033d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a44b5cfc5223e88977667b07e68ce3371f50033d)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s6) Nearest Neighbors (NN)
Number of References: 4

(p6.0) In Ashinsky et al. (2015) and Ashinsky et al. (2017), a weighted neighbor distance method was used with a compound hierarchy of algorithms first introduced in Shamir et al. (2008) representing morphology (a technique abbreviated with the acronym WND-CHRM) and applied to the problem of OA detection in MRIs of articular cartilage scans. This tool is an image classifier that extracts features from a training set of images, and weights them by discriminating order (for example, through LDA). The features extracted by WND-CHRM are numerical image content descriptors-such as image textures, pixel statistics, polynomial decomposition and high-contrast features-as well as image transforms and pair-wise combinations of these transforms. In the first of the two studies, this technique was used for binary classification. The authors used the Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI) score (Pritzker et al., 2006) as the final output of a multiple linear least-squares regression model to score each cartilage plug, apart from the previous binary classification. This score was assessed manually by two human experts on the same set of images, and both scores were used as the basis for the linear regression procedure. The best separation task was obtained by extracting features with WND-CHRM from T2-weighted (T2W) measurements (among the different scan measurements taken from the original MRI), with an accuracy of 97%, sensitivity of 94%, specificity of 100%. With regard to the regression task, the best performance was given for the same set of features as above (T2W), with the lowest root-mean square (RMS) value of 1.6.
## (s7) Linear Regression and Other Similar Techniques
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) In orthopedics literature, several papers use regression methods to model, for example, knee injuries (e.g, anterior cruciate ligament-ACL and posterior cruciate ligament-PCL, Matić et al., 2016), and articular cartilage degeneration for predicting advancements in OA (Pedoia et al., 2017). In the study by Matić et al. (2016), a gait analysis was performed to obtain a model of useful indicators of knee deficiencies (ACL), by means of movement curves. The main indicators of ACL-deficiency were detected in anterior posterior translations (APT) and internal external rotations (IER). After having tested the statistical significance of the APTs and IERs to discriminate between healthy and pathological subjects by means of a Wald test, a binary logistic regression function was modeled to classify the two APT-and IER-independent factors. The decision boundary traced by the regression function was manually assessed by an expert, thereby leading to a successful discrimination rate of two cases out of the three that were manually analyzed. There were no other evaluation criteria in the study, with the exception of statistically significant APT and IER ordered pairs in showing a relation with ACL-deficiency. Higher ATP values revealed that the presence of ACL-deficiency is 1.1758 times more frequent than in lower ATP values (95% CI). Higher values of IER show that an ACL-deficiency is 2.2516 times more frequent than lower IER values (95% CI).
## (s8) SVM
Number of References: 7

(p8.0) SVM are used in orthopedics research for disparate kinds of classification tasks and on different data sources. For example, for OA prediction, they are applied on images (Zhang et al., 2013;Nagarajan et al., 2014;Madelin et al., 2015), biochemical (Ahmed et al., 2016) and biomechanical measurements (Yoo et al., 2013a;Phinyomark et al., 2016). In Phinyomark et al. (2016), 100 knee OA subjects and 43 healthy subjects (both equally distributed between men and women) participated in a study where their kinematic behavior was observed, registered and measured. Each gait pattern was represented by angles of interest for each joint and plane of motion. A feature vector representing each subject (i.e., OA and control groups) was then extracted, and a principal component analysis (PCA) was applied in order to reduce the vector dimensionality to a low resolution space that maximized the variability of the original data and created a Principal Component (PC) coefficient matrix for each group. Both the original data and the PC data were analyzed using a conventional statistical method, that is, ANOVA, and by a SVM classifier. A statistically significant difference was found in OA women kinematics with respect to OA men, and the same difference was obtained for healthy subjects from transformed data. This difference affected healthy females who exhibited significantly greater probability of musculoskeletal injuries, as confirmed by previous studies mentioned in the present study. SVM accuracy was assessed to be 99% in correctly separating OA women from OA men, using a ten-fold cross-validation. For healthy subjects, the SVM accuracy was assessed to be 86%.
## (s9) K-means Clustering and Other Similar Techniques
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Apart from the research by Thong et al. (2016), already described in section 4.2, another orthopedic research used clustering techniques on image data (Kruse et al., 2017b). In the above study, over 10,000 patients were divided into clusters representing different fracture risks levels: high, average and low. The features were extracted from DXA scans (e.g., lumbar and hip region Bone Mineral Density-BMD), and other clinical information, such as primary care visits and co-morbidity in women subjects with the Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI). Clustering was formed by standardizing variable means using Euclidean Distance, and were optimized by the Ward's method to minimize intra-cluster variance. Other descriptive statistics were computed on the data for unstandardized variables and on the identified clusters. The hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) procedure computed nine clusters, where the following were the most discriminating features: the BDM, with high fracture risk associated with very low BDM, average fracture risk associated with average DBM, and low fracture risk associated with high to very high BDM; age and specific medications (for example, the use of antiresorptive treatments in peri-menopausal women and medical treatments for previous fractures in other subjects); and CCI. The study lacks a quality evaluation metric.
## (s11) Gradient boost machines (GBM)
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) Gradient Boost Machines (GBM) were used in two studies Atkinson et al. (2012); Kruse et al. (2017b) for automatic bones fracture prediction in subjects at risk, such as menopausal women. In Atkinson et al. (2012), the novel idea was to collect features other than the standard areal bone mineral density (aBMD) to find other strong predictors or a combination of them that are able to improve the fracture prediction outcome. Three sets of variables were then extracted from quantitative computer tomography (QCT) images of both distal forearm fractures (DFF) and vertebral fractures (VF). The same data were collected for two random control groups. These were variables that pertaining to the following aspects: bones density (aBMD), derived by dual-energy X-Ray absorptiometry (DXA); bones geometry, derived by spiral QCT extractions of volumetric bone mineral density (vBMD) of cortical and trabecular bones; and bones micro-structures, derived by high-res peripheral QCT imaging (HRpQCT). These features were used in different combinations to feed the GBM and logistic regression models that were adjusted and evaluated based on ROC results on each combination of variables. In order to prevent overfitting 5 , DFF GBM were also used to predict VF response variables and vice versa. The results suggested that using a model with the entire set of variables (267) yielded an ROC of 1.0. Other ROCs were computed for the following combinations: DXA 0.95, HRpQCT 0.96 and spital QCT 1.0.
## (s12) LDA and other similar techniques
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) LDA was used in orthopedics for automating the diagnosis of OA and the prognosis of cartilage loss risk (Marques et al., 2013). The authors analyzed MRI scans of both knees, taken before and after two years, of approximately 150 subjects aged between 30 and 72 years of age. The same scans were manually assessed by an expert radiologists who scored them using Kellgren Lawrence (KL) grades (Kellgren and Lawrence, 1957). The medial tibial cartilage volume was estimated in both the sets of images, after a segmentation procedure and the extraction of the ROIs representing the trabecular bone structure. The extracted features were used to train an LDA classifier able to select the best combination of them for relating the bone structure markers to the prediction of cartilage volume loss. The results of the ML output were evaluated with an ROC of 0.92 for correct classification of healthy vs OA affected ones, and with odds ratio (OR) for the prediction of cartilage loss volume by quantifying bone structure. It was shown that the vertical trabecularization was the most related to cartilage loss progression (with an OR of 16).

(p12.1) A similar study was conducted earlier by the same authors (Marques et al., 2012) by using six different ML classifiers for analyzing trabecular bone structure and quantifying OA risks. The best approaches were LDA (witn a ROC of 0.82) and the weighted k-NN (with a ROC of 0.81). The same approach was one of the best performing ones in the task of skeletal maturity assessment among over 20 ML methods that were tested in the same study (Cunha et al., 2014, see section 4.1.6.1 for details on this research).
