# Convolutional neural networks: an overview and application in radiology

CorpusID: 49389393 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7580c72df96488927c59a5f31a4b10784adfc749](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7580c72df96488927c59a5f31a4b10784adfc749)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s2) How is CNN different from other methods employed in radiomics?
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) Most recent radiomics studies use hand-crafted feature extraction techniques, such as texture analysis, followed by conventional machine learning classifiers, such as random forests and support vector machines [15,16]. There are several differences to note between such methods and CNN. First, CNN does not require hand-crafted feature extraction. Second, CNN architectures do not necessarily require segmentation of tumors or organs by human experts. Third, CNN is far more data hungry because of its millions of learnable parameters to estimate, and, thus, is more computationally expensive, resulting in requiring graphical processing units (GPUs) for model training.
## (s15) Data and ground truth labels
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) Data and ground truth labels are the most important components in research applying deep learning or other machine learning methods. As a famous proverb originating in computer science notes: BGarbage in, garbage out.^Careful collection of data and ground truth labels with which to train and test a model is mandatory for a successful deep learning project, but obtaining high-quality labeled data can be costly and time-consuming. While there may be multiple medical image datasets open to the public [24,25], special attention should be paid in these cases to the quality of the ground truth labels. Available data are typically split into three sets: a training, a validation, and a test set (Fig. 8), though there are some variants, such as cross validation. A training set is used to train a network, where loss values are calculated via forward propagation and learnable parameters are updated via backpropagation. A validation set is used to evaluate the model during the training process, fine-tune hyperparameters, and perform model selection. A test set is ideally used only once at the very end of the project in order to evaluate the performance of the final model that was fine-tuned and selected on the training process with training and validation sets.
## (s20) Detection
Number of References: 3

(p20.0) A common task for radiologists is to detect abnormalities within medical images. Abnormalities can be rare and they must be detected among many normal cases. One previous study investigated the usefulness of 2D-CNN for detecting tuberculosis on chest radiographs [7]. The study utilized two different types of 2D-CNN, AlexNet [3] and GoogLeNet [32], to detect pulmonary tuberculosis on chest radiographs. To develop the detection system and evaluate its performance, the dataset of 1007 chest radiographs was used.
## (s21) Others
Number of References: 3

(p21.0) Low-dose CT has been increasingly used in clinical situations. For example, low-dose CT was shown to be useful for lung cancer screening [51]. Because noisy images of low-dose CT hindered the reliable evaluation of CT images, many techniques of image processing were used for denoising low-dose CT images. Two previous studies showed that low-dose and ultra-low-dose CT images could be effectively denoised using deep learning [52,53]. Their systems divided the noisy CT image into image patches, denoised the image patches, then reconstructed a new CT image from the denoised image patches. Deep learning with encoder-decoder architecture was used for their systems to denoise image patches. Training data for the denoising systems consisted of pairs of image patches, which are obtained from standard-dose CT and low-dose CT. Figure 13 shows a representative example of the training data of the systems.
