# A review on preparation methods of SNPs and their biomedical applications

CorpusID: 54529407 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/09e9ba4497465e74448c2f50e818c2c3f4f509c2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/09e9ba4497465e74448c2f50e818c2c3f4f509c2)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s3) Citrate reduction synthesis
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) A frequently used method for preparing silver colloidal solutions is citrate reduction of silver (Ag + ) ions because it doesn't require intense laboratorial skills [29][30][31]. This method was first introduced in 1982 by Lee and Meisel [32]. In this method SNPs are created when a predetermined amount of sodium citrate is put in a liquid state solution of silver nitrate (AgNO 3 ) which was boiling and kept for a minimum of 60 minutes. Though this method is quite easy it didn't result in regulated size of NPs. The final product exhibited a very broad range of size from 20 -600 nm. Nevertheless, pH regulation is a critical factor, since only little shape controlled techniques had been examined by earlier researchers by regulating pH with values such pH = 11.1 for spherical shape and rod like particles and pH=5.7 for a triangular shape [33,34].
## (s9) Microwave-assisted synthesis
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) A method with good prognosis for creation of SNPs is microwaveassisted synthesis. Studies have shown that this method consistently yields SNPs with narrower size distribution, higher degree of crystallization and smaller sizes as compared to conventional oil baths [57]. Along with the prevention of the clustering of NPs formed microwave heating has reduced energy usage, greater product yields and shorter time of production [57]. This technique with help from non-hazardous media eliminates the usage of oil baths tremendously decreases the chemical waste and time duration of reaction in many chemical alterations and many organic syntheses [58]. Carboxymethylselilo sodium can be used as a stabilizing and reducing agent for the synthesis of SNPs by this process route. There were no visible variations noticed and the so produced SNPs were stable and uniform at room temperature for 2 months [59]. It was also reported that there was the creation of ethylene glycol and polyvinyl pyrrolidine in the presence of platinum seeds [60].
## (s12) Catalysis
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) The usage of nanoparticles as catalyst is a quickly growing field in nanoscience and technology. The characteristics of noble SNPs make them the best materials for nano-catalysis. Especially where selectivity and reaction yield depend on the properties of catalyst surface. They exhibit greater turnover frequencies as compared to bulk materials because of lower volume to surface area ratio. For instance, we know that in the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide to Oxygen the catalytic properties of Silver are quite useful. In addition, noble metals are also involved in catalysis of luminal hydrogen peroxide systems. It was seen that the addition of silver, gold colloid highly improved the chemiluminescence emission coming from luminal H 2 O 2 systems [71]. Also popular is the utilization of silver in the catalysis of ethylene oxide from oxidation of ethylene and formaldehyde from oxidation of methanol. But, something that piques greater interest is that the nanoparticles show shaped regulated catalytic activity. When benzene hydrogenation occurs in the presence of platinum catalyst we can notice shape regulated catalytic characteristics [72].
