# NERIUM OLEANDER: IT'S APPLICATION IN BASIC AND APPLIED SCIENCE: A REVIEW 1 SAABIYA FAROOQUI, 2 TULIKA TYAGI

CorpusID: 54673149 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/71b63fb483412e74e5cb78ebbab067ed5586ac90](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/71b63fb483412e74e5cb78ebbab067ed5586ac90)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) Nerium oleander is an evergreen shrub in the dogbane family Apocynaceae ( fig. 1). It is the only species currently classified in the genus Nerium. It is commonly known as oleander, from its superficial resemblance to the unrelated olive Olea. It is widely cultivated and though to be originated from Southwest Asia. Oleander grows well in warm subtropical regions, where it is extensively used as an ornamental plant in landscapes, in parks, and along roadsides. The oleander is most prevalent, and its alluring flowers make it a particular hazard for accidental ingestion [1]. The plant also has shown the toxicologic importance for accidents when used in folk medicines, in homicides or suicides [2]. All parts of the oleander plant contain cardiac glycosides, including the roots and the smoke produced from burning, as heat does not inactivate the glycosides. This plant is known by many names throughout the world which includes Adelfa, Baladre, Cascabela thevetia, Cerbera thevetia, Common Oleander, Exile Tree, Huang Hua Jia, Jia Zhu Tao, Kaner, Karvir, Karvira, Laurel Rosa, Laurier-Rose, Laurier Rose, Laurose, Nérier à Feuilles de Laurier, Nérion, Nerium indicum, Nerium Oleander, Nerium odorum, Oleander blatter, Oleandre, Oleandri folium, Rose Bay, Rose Laurel, Sweet Scented Oleander, Thevetia neriifolia, Thevetia peruviana, Yellow Oleander.
## (s9) Anticancer activity
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Ali and co-workers [19] was able to extract essential oil from the flowers of the oleander. It showed antitumor activity on the cell lines, Ehrlich Ascites Carcinoma (EAC). Different amount of Anvirzel (1.0 ng. ml-1 to 500 micrograms. ml-1) or Oleandrin (0.01 ng. ml-1 to 50 micrograms. ml-1) in both continuously treated and pulsetreated/recovery Cell cultures [20]. Both Oleandrin and Anvirzel were able to induce cell killing in human cancer cells, but not in murine cancer cells.
## (s14) Future application of Nerium oleander
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) Utilizing biotechnology research and new breakthrough extraction technology, Nerium is continuing to develop a complete line of products that harnesses Nerium oleander's unique and effective properties. Anti-aging skin creams are abundant in today's cosmetic marketplace. Future product development includes Nerium AD Eye Cream Spot Cream, Skin Repair Cream, Blemish Cream and lots of such products. According to the American Cancer Society, "even a small amount of oleander can cause death", and "the effectiveness of oleander has not been proven". Nerium is also effective in increasing the CD4 counts of HIV-positive individuals with initial CD4 counts of less than 400 in a meaningful way over a 60-day period. Nerium oleander aqueous extract as a novel anti-HIV therapeutic. This oleander is useful in future cancer and AIDS treatment [31]. Nerium as environmentally safer and greener approach for mosquito control and other pest control measure in the future [17].
