# Etiology of acute viral respiratory infections common in Pakistan: A review

CorpusID: 56486586 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cbfb3918ec54359f1290456e75319cdfe7da422a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cbfb3918ec54359f1290456e75319cdfe7da422a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s3) | Etiology
Number of References: 7

(p3.0) Viral etiology of LTRIs includes respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and parainfluenza virus 3 among Pakistani population. 6 According to a study, enterovirus/rhinovirus, coronavirus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, and human Bocavirus were also found to be associated with respiratory infections particularly with viral pneumonia. 7  Throat swabs were tested by RT-PCR. Nineteen percent of cases were identified as RSV associated infections. RSV appeared to be more incident from August to October and highest in September. Susceptibility increased in rainy seasons. 10 HMPV was detected in 7% of the cases in the above scenario, most of which were children under 1 year of age. 11 The results of a surveillance study conducted during January 2008 and December 2011 determined influenza A as a causative agent of infection in a great number of people. A total of 6258 samples were analyzed by RT-PCR assay, out of which 1489 samples were positive for influenza virus. Seventy-two percent of which were influenza A, and 28% were influenza B. Among influenza A, three strains were identified. These strains were A/H1N1, A/H3N2, and A/H1N1pdm09. 12 The results of another hospital-based study confirmed the viral association with ALRI. The study was conducted in two hospitals of twin cities of Pakistan from November 1986 to  HMPV. RSV-A and RSV-B association was detected more commonly during 2 to 6 months of age, while influenza A was estimated as more common in 2.1 to 6-month age group. 9 RSV association with kids between the ages of one and 5 years old suffering from pneumonia and asthma was the most widely recognized finding of a 3-year study conducted in Karachi from August 2009 to June 2012. In older children between the ages of one and 5 years old, pneumonia and asthma were the most widely recognized findings. 10 In another study conducted by the group, the cases were characterized by pneumonia followed by bronchiolitis. 11
