# Physiologically based mathematical models of nanomaterials for regulatory toxicology: A review

CorpusID: 57666310 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc516d70754fd0a396b2ddd4329f31669e619a04](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc516d70754fd0a396b2ddd4329f31669e619a04)

Fields: Mathematics, Materials Science, Medicine, Environmental Science, Computer Science

## (s12) Kinetic processes in in vitro dosimetry models applicable to MN
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) Kinetic processes such as diffusion (based on the Stokes-Einstein equation), sedimentation (based on Stokes law) and advection (transfer by motion of the fluid) are some of the processes that are considered in these models (e.g. In vitro Sedimentation, Diffusion and Dosimetry model -ISDD -by Hinderliter et al. [53]). Mukherjee et al. [45] also includes in their agglomeration-diffusion-sedimentation-reaction model (ADSRM), dynamic transformation processes important for MNs, specifically dissolution. Neither the ISDD nor ADSRM models consider the interaction of MNs with molecules present in the test system media. To overcome this limitation in the ASDRM model, the authors [54] extended the ADSRM model to consider the interaction of MNs with various fractions of lipids and surfactant proteins in the model. Another enhancement worth mentioning is the semi-analytical solution for the ISDD model developed by Mahnama et al. [55]. Based on a generalised integral transform technique (GITT) the predictions concerning the advection-diffusion processes were improved, and consequently the accuracy of the ISDD model. The above-mentioned models are mainly designed for in vitro supporting systems such as tubes or cell culture well plates.
## (s18) Conclusions
Number of References: 8

(p18.0) A number of PB models have been developed and applied to MNs. Particle size is not a required input in all model types: respiratory tract dosimetry models usually have a more detailed consideration of particle behaviour in the airways compared to TK models, which in many cases do not consider any size-related parameter [13,17,31,36]. Regarding the structure of the available PBK models, the assumptions made for the model structure are similar to those made for chemicals (e.g. airway architecture, homogeneous compartments, same blood partitioning coefficients for different organs) [23,33,46,72]. On the other hand, parameters that are specific to MNs like the influence of their physicochemical properties, such as size, on their biokinetics and reversibility of processes like agglomeration and sedimentation are typically neglected as models usually assume that MNs do not agglomerate, and that when inhalation is considered as an exposure pathway, there is no overload effect in the lungs.
