# A Review on Automatic Mammographic Density and Parenchymal Segmentation

CorpusID: 5776759 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b89642fb857478bf3fb82566c6d880e45727987](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b89642fb857478bf3fb82566c6d880e45727987)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 5

(p0.0) Breast cancer is the most common cause of death in female cancer sufferers in both developed and developing countries [1]. The exact cause(s) of the majority of breast cancers still remains unknown [2]. By far the most effective way to tackle the disease is through early detection, precise identification of women at risk, and applying preventative measures. Within screening mammography, both mammographic density and parenchymal pattern have been established as image-based risk factors [2]. Current studies suggest that mammographic density is a major risk factor, even though it adds only little to the Gail model [3], and it is still not clear how to incorporate the factors as biomarkers into the risk prediction models [4].
## (s6) Screen Mammography
Number of References: 12

(p6.0) Early detection through breast screening programmes is by far the most effective way to improve survival rate [98]. There are multiple breast imaging modalities; mammography, ultrasound, thermography, PET (positron emission tomography), MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), CT (computed tomography), scintimammography, optical imaging, and electrical impedance tomography (EIT) based imaging have all been used for different purposes. The clinical role for nonmammographic modalities is often to provide additional information when the results of mammograms are indeterminate or of limited utility [99]. This review focuses on evaluation of density using (X-ray related) mammographic modalities, and other modalities are outside the current scope. The reader is referred to [98] for a detailed overview and [100] for a comparison of breast imaging modalities, and the associated biomarkers used for early detection can be found in [101].

(p6.1) Mammography is the gold standard method in detection of early stage breast cancer before lesions become clinically palpable. The most criticised aspect of screening mammography is that, for women with dense breasts, the sensitivity of mammography is significantly reduced leading to concerns over unnecessary biopsies and treatment [102,103]. This may lead to another harm to the patient (e.g., physical, emotional, financial, and/or psychological) [104]. Despite these limitations, mammography as an initial examination can have very good sensitivity and specificity when compared to other modalities (e.g., PET, CT, and MRI). However, the reading and assessment of mammogram densities can be highly subjective with only moderate agreement among radiologists [24,105,106]. Note that modalities such as ultrasound and MRI can have better sensitivity in some cases but with a corresponding loss of specificity. Clinically these modalities are most often used as an adjunct to mammography, whether 2D or 3D, and as follow-up examination to investigate specific mammographic findings. Mammography is a low cost simple procedure, which is affordable for all population screening [98]. Therefore, there is a huge incentive to develop computer aided mammographic analysis approaches, in order to deliver objective and accurate results in an effective and cost-effective way and to facilitate early detection and precise identification in a clinical environment.
## (s25) Discussion
Number of References: 3

(p25.0) This review covers mammographic tissue segmentation existing in the literature covering the period from 1992 to 2014, focusing on automatic approaches, and excluding manual and semiautomatic approaches. Only a fully automatic approach can deliver consistent, standardised, fully reproducible, and comparable measurements for high-throughput breast screening programmes across sites. Figure 7 shows the distribution of various mammographic tissue segmentation approaches, and Figure 8 shows the trend lines for area and volumetric based mammographic density/parenchymal segmentation approaches. This indicates a decline in the number of studies using 2D projection and an increase in the number of studies in 3D volumetric segmentation. Without automation and accurate estimation of breast density/parenchymal patterns, mammographic segmentation developed in a research environment is unlikely to become useful in clinical practices for assessing mammographic risk or in clinical trials evaluating the influence of different variables (drugs) on breast tissue [187]. Eng et al. [10] concluded that fully automated methods are valid alternatives to the labour intensive "gold standard" Cumulus for quantifying density. However, the choice of a particular method will depend on the aims and settings, and it is essential that the same density assessments approach is required for a research design or survey in which the same subjects are observed repeatedly over a period of time. Despite various methodology issues related to the developed techniques as reviewed in Section 4, there are several other obstacles for most of the developed approaches to demonstrate that imagebased risk prediction can be incorporated in the current nonimage-based risk prediction models (e.g., the Gail and the Tyrer-Cuzick models). A developed mammographic tissue segmentation may work well for one database but not necessarily for other databases; a tuning process may be required to adapt the approach for a different database [189]. As a result, it is difficult to determine the robustness and reliability of a segmentation approach without quantitative and qualitative analysis using mammographic images obtained from different manufactures and perhaps digitised differently. Note that digitised SFM lacks the linearity of the characteristic curve of film, which in combination with the lack of uniformity of thickness of breast tissue during compression can influence the accuracy of the relationship,  Figure 8: Polynomial based trend lines for both area and volumetric based mammographic density/parenchymal segmentation approaches from 1992 to 2014. Note that the (blue) 2D trend line shows harmonic (e.g., interval peaks) behaviour which may be because a surge of manuscripts was submitted for publication at the same years (e.g., biannual) as the major breast imaging related conferences.
## (s26) Imaging Modality.
Number of References: 3

(p26.0) There are doubts about the relationship between mammographically determined breast density/parenchymal patterns and breast cancer risk [155]. One of the inherent limitations for area based measurements is that they do not take thickness of dense tissue into account. It is biologically more plausible that breast cancer risk is related to the volume of dense tissue in the breast rather than to its projection. Conventional 2D mammography is affected by tissue superimposition, whilst volumetric analysis of breast tissue through emerging tomographic breast imaging modalities has been suggested as necessary to advance breast cancer risk modelling [155]. It should be noted that all the mammographic risk/density schemes as discussed in Section 2 were established based on digitised SFM. Although some image-based models like the BI-RADS scheme are reviewed in a clinical environment, there are no updates in the literature to indicate that when using FFDM or DBT, the relationship between breast density/parenchymal patterns and breast cancer risk is the same as that established for SFM. To date, all the studies presume the relationship between breast density/parenchymal patterns of different modalities and breast cancer risk is the same, with no clinical evidence or proof. Previously unknown relationships between breast density/parenchymal patterns and breast cancer risk may be discovered by using more advanced breast imaging techniques and modalities, especially when FFDM is likely to 24 International Journal of Breast Cancer replace standard SFM and DBT is fundamentally different to SFM and FFDM.
## (s28) Study Population Matters.
Number of References: 8

(p28.0) During evaluations, many studies only used a small amount of data from the general populations of western developed countries, and few studies subgrouped data based on different criteria. Although it is well established that density measurements are associated with breast cancer risk, still several aspects are questioned [87]. For example, hormone therapy is known to increase breast density; certain regimes are known to relate to breast cancer risk [191], but the degree to which density and risk are related during hormone therapy is not known [192,193]. Several studies [96,97,194,195] on the assessment of breast cancer risk in postmenopausal women showed no clear correlation between the disease and tissue density, and the magnitude of the association varied. Therefore studies involving all ranges and subgroups of the populations based on age, body mass, ethnic background, and so forth could be beneficial in providing additional evidence and linking breast density/parenchymal patterns with other breast cancer risk factors established in non-image-based risk prediction models.
## (s29) Segmentation Schemes.
Number of References: 11

(p29.0) The vast majority of mammographic tissue segmentation approaches are focused on the well-established density as biomarker. However, some of the studies use BI-RADS density categories and others may use the SCC or Wolfe scheme. The relation between breast cancer risk and density is at best hypothesised [87], and the optimal approach to derive information from mammograms relating to risk of breast cancer is still argued [196,197]. Various classification/categorisation mappings between different schemes have been studied [24,90,94], which is beneficial for experimental comparison when using different imagebased breast cancer risk prediction models. Recent studies have indicated that not just density but also heterogeneity in mammograms can be associated with risk [196,198,199]. This suggested that mammographic tissue segmentation based on Tabár's parenchymal patterns (i.e., mammographic building blocks) could be more useful than density based approaches. 5.6. Evaluation. Clinically obtained "ground truth" is often used in algorithm evaluation and validation. Many studies have shown issues of large interobserver variations in breast tissue annotated by radiologists with different mammogram reading experiences. This makes area overlapping based evaluation unreliable. Such variations also exist for mammographic risk assessment by radiologists, as manual mammographic risk assessment is intrinsically subjective, and there is substantial inter-and intraobserver variability [119,200]. This subjectiveness includes visual assessment. Therefore, inconsistent results could be obtained if a different group of radiologists is used to obtain "ground truth" for evaluation or validation, even when the methodology remains the same. There is no easy solution to overcome this, but using consensus data is probably by far the best way to deal with this issue.
