# Automatic Compilation of Travel Information from Texts: A Survey Automatic Compilation of Travel Information from Texts: A Survey

CorpusID: 58789753 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/222e128a140e5a6cd180e79280928150cd6d782e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/222e128a140e5a6cd180e79280928150cd6d782e)

Fields: Geography, Computer Science

## (s3) Automatic extraction of travel information from texts
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) Nakatoh et al. [24] proposed a method for extracting names of local culinary dishes from travel blogs written in Japanese, which were identified when the blog entry included both the name of a sightseeing destination and the word "tourism". They extracted local dishes by gathering nouns that are dependent on the verb "'ßy‹" (eat). Tsai and Chou [32] also proposed a method for extracting dish names from restaurant review blogs written in Chinese using a machine learning (CRF) technique.  In the following, we explain the detail of the bootstrapping-based and machine learning-based information extraction approaches based on Nanba's work [25]. Nanba et al. extracted pairs comprising a location name and a local product from travel blogs written in Japanese, which were identified using the method described in Section 2.1. For the efficient extraction of travel information, they employed a bootstrapping method.
## (s22) Providing travel information along streetcar lines
Number of References: 4

(p22.0) Ishino et al. [13] proposed a method for collecting blog entries about the Hiroshima Electric Railway (Hiroden) from a blog database. 15 Hiroden blog entries were defined as travel journals that provide regional information for streetcar stations in Hiroshima. The task of collecting Hiroden blog entries was divided into two steps: (1) collection of blog entries; and (2) identification of Hiroden blog entries. Figure 7 shows a route map used by the system for providing travel information along the Hiroden streetcar lines. The route map shows Hiroden streetcar stations and major tourist spots. The steps in the search procedure are as follows.
## (s23) Natural language interface for accessing databases
Number of References: 12

(p23.0) Several ontologies for e-tourism have been developed (see Section 6). Unfortunately, the gap between human users who want to retrieve information and the Semantic Web is yet to be cloased. Ruiz-Martínez et al. [30] proposed a method for querying ontological knowledge bases using natural language sentences. For example, when the user inputted the query "I want to visit the most important tourist attractions in Paris", the system conducted part-of-speech tagging, lemmatizing, and modification of query terms by synonyms, and finally searched the ontology. 14 Bressan et al. used images that were categorized into 44 classes as training data for visual categorization. Each class was given a short text name, such as "clouds and sky" or "beach". When an image was categorized as belonging to classes A and B using the visual categorizer, the short texts given to each class were assigned as keywords of the image. 15 

(p23.1) Several ontologies for e-tourism have been developed (see Section 6). Unfortunately, the gap between human users who want to retrieve information and the Semantic Web is yet to be cloased. Ruiz-Martínez et al. [30] proposed a method for querying ontological knowledge bases using natural language sentences. For example, when the user inputted the query "I want to visit the most important tourist attractions in Paris", the system conducted part-of-speech tagging, lemmatizing, and modification of query terms by synonyms, and finally searched the ontology. 14 Bressan et al. used images that were categorized into 44 classes as training data for visual categorization. Each class was given a short text name, such as "clouds and sky" or "beach". When an image was categorized as belonging to classes A and B using the visual categorizer, the short texts given to each class were assigned as keywords of the image. 15 
## (s39) Automatic extraction of travel information from texts
Number of References: 6

(p39.0) Nakatoh et al. [24] proposed a method for extracting names of local culinary dishes from travel blogs written in Japanese, which were identified when the blog entry included both the name of a sightseeing destination and the word "tourism". They extracted local dishes by gathering nouns that are dependent on the verb "'ßy‹" (eat). Tsai and Chou [32] also proposed a method for extracting dish names from restaurant review blogs written in Chinese using a machine learning (CRF) technique.  In the following, we explain the detail of the bootstrapping-based and machine learning-based information extraction approaches based on Nanba's work [25]. Nanba et al. extracted pairs comprising a location name and a local product from travel blogs written in Japanese, which were identified using the method described in Section 2.1. For the efficient extraction of travel information, they employed a bootstrapping method.
## (s58) Providing travel information along streetcar lines
Number of References: 4

(p58.0) Ishino et al. [13] proposed a method for collecting blog entries about the Hiroshima Electric Railway (Hiroden) from a blog database. 15 Hiroden blog entries were defined as travel journals that provide regional information for streetcar stations in Hiroshima. The task of collecting Hiroden blog entries was divided into two steps: (1) collection of blog entries; and (2) identification of Hiroden blog entries. Figure 7 shows a route map used by the system for providing travel information along the Hiroden streetcar lines. The route map shows Hiroden streetcar stations and major tourist spots. The steps in the search procedure are as follows.
## (s59) Natural language interface for accessing databases
Number of References: 12

(p59.0) Several ontologies for e-tourism have been developed (see Section 6). Unfortunately, the gap between human users who want to retrieve information and the Semantic Web is yet to be cloased. Ruiz-Martínez et al. [30] proposed a method for querying ontological knowledge bases using natural language sentences. For example, when the user inputted the query "I want to visit the most important tourist attractions in Paris", the system conducted part-of-speech tagging, lemmatizing, and modification of query terms by synonyms, and finally searched the ontology. 14 Bressan et al. used images that were categorized into 44 classes as training data for visual categorization. Each class was given a short text name, such as "clouds and sky" or "beach". When an image was categorized as belonging to classes A and B using the visual categorizer, the short texts given to each class were assigned as keywords of the image. 15 

(p59.1) Several ontologies for e-tourism have been developed (see Section 6). Unfortunately, the gap between human users who want to retrieve information and the Semantic Web is yet to be cloased. Ruiz-Martínez et al. [30] proposed a method for querying ontological knowledge bases using natural language sentences. For example, when the user inputted the query "I want to visit the most important tourist attractions in Paris", the system conducted part-of-speech tagging, lemmatizing, and modification of query terms by synonyms, and finally searched the ontology. 14 Bressan et al. used images that were categorized into 44 classes as training data for visual categorization. Each class was given a short text name, such as "clouds and sky" or "beach". When an image was categorized as belonging to classes A and B using the visual categorizer, the short texts given to each class were assigned as keywords of the image. 15 
