# Design of LDPC Codes: A Survey and New Results

CorpusID: 617887 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c86374e2c091311860fd8f8616f50cb4f02fa3fa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c86374e2c091311860fd8f8616f50cb4f02fa3fa)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 5

(p0.0) The class of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes represents the leading edge in modern channel coding. They have held the attention of coding theorists and practitioners in the past decade because of their near-capacity performance on a large variety of data transmission and storage channels and because their decoders can be implemented with manageable complexity. They were invented by Gallager in his 1960 doctoral dissertation [1] and were scarcely considered in the 35 years that followed. One notable exception is Tanner, who wrote an important paper in 1981 [2] which generalized LDPC codes and introduced a graphical representation of LDPC codes, now called Tanner graphs. Apparently independent of Gallager's work, LDPC codes were re-invented in the mid-1990's by MacKay, Luby, and others [3] [4][5] [6] who noticed the advantages of linear block codes which possess sparse (low-density) parity-check matrices.
## (s3) A. Definition and Problem Statement
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) A protograph [24][25] [26][27] is a relatively small bipartite graph from which a larger graph can be obtained by a copyand-permute procedure: the protograph is copied Q times, and then the edges of the individual replicas are permuted among the replicas (under restrictions described below) to obtain a single, large graph. An example is presented in Fig.  4. The permuted edge connections are specified by the paritycheck matrix H. Note that the edge permutations cannot be arbitrary. In particular, the nodes of the protograph are labeled so that if variable node V is connected to check node C in the protograph, then variable node V in a replica can only connect to one of the Q replicated C check nodes. Doing so preserves the decoding threshold properties of the protograph. A protograph can possess parallel edges, i.e., two nodes can be connected by more than one edge. For LDPC codes, the copy-and-permute procedure must eliminate such parallel connections in order to obtain a derived graph appropriate for a parity-check matrix.

(p3.1) It is convenient to choose the parity-check matrix H as an M × N array of Q × Q (weight-one) circulant permutation matrices (some of which may be the Q × Q zero matrix). When H is an array of circulants, the LDPC code will be quasi-cyclic. Such a structure has a favorable impact on both the encoder and the decoder. The encoder for QC codes can be implemented with shift-register circuits with complexity linearly proportional to m for serial encoding and to n for parallel encoding [13]. By contrast, encoders for unstructured LDPC codes require much more work. The decoder for QC LDPC codes can be implemented in a modular fashion by exploiting the circulant-array structure of H [28] [29].
