# The influence of functional electrical stimulation on hand motor recovery in stroke patients: a review

CorpusID: 6352356 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/083651e5a03ec55090e7b8ba109e08a2f2ce358a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/083651e5a03ec55090e7b8ba109e08a2f2ce358a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) Neuromuscular electrical stimulation in patients with motor function impairment of the upper extremity has been employed as one rehabilitative treatment option for many years [1]. Electrical stimulation of the neuromuscular system induces a depolarization of peripheral neurons and subsequently elicits muscle contractions. One can distinguish between electrical stimulation used as a therapeutic intervention and functional electrical stimulation (FES). The former induces physiological changes that remain after the actual stimulation, facilitating plastic changes during recovery and leading to improvement of voluntary functions. In contrast, the primary goal of neuromuscular FES is to supplement lost functions. In FES muscles are stimulated in a coordinated manner with the objective to provide function. One of the best known applications is the peroneal nerve stimulator in patients with a drop foot [2]. Thus, FES systems are used to assist patients either by substituting or supporting movements. FES is often applied in patients whose functional recovery has already plateaued. However, it has been shown that repeated muscle activation within the framework of FES might also lead to improvement of voluntary motor control, which exceeded the time of stimulation, compounding the terms therapeutic and functional electrical stimulation and raising the question by what means FES influences motor recovery.
## (s3) Stimulation parameters
Number of References: 5

(p3.0) The specific magnitude parameters of stimulation are subject of discussion. There is scope for variation not only across studies but also inter-individually to evoke optimal muscle contraction and avoid discomfort, pain and skin irritations. The waveform of electrical current pulses is defined by the amplitude (mA), pulse width (μs), ramping form and frequency (Hz). Frequencies above 12 Hz -15 Hz lead to a temporal summation of muscle twitches, increasing the strength and smoothness of a muscle contraction. Spatial summation is achieved by increasing the electrical charge through pulse amplitude and pulse width, influencing the depth of the stimulation effect. Often frequency and pulse width are set constant, whereas pulse amplitude is varied. Stimulation parameters for successful FES are in the range of (I) frequency: 20 -50 Hz, (II) pulse width: 30 -500 μs, (III) amplitude ≤ 100 mA [14,27,28]. De Kroon et al. compared the influence of different stimulation frequencies across studies and detected no relationship between frequency and clinical outcome [27]. A more recent study investigated the effect of pulse width on the paretic and nonparetic arm and found a significant increase in elbow flexion torque in the paretic arm when using a wide-pulse stimulation scheme (1000 μs) [29]. The authors speculate that wide-pulse stimulation may lead to a greater reflexive recruitment in the paretic arm, underlining that pathological changes influence stimulation response.
## (s4) Mechanisms by which FES could lead to plastic changes
Number of References: 9

(p4.0) It remains the question, however, by what means FES influences cortical reorganization. Multiple mechanisms have been proposed. Firstly, FES not only stimulates motor nerve fibers but also afferent sensory nerve fibers. Alteration of afferent input has been shown to lead to organizational changes in cortex in rodents [39] and prolonged stimulation of peripheral nerves can induce changes of motor networks in human cortex [40]. Therefore, the afferent feedback provided by FES temporally coupled with task-related motor execution could facilitate brain plasticity. Secondly, electrical stimulation also induces antidromic firing of motor nerve fibers. The retrograde impulse leads to a depolarization of the anterior horn cells. Rushton hypothesized that the synapse of the pyramidal tract to the anterior horn cell may act as a modifiable Hebb-type synapse in which the antidromic discharge triggered by FES coupled with voluntary motor effort lead to a synchronized pre-and postsynaptic coupling and enhanced synaptic remodeling [41]. Regardless the precise mechanism underlying reorganization, neural network changes during recovery after injury seem to be similar to changes during motor learning of a new skill [42][43][44]. Cortical reorganization during motor learning is evoked by repeatedly performed skilled movements with task specificity and high functional content [45,46]. Moreover, the visual-perception information of the electrically evoked movement can further enhance motor learning [47]. Consequently, functional electrical stimulation could enhance motor recovery on the grounds that it simulates a meaningful task and increases functional relevance.
## (s5) EMG-mediated FES
Number of References: 11

(p5.0) The onset of stimulation can be triggered either cyclic, by button press or through movement-related EMG  activity exceeding a predefined threshold. EMGmediated FES has been applied in multiple studies [12,30,[48][49][50] and links voluntary movement attempts to electrical stimulation. Studies suggested that EMGmediated functional stimulation is more likely to improve motor functions than cyclic stimulation [13]. One can speculate that temporally coupling central neural activity, here the intention to execute a movement, with peripheral activity, a stimulated motor output, reinforces plastic changes further compared to sole stimulation [51,52]. Since stroke patients with severe paresis might fail to evoke sufficient myographic activity, Hong et al. combined EMG-triggered FES with mental imagery training to heighten the electrical activity produced by the muscle and observed an advantage over FES alone [53]. In the attempt to enhance neuroplasticity, other research groups decoded cortical changes during motor imagery using EEG to drive electrical stimulation [54,55].
## (s6) Stage after stroke
Number of References: 15

(p6.0) It remains an open research question to what degree the delay of FES intervention after stroke is critical for rehabilitative success. The time course of cortical reorganization following stroke has been studied in animals and humans (for a review see [56]). During the early post-stroke recovery phase multiple mechanisms, such as homeostatic processes, altered gen expression and changed overall excitability have been shown to promote neuroplasticity [57,58]. The post-stroke brain displays enhanced sensitivity to rehabilitative treatment, hence making the time point for treatment initiation critical [59]. Even during the chronic stage, however, recovery of motor function can be obtained by enhanced rehabilitative therapy [60,61]. Since the primary goal of FES rehabilitation is directed towards the supplementation of lost function, most studies investigated the effect of FES in chronic stroke patients [9,28,30,33,[62][63][64].

(p6.1) Only few studies looked at the rehabilitation effect of FES in acute stroke patients during a time period with potentially even greater impact on recovery ( functional arm movements and found that treatment prevented the development of pain in patients and resulted in improvement of muscle strength [14,66]. To make a comparison across results more complex, especially in studies probing the recovery in a heterogeneous group of acute patients, it is difficult to distinguish between spontaneous improvement or improvement due to a given intervention. All in all, it remains unclear if and how the stage after stroke impacts the potential for improvement mediated through FES. As described earlier, the changes in cortical activation patterns and hence the rehabilitative mechanisms might be dependent on the stage after stroke. So far no studies have been conducted specifically comparing the differences in acute, subacute and chronic stroke patients.
## (s7) Degree of impairment
Number of References: 17

(p7.0) Most studies utilizing FES combine a great variety of patients with diverse severity ranging from mild impairments of dexterity to no residual hand motor function. Thus, comparison of FES studies is complicated by heterogeneous inclusion criteria, which is reflected in diverse outcome results [68]. Von Lewinski et al. found a trend towards greater improvement of arm function in chronic stroke patients with only mild to moderate motor impairment [50]. A clear conclusion, however, whether mild, moderate or severe impairment levels show a greater outcome effect cannot be drawn since most controlled, randomized-trials include only patients with mild to moderate impairment of hand function [8][9][10][11]64,65,69,70], whereas severely impaired patients, with no active hand extension, are predominately evaluated in single case and non-controlled studies [54,63,71]. Hence, FES-based rehabilitation would benefit from measures allowing an a priori prediction of responderrate and functional recovery to help guide specific treatment protocols. However, the temporal evolution of motor function recovery as well as long-term outcome show large inter-individual differences. One simple indicator of functional outcome prognosis is the degree of initial motor impairment [72], however, individual prediction remains difficult due to notable variability in each patient. Newer measures such as the integrity of the corticomotor pathway and ipsilesional cortical activity after stroke obtained with neuroimaging techniques and TMS give rise to additional prognostic values [35,73,74], but it remains to be seen whether they can contribute information on treatment success using FES.
## (s8) Spasticity
Number of References: 17

(p8.0) Other parameters affecting usability of FES in stroke patients are spasticity and concurring muscle changes. On the one hand studies employing FES aim for a reduction of spasticity, on the other hand, excessive spasticity might complicate successful electrical stimulation and is an exclusion criteria in some studies [26,28,30,33]. Poststroke spasticity is a common complication occurring in roughly one third of stroke patients [75]. The pathophysiology of spasticity is likely due to abnormalities on different levels, including muscle properties, spinal mechanism as well as supraspinal alterations [76]. It is one hypothesis that electrical stimulation induces specific plasticity of spinal chord pathways [77] and first attempts to measure changes in spinal circuits through differences in the H-reflex upon neuromuscular electrical stimulation have been made [78]. However, even though few studies indicated a decrease in spasticity after treatment with FES [15,79], others did not find a reduction of spasticity compared to a control group [14,18]. Another obstacle for successful stimulation are chronic tissue changes due to immobilization such as atrophy, loss of sarcomeres, muscle conversion to connective tissue and a decreased resting length of the muscle [80]. Moreover, a loss of motor units in the paretic arm, which might be due to secondary transsynaptic degeneration, could compromise effective FES performance [81,82]. In addition, concurrent flexor spasticity might reduce the effectiveness of FES and enhance spasticity further. Especially EMG-controlled FES with the patients trying to assist the stimulation with a voluntary movement effort [18,83] resulted in less effective stimulation effects due to flexor spasticity.
## (s9) Dosages
Number of References: 6

(p9.0) Not only the onset of treatment but also the duration and frequency of treatment are likely to influence motor outcome. Treatment protocols vary from only few days [9] up to multiple months [30] and daily duration of stimulation differs along studies (see Table 2 for an overview of studies in acute stroke patients). Page et al. compared the efficacy of different rehabilitation protocols in subacute stroke patients and found that 120 minutes of repetitive task-specific practice combined with electrical stimulation was superior compared to shorter durations of stimulation [26]. Similarly, Hsu et al. reported the dosage, ranging from 0 -20 hours of stimulation, as one positive determinant for functional improvement [84]. However, standardized protocols specifying frequency and duration of treatment are missing. One advantage of FES-based rehabilitative therapy is its possibility for in-home usage, allowing for higher costeffective training intensities [15,48].
