# IT applications in healthcare management: a survey

CorpusID: 65012249 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b690e197e405d2fab5b0dccf9e25568581afb98](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b690e197e405d2fab5b0dccf9e25568581afb98)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s2) Medic robots
Number of References: 10

(p2.0) Since the introduction in 1960s, robots have been used in many scientific and social fields. Their use in fields like nuclear arsenal, production of automobiles, and manipulations in space has been widespread. In comparison, the medical science field has somewhat been gradual to take advantage of this technology. Nevertheless, robots are now days being utilised to assist in or perform many complex medical procedures, which has given rise to the term Robotic Surgery. A comprehensive discussion of robotic surgery is available in [6]. Indeed there are many advantages of using robots in healthcare management. For example, developing pharmaceuticals through clinical trials can take many years and cost may rise to billions of dollars. Making this process faster and more affordable could change the world. Robots can play a critical role in such trials. Robots are also very effective in medico training where simulations are achieved.

(p2.1) Use of Robots in abdominal surgery [7] is innovative in comparison to the conventional laparoscopy procedures, and has the potential to eliminate the existing shortcomings and drawbacks. According to [8], the most promising procedures are those in which the robot enables a laparoscopic approach where open surgery is usually required. Likewise robotic surgery for Gynaecology related ailments [9] can also be very effective. The conventional laparoscopy, the surgeon would have limited degree of freedom with a 2D vision, whereas the robotic system would provide a 3D view with intuitive motion and enable additional degrees of freedom. Prostatic surgery, being complex in the way of the degree of freedom, is another area where robots are very effective [10].
## (s3) Virtual, augmented and mixed reality simulations
Number of References: 16

(p3.0) Concept and related technology of Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR) and Mixed Reality (MR), which originate from image processing and make extensive use of AI, have been in use for decades in games and movies. For some time now, the VR, AR and MR tools and technology are assisting the medical field in a significant way. Virtual reality has been used in robotic surgery to develop simulators to train surgeons in a stress free environment using realistic models and surgical simulation, without adversely affecting operating time or patient safety [15]. An account of AR and VR technologies, including the advantages and disadvantages can be found in [16]. The AR and VR technology can be very useful in medical and healthcare education, an account of which can be found in [17]. Applications of VR, AR and MR can also be very helpful in Urology [18].

(p3.1) Concept and related technology of Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR) and Mixed Reality (MR), which originate from image processing and make extensive use of AI, have been in use for decades in games and movies. For some time now, the VR, AR and MR tools and technology are assisting the medical field in a significant way. Virtual reality has been used in robotic surgery to develop simulators to train surgeons in a stress free environment using realistic models and surgical simulation, without adversely affecting operating time or patient safety [15]. An account of AR and VR technologies, including the advantages and disadvantages can be found in [16]. The AR and VR technology can be very useful in medical and healthcare education, an account of which can be found in [17]. Applications of VR, AR and MR can also be very helpful in Urology [18].
## (s5) Evolution of healthcare systems
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) Although the evolution of Information technologies began much earlier, however, its implementation by businesses and corporations occurred in the second half of the last century. The healthcare industry a bit slow to take the advantage of the technology. Earlier, medical records and systems were paper based. Thus the first phase of the usage of information technology and systems in hospital and healthcare management was to transform paper based records to database systems. Not only did it change paper based systems to electronic ones but also allowed data manipulation. As a result, more data could be processed in a very short time, which was critical in making timely decisions. A discussion of early stages of this transformation can be found in [22]. Consolidation of this technology resulted in Healthcare Management Information Systems (HMIS). Timely decision is critical in all walks of life but it assumes a much greater urgency in some healthcare cases. HMIS is capable to transferring data from one location or application to another within split of a second, as opposed to days without the help of electronic systems. This allows users to access, use and manipulate data instantly and concurrently. As the technology continues to evolve and refine, the performance of information systems operations, in particular those of HMIS, is bound to improve.

(p5.1) Although the evolution of Information technologies began much earlier, however, its implementation by businesses and corporations occurred in the second half of the last century. The healthcare industry a bit slow to take the advantage of the technology. Earlier, medical records and systems were paper based. Thus the first phase of the usage of information technology and systems in hospital and healthcare management was to transform paper based records to database systems. Not only did it change paper based systems to electronic ones but also allowed data manipulation. As a result, more data could be processed in a very short time, which was critical in making timely decisions. A discussion of early stages of this transformation can be found in [22]. Consolidation of this technology resulted in Healthcare Management Information Systems (HMIS). Timely decision is critical in all walks of life but it assumes a much greater urgency in some healthcare cases. HMIS is capable to transferring data from one location or application to another within split of a second, as opposed to days without the help of electronic systems. This allows users to access, use and manipulate data instantly and concurrently. As the technology continues to evolve and refine, the performance of information systems operations, in particular those of HMIS, is bound to improve.
## (s15) Medic robots
Number of References: 10

(p15.0) Since the introduction in 1960s, robots have been used in many scientific and social fields. Their use in fields like nuclear arsenal, production of automobiles, and manipulations in space has been widespread. In comparison, the medical science field has somewhat been gradual to take advantage of this technology. Nevertheless, robots are now days being utilised to assist in or perform many complex medical procedures, which has given rise to the term Robotic Surgery. A comprehensive discussion of robotic surgery is available in [6]. Indeed there are many advantages of using robots in healthcare management. For example, developing pharmaceuticals through clinical trials can take many years and cost may rise to billions of dollars. Making this process faster and more affordable could change the world. Robots can play a critical role in such trials. Robots are also very effective in medico training where simulations are achieved.

(p15.1) Use of Robots in abdominal surgery [7] is innovative in comparison to the conventional laparoscopy procedures, and has the potential to eliminate the existing shortcomings and drawbacks. According to [8], the most promising procedures are those in which the robot enables a laparoscopic approach where open surgery is usually required. Likewise robotic surgery for Gynaecology related ailments [9] can also be very effective. The conventional laparoscopy, the surgeon would have limited degree of freedom with a 2D vision, whereas the robotic system would provide a 3D view with intuitive motion and enable additional degrees of freedom. Prostatic surgery, being complex in the way of the degree of freedom, is another area where robots are very effective [10].
## (s16) Virtual, augmented and mixed reality simulations
Number of References: 16

(p16.0) Concept and related technology of Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR) and Mixed Reality (MR), which originate from image processing and make extensive use of AI, have been in use for decades in games and movies. For some time now, the VR, AR and MR tools and technology are assisting the medical field in a significant way. Virtual reality has been used in robotic surgery to develop simulators to train surgeons in a stress free environment using realistic models and surgical simulation, without adversely affecting operating time or patient safety [15]. An account of AR and VR technologies, including the advantages and disadvantages can be found in [16]. The AR and VR technology can be very useful in medical and healthcare education, an account of which can be found in [17]. Applications of VR, AR and MR can also be very helpful in Urology [18].

(p16.1) Concept and related technology of Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR) and Mixed Reality (MR), which originate from image processing and make extensive use of AI, have been in use for decades in games and movies. For some time now, the VR, AR and MR tools and technology are assisting the medical field in a significant way. Virtual reality has been used in robotic surgery to develop simulators to train surgeons in a stress free environment using realistic models and surgical simulation, without adversely affecting operating time or patient safety [15]. An account of AR and VR technologies, including the advantages and disadvantages can be found in [16]. The AR and VR technology can be very useful in medical and healthcare education, an account of which can be found in [17]. Applications of VR, AR and MR can also be very helpful in Urology [18].
## (s18) Evolution of healthcare systems
Number of References: 4

(p18.0) Although the evolution of Information technologies began much earlier, however, its implementation by businesses and corporations occurred in the second half of the last century. The healthcare industry a bit slow to take the advantage of the technology. Earlier, medical records and systems were paper based. Thus the first phase of the usage of information technology and systems in hospital and healthcare management was to transform paper based records to database systems. Not only did it change paper based systems to electronic ones but also allowed data manipulation. As a result, more data could be processed in a very short time, which was critical in making timely decisions. A discussion of early stages of this transformation can be found in [22]. Consolidation of this technology resulted in Healthcare Management Information Systems (HMIS). Timely decision is critical in all walks of life but it assumes a much greater urgency in some healthcare cases. HMIS is capable to transferring data from one location or application to another within split of a second, as opposed to days without the help of electronic systems. This allows users to access, use and manipulate data instantly and concurrently. As the technology continues to evolve and refine, the performance of information systems operations, in particular those of HMIS, is bound to improve.

(p18.1) Although the evolution of Information technologies began much earlier, however, its implementation by businesses and corporations occurred in the second half of the last century. The healthcare industry a bit slow to take the advantage of the technology. Earlier, medical records and systems were paper based. Thus the first phase of the usage of information technology and systems in hospital and healthcare management was to transform paper based records to database systems. Not only did it change paper based systems to electronic ones but also allowed data manipulation. As a result, more data could be processed in a very short time, which was critical in making timely decisions. A discussion of early stages of this transformation can be found in [22]. Consolidation of this technology resulted in Healthcare Management Information Systems (HMIS). Timely decision is critical in all walks of life but it assumes a much greater urgency in some healthcare cases. HMIS is capable to transferring data from one location or application to another within split of a second, as opposed to days without the help of electronic systems. This allows users to access, use and manipulate data instantly and concurrently. As the technology continues to evolve and refine, the performance of information systems operations, in particular those of HMIS, is bound to improve.
