# A review on recent innovation in osmotically controlled drug delivery system

CorpusID: 6526196 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18fd54301f316f38d7348d6780c4130574d17dec](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18fd54301f316f38d7348d6780c4130574d17dec)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s7) Ideal properties of semi permeable membrane [21]
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) The semi permeable membrane must meet some performance criteria, a. The material must possess sufficient wet strength (10-5 psi) and wet modules so (10-5 psi) as to retain its dimensional integrity during the operational lifetime of device. b. The membrane must exhibit sufficient water permeability so as to attain water flux rates (dv/dt) in the desired range. The water vapour transmission rate can be used to estimate water flux rate. c. The reflection co-efficient (ɵ) or "leakiness" of the osmotic agent should approach the limiting value of unity. But polymer membrane must be more permeable to water. Hai Bang Lee et al (2000) studied the sandwiched osmotic tablet system (SOTS). A sandwiched osmotic tablet core surrounded by a cellulose acetate membrane with two orifices on the surfaces of both sides was successfully prepared for the purpose of delivering nifedipine. The appropriate orifice size was observed in the range of 0.50 -1.41 mm. It was also found that the drug release rate of SOTS could be increased by incorporating hydrophilic plasticizer in the membrane, whereas it could be decreased by incorporating a hydrophobic plasticizer [22]. Herbig S. M. et al (1995) found a new type of asymmetric membrane tablet coatings offering significant advantages over conventional osmotic tablets. These asymmetric-membrane coatings can be used to make osmotic drug-delivery formulations with several unique characteristics. The use of asymmetric-membrane coatings on pharmaceutical tablets is described in this study; the coatings have also been applied to capsules and multi-particulate formulations [23].
## (s26) Controlled Porosity Osmotic Pump
Number of References: 4

(p26.0) A controlled porosity osmotic pump-based drug delivery system Unlike the elementary osmotic pump (EOP) which consists of an osmotic core with the drug surrounded by a semipermeable membrane drilled with a delivery orifice, controlled porosity of the membrane is accomplished by the use of different channeling agents in the coating [62]. The CPOP contains water soluble additives in coating membrane, which after coming in contact with water; dissolve resulting in an in-situ formation of microporous membrane. Then the resulting membrane is substantially permeable to both water and dissolved solutes and the mechanism of drug release from these system was found to be primarily osmotic, with simple diffusion playing a minor role [63,64]. Drug delivery from asymmetric membrane capsule is principally controlled by the osmotic pressure of the core formation. In-situ formed delivery orifice in the asymmetric membrane in mainly responsible for the solubilization in the core for a drug with poor water solubility [65].
