# Platelet-rich plasma for androgenetic alopecia: A review of the literature and proposed treatment protocol ☆,☆☆

CorpusID: 67861972 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/40065f41ce45fe09938d82db1c6f01515f2dbbee](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/40065f41ce45fe09938d82db1c6f01515f2dbbee)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 3

(p0.0) Androgenetic alopecia (AGA), also known as female pattern hair loss, is the most common cause of hair loss, affects up to 50% of women over the course of their lifetime, and is known to advance with age and menopause (Rogers and Avram, 2008). AGA is a nonscarring diffuse alopecia due to hormonal and genetic influences and is characterized by the progressive miniaturization of hair follicles, with the transformation of terminal hair into vellus hair (Dinh and Sinclair, 2007). AGA is believed to be attributed to genetic and environmental factors and is known to cause upregulated perifollicular 5-alpha reductase (Rogers and Avram, 2008). The 5alpha reductase converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, which binds to androgen receptors and leads to the activation of genes that transform healthy terminal follicles into vellus-like hairs in androgen-dependent areas of the scalp. These areas are the central, frontal, and parietal regions.
## (s1) Platelet-rich plasma classification systems
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) Multiple authors have suggested classification systems to promote the standardization of PRP to facilitate interpretation and comparison of different studies and its efficacy. Currently, PRP is an umbrella term that does not distinguish between the various characteristics of what is being used, including platelet concentration, presence or absence of granulocytes, and other factors that can affect hair growth. Mishra's PRP classification system was based on the presence or absence of white blood cells, activation status, and platelet concentration coefficient compared with whole-blood baseline (Mishra et al., 2012). This classification system was based on available PRP systems in 2006, which included buffy coat and singlespin suspension. Since its publication, technology and knowledge of important PRP attributes have evolved. The double-spin method was developed and produces a higher platelet concentration (N5 times whole-blood platelet concentration) with little to no red blood cells and neutrophils (Mautner et al., 2015).
