# Eyelid Reconstruction Techniques : An Overview

CorpusID: 67152282 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/980c381e1b95ba21fe03f1b9c74d73c883580e10](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/980c381e1b95ba21fe03f1b9c74d73c883580e10)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) e. Cutler-Beard reconstruction
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) The Cutler-Beard flap (''bridge flap'') was first described in 1955. 12 The principle is to bring full-thickness lower eyelid tissue, harvested from 4 mm below the lower eyelid margin, underneath this remaining ''bridge'' of tissue and over the cornea to fill the upper eyelid defect (Figure 3a-d). The full-thickness flap is divided 4-8 weeks after surgery at the level of the newly reconstructed upper eyelid margin. The Cutler-Beard   19,20 Various modifications have been made to the original Cutler-Beard procedure to address such problems, including the implantation of a stiffener such as donor sclera, 20,21 ear cartilage, 13 and Achilles tendon 22 between the skin-muscle layer and the conjunctival layer of the lower eyelid. An alternative approach has been to raise flaps of only anterior or posterior lamellae from the lower eyelid and to use a free graft to reconstruct the other lamella. Tarsoconjunctival flaps can be raised from the lower eyelid as a reverse of the upper eyelid modified Hughes procedure. 23,24 f. Glabellar flap Defects in the medial canthal areas may involve the skin alone or MCT and/or the lacrimal drainage system. For the skin defect alone, the laissez Faire method which is spontaneous healing of the area is sometimes recommended. 25 The glabellar flap is a transposition flap raised from the glabellar region. The surrounding area is undermined to allow for the direct closure of the donor area and help in transposing the flap into the defect. The donor area is closed like an inverted "Y". It brings the medial ends of the eyebrow together. The MCT and lacrimal drainage system need not be repaired primarily in defects due to malignant lesions.
## (s8) j. Non-bridging, Non-occlusive Techniques
Number of References: 6

(p8.0) To avoid occluding the eye with a bridge flap, vascularized tissue must be recruited from the periocular region to support both lamellae. This may be in the form of an anterior lamellar flap in conjunction with a posterior lamellar graft or bi-lamellar grafts supported by orbicularis mobilization (''sandwich flap''). 32,33 Autologous grafts for upper eyelid posterior lamellar reconstruction include tarsoconjunctiva, 26,27 and hard palate chondromucosa. 29,30 Buccal mucous membrane is another alternative, although this lacks rigidity. 34 k.
