# A review of acoustic imaging methods using phased microphone arrays Part of the "Aircraft Noise Generation and Assessment" Special Issue A review of acoustic imaging methods using phased microphone arrays Part of the "Aircraft Noise Generation and Assessment" Special Issue

CorpusID: 69840714 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3a4345b524efe03d0ae514474e13be0e45ea6ea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3a4345b524efe03d0ae514474e13be0e45ea6ea)

Fields: Physics, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s6) Reynolds number dependence
Number of References: 8

(p6.0) In standard wind-tunnel measurements, a sole discrepancy in Reynolds number at otherwise similar conditions can lead to a difference in results. The effect of a varying Reynolds number on the noise generated was investigated by Ahlefeldt [62]. Here, acoustic measurements were performed on a small-scale aircraft model in high-lift configuration at both a real-flight Reynolds number and a lower Reynolds number corresponding to the standard wind-tunnel conditions. Measurements were performed in the European Transonic Wind tunnel (ETW) which, due to its pressurized and cryogenic environment, enabled a variation of Reynolds number up to real-flight Reynolds numbers. Other parameters were kept unchanged. Thus, Reynolds number effects on aeroacoustic behavior were separated from the effects of model fidelity and Mach number M. Several sources with significant Reynolds number dependence were found and exemplary differences at selected Strouhal numbers are shown in Fig. 2. Several dominant sources can be found at the real-flight Reynolds number, but are not present at standard conditions. Contrary to that, sources are present in the standard measurement but not at the real-flight Reynolds number, as can be seen for example in the slat region. Locally integrated sources from the slat and the flap are shown in Fig. 3. The strong tonal components in the spectrum in the slat region measured at the standard wind-tunnel conditions (lower Reynolds number) disappeared at real-flight Reynolds numbers.

(p6.1) In standard wind-tunnel measurements, these so-called "slat tones" are treated with several transition fixation concepts [63]. For the flap, the real-flight Reynolds number flap sources show their dominant character.

(p6.2) In standard wind-tunnel measurements, a sole discrepancy in Reynolds number at otherwise similar conditions can lead to a difference in results. The effect of a varying Reynolds number on the noise generated was investigated by Ahlefeldt [62]. Here, acoustic measurements were performed on a small-scale aircraft model in high-lift configuration at both a real-flight Reynolds number and a lower Reynolds number corresponding to the standard wind-tunnel conditions. Measurements were performed in the European Transonic Wind tunnel (ETW) which, due to its pressurized and cryogenic environment, enabled a variation of Reynolds number up to real-flight Reynolds numbers. Other parameters were kept unchanged. Thus, Reynolds number effects on aeroacoustic behavior were separated from the effects of model fidelity and Mach number M. Several sources with significant Reynolds number dependence were found and exemplary differences at selected Strouhal numbers are shown in Fig. 2. Several dominant sources can be found at the real-flight Reynolds number, but are not present at standard conditions. Contrary to that, sources are present in the standard measurement but not at the real-flight Reynolds number, as can be seen for example in the slat region. Locally integrated sources from the slat and the flap are shown in Fig. 3. The strong tonal components in the spectrum in the slat region measured at the standard wind-tunnel conditions (lower Reynolds number) disappeared at real-flight Reynolds numbers.

(p6.3) In standard wind-tunnel measurements, these so-called "slat tones" are treated with several transition fixation concepts [63]. For the flap, the real-flight Reynolds number flap sources show their dominant character.
## (s27) Linear programming deconvolution (LPD)
Number of References: 6

(p27.0) Linear programming deconvolution (LPD) [145] is basically a faster alternative than DAMAS to solve the inverse problem introduced in Eq. (15). It considers an additional constraint that no correct model of the beamform map Ãx would exceed the beamform source map obtained by CFDBF y anywhere. This difference ( y −Ãx ) represents the effect of uncorrelated sound sources that were present in the measurement but not in the model, such as background noise, microphone self noise, and long-range reflections [145]. Hence, an approach to obtain x is to maximize the model Ãx , subject to the constraint that it nowhere exceeds y .
## (s31) Compressive-sensing beamforming
Number of References: 16

(p31.0) Compressive sensing [163,164] is a new paradigm of signal processing used in the field of information technology which reduces sampling efforts extensively by conducting L 1 optimization. Reference [165] provides a tutorial example to demonstrate this method for potential aeroacoustic applications. A compressive-sensing-based beamforming method has been developed recently for aeroacoustic applications [166], by assuming a spatially sparse distribution of flow-induced sound sources, S . In particular, a narrow-band compressive-sensing beamforming can be performed using a non-linear optimization algorithm, such as:

(p31.1) where, here, ( ⋅) denotes the estimation and is a noise parameter for which = 0 if the measurements are free of (23) arg min ||Ŝ|| 1 , subject to ||p − GŜ|| 2 ≤ , ≥ 0, noise. A more robust (but more complicated) form can be found in reference [166].

(p31.2) This method has been adopted in the identification of spinning modes for turbofan noise using microphone-array measurements. The required number of sensors can be much less than the number required by the sampling theorem as long as the incident fan noise is sparse in spinning modes [167][168][169].
## (s32) Generalized inverse beamforming (GIBF)
Number of References: 4

(p32.0) The idea behind generalized inverse beamforming (GIBF) [13] is to reconstruct the CSM by a collection of partially coherent sources. Although a method exists which directly recovers the entire CSM [170], its computational cost drastically increases with the number of microphones. To reduce the computational time substantially, use of an eigenvalue decomposition can be made [see Eq. (7)]. This decomposition breaks the problem into N decoupled equations as follows:
## (s70) Reynolds number dependence
Number of References: 8

(p70.0) In standard wind-tunnel measurements, a sole discrepancy in Reynolds number at otherwise similar conditions can lead to a difference in results. The effect of a varying Reynolds number on the noise generated was investigated by Ahlefeldt [62]. Here, acoustic measurements were performed on a small-scale aircraft model in high-lift configuration at both a real-flight Reynolds number and a lower Reynolds number corresponding to the standard wind-tunnel conditions. Measurements were performed in the European Transonic Wind tunnel (ETW) which, due to its pressurized and cryogenic environment, enabled a variation of Reynolds number up to real-flight Reynolds numbers. Other parameters were kept unchanged. Thus, Reynolds number effects on aeroacoustic behavior were separated from the effects of model fidelity and Mach number M. Several sources with significant Reynolds number dependence were found and exemplary differences at selected Strouhal numbers are shown in Fig. 2. Several dominant sources can be found at the real-flight Reynolds number, but are not present at standard conditions. Contrary to that, sources are present in the standard measurement but not at the real-flight Reynolds number, as can be seen for example in the slat region. Locally integrated sources from the slat and the flap are shown in Fig. 3. The strong tonal components in the spectrum in the slat region measured at the standard wind-tunnel conditions (lower Reynolds number) disappeared at real-flight Reynolds numbers.

(p70.1) In standard wind-tunnel measurements, these so-called "slat tones" are treated with several transition fixation concepts [63]. For the flap, the real-flight Reynolds number flap sources show their dominant character.

(p70.2) In standard wind-tunnel measurements, a sole discrepancy in Reynolds number at otherwise similar conditions can lead to a difference in results. The effect of a varying Reynolds number on the noise generated was investigated by Ahlefeldt [62]. Here, acoustic measurements were performed on a small-scale aircraft model in high-lift configuration at both a real-flight Reynolds number and a lower Reynolds number corresponding to the standard wind-tunnel conditions. Measurements were performed in the European Transonic Wind tunnel (ETW) which, due to its pressurized and cryogenic environment, enabled a variation of Reynolds number up to real-flight Reynolds numbers. Other parameters were kept unchanged. Thus, Reynolds number effects on aeroacoustic behavior were separated from the effects of model fidelity and Mach number M. Several sources with significant Reynolds number dependence were found and exemplary differences at selected Strouhal numbers are shown in Fig. 2. Several dominant sources can be found at the real-flight Reynolds number, but are not present at standard conditions. Contrary to that, sources are present in the standard measurement but not at the real-flight Reynolds number, as can be seen for example in the slat region. Locally integrated sources from the slat and the flap are shown in Fig. 3. The strong tonal components in the spectrum in the slat region measured at the standard wind-tunnel conditions (lower Reynolds number) disappeared at real-flight Reynolds numbers.

(p70.3) In standard wind-tunnel measurements, these so-called "slat tones" are treated with several transition fixation concepts [63]. For the flap, the real-flight Reynolds number flap sources show their dominant character.
## (s91) Linear programming deconvolution (LPD)
Number of References: 6

(p91.0) Linear programming deconvolution (LPD) [145] is basically a faster alternative than DAMAS to solve the inverse problem introduced in Eq. (15). It considers an additional constraint that no correct model of the beamform map Ãx would exceed the beamform source map obtained by CFDBF y anywhere. This difference ( y −Ãx ) represents the effect of uncorrelated sound sources that were present in the measurement but not in the model, such as background noise, microphone self noise, and long-range reflections [145]. Hence, an approach to obtain x is to maximize the model Ãx , subject to the constraint that it nowhere exceeds y .
## (s95) Compressive-sensing beamforming
Number of References: 16

(p95.0) Compressive sensing [163,164] is a new paradigm of signal processing used in the field of information technology which reduces sampling efforts extensively by conducting L 1 optimization. Reference [165] provides a tutorial example to demonstrate this method for potential aeroacoustic applications. A compressive-sensing-based beamforming method has been developed recently for aeroacoustic applications [166], by assuming a spatially sparse distribution of flow-induced sound sources, S . In particular, a narrow-band compressive-sensing beamforming can be performed using a non-linear optimization algorithm, such as:

(p95.1) where, here, ( ⋅) denotes the estimation and is a noise parameter for which = 0 if the measurements are free of (23) arg min ||Ŝ|| 1 , subject to ||p − GŜ|| 2 ≤ , ≥ 0, noise. A more robust (but more complicated) form can be found in reference [166].

(p95.2) This method has been adopted in the identification of spinning modes for turbofan noise using microphone-array measurements. The required number of sensors can be much less than the number required by the sampling theorem as long as the incident fan noise is sparse in spinning modes [167][168][169].
## (s96) Generalized inverse beamforming (GIBF)
Number of References: 4

(p96.0) The idea behind generalized inverse beamforming (GIBF) [13] is to reconstruct the CSM by a collection of partially coherent sources. Although a method exists which directly recovers the entire CSM [170], its computational cost drastically increases with the number of microphones. To reduce the computational time substantially, use of an eigenvalue decomposition can be made [see Eq. (7)]. This decomposition breaks the problem into N decoupled equations as follows:
