# IJBCP International Journal of Basic & Clinical Pharmacology Advances in human papilloma virus vaccines: a review

CorpusID: 72468269 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4775486ddf4f901753082c0b4bfae818e7bf1f42](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4775486ddf4f901753082c0b4bfae818e7bf1f42)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Virus-Like Particles (VLPs)
Number of References: 20

(p2.0) A major breakthrough in HPV vaccine research came with the discovery that the capsid proteins L1 and L2 (or L1 alone) self-assemble into virus-like particles (VLPs) when expressed in cells. VLPs closely resemble native HPV particles and include the conformational epitopes that induce virus-neutralizing antibodies. Therefore, the immune system perceives VLPs as infectious viruses and responds accordingly. 24,30 Because VLPs are empty and do not include viral DNA, they are not infectious. VLPs have been produced for at least ten HPV types so far (6, 11,16,18,31,33,35,39,45, and 58), proving the applicability of this approach for a multivalent vaccine. 31 Two prophylactic HPV-VLP vaccines are available globally and in India. A bivalent HPV16/18 L1 VLP vaccine (Cervarix; Glaxo Smith Kline Biologicals, Rixensart, Belgium), [32][33][34] and a quadrivalent HPV6/11/16/18 L1 VLP vaccine (GARDASIL; Merck, Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA). [35][36][37][38][39] The vaccines are administered by intramuscular injection (0.5ml) either in deltoid muscle or in the anterolateral thigh at a dose of 20-40 micrograms of each VLP at three time points over a 6-month period (0, 1 or 2, and 6 months). 40 For storage and administration of vaccine manufacturer's instructions should be followed.
