# SURVEY AND SUMMARY Two faces of p53: aging and tumor suppression

CorpusID: 7278576 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9a7f6734891d45a88b86d9c6988bc01eb4a642d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9a7f6734891d45a88b86d9c6988bc01eb4a642d)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s2) DNA damage, stem cells and differentiated somatic tissues
Number of References: 9

(p2.0) Cancer is a major age-related disease in mice, humans and many other mammals (7). In the absence of cancer, aging is mostly characterized by tissue atrophy and degeneration (8).

(p2.1) Most mammalian tissues can be described as being comprised of two major cellular components: stem or progenitor cells, which are responsible for regenerative capacity or repair after injury, and differentiated somatic cells, responsible for adult stem cell support and specialized tissue/organ functions. Based on this classification, two major mechanisms can account for tissue degeneration associated with age: loss of stem cell pool division potential (loss of regenerative capacity) and loss of differentiated somatic cell function, which directly leads to loss of organ function. Loss of differentiated somatic cell function can additionally indirectly affect adult stem and progenitor cells by altering the tissue microenvironment that is essential for stem cell support (the stem cell niche). In general, loss of stem cell pool division potential can occur through multiple mechanisms including stem cell senescence, death or dysfunction of the niche. One specific mechanism that can account for the loss of both stem cell and differentiated somatic cell function is the gradual accumulation of persistent DNA damage. Persistent DNA damage and its erroneous resolution *To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1 415 209 2042; Fax: 415-209-22232; Email: dbhaumik@buckinstitute.org ß 2007 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. include telomeric dysfunction (9)(10)(11) and somatic mutations (12), both of which increase with age; both also have been proposed to contribute to the loss of stem and differentiated somatic cell function with age (13,14). DNA damage accumulation in stem cells has been detected in mice and clearly contributes to the attrition of stem cell division potential during aging (15). Thus, it is likely that DNA damage contributes to aging by limiting stem cell division potential and by also interfering with somatic tissue functions, including stem cell niches.
## (s4) P53 AND AGING IN MOUSE MODELS
Number of References: 6

(p4.0) Recent studies indicate that proteins involved in DNA damage repair play an essential role in life span determination (61)(62)(63)(64). Several of these studies implicate a role of p53 in establishing senescence and implicate it as a potential regulator of organismal aging (4,6). Although a physiological role for p53 in aging is controversial, studies with different mouse models indicate a delicate balance between the tumor suppressive and agepromoting functions of p53. Here, we discuss several of these mouse models (summarized in Table 1). Note that when referring to altered aging phenotypes in mouse models, in general, premature aging refers to phenotypes that occur very early (weeks) after birth, whereas accelarated aging refers to phenotypes that take longer to develop (months/years), but that would normally take much longer to develop in control animals.   
## (s5) Mouse models affected by p53
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) Ku80 null mice. Ku80 is a DNA repair protein that associates with Ku70 to comprise the DNA-binding component of DNA-PK (65). Ku80 null mice exhibit accelerated aging phenotypes, including skin atrophy, osteopenia, hepatocellular degeneration and shortened life span (61). The authors speculated that a lack of NHEJ and therefore increased DNA damage load could account for the accelerated aging phenotype. In support of this hypothesis, mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from Ku80 À/À mice clearly underwent p53-dependent premature replicative senescence. A requirement for p53 was illustrated by the limited proliferative capacity of Ku80 À/À cells compared to Ku80 À/À p53 +/À fibroblasts (66). Thus, p53 deficiency rescues the premature replicative senescence of Ku80 À/À MEFs. If, as suggested, increased DNA damage and increased p53 activity is responsible for the accelerated aging phenotype of Ku80 À/À mice, crossing these animals with p53-deficient mice might rescue the accelerated aging. Interestingly, mice deficient in both Ku80 and p53 were much more cancer-prone than mice that were deficient only in p53 (66). The increase in cancer incidence was large enough to obscure any beneficial effect that loss of p53 might have conferred on the accelerated aging observed in Ku80deficient mice. Clearly, loss of p53 cannot rescue accelerated aging phenotypes if cancer incidence is dramatically increased.
