# antibiotics A Review of Quality Measures for Assessing the Impact of Antimicrobial Stewardship Programs in Hospitals

CorpusID: 7625026 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/82bf2cb915fc27fdd7e8938d42fcd3e813a04c44](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/82bf2cb915fc27fdd7e8938d42fcd3e813a04c44)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Results
Number of References: 5

(p5.0) The initial search returned 4319 articles. Of these, 152 met the inclusion criteria, and a full-text evaluation was carried out on 63 studies. In summary, four studies defined quality metrics for evaluating ASP. Twenty-one studies assessed impact on antimicrobial utilization and cost, 25 studies evaluated impact on resistance patterns and/or rate of CDI. Thirteen studies assessed impact on patient outcomes including mortality, LOS, and readmission rates. Table 1 includes studies [16][17][18][19] that developed or defined quality measures for evaluating ASP. Methods used were modified Delphi technique, survey, and interviews. Bumpass et al. [19] surveyed ID physicians' and pharmacists' opinions of AMS metrics considered important in evaluating ASP. The authors reported that although appropriateness of antimicrobial use, infection-related mortality, and antibiotic associated length of stay were considered more important outcomes by those surveyed, antimicrobial use and cost were the most commonly collected metrics. 
## (s9) Impact of ASP on Resistance Patterns and Clostridium Difficile Infection (CDI)
Number of References: 14

(p9.0) A total of 25 studies  assessed the impact of ASP on microbiological outcomes (bacterial resistance patterns) and/or CDI rates. Thirteen of the 25 studies assessed impact on CDI rates and other outcomes. Nine out of 13 studies reported a statistically significant reduction in the rate of CDI following ASP implementation [41,42,51,52,54,56,58,61,64]. Khan and Cheesbrough [44] and Malani et al. [62] reported a progressive fall in the rate of C. difficile-associated diarrhea (CDAD) and 50% decrease in the likelihood of developing CDI respectively. A restriction policy on ciprofloxacin and ceftriaxone resulted in a 70.20% reduction in the CDI with non-significant effect on extended spectrum beta lactamases (ESBL)-producing colliforms (p = 0.075) [63]-a proxy for antimicrobial resistance development.

(p9.1) Twelve studies assessed the impact on the resistance patterns of organisms commonly associated with hospital infections (ESKAPE: Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcocus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species, e.g., Escherichia coli) [67] and reported a reduction in resistance or unchanged susceptibilities in these organisms following AMS interventions. Saizy-Callaert et al. [45] reported a significant fall in the rate of ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae (p < 0.001) following the development of a multidisciplinary consultative approach which included developing local prescribing consensus with all prescribers; restricted prescriptions policy; regular audits of use of restricted antibiotics and institutional wide training and information for prescribers. A restriction policy on ceftazidime resulted in a significant decrease in A. baumannii (p = 0.01) [48]. Table 3 summarizes studies that assessed impact on CDI rate and resistance patterns.  
