# Sleep as a biological problem: an overview of frontiers in sleep research

CorpusID: 7699168 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b73104e78d4c831f46f39f45fffcfce4e1e8b077](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b73104e78d4c831f46f39f45fffcfce4e1e8b077)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s1) Section 1: Cortical dynamics during sleep
Number of References: 36

(p1.0) What is sleep? This fundamental question must be answered before we can achieve an understanding of the mechanisms and functions of sleep, however, it has been virtually ignored in the biology of sleep. Sleep is generated by the brain. Therefore, a neurophysiological perspective is an essential consideration for biology of sleep [23]. Although sleep is a global phenomenon not only in the brain but also in the whole body, it is not so reliable to judge the sleeping state in many species of animals only by the behavioral aspects such as posture, body motion, and opening and closing of eyelids. As described above, the EEG reflects closely the state of sleep. In fact, EEG is generally used to score sleep stages in mammals including humans. In other words, the neurophysiological features of cerebral cortex are the keys for understanding the state of sleep itself. Unfortunately, however, it is almost impossible to estimate the electrophysiological behavior of individual cells from EEG date, because, in principal, this inverse problem is ill-posed [24].

(p1.1) Ideally, the state of sleep should be understood from a comprehensive picture of the neural activity all over the cortex in vivo with high spatial (subcellular-cellular) and temporal (millisecond-second) resolution. In reality, conventional techniques do not simultaneously meet the requirements [25]. It should be noted that functional imaging of the whole brain with a cellular resolution has been achieved with light-sheet microscopy in the larval zebrafish in vivo [26] and in the larval Drosophila ex vivo [27]. At this point, however, it is technically difficult to shed light on the mammalian brain in vivo with light sheets due to the larger size and the lower optical transparency compared to that of the larvae. For obtaining accurate knowledge of individual neural dynamics, currently available methods to measure a wide-range of cerebral activity are partly prospective but still need further improvement. Hence, in the mammalian brain, we can still learn a lot from the socalled 'bottom-up (from parts to the whole)' approaches with in vivo cellular physiological techniques which have continued since the era of classical single-unit studies.

(p1.2) The rhythmic activity in the cortex during SWS is a common feature across areas, species, and dimensions, which is being explored with the use of electrophysiological techniques such as unit, intracellular, and patch-clamp recordings in vivo. In intracellular studies, the sequential depolarized (UP) and hyperpolarized (DOWN) states appear in the membrane potentials of cortical neurons under anesthesia, which are correlated with the oscillations in the EEG [28][29][30]. The UP/DOWN states are observed also in naturally sleeping animals [31,32]. In natural sleep, the transition of UP/DOWN states is synchronous not only between nearby neurons [33] but also between distant neurons (up to 12 mm apart) [34]. In extracellular studies, sleep provokes a change in firing behaviors of pyramidal tract neurons: a regular spiking during wakefulness and a rhythmic burst firing during SWS [35]. During SWS, multiple cortical neurons cease to fire in synchrony for a short period, and that the silent periods are associated with surface EEG and local field potentials (LFP) in rats [36,37] and in humans [38]. The period of spontaneous discharge and the period of quiet in a group are referred to as ON and OFF period, respectively. However, it has not been proven directly whether ON/OFF periods in the extracellular studies correspond to UP/DOWN states in the intracellular studies. In addition, the origin and the mechanisms involved in the rhythmic cortical activity for SWS remain controversial [22,39].
## (s3) Section 5: Regulation of sleep homeostasis and energy metabolism focusing on PPAR and ketone body
Number of References: 8

(p3.0) Multiple studies have demonstrated an association between sleep and energy metabolism. Numerous epidemiologic studies have provided evidence that short-duration or poorquality sleep induces appetite dysregulation, increases Fig. 2 Single-unit recording from neurons in the amygdala during REM sleep. PS-active neurons recorded from the amygdala, which shows phasic firing preceding blood pressure (BP) increase (a vertical dashed line) during REM sleep body mass index (BMI), and decreases glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity, which increases the risk of type 2 diabetes [93][94][95][96]. However, the mechanisms of the relationship between sleep restriction and metabolic disorders have remained elusive. We recently demonstrated that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) and ketone bodies (acetoacetate, AcAc and b-hydroxybutyrate, BHB), both of which are important for energy metabolism, also participate in sleep regulation.
## (s8) Section 1: Cortical dynamics during sleep
Number of References: 36

(p8.0) What is sleep? This fundamental question must be answered before we can achieve an understanding of the mechanisms and functions of sleep, however, it has been virtually ignored in the biology of sleep. Sleep is generated by the brain. Therefore, a neurophysiological perspective is an essential consideration for biology of sleep [23]. Although sleep is a global phenomenon not only in the brain but also in the whole body, it is not so reliable to judge the sleeping state in many species of animals only by the behavioral aspects such as posture, body motion, and opening and closing of eyelids. As described above, the EEG reflects closely the state of sleep. In fact, EEG is generally used to score sleep stages in mammals including humans. In other words, the neurophysiological features of cerebral cortex are the keys for understanding the state of sleep itself. Unfortunately, however, it is almost impossible to estimate the electrophysiological behavior of individual cells from EEG date, because, in principal, this inverse problem is ill-posed [24].

(p8.1) Ideally, the state of sleep should be understood from a comprehensive picture of the neural activity all over the cortex in vivo with high spatial (subcellular-cellular) and temporal (millisecond-second) resolution. In reality, conventional techniques do not simultaneously meet the requirements [25]. It should be noted that functional imaging of the whole brain with a cellular resolution has been achieved with light-sheet microscopy in the larval zebrafish in vivo [26] and in the larval Drosophila ex vivo [27]. At this point, however, it is technically difficult to shed light on the mammalian brain in vivo with light sheets due to the larger size and the lower optical transparency compared to that of the larvae. For obtaining accurate knowledge of individual neural dynamics, currently available methods to measure a wide-range of cerebral activity are partly prospective but still need further improvement. Hence, in the mammalian brain, we can still learn a lot from the socalled 'bottom-up (from parts to the whole)' approaches with in vivo cellular physiological techniques which have continued since the era of classical single-unit studies.

(p8.2) The rhythmic activity in the cortex during SWS is a common feature across areas, species, and dimensions, which is being explored with the use of electrophysiological techniques such as unit, intracellular, and patch-clamp recordings in vivo. In intracellular studies, the sequential depolarized (UP) and hyperpolarized (DOWN) states appear in the membrane potentials of cortical neurons under anesthesia, which are correlated with the oscillations in the EEG [28][29][30]. The UP/DOWN states are observed also in naturally sleeping animals [31,32]. In natural sleep, the transition of UP/DOWN states is synchronous not only between nearby neurons [33] but also between distant neurons (up to 12 mm apart) [34]. In extracellular studies, sleep provokes a change in firing behaviors of pyramidal tract neurons: a regular spiking during wakefulness and a rhythmic burst firing during SWS [35]. During SWS, multiple cortical neurons cease to fire in synchrony for a short period, and that the silent periods are associated with surface EEG and local field potentials (LFP) in rats [36,37] and in humans [38]. The period of spontaneous discharge and the period of quiet in a group are referred to as ON and OFF period, respectively. However, it has not been proven directly whether ON/OFF periods in the extracellular studies correspond to UP/DOWN states in the intracellular studies. In addition, the origin and the mechanisms involved in the rhythmic cortical activity for SWS remain controversial [22,39].
## (s10) Section 5: Regulation of sleep homeostasis and energy metabolism focusing on PPAR and ketone body
Number of References: 8

(p10.0) Multiple studies have demonstrated an association between sleep and energy metabolism. Numerous epidemiologic studies have provided evidence that short-duration or poorquality sleep induces appetite dysregulation, increases Fig. 2 Single-unit recording from neurons in the amygdala during REM sleep. PS-active neurons recorded from the amygdala, which shows phasic firing preceding blood pressure (BP) increase (a vertical dashed line) during REM sleep body mass index (BMI), and decreases glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity, which increases the risk of type 2 diabetes [93][94][95][96]. However, the mechanisms of the relationship between sleep restriction and metabolic disorders have remained elusive. We recently demonstrated that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) and ketone bodies (acetoacetate, AcAc and b-hydroxybutyrate, BHB), both of which are important for energy metabolism, also participate in sleep regulation.
