# TRAINING OF POSTGRADUATE STUDENTS IN PATHOLOGY, CURRENT SCENARIO AND HOW IT CAN BE IMPROVED: A REVIEW

CorpusID: 78783514 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4b9f146c3429e5eb302dd3b25eabcaece1446463](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4b9f146c3429e5eb302dd3b25eabcaece1446463)

Fields: Medicine, Education

## (s3) METHODS TO IMPROVE:
Number of References: 9

(p3.0) The various observations and suggestions of eminent pathologists and clinicians in this field were as follows. [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9] 1. Providing a list of learning objectives as per Medical Council of India/Universities in a sequential manner and evaluating their achievement in a stepwise process. incomplete, inaccurate, inappropriate laboratory reports and hold discussions with the residents on the construction of good quality reports. 6. Sensitization to applications of molecular pathology and genomics: An attempt could at least be made to discuss the basis for the techniques and the common diagnostic and therapeutic applications of the common ones. If there is a regional laboratory that performs these tests, the trainees should be encouraged to go and observe them. 7. Research methodology and statistical analysis: They should be taught and tested as modules. 8. Exposure to experimental medicine/pathology laboratories: Most departments do not have the facilities for animal experimentation or tissue cultures. An attempt should be made to arrange visitation by trainees to centers where these are available to get a concept on how they run. 9. Clinical correlations: Many pathologists feel that writing a good report is the total activity of a pathologist. The trainees should be encouraged to think about the patient and develop the competence to build a clinical story based on a pathology image and vice versa. This should be a part of teaching and testing. 10. Electronic portfolio (e-portfolio): The trainees should be encouraged to develop an eportfolio of their learning activities. They should add to it and enhance it regularly. The eportfolio could be one vital segment of the overall evaluation of the trainee. 11. Developing algorithms for approach towards diagnosis: The algorithms can be computerized. This is more helpful than jumping to diagnostic conclusions. 12. The evaluations should be in multiple stages, at the end of first three months, first 6, 12, 18 and 24 months. A greater value should be attached to the in-course evaluation to reduce the tensions and subjectivity of an all or none final examination. The in-course assessment should monitor the communications skills and professional behavior in addition to cognitive skills. The faculty members should also be evaluated by the trainees regularly and should have regular meetings with the residents to discuss and resolve issues related to training.
