# molecules Assessment of Enzyme Inhibition: A Review with Examples from the Development of Monoamine Oxidase and Cholinesterase Inhibitory Drugs

CorpusID: 7896027 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c2f7fe59cd159c9c3d7edbfd0c06b5c868a9cfe](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c2f7fe59cd159c9c3d7edbfd0c06b5c868a9cfe)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry

## (s2) Propargylamines
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) The first drug used in the propargyl class was the non-specific pargyline (Figure 1a). Subsequent development led to selective inactivators, clorgyline for MAO A and l-deprenyl and rasagiline for MAO B. l-Deprenyl and rasagiline are used for adjunct therapy of Parkinson's disease. Both ldeprenyl and rasagiline inactivate MAO B at nanomolar concentrations, but can also inactivate MAO A at higher concentrations [30]. A polar anionic mechanism has been proposed from quantumchemical calculations, where the flavin moiety acts as an electrophile and the bond is formed after deprotonation at the terminal carbon [62]. The acetylenic moiety of the propargyl group is particularly useful for incorporation into multi-target compounds because specificity is defined by the requirement for the catalytic activity of the MAO. Its further adaptation into multi-target compounds for neurodegenerative diseases has been reviewed [63].
## (s4) Propargylamines
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) The first drug used in the propargyl class was the non-specific pargyline (Figure 1a). Subsequent development led to selective inactivators, clorgyline for MAO A and l-deprenyl and rasagiline for MAO B. l-Deprenyl and rasagiline are used for adjunct therapy of Parkinson's disease. Both l-deprenyl and rasagiline inactivate MAO B at nanomolar concentrations, but can also inactivate MAO A at higher concentrations [30]. A polar anionic mechanism has been proposed from quantum-chemical calculations, where the flavin moiety acts as an electrophile and the bond is formed after deprotonation at the terminal carbon [62]. The acetylenic moiety of the propargyl group is particularly useful for incorporation into multi-target compounds because specificity is defined by the requirement for the catalytic activity of the MAO. Its further adaptation into multi-target compounds for neurodegenerative diseases has been reviewed [63].
## (s8) Inhibitors of Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and Butyrylcholinesterase (BChE)
Number of References: 3

(p8.0) The observations that presynaptic ACh levels and the activity of its synthetic enzyme, choline acetyltransferase are decreased in AD resulted in the use of AChE inhibitors to treat the cognitive dysfunction. AChE inhibitors have also been used in the treatment of myasthenia gravis and as a CNS stimulant (analeptic) following the early observation that tacrine (1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-9-acridinamine) caused rapid arousal in experimental animals after morphine administration [100]. Tacrine was subsequently shown to be a reversible inhibitor of both AChE and BChe (see [101,102]). This was the first drug approved in the USA for therapy in Alzheimer's disease. Despite moderate success, its use was subsequently discontinued because of adverse effects. Along with several other cholinesterase inhibitors, it has also been marketed as a cognitive enhancing (nootropic) agent.
## (s9) Design of Compounds that Inhibit Both MAO and ChE
Number of References: 6

(p9.0) The starting point for rational design of dual inhibitors of MAO and ChE has been existing drugs and known pharmacophores. Figure 4 shows the strategy followed in some recent publications to combine anti AD drugs donepezil or tacrine that inhibit ChEs with coumarin structures that inhibit MAO. The combination of donepezil and coumarin shown in Figure 5 met with some success with the best compound showing micromolar AChE and BChE inhibition (IC 50 = 9.10 µM and 5.90 µM, respectively), and selective hMAO-B inhibition (IC 50 = 0.30 µM), but the potency on the four enzymes varied widely across the series [14]. Using tacrine as in the example in Figure 4b was less successful because the large size decreased the inhibition of MAO (IC 50 = 10-100 µM), although the inhibtion of ChEs remained in the sub-micromolar range [129]. Huperzine A ( Figure 3) is an alkaloid that was first isolated from the club moss Huperzia serrata, which has been a traditional 'folk-medicine' remedy in in China. It binds to the PAS, but may also penetrate the active site gorge [124]. It is much less potent as an inhibitor of BChE. It appears to have several additional targets, in protecting mitochondrial function, reducing the tissue labile iron pool and behaving as an antioxidant. [125]. Although Huperzine A is licenced for use as a drug for AD and vascular dementia in China, it is only available as a nutraceutical in many other countries. This may have hampered detailed international clinical trials and account for the conflicting evidence that is presently available on its effectiveness [126,127].
## (s10) Design of Compounds that Inhibit Both MAO and ChE
Number of References: 8

(p10.0) The starting point for rational design of dual inhibitors of MAO and ChE has been existing drugs and known pharmacophores. Figure 4 shows the strategy followed in some recent publications to combine anti AD drugs donepezil or tacrine that inhibit ChEs with coumarin structures that inhibit MAO. The combination of donepezil and coumarin shown in Figure 5 met with some success with the best compound showing micromolar AChE and BChE inhibition (IC50 = 9.10 μM and 5.90 μM, respectively), and selective hMAO-B inhibition (IC50 = 0.30 μM), but the potency on the four enzymes varied widely across the series [14]. Using tacrine as in the example in Figure 4b was less successful because the large size decreased the inhibition of MAO (IC50 = 10-100 μM), although the inhibtion of ChEs remained in the sub-micromolar range [129]. Combining existing drugs to produce multi-target compounds. (a) The core structure of donepezil, an anticholinesterase drug used for AD cognitive effects, is combined with coumarins that inhibit MAO [14]; (b) the discontinued AD drug, tacrine, combined with coumarin [129]; (c) combining the propargyl MAOI rasagiline with the carbamate moeity of the AD drug rivastigmine [130]. Combining existing drugs to produce multi-target compounds. (a) The core structure of donepezil, an anticholinesterase drug used for AD cognitive effects, is combined with coumarins that inhibit MAO [14]; (b) the discontinued AD drug, tacrine, combined with coumarin [129]; (c) combining the propargyl MAOI rasagiline with the carbamate moeity of the AD drug rivastigmine [130]. 7. Change in assay conditions: If the assay conditions are not constant the rate of product formation might be expected to change. If, for example, the reaction involves the formation or consumption of hydrogen ions, the pH of the reaction mixture may change during the reaction, unless it is adequately buffered. If this resulted in a change of pH away from the optimum pH of the reaction this could lead to a decrease in the rate of the reaction. Coupled assays, which continuously remove one of the products, should prevent any decline from cause 2 and, possibly, 3 from occurring.
## (s27) Mixed and noncompetitive inhibition
Number of References: 2

(p27.0) This represents the case where the inhibitor can bind both to the free enzyme (competitive) and to the enzyme-substrate complex (uncompetitive). Such a compound would behave as a mixture of a competitive and an uncompetitive inhibitor; hence the term mixed inhibition. The competitive effect (governed by Ki in Scheme 2) will increase the Km, whereas the uncompetitive effect (governed by K'i The simple treatment of competitive inhibition implies the inhibitor binding to the same site as the substrate. However, it is possible to envisage cases where the inhibitor binds to an adjacent site that prevents substrate binding whilst substrate also prevents inhibitor binding. Such a situation appears to occur with edrophonium (N-ethyl-3-hydroxy-N,N-dimethylanilinium), which competitively inhibits AChE by binding to the PAS [141]. An allosteric effect, whereby inhibitor binding results in a conformational change which prevents substrate binding, whereas substrate binding causes a conformational change that prevents inhibitor binding, is also possible, as appears to be case for several AChE inhibitors [142].
## (s33) Tight-binding inhibitors
Number of References: 7

(p33.0) Some inhibitors bind so tightly to an enzyme that inhibition occurs with inhibitor concentrations that are comparable to those of the enzyme. In such cases, the rate of onset of inhibition, which will be governed by the second-order rate constant for combination between E and I, can be relatively slow. Conversely the rate of dissociation after dilution of the enzyme-inhibitor complex would also be expected to be slow. The kinetic equations governing such inhibition have been presented [144] and graphical [145] and computational [146,147] methods have been reported for determining the type of inhibition and Ki values. Inhibitors of MAO that have been shown to behave in this way include cimoxatone [148], harmaline (see [149]) and methylene blue [150]. As discussed above, AChE is inhibited by high concentrations of substrate, which has been attributed to substrate binding to the PAS as well as to the active site. Such high substrate inhibition may be most simply represented by the model shown in Scheme 4, where a second molecule of substrate binds to the ES complex. This gives a relationship of the form:
## (s35) Tight-Binding Inhibitors
Number of References: 7

(p35.0) Some inhibitors bind so tightly to an enzyme that inhibition occurs with inhibitor concentrations that are comparable to those of the enzyme. In such cases, the rate of onset of inhibition, which will be governed by the second-order rate constant for combination between E and I, can be relatively slow. Conversely the rate of dissociation after dilution of the enzyme-inhibitor complex would also be expected to be slow. The kinetic equations governing such inhibition have been presented [144] and graphical [145] and computational [146,147] methods have been reported for determining the type of inhibition and K i values. Inhibitors of MAO that have been shown to behave in this way include cimoxatone [148], harmaline (see [149]) and methylene blue [150].
## (s53) Coupled Assays for MAO Activity
Number of References: 3

(p53.0) A recently reported chemically coupled assay that takes advantage of the of the acid-induced conversion of the aldehyde product to a form that induces the aggregation of silole to a fluorescent product has been reported [172]. More convenient are the various enzyme-coupled assays developed for high throughput work, using peroxidase to couple the H 2 O 2 formed by MAO activity to the oxidation of a dye. Several dyes have been employed for this purpose, but, not surprisingly, those that are available commercially in assay kits, have become the most widely used. The use of 10-acetyl-3,7-dihydroxyphenoxazine (Amplex Red™) that oxidizes to the fluorescent compound, resorufin, with fluorescence detection is sensitive and convenient, but careful controls for interference in the detection components by the compounds to be studied as inhibitors of MAO are essential. For example, a series of disubstituted indolyl thioureas, particularly those with phenolic groups, being assessed as inhibitors of MAO were found to be potent inhibitors of horseradish peroxidase preventing the use of this coupled assay [176]. Furthermore, it is necessary that the substrate used is not oxidized by the H 2 O 2 -peroxidase system or the detection dye. The luminescence assay (MAO-Glo™ [170] minimizes the problem of inhibition of the coupling system by using a luciferin derivative as the substrate incubated with MAO alone, then stopping the reaction by adding excess coupling system. This makes the MAO-Glo method a stopped (single time point) assay so linearity with time must be verified. As with all coupled assays, careful controls are required and it is advisable to validate hits with direct or different assays.
## (s62) Determination of Acetylcholinesterase Activity
Number of References: 6

(p62.0) Numerous assay procedures have been reported for the cholinesterases, although many of these are modifications of earlier methods to make them more appropriate for specific applications, such as large-scale screening for inhibitors. Before considering the procedures that that may be used, it is necessary to consider the applications for which assays are desired. At the basic level, they might be used to answer the simple questions of whether an individual has been exposed to a toxic AChE inhibitor or whether an area is contaminated with such compounds that may have been used as pesticides or herbicides. Such assays are sometimes carried out in the field where elaborate laboratory equipment is not available and a high degree of accuracy is not required. The details of such methods have been covered in excellent reviews [136,185,186]. More sophisticated procedures are necessary for studies on the mechanisms of inhibition and the kinetic constants involved. This account will concentrate on assays (such as shown in Figure 14) used for accurate kinetic purposes and refer only briefly to the others. necessary to consider the applications for which assays are desired. At the basic level, they might be used to answer the simple questions of whether an individual has been exposed to a toxic AChE inhibitor or whether an area is contaminated with such compounds that may have been used as pesticides or herbicides. Such assays are sometimes carried out in the field where elaborate laboratory equipment is not available and a high degree of accuracy is not required. The details of such methods have been covered in excellent reviews [136,185,186]. More sophisticated procedures are necessary for studies on the mechanisms of inhibition and the kinetic constants involved. This account will concentrate on assays (such as shown in Figure 14) used for accurate kinetic purposes and refer only briefly to the others. Figure 14. Hydrolysis of acetylcholine. The products used as the basis of assay methods are indicated.
## (s65) Hydrogen Ion Liberation
Number of References: 6

(p65.0) As illustrated in Figure 14, the hydrolysis of acetylcholine liberates a hydrogen ion. Thus, the reaction can simply be followed by determining the pH change. Originally, the method involved just two measurements at different times, with the activity being then expressed as ∆pH/hour [188]. A variation involved measuring the time taken for the pH to fall by a set amount. A more elaborate development of this approach for screening acetylcholinesterase inhibitors has been to immobilize the enzyme on to the surface of the pH electrode [189]. However, generally one would wish the pH to remain constant during the reaction, and furthermore, the pH scale is logarithmic rather than linear. This has been overcome titrating with an alkaline solution to keep the pH constant and measuring the amount added with time. Originally this was done manually but this has been superseded but the pH-stat (see [190]), which automatically adds dilute alkali (NaOH or KOH) to the assay mixture to keep the pH constant whilst recording the rate of addition to give a direct measure of the reaction rate. An alternative procedure involves the use of a pH indicator to provide a colorimetric determination of the pH change (see [191]). A variety of indicators, such as phenol red, have been used.

(p65.1) A difficulty with all such methods is that the assay mixture must be unbuffered, or only weakly buffered. For example, the protein in serum or blood samples can militate against any pH changes. Furthermore, it may affect the choice of substrate and any other reaction component under test. For example, acetylthiocholine, which is a commonly-used artificial substrate for AChE, is hydrolysed to the weak acid thiocholine that consumes some of the H + released [190]. Although pH methods have been largely replaced by other approaches for the accurate determination of AChE activity, rapid assessments of inhibition can be made by using test-strips comprising entrapped AChE and a suitable indicator (see [192]).
## (s68) Virtual Screening
Number of References: 5

(p68.0) Rational design of ligands has been greatly facilitated by the availability of crystal structures of target enzymes. Docking programmes allow basic visualization of ligands in the active site and prediction of suitable modifications to small molecules to improve affinity and selectivity. Virtual screening using scoring functions to estimate binding energies for each compound can be used to seek new ligands from large chemical libraries. Probabilistic models, based on the compound structure, have also been used to predict both the primary pharmaceutical target and any off-target interactions [4,6]. Although virtual screening has proved successful in identifying new leads, the accuracy of predicted binding energies is doubtful [210]. Docking methods have become major tools in rational drug design, particularly for multi-target compounds, to probe the effects of alterations in ligand structure on the affinity of the compound for the target enzyme(s). However, predictions of the functional effect of ligand binding on the catalysis by the target(s) still requires verification by assays. Docking cannot predict the efficiency of the mechanism-based inhibitor-only its initial reversible binding. Combining information from theoretical and laboratory assays facilitates the design of analogs from a lead compound, as exemplified by multi-potent ASS234 analogs [183]. In another example, experimental values closely paralleled the predicted values in a test set of carbamate compounds when 3D-Quantitative-Structure-Activity Relationship (3D-QSAR) was used to define 3D-pharmacophores for inhibition of MAO A and B, and of the ChEs [211].
## (s69) Inhibition for Effective Drugs
Number of References: 15

(p69.0) Some of the nerve gases, suicide inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase, discussed in Section 2.4, cholinesterases have been used therapeutically but they are also toxins. Their off-target interactions with the neurotoxin-target esterase can cause further deleterious effects. Since carbamates do not affect NTE, they have proven to be safer alternatives. Many of these are behave as poor substrates for AChE, in which the rate of hydrolysis of the carbamyl-serine intermediate is relatively slow. Their effective half-lives in vivo will depend on the rate of this hydrolytic step. In contrast, the rate of recovery from the effects of reversible inhibitors will be determined by their rates of clearance by metabolism and excretion. The toxicity of irreversible AChE inhibitors, led to the application of reversible and competitive inhibitors for use in AD. The main ones, now in general use, donepezil, galantamine and rivastigmine, are different in structure and also in their target binding sites. Their reported effectiveness in mild-to-moderate AD, leaves open the question of whether, or not, binding to the PAS, rather than, or as well as, to the active site, confers any particular benefit. Despite this uncertainty, one strategy in designing AChE inhibitors for use in against Alzheimer's disease, has been to incorporate binding both at the catalytic site (to spare acetylcholine) and at the peripheral site (to prevent facilitation of Aβ aggregation). Binding of an inhibitor to two sites on the target can also result in a considerable enhancement of affinity as a result of the chelate effect [212]. Examples of multiple points of binding resulting in increased affinity can be seen, for example, in [213][214][215][216]. Since galantamine and rivastigmine also inhibit BChE, whereas donepezil does not, further evidence would be necessary, before it would be possible to evaluate the possible benefits of inhibiting that enzyme. Each inhibitor has a relatively short duration of action and rivastigmine has been reported to give about 30% occupancy [217].

(p69.1) Many different MAO inhibitors have been used therapeutically and this has resulted in an accumulated understanding of their interactions and metabolism. The enzyme has an important role in the metabolism of ingested and xenobiotic amines in addition to neurotransmitter metabolism. The antidepressant moclobemide, a reversible competitive inhibitor that is selective for MAO A, does not completely prevent the intestinal enzyme from catalysing the oxidation of tyramine. In contrast, irreversible inhibitors that are selective for MAO A, such as clorgyline and those that are non-selective, such as, pargyline, allow tyramine to pass unchanged through the intestinal wall and into the serum, with a consequent vascular crisis [53]. In the brain, moclobemide, provides anti-depressant effects at 74% occupancy of MAO A [218]. The proportion of enzyme molecules occupied by such a reversible inhibitor will vary depending on the local concentration of other ligands, such as the substrates, competing for the active site. With competitive inhibitors, the inhibitor can be displaced from the active site by higher substrate concentrations, as discussed above for intestinal MAO, where the inhibitor may be displaced by dietary tyramine allowing some metabolism to occur [219]. For enzymes such as AChE catalyzing essential processes, using a competitive inhibitor ensures that the metabolism can take place when the substrate spikes in concentration. It should be noted that the amelioration of inhibitory effects by rising substrate concentrations requires a competitive inhibitor, since the effects of a true noncompetitive inhibitor would be unaffected whereas those of an uncompetitive inhibitor would be strengthened.

(p69.2) The early MAO inhibitors used as antidepressants were hydrazine derivatives. However, most of these were withdrawn because, in addition to the cheese reaction, there were serious hepatotoxicity problems. The hepatotoxicity appears to have resulted from the N-hydroxylation of the hydrazine group to form a toxic metabolite by microsomal hydroxylases [220]. The one hydrazine, phenelzine (Nardil), that remains in use has few hepatotoxic problems. It appears that the earlier problems may have been compounded by the co-administration of barbiturates to counter sleep disturbances [221]. Such compounds are powerful inducers of the microsomal system and would thus potentiate the toxification of the hydrazine derivatives. The discontinuation of use of barbiturates has now reduced this problem.

(p69.3) Metabolic complications also occur with some other MAO inhibitors. For example, l-deprenyl can be metabolized to l-amphetamine and it has been speculated that this may contribute to its effects [222]. The formation of the more active enantiomer, d-amphetamine from d-deprenyl caused undeniable side-effects that led to led to the discontinuation of that racaemic deprenyl. There is conflicting evidence that the antidepressant tranylcypromine may also be metabolized to amphetamine [223].

(p69.4) In contrast, the antiparkinsonian drugs, l-deprenyl and rasagiline are mechanism-based MAO inhibitors with high selectivity for MAO B (>10,000). Effective inhibition of MAO B in the brain by l-deprenyl was determined using PET scans as about 60% [37]. l-Deprenyl and rasagiline contain a propargyl group that after oxidation reacts with the flavin prosthetic group forming a covalent adduct at the N5 of the FAD in the active site [18]. In the case of the propargylamine derivatives, their off-target neuroprotective effects, which are independent of MAO inhibition [see 24], enhance their therapeutic value.
