# A Review of Current Radiation Therapies for the Treatment of Metastatic Brain Tumors Provisional chapter A Review of Current Radiation Therapies for the Treatment of Metastatic Brain Tumors

CorpusID: 79407121 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/55240a6237ba06bb0a61ec9c03ee70d3ffb59a19](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/55240a6237ba06bb0a61ec9c03ee70d3ffb59a19)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Radiation therapy
Number of References: 8

(p1.0) Radiation therapy (RT) has been the mainstay in the management of CNS metastases. Since the presentation is often multi-focal, surgery is not indicated [4]. However, responses of tumor metastases to whole brain radiation therapy (WBRT) (the current standard of care) are usually incomplete and of short duration and often accompanied by local toxicities, such as neurocognitive loss, etc. [4]. Whole brain radiation therapy (WBRT) was the treatment of choice in the past [6]. WBRT was usually started with a warm up dose of 50 cGy on the first treatment day increasing gradually to 200 cGy over several daily fractions to a planned total dose of 3000-4000 cGy [6].

(p1.1) The advent of glucocorticoid steroids controlled the radiation side effects such as headaches, papilledema, etc. and allowed higher daily doses of radiation to be given without exacerbation of intracranial edema, etc. [7,8]. Although palliative care was provided, neurocognitive and other neurological/behavioral disorders still existed [9]. Also, the doses of WBRT administered were insufficient to treat subclinical metastatic disease that is not seen on the imaging tools available. The common dose schedules used were 3000 cGy in 10 fractions or 4000 cGy in 16 fractions [6].
## (s2) Radiosurgical devices
Number of References: 11

(p2.0) With the development of radiosurgical instruments such as the Gamma Knife and Cyber Knife, it is possible to radiate individual metastatic lesions with great accuracy. In combination with MRI techniques, stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) has become the most widely used procedure to reduce metastatic CNS cancer lesions and has also reduced the incidence of radiation-associated neurocognitive effects [9][10][11][12][13]. The exact radiation dosing varies depending on the size and number of metastases [13,14]. As these techniques have improved, combining WBRT with SRS has been evaluated, and after multiple studies, no increase in overall survival (OS) (but an increase in local control) with WBRT after surgery/radiosurgery has been observed [15][16][17][18]. However, there still remains scenarios in which WBRT may be beneficial. Later in the chapter, we will review this evidence for the use of WBRT.
