# Hyaluronan-Based Hydrogel Scaffolds for Limbal Stem Cell Transplantation: A Review

CorpusID: 80626621 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c36f1b7c361f4637714003f3bca01a3a22941b73](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c36f1b7c361f4637714003f3bca01a3a22941b73)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry, Engineering

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 16

(p0.0) Karl Meyer and John Palmer were the first to extract hyaluronic acid (conjugate base hyaluronate) from bovine vitreous humor in 1934. They named it based on its appearance (hyalos: glass in Greek) and structure (uronic acid: one of sugar molecules) [1]. Endre Balazs later defined various forms of the molecule in 1986. The suggestion of "hyaluronan" (HA) by Balazs (1986) was found to fit well with the international nomenclature of polysaccharides and was subsequently adopted [2].

(p0.1) HA, a well-conserved biopolymer with a disaccharide repeat unit in mammalian species, is one of the main components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) with widespread presence in many tissues in the body. Its concentration varies widely in different tissues: e.g., HA concentration is much lower in lung ECM (15-150 µg/g) and the vitreous humor of the eye (200 µg/g) compared to in the ECM of The configuration and role of HA is determined by its size. This particularly affects its role in the ECM, where it provides structural and biochemical support to surrounding cells. HA can combine with other molecules, such as growth factors and cytokines. Hence, any structural change in the HA polymer can influence the extracellular microenvironment. High conservation of the structural features of HA across mammalian species illustrates the important role of HA in facilitating normal cellular function [3,7,8,25].

(p0.2) Two forms of HA have been classified based on size: low molecular weight (~200 kDa) and high molecular weight (~2000 kDa). Despite being composed of similar subunits they exhibit different biological activities. For instance, it has been proposed that high-molecular-weight HA is involved in reducing inflammatory responses, whereas low-molecular-weight HA induces expression of inflammatory mediators [19,[26][27][28].

(p0.3) Synthesis of HA chains in vertebrates is performed by a class of integral membrane proteins, HASs (HAS1, 2, and 3). These enzymes are site-specific and they distinguish HA from other GAGs [29]. Following HA synthesis, HAS enzymes help to extrude these space-occupying polymers into the extracellular space instead of letting them accumulate in cells [30]. High-molecular-weight HA is thought to be synthesized by HAS1 and HAS3 and low-molecular-weight HA by HAS2 [19,31,32].
