# Journal of Integrative Cardiology Carotid intima media thickness as a surrogate measure for cardiovascular disease in rheumatoid arthritis: Literature review

CorpusID: 80811985 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8e1fbdcbf202840a1b651fd08fd3053323dfb9a0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8e1fbdcbf202840a1b651fd08fd3053323dfb9a0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 38

(p0.0) Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients have significantly increased mortality and morbidity as a result of CVD and cerebro-vascular disease [1]. Laboratory, clinical and epidemiological studies suggest that immune dysregulation and systemic inflammation play an important role in the accelerated atherosclerosis of RA [2,3]. Although cardiovascular (CV) events are major consequences of RA, these complications develop over years, and the time course of epidemiologic and clinical studies has been reduced by using B-mode ultrasound measurement of carotid intima-media thickness (cIMT) and carotid plaque to study early atherosclerotic changes non-invasively [4] ( Figure 1). cIMT values measured by ultrasound correlate closely with direct measurement of local and systemic atherosclerotic burden in pathology studies and with clinical CV endpoints [4][5][6]. Single cIMT measurement is of correspondent to the commonly used risk factors for the prediction of CVD [7]. Therefore, number of studies demonstrated the presence impaired cIMT in RA [8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18][19][20][21], and the change in the cIMT found to be helpful in assessing possible effect of RA drug treatment on CVD risk [22].

(p0.1) Ultrasonographic assessment of common carotid atherosclerosis is a feasible, reliable, valid and cost-effective method for both population studies and clinical trials of atherosclerosis progression and regression [23]. Several studies have demonstrated sub-clinical atherosclerosis in established and in early RA patients, either by increased cIMT or presence of carotid atherosclerotic plaque [8,[11][12][13]15,20,21,24].

(p0.2) Even though atherosclerotic disease may remain asymptomatic for decades, its first manifestation can be severe, even fatal. For this reason, early primary prevention of atherosclerosis and efforts to ameliorate its progression has become important goals in medicine. The non-invasive nature of B mode ultrasonography makes it ideal for screening the presence of CVD and for longitudinal studies. cIMT measures of the far wall for both right and left carotid arteries were obtained. Using the far wall has the advantage that it is the clearest target for measurement and the easiest segment to re-image in a reproducible fashion, Figure  1. Dedicated software for the automated measurement of the cIMT are available, eliminating reader bias and variability that significantly contributes to the noise associated with cIMT measurement. It also reduces measurement error related to repeated measurements in long studies and variability between the measurements [25] coefficients of variation of 5-10% [40,41], although some reports are as high as 18% [42,43].In addition, it is inexpensive, can be used in asymptomatic subjects, can be carried out repeatedly, thus reducing the necessary sample size, is safe, and can be used to quantitatively measure structural changes in the wall of superficial large arteries [39].
## (s1) What is normal cIMT?
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) The American Heart Association Committee has attempted to define the normal arterial intima. In their view, some arterial segments have particularly thick intima, related to the carotid bifurcation. This bifurcation-related thickening has been termed "eccentric intimal thickening", "intimal cushion", or "intimal pad". In straight, nonbranching arteries, such as the distal 1 cm of the common carotid artery (CCA), "normal" intimal thickness is small and comprises a single layer of attenuated endothelial cells over a thin layer of sub-endothelial connective tissue. Both layers give a measure of ≈ 0.02 mm thickness. Because of this small size they cannot be discerned with B mode ultrasound techniques. Therefore, the majority of IMT in a normal CCA is composed of the tunica media [23]. It has been reported that the average thickness of the combined media and intima in a normal CCA varies in middle aged men between 0.7 and 1.2 mm, depending on age [44] (Figure 2).

(p1.1) On the other hand, it has been demonstrated that the intimal layer is very thin in straight, non-branching arteries where median intimal cell layer account for 2.5% (0.02-mm) and the median IMT of approximately 97.5% (0.8 mm) [45]. As a result, most of the observed IMT in these regions is from the media rather than intima. In more diseased arteries, the proportions likely approach 20 % intima and 80% media. However, plaque formation is largely a result of intimal thickening. It is therefore possible that IMT fails to accurately reflect risk for CAD [46].
## (s3) Carotid intima-media thickness (cIMT) as a proxy measure for atherosclerosis
Number of References: 12

(p3.0) In the 1980s, several studies concluded that B-mode ultrasound imaging represent a useful approach for measurement of cIMT [4,[27][28][29][30][31]. Since then, great number of studies analysed the relationship of cIMT to different diseases including RA. cIMT is a well-validated surrogate measure of the risk of coronary and cerebrovascular disease in an individual. Higher cIMT has been shown to predict future ischemic cardiac and cerebral events among people in asymptomatic populations [32,33]. It been shown that the strength of the association between cIMT and myocardial infarction was at least as strong as the association seen with traditional risk factors [34].

(p3.1) In several prospective follow-up studies cIMT has been used as a determinant of an outcome, or as an outcome variable to study determinants of progression of vessel wall abnormalities [35][36][37]. cIMT thickness may be used in clinical trials to study the efficacy of nonpharmacological and pharmacological interventions on progression or regression of the atherosclerotic process. This application of the measurement assumes that changes in cIMT parallel changes in cardiovascular risk, through a common mechanism.
## (s5) Feasibility, reliability, validity and cost effectiveness of cIMT ultrasound
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) A carotid artery ultrasound is of interest because of it is easy accessibility. It has been suggested that ultrasonographic assessment of cIMT is a feasible, reliable, valid and cost-effective method for both population studies and clinical trials of atherosclerosis progression and regression [23,39]. The reliability of this measurement has been well characterized by several groups. Its reproducibility decreases with increasing values of cIMT, but overall figures indicate inter-observer Hannawi, et al. found that cIMT at early onset rheumatoid arthritis was significantly associated with male gender, and there was a similar trend for cIMT progression. They explained that it might be a result of overwhelming effect of RA-associated inflammation on the usual sex-cIMT progression relationship [21]. Others suggested that the sex differences in terms of cIMT are partly attributable to differences in carotid lumen diameter and may therefore reflect differences in physiology rather than differences in vascular damage [49].
## (s7) cIMT measurement
Number of References: 7

(p7.0) Analyses best carried out on frozen images via ECG triggering (lead II) -top of R-wave-to minimize variability depending on changes in the IMT and lumen diameter occurring during the cardiac cycle [23,50]. The interface of the distal CCA was marked over a length of 10 mm. The beginning of the dilatation of the distal CCA served as a reference point for the start of the measurement. The measures only involved the far wall IMT, according to the leading-edge principle. IMT is defined as the distance from the leading edge of the first echogenic (bright) line to the leading edge of the second line; each tissue interface produces an echo if there is sufficient difference in structure, i.e. in acoustic impedance; this allows detection of small structures whose dimension is beyond the resolution limit ( Figure 3). Thus, the anatomical location of a biological structure is always defined by the leading edge, and the thickness of an anatomical entity as the distance between the leading edge of two different echoes [51]. Using the mean of several cIMT measurement rather than a single maximum measure, is generally an accepted method of measurement [25]. Some use the average IMT of six frozen images to be calculated and mean cIMT ((left + right)/2) was taken as a measure of the wall thickness of the distal CCA [25].

(p7.1) Measurements should be made at a mineralized ("hard") plaque, as the echogenic shadow resulting from mineralization usually renders the medial-adventitial interface invisible. As the ultrasonography interfaces are less sharp in the carotid bulb and as the carotid bulb may not be accessible for all subjects, the IMT should not be measured at the carotid bulb even though the IMT is typically greater there than in the CCA. Anatomically, such ultrasound measurement of IMT has been shown to closely relate to the histological measurement of combined IMT in pathological specimens [4,52].
