# Detrimental impact of Microbiota- Accessible Carbohydrate-Deprived Diet on Gut and immune Homeostasis: An Overview

CorpusID: 808767 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f5ca4fb3151dbdc6ae2415b10fd10b7544e9270](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f5ca4fb3151dbdc6ae2415b10fd10b7544e9270)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s4) Low Dietary MACs Contribute to Decreased epithelial integrity
Number of References: 12

(p4.0) Bacterially derived SCFAs ensure epithelial integrity by increasing transepithelial resistance (34), as well as promoting mucus secretion (35). SCFAs increase prostaglandin secretion by subepithelial myofibroblasts, which, in turn, promote epithelial mucin expression, a key component of the mucus layer (36). Butyrate, but neither acetate nor propionate, upregulated colonic mucin expression in vitro, by inhibiting HDAC activity (37). SCFAs have also been recently found to be critical for epithelium repair, through the direct activation of NLRP3 inflammasome in gut epithelial cells, leading to release of IL-18 (4). NLRP3 inflammasome activation is protective in a murine model of colitis induced by dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) (38). Mice fed on an MAC-deprived diet had significantly less IL-18, and worse DSS-induced colitis (4,39). Inflammasome activation is a two-step process involving both a priming and a trigger phase (39). While these phases are well characterized in macrophages, they remain elusive in epithelial cells. It was recently shown that fecal extracts, containing various microbial associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) could prime the NLRP3 inflammasome, and that acetate could trigger this pathway by inducing cell hyperpolarization secondary to increased intracellular Ca 2+ . Interestingly, fecal supernatants from low MAC-fed mice were less potent in priming NLRP3 inflammasome compare to those from high MACs probably due to the different MAMPs present (4). While most studies focus on SCFAs as critical in promoting beneficial effects of MACs in diseases, it is important to note that beneficial changes in the microbiota by itself is also critical, as treatment with SCFAs in drinking water only partially recapitulates the effects of MACs (4,22). Microbiota-accessible carbohydrate-induced microbiota changes can also directly impact epithelial integrity. As described above, under low-MAC conditions, some bacteria use the mucus layer as a source of energy. This phenomenon thins the mucus layer and impairs the epithelial barrier. This low MAC-induced gut permeability was associated with increased susceptibility to the epithelium-targeting pathogen Citrobacter rodentium suggesting that dietary MACs are key in fighting gastrointestinal infections (29).
