# MEDITERRANEAN JOURNAL OF RHEUMATOLOGY Association of Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance with Behcet's Disease: A Review of Shared Common Disease Pathogenetic Mechanisms

CorpusID: 81523315 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e8aa515d98f30f760d59fe0c721a7c58505539f5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e8aa515d98f30f760d59fe0c721a7c58505539f5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) ASSOCIATION OF MONOCLONAL GAMMOPATHY OF UNDETERMINED SIGNIFICANCE WITH BEHCET'S DISEASE: A REVIEW OF SHARED COMMON DISEASE PATHOGENETIC MECHANISMS
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) not coincidental and could arise from persistent antigenic stimulation and cytogenetic abnormalities due to chronic, persistent pro-inflammatory microenvironment milieu-induced deleterious epigenetic modifications. 4 There are no reports in the literature of an association between MGUS and BD. Given the relatively high prevalence of MGUS in the general population, the reported associations may be coincidental. 5 However, a population-based study reported that inflammatory conditions and autoimmune diseases including rheumatic diseases, but not Behcet's disease (BD), are significantly associated with an increased risk of developing MGUS. 6 Behcet's disease (BD) is a multi-systemic chronic auto-inflammatory disorder exhibiting varied clinical characteristics which include the classic triad of recurrent orogenital aphthosis, uveitis, and cutaneous lesions.
## (s3) DISCUSSION
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) We review and report here for the first time the association of BD with MGUS development. There has been a report of a patient receiving hydroxyurea who developed chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) and three other CML cases who also developed BD whilst on IFN-α therapy. 9 The link between RDs and MGUS has been investigated with population-based studies reporting a significant association. 5,6 No associations of MGUS and BD have been reported in the medical literature. BD and MGUS are both complex diseases with poorly understood pathogenetic and pathophysiological mechanisms. The mechanisms involved in both conditions probably arise from shared immunological aberrations and overlap in pathogenetic pathways. One hypothesis is the shared role of chronic antigen stimulation in the aetiopathogenesis of both diseases. Autoinflammatory perturbations in BD could act as a trigger for MGUS development via epigenetic modifications in part. A multi-step view of autoimmune disease pathogenesis indicates that tolerance checkpoints exist and that the genes and molecular pathways that underpin these mechanisms overlap with those involved in tumour suppression. 10 Elimination or disruption of these pathways can therefore potentially result in the development of both diseases in tandem or sequentially.
## (s6) Epigenetics
Number of References: 5

(p6.0) The role of epigenetics in the pathogenesis of BD and its association with MGUS could explain in part the contribution of the environment to the pathogenetic mechanisms. MicroRNAs which are short noncoding RNAs that negatively regulate gene expression by acting post-transcriptionally, have been implicated in BD. 38 They are crucial in modulating cellular processes such as proliferation and apoptosis. MicroRNA-155 is significantly decreased in dendritic cells from BD patients whilst IL-6 and IL-17 production are increased. 39 DNA methylation -an epigenetic mechanism through which methyl groups are added to DNA molecule causing genes to switch off or on -were identified by a recent genome-wide study as playing a role in the epigenetic remodelling of cytoskeleton-related genes involved in the pathogenesis of BD. 40 Dysregulation of these genes could underpin increased leukocyte migration observed in BD. In comparison to health controls, 283 and 125 differentially methylated sites were identified in monocytes and CD4+ T-cells from BD patients. Interestingly, treatment reversed these methylation differences with complete restoration of a normal profile in many cases. 40 GWAS has shown changes in DNA methylation in MGUS also, with aberrant demethylation occurring in Cytosine-phosphodiester-Guanine (CpG) islands and differential methylation occurring in genes involved in cell proliferation and cell cycle. 41  functions, such as miR-21 in MGUS, which could promote plasma cell transformation by blocking apoptosis. Upregulation of miR-17 downregulates a gene (SOCS-1) which play a critical role in inhibiting IL-6 growth signalling. 42 Epigenetic therapy targeting the distinctive signatures in MGUS, myeloma and BD inflammatory cells could therefore have therapeutic potential.
