# Int J cell Sci & mol biol Organ Transplantation: An Overview from History to Challenges

CorpusID: 81621566 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e20d6f62307aa0625e5ef50abd313f61e5f76f46](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e20d6f62307aa0625e5ef50abd313f61e5f76f46)

Fields: Medicine

## (s34) International Journal of Cell Science & Molecular Biology Transplant Rejection
Number of References: 2

(p34.0) It is common problem that seen after most transplants. It is due to the attack of immune system that protects our body from different pathogens attacks that causes disease. It works very accurately. When any foreign particle or pathogen enter in body then the immune system active and check that whether a particle is self or non-self. If it identifies as non-self, then release specific proteins that are antibody for the destruction of that foreign particle and also remove that particle [20]. When doctors do surgery and transplant organ into body then immune system recognize it as non-self because particle that attaches on organ are different to those that are naturally present or organ. So, it releases immune response for destroy organ [21]. Sometimes, blood transfusion reaction occurs that make clogs of blood. Rejection has commonly three types.
## (s37) Chronic rejection
Number of References: 2

(p37.0) It occurs after many years of transplantation. Immune system slowly damages the organ/tissue that is transplanted [22]. Perfect matching of recipient and donor can reduce the rejection risk. But perfect match is not possible. 100% perfect match mean genetically identical and genetically identical are only twins. So, a doctor refers some drugs that suppress immune response, and these are called immunosuppressant minimize the chances of blood transfusion reactions. Cornea is the only part where blood transfusion not occurs because blood is not present [23]. It also has two types.
