# A review of culturally tailored interventions to reduce cardiovascular disease in South Asians

CorpusID: 81716334 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3cf2fc563b09f9533bfce090c10d2f6d0d057d04](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3cf2fc563b09f9533bfce090c10d2f6d0d057d04)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s3) Single intervention: Diet
Number of References: 9

(p3.0) For SAs, a culturally tailored diet provides a link back to the culture and traditions of their native countries. Dietary interventions are often difficult to sustain but provide an opportunistic modifiable variable. Studies focusing on culturally tailored dietary interventions alone showed significant reductions of CVD risk factors in SAs [13,14]. Specifically, dietary interventions found focused on education programs that featured methods to modify culturally traditional ingredients with low fat, low cholesterol-based foods. Backes et al. [13] assessed the efficacy of a 3-month dietary modification program (calorie and carbohydrate-restricted diet) in twenty-three women with ages ranging from 30-65 years, BMI ≥ 23 kg/m 2 with no reported history of diabetes or other chronic diseases. In the 3 months following their caloric restriction diet (use olive oil vs. ghee, brown rice vs. white rice, etc.) from a dietician (weekly visit), the cohort showed statistically significant reductions in weight, BMI, fasting blood glucose (FBG), steady state plasma glucose (SSPG), and triglyceride (TG).

(p3.1) While the short-term changes reported by authors are favorable, sustained changes in diet are often difficult to maintain [13]. To investigate this, a 2-year follow-up study by Singh et al. [14] evaluated the effects of Indo-Mediterranean diet vs. the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) diet in SAs with pre-existing coronary artery disease. One thousand SAs were included in this study to measure the impact of diet on disease progression and complications. Although the authors did not specify what specific changes were made to the basic Indo-Mediterranean diet, this diet traditionally comprises increased fruit, nut, vegetables, legumes and whole grains [15]. The NCEP diet recommends consuming lower amounts of saturated fat and cholesterol while increasing soluble fiber intake [16]. Participants in the intervention group were asked to follow the Indi-Mediterranean diet, asked to complete for 1 week a record of food intake and physical activity, and followed-up at the regular intervals. Those that consumed the modified Indo-Mediterranean diet presented with significantly lower CVD events over the length of the study compared with the NCEP diet group. Both Backes et al. [13] and Singh et al. [14] supported the overall effect of instituting dietary modifications to reduce CVD risk factors in this population.
## (s4) Single intervention: Physical activity
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) To measure the impact of physical activity, a pilot study was conducted by Gany et al. [17] of otherwise sedentary SA taxi drivers over a 12-week span. Seventy-four participants with elevated CVD risk factors were issued pedometers to increase their daily step counts and to measure the potential impact of intervention on this high-risk population. Comprehensive intake and exit health questionnaires and health screenings (BP, BMI, cholesterol, glucose) were administered. Baseline daily step counts were recorded starting four days after the initial screening. At the 4, 8, and 12-week points, step counts were recorded. Overall, the step count intervention resulted in a small (nonsignificant) increase in daily step count of among the 29 participants that completed the program. However, when data was stratified for mediating variables, Gany et al. [17] found significant increases in physical activity in men who were married, suggesting that partner support may be relevant mediator for increased physical activity in this cohort.
## (s6) Interventions using Technology
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Two studies reported the use of novel approaches using technology-based approaches to reducing CVD risk factors in SAs. Shah et al. [29] reported the effectiveness of using multimedia health education on participants' knowledge on 112 SAs across different language, education, and acculturation levels. The authors measured participants' CVD risk factors knowledge using pre, post questionnaire and concluded that post-test score of study participants significantly improved, including those with limited English proficiency. To integrate digital health interventions into the lives of SAs, Anand et al. [30] aimed to educate the target SA population, free of CVD, in regard to their personal genetic risk of developing CVD, as well as attempting to encourage the individual to modify physical activity and dietary intake. This was accomplished by sending bi-weekly emails or weekly text messages based on the participants preferred a mode of communication. Researchers focused on BP, waist to hip ratio, HbA1c, and apolipoprotein A/B ratios. The researcher reported that neither the digital interventions nor the knowledge of the participant's MI risk factor showed significant positive change to prevent CVD. Some of the reasons for non-significant findings could be that the authors have recruited participants who were free of CVD, reported already physically active and were involved in dietary modification. It might be helpful to follow these participants longer than 1 year to measure the impact of digital health interventions in this ethnic group.
