# Trait of Gait: A Survey on Gait Biometrics

CorpusID: 85517646 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/64e703c01f0b8846d1601bca71804a7b194fc983](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/64e703c01f0b8846d1601bca71804a7b194fc983)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s2) Earlier methods
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) The earliest known spatiotemporal gait recognition techniques were published during the 90s. Niyogi et al. [22] proposed to recognise gait at a sagittal angle with the subject walking frontoparallel. It is a template-based method which modelled the human gait in the form of a set of spatiotemporal snakes [39] from the slices of the moving parts of the human contour along the time domain. They expressed the spatiotemporal dimensions as XYT signifying the 2D (x, y) spatial coordinates varying with respect to time t. The recognition they have obtained with 26 image sequences across five human subjects reaches up to 83%.
## (s16) Small Dataset
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) Though the large database had the most members, the small database with 12 subjects had the most covariates compared to all other currently available public databases. Gait sequences were recorded in different conditions as follows: The background is staged with a green curtain and a dark green walkway. There is not yet a credible source to state exactly how many gait sequences are present in this database. It is also to note that not all 12 subjects perform all of the above variations; studies shows records of only 11 subjects [28,45].  Figure 3: A sample sub-sequence of the silhouettes provided in the USF Gait Challenge database. This illustration contains one frame for every three frames in the sequence. Notice that the shadow produced by the subject is also captured leaving the heel angle incalculable for most of the sequences.
## (s29) Large Population Dataset
Number of References: 3

(p29.0) This dataset consists of gait silhouettes of over 4000 subjects with ages of 1 to 94 years. The gait sequences were captured with two cameras at two different angles out of which only one is available so far as part of the publicly available dataset. This is the gait dataset that involves the largest number of human subjects till date. The total number of gait sequences in this dataset is reported to be 7842 [51,95]. A detailed description of this dataset can be found in [90].
## (s38) Active areas
Number of References: 5

(p38.0) • Reliable recognition independent of clothing style. Several algorithms have been outlined to combat this problem (e.g., [53,86]) and a handful of datasets to help with this regard (CASIA-B, OU-ISIR-B, TUM-GAID, and so on). However, state of the art gait biometrics algorithms do suffer a significant depreciation when the clothing style changes.

(p38.1) • Gait recognition at different walking speed. With datasets like CASIA-C and OU-ISIR-A, gait recognition at different speeds is becoming more of interest [75,79,104]. There are, however, further improvements that can be made.
