# Ochratoxin A in Ruminants-A Review on Its Degradation by Gut Microbes and Effects on Animals

CorpusID: 85000766 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1f4e9d3ecc84c6b96b912cf38df5cc0cb176d98](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1f4e9d3ecc84c6b96b912cf38df5cc0cb176d98)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology

## (s1) Occurrence of Ochratoxin A in Ruminant Feeds
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) Given the detoxification potential of ruminants and the generally low indication for OTA occurrence in forages, it is not surprising that OTA contamination is not at the centre of mycotoxin concerns in ruminant feeds [25]. However, some OTA contamination of diets can not be excluded given the variety of feeds offered to ruminants. While it can sometimes occur at concentrations high enough to cause major losses in health and performance of monogastrics, a more likely scenario for ruminants is to find a lower level of OTA occurrence in diets and only subclinical disorders related with OTA.

(p1.1) Given the detoxification potential of ruminants and the generally low indication for OTA occurrence in forages, it is not surprising that OTA contamination is not at the centre of mycotoxin concerns in ruminant feeds [25]. However, some OTA contamination of diets can not be excluded given the variety of feeds offered to ruminants. While it can sometimes occur at concentrations high enough to cause major losses in health and performance of monogastrics, a more likely scenario for ruminants is to find a lower level of OTA occurrence in diets and only subclinical disorders related with OTA.
## (s15) Pathological findings and systemic occurrence
Number of References: 32

(p15.0) The lack of a general protocol (e.g., whether signs were actually searched for, or only noticed by chance when very clear) complicate comparison of studies, but conclusions can still be drawn from the information available to date. Clear signs of discomfort and starting intoxification (polyuria, reduced feed intake) are first reported at repeated doses of 225 μg/kg bw [10] or at a single dose of 500 μg/kg bw (polyuria; [73]) for sheep. At a single, but very high dose of 13,300 μg/kg bw a cow showed severe clinical signs like difficulties in arising, diarrhoea, anorexia and cessation of milk production, the latter only recovering to one third of normal during this lactation [126]. In the same study, an adult goat died within 5-6 days after daily oral OTA doses of 3,000 μg/kg bw. This is not to say that such effects can not occur at lower levels but rather that one can expect such effects at the OTA doses used in these studies.

(p15.1) Little work has been published on changes of the target tissues of OTA like kidney or liver. While only minimal microscopic kidney changes were reported in goats fed a high OTA dose for 14 days [126], another study did not find pathological kidney changes at practically relevant OTA levels and dosage periods [70].

(p15.2) While such information could be interpreted as a justification of considering OTA as a mycotoxin of no relevance and completely uncritical in ruminants, repeated reports on the systemic occurrence (like in blood and in urine) not only of the harmless OTα metabolite, but also of OTA show that detoxification is less than might have been expected. Even repeated doses of 9.5 μg/kg bw [11] led to OTA in blood serum and urine of sheep. Overall, transfer of OTA into blood is linearly increasing with the dose of OTA [11].  --Lucerne hay + conc. [126] n = sample size; n.g. = not given; conc. = concentrate; HPLC = high pressure liquid chromatography; 1 plus aflatoxin.  

(p15.3) The lack of a general protocol (e.g., whether signs were actually searched for, or only noticed by chance when very clear) complicate comparison of studies, but conclusions can still be drawn from the information available to date. Clear signs of discomfort and starting intoxification (polyuria, reduced feed intake) are first reported at repeated doses of 225 μg/kg bw [10] or at a single dose of 500 μg/kg bw (polyuria; [73]) for sheep. At a single, but very high dose of 13,300 μg/kg bw a cow showed severe clinical signs like difficulties in arising, diarrhoea, anorexia and cessation of milk production, the latter only recovering to one third of normal during this lactation [126]. In the same study, an adult goat died within 5-6 days after daily oral OTA doses of 3,000 μg/kg bw. This is not to say that such effects can not occur at lower levels but rather that one can expect such effects at the OTA doses used in these studies.

(p15.4) Little work has been published on changes of the target tissues of OTA like kidney or liver. While only minimal microscopic kidney changes were reported in goats fed a high OTA dose for 14 days [126], another study did not find pathological kidney changes at practically relevant OTA levels and dosage periods [70].

(p15.5) While such information could be interpreted as a justification of considering OTA as a mycotoxin of no relevance and completely uncritical in ruminants, repeated reports on the systemic occurrence (like in blood and in urine) not only of the harmless OTα metabolite, but also of OTA show that detoxification is less than might have been expected. Even repeated doses of 9.5 μg/kg bw [11] led to OTA in blood serum and urine of sheep. Overall, transfer of OTA into blood is linearly increasing with the dose of OTA [11].  --Lucerne hay + conc. [126] n = sample size; n.g. = not given; conc. = concentrate; HPLC = high pressure liquid chromatography; 1 plus aflatoxin.  
## (s17) Particularities influencing OTA toxicity and degradation in ruminants
Number of References: 44

(p17.0) The systemic occurrence of OTA in ruminants despite the microbial population actively degrading the toxin can best be explained by the fact that the rumen functions comparable to a mixing chamber, which allows some outflow (bypass) of any substrate entering the rumen [11], irrespective of the measured long mean retention times. OTA escaping ruminal degradation will readily be absorbed in the lower digestive tract, just as in non-ruminants.

(p17.1) Several factors have been discussed in their influence on OTA toxicity in ruminants, most of them connected to ruminal degradation. A significant influence of diet (mostly quantified as concentrate to roughage ratio) has been indicated by two studies [73,104], pointing to a more comprehensive bioavailability of OTA in concentrate based diets. Besides influencing the microbial population (as outlined above in more detail), a low rumen pH will also increase the occurrence of OTA in its nondissociated ("protonated") form, which will also facilitate absorption of OTA from the rumen and therefore systemic availability of the toxin [11]. Based on the consideration that general proteolytic enzymes catalyze the cleavage responsible for OTA detoxification, a signifcant improvement of degradation capacity via adaptation of the microbial population does not seem probable, e.g., in contrast to fibre digestion.

(p17.2) There are further relevant aspects for systemic OTA metabolism in ruminants. Biliary secretion (like demonstrated in other taxa like rats) has been postulated for OTA [73], explaining repeated peaks in blood concentrations of OTA and its metabolites and the occurrence of OTA in the faeces of animals dosed intravenously.

(p17.3) The binding of OTA to blood serum proteins determines its excretion rate and therefore its toxicity. Since in cattle as in humans and pigs binding is 2-3 times stronger than in sheep, the latter appear less prone to accumulation of OTA in blood [11]. The high urinary pH of herbivores facilitates OTA clearance from blood compared to rhesus monkeys, pigs and rats [11]. In general, chronic ingestion of comparatively low levels of OTA represents the situation in practice, and it can be considered the more critical scenario, having some potential to lead to accumulation in the long run.

(p17.4) OTα has been shown to be almost non-harmful on a cellular level in toxicology studies [136,137]. The far weaker bondage of OTα to blood serum proteins and therefore faster excretion is generally considered to be another key feature for its much lower toxicity compared with OTA [138,139].

(p17.5) The systemic occurrence of OTA in ruminants despite the microbial population actively degrading the toxin can best be explained by the fact that the rumen functions comparable to a mixing chamber, which allows some outflow (bypass) of any substrate entering the rumen [11], irrespective of the measured long mean retention times. OTA escaping ruminal degradation will readily be absorbed in the lower digestive tract, just as in non-ruminants.

(p17.6) Several factors have been discussed in their influence on OTA toxicity in ruminants, most of them connected to ruminal degradation. A significant influence of diet (mostly quantified as concentrate to roughage ratio) has been indicated by two studies [73,104], pointing to a more comprehensive bioavailability of OTA in concentrate based diets. Besides influencing the microbial population (as outlined above in more detail), a low rumen pH will also increase the occurrence of OTA in its nondissociated ("protonated") form, which will also facilitate absorption of OTA from the rumen and therefore systemic availability of the toxin [11]. Based on the consideration that general proteolytic enzymes catalyze the cleavage responsible for OTA detoxification, a signifcant improvement of degradation capacity via adaptation of the microbial population does not seem probable, e.g., in contrast to fibre digestion.

(p17.7) There are further relevant aspects for systemic OTA metabolism in ruminants. Biliary secretion (like demonstrated in other taxa like rats) has been postulated for OTA [73], explaining repeated peaks in blood concentrations of OTA and its metabolites and the occurrence of OTA in the faeces of animals dosed intravenously.

(p17.8) The binding of OTA to blood serum proteins determines its excretion rate and therefore its toxicity. Since in cattle as in humans and pigs binding is 2-3 times stronger than in sheep, the latter appear less prone to accumulation of OTA in blood [11]. The high urinary pH of herbivores facilitates OTA clearance from blood compared to rhesus monkeys, pigs and rats [11]. In general, chronic ingestion of comparatively low levels of OTA represents the situation in practice, and it can be considered the more critical scenario, having some potential to lead to accumulation in the long run.

(p17.9) OTα has been shown to be almost non-harmful on a cellular level in toxicology studies [136,137]. The far weaker bondage of OTα to blood serum proteins and therefore faster excretion is generally considered to be another key feature for its much lower toxicity compared with OTA [138,139].
## (s18) Occurrence of OTA in ruminant tissues (meat)/products
Number of References: 10

(p18.0) For tissue of monogastric animals, there is clear evidence for the presence of OTA in pig meat and meat products [140]. Since OTA is accumulated in kidneys, this organ is contaminated most significantly, followed by liver, muscle and fat. The incidence of OTA in different pig-based sausages ranged from 46.7 to 77.2%, with maximum OTA concentrations of 3.16 or 4.56 µg/kg blood or livertype sausages, respectively [140]. OTA was essentially absent in meat from poultry, but present in considerable amounts in blood [141] and high concentrations in kidneys [1].

(p18.1) Ruminant organs or muscle meat are not considered to be contaminated by OTA [142]. Given the accumulation in the kidney in other species, this would be expected to be the most likely tissue to be OTA contaminated. Overall, OTA was only detected in five of 31 beef sausage samples. It was noted that OTA contamination of ruminant meat products may also arise from the use of pig blood plasma and OTA contaminated spices [140].
## (s19) Occurrence and transfer of OTA into ruminant milk
Number of References: 8

(p19.0) In general, carry-over of OTA into ruminant milk is considered to be of little significance [6,25], especially if compared with monogastric species or other mycotoxins like aflatoxin. However, some studies found a transfer of OTA into ruminant milk, too. OTα was found in the milk of cows when being fed an OTA contaminated diet (in a single dose of 13.3 mg/kg and daily doses of 1.66, 0.75 and 0.25 mg/kg; one cow per treatment) [126]. For the cow with the very high single dose, OTA was found in milk in high amounts one day after the treatment. Traces of OTA were found on days 3, 4 and 5 after the start for the cow on the 1.66 mg/kg dose of OTA, and no OTA was found at daily doses <1.66 mg/kg. In goats given a single dose of 0.5 mg OTA/kg, recovery of OTA and OTA metabolites in milk was about 6% of the total excretion (faeces: ~54%; urine 38%; 2.3% in serum) [103]. Of this 6%, about 14% were in the form of OTA, and the rest in the form of 3 other metabolites not further characterised.
## (s32) Occurrence of Ochratoxin A in Ruminant Feeds
Number of References: 4

(p32.0) Given the detoxification potential of ruminants and the generally low indication for OTA occurrence in forages, it is not surprising that OTA contamination is not at the centre of mycotoxin concerns in ruminant feeds [25]. However, some OTA contamination of diets can not be excluded given the variety of feeds offered to ruminants. While it can sometimes occur at concentrations high enough to cause major losses in health and performance of monogastrics, a more likely scenario for ruminants is to find a lower level of OTA occurrence in diets and only subclinical disorders related with OTA.

(p32.1) Given the detoxification potential of ruminants and the generally low indication for OTA occurrence in forages, it is not surprising that OTA contamination is not at the centre of mycotoxin concerns in ruminant feeds [25]. However, some OTA contamination of diets can not be excluded given the variety of feeds offered to ruminants. While it can sometimes occur at concentrations high enough to cause major losses in health and performance of monogastrics, a more likely scenario for ruminants is to find a lower level of OTA occurrence in diets and only subclinical disorders related with OTA.
## (s46) Pathological findings and systemic occurrence
Number of References: 32

(p46.0) The lack of a general protocol (e.g., whether signs were actually searched for, or only noticed by chance when very clear) complicate comparison of studies, but conclusions can still be drawn from the information available to date. Clear signs of discomfort and starting intoxification (polyuria, reduced feed intake) are first reported at repeated doses of 225 μg/kg bw [10] or at a single dose of 500 μg/kg bw (polyuria; [73]) for sheep. At a single, but very high dose of 13,300 μg/kg bw a cow showed severe clinical signs like difficulties in arising, diarrhoea, anorexia and cessation of milk production, the latter only recovering to one third of normal during this lactation [126]. In the same study, an adult goat died within 5-6 days after daily oral OTA doses of 3,000 μg/kg bw. This is not to say that such effects can not occur at lower levels but rather that one can expect such effects at the OTA doses used in these studies.

(p46.1) Little work has been published on changes of the target tissues of OTA like kidney or liver. While only minimal microscopic kidney changes were reported in goats fed a high OTA dose for 14 days [126], another study did not find pathological kidney changes at practically relevant OTA levels and dosage periods [70].

(p46.2) While such information could be interpreted as a justification of considering OTA as a mycotoxin of no relevance and completely uncritical in ruminants, repeated reports on the systemic occurrence (like in blood and in urine) not only of the harmless OTα metabolite, but also of OTA show that detoxification is less than might have been expected. Even repeated doses of 9.5 μg/kg bw [11] led to OTA in blood serum and urine of sheep. Overall, transfer of OTA into blood is linearly increasing with the dose of OTA [11].  --Lucerne hay + conc. [126] n = sample size; n.g. = not given; conc. = concentrate; HPLC = high pressure liquid chromatography; 1 plus aflatoxin.  

(p46.3) The lack of a general protocol (e.g., whether signs were actually searched for, or only noticed by chance when very clear) complicate comparison of studies, but conclusions can still be drawn from the information available to date. Clear signs of discomfort and starting intoxification (polyuria, reduced feed intake) are first reported at repeated doses of 225 μg/kg bw [10] or at a single dose of 500 μg/kg bw (polyuria; [73]) for sheep. At a single, but very high dose of 13,300 μg/kg bw a cow showed severe clinical signs like difficulties in arising, diarrhoea, anorexia and cessation of milk production, the latter only recovering to one third of normal during this lactation [126]. In the same study, an adult goat died within 5-6 days after daily oral OTA doses of 3,000 μg/kg bw. This is not to say that such effects can not occur at lower levels but rather that one can expect such effects at the OTA doses used in these studies.

(p46.4) Little work has been published on changes of the target tissues of OTA like kidney or liver. While only minimal microscopic kidney changes were reported in goats fed a high OTA dose for 14 days [126], another study did not find pathological kidney changes at practically relevant OTA levels and dosage periods [70].

(p46.5) While such information could be interpreted as a justification of considering OTA as a mycotoxin of no relevance and completely uncritical in ruminants, repeated reports on the systemic occurrence (like in blood and in urine) not only of the harmless OTα metabolite, but also of OTA show that detoxification is less than might have been expected. Even repeated doses of 9.5 μg/kg bw [11] led to OTA in blood serum and urine of sheep. Overall, transfer of OTA into blood is linearly increasing with the dose of OTA [11].  --Lucerne hay + conc. [126] n = sample size; n.g. = not given; conc. = concentrate; HPLC = high pressure liquid chromatography; 1 plus aflatoxin.  
## (s48) Particularities influencing OTA toxicity and degradation in ruminants
Number of References: 44

(p48.0) The systemic occurrence of OTA in ruminants despite the microbial population actively degrading the toxin can best be explained by the fact that the rumen functions comparable to a mixing chamber, which allows some outflow (bypass) of any substrate entering the rumen [11], irrespective of the measured long mean retention times. OTA escaping ruminal degradation will readily be absorbed in the lower digestive tract, just as in non-ruminants.

(p48.1) Several factors have been discussed in their influence on OTA toxicity in ruminants, most of them connected to ruminal degradation. A significant influence of diet (mostly quantified as concentrate to roughage ratio) has been indicated by two studies [73,104], pointing to a more comprehensive bioavailability of OTA in concentrate based diets. Besides influencing the microbial population (as outlined above in more detail), a low rumen pH will also increase the occurrence of OTA in its nondissociated ("protonated") form, which will also facilitate absorption of OTA from the rumen and therefore systemic availability of the toxin [11]. Based on the consideration that general proteolytic enzymes catalyze the cleavage responsible for OTA detoxification, a signifcant improvement of degradation capacity via adaptation of the microbial population does not seem probable, e.g., in contrast to fibre digestion.

(p48.2) There are further relevant aspects for systemic OTA metabolism in ruminants. Biliary secretion (like demonstrated in other taxa like rats) has been postulated for OTA [73], explaining repeated peaks in blood concentrations of OTA and its metabolites and the occurrence of OTA in the faeces of animals dosed intravenously.

(p48.3) The binding of OTA to blood serum proteins determines its excretion rate and therefore its toxicity. Since in cattle as in humans and pigs binding is 2-3 times stronger than in sheep, the latter appear less prone to accumulation of OTA in blood [11]. The high urinary pH of herbivores facilitates OTA clearance from blood compared to rhesus monkeys, pigs and rats [11]. In general, chronic ingestion of comparatively low levels of OTA represents the situation in practice, and it can be considered the more critical scenario, having some potential to lead to accumulation in the long run.

(p48.4) OTα has been shown to be almost non-harmful on a cellular level in toxicology studies [136,137]. The far weaker bondage of OTα to blood serum proteins and therefore faster excretion is generally considered to be another key feature for its much lower toxicity compared with OTA [138,139].

(p48.5) The systemic occurrence of OTA in ruminants despite the microbial population actively degrading the toxin can best be explained by the fact that the rumen functions comparable to a mixing chamber, which allows some outflow (bypass) of any substrate entering the rumen [11], irrespective of the measured long mean retention times. OTA escaping ruminal degradation will readily be absorbed in the lower digestive tract, just as in non-ruminants.

(p48.6) Several factors have been discussed in their influence on OTA toxicity in ruminants, most of them connected to ruminal degradation. A significant influence of diet (mostly quantified as concentrate to roughage ratio) has been indicated by two studies [73,104], pointing to a more comprehensive bioavailability of OTA in concentrate based diets. Besides influencing the microbial population (as outlined above in more detail), a low rumen pH will also increase the occurrence of OTA in its nondissociated ("protonated") form, which will also facilitate absorption of OTA from the rumen and therefore systemic availability of the toxin [11]. Based on the consideration that general proteolytic enzymes catalyze the cleavage responsible for OTA detoxification, a signifcant improvement of degradation capacity via adaptation of the microbial population does not seem probable, e.g., in contrast to fibre digestion.

(p48.7) There are further relevant aspects for systemic OTA metabolism in ruminants. Biliary secretion (like demonstrated in other taxa like rats) has been postulated for OTA [73], explaining repeated peaks in blood concentrations of OTA and its metabolites and the occurrence of OTA in the faeces of animals dosed intravenously.

(p48.8) The binding of OTA to blood serum proteins determines its excretion rate and therefore its toxicity. Since in cattle as in humans and pigs binding is 2-3 times stronger than in sheep, the latter appear less prone to accumulation of OTA in blood [11]. The high urinary pH of herbivores facilitates OTA clearance from blood compared to rhesus monkeys, pigs and rats [11]. In general, chronic ingestion of comparatively low levels of OTA represents the situation in practice, and it can be considered the more critical scenario, having some potential to lead to accumulation in the long run.

(p48.9) OTα has been shown to be almost non-harmful on a cellular level in toxicology studies [136,137]. The far weaker bondage of OTα to blood serum proteins and therefore faster excretion is generally considered to be another key feature for its much lower toxicity compared with OTA [138,139].
## (s49) Occurrence of OTA in ruminant tissues (meat)/products
Number of References: 10

(p49.0) For tissue of monogastric animals, there is clear evidence for the presence of OTA in pig meat and meat products [140]. Since OTA is accumulated in kidneys, this organ is contaminated most significantly, followed by liver, muscle and fat. The incidence of OTA in different pig-based sausages ranged from 46.7 to 77.2%, with maximum OTA concentrations of 3.16 or 4.56 µg/kg blood or livertype sausages, respectively [140]. OTA was essentially absent in meat from poultry, but present in considerable amounts in blood [141] and high concentrations in kidneys [1].

(p49.1) Ruminant organs or muscle meat are not considered to be contaminated by OTA [142]. Given the accumulation in the kidney in other species, this would be expected to be the most likely tissue to be OTA contaminated. Overall, OTA was only detected in five of 31 beef sausage samples. It was noted that OTA contamination of ruminant meat products may also arise from the use of pig blood plasma and OTA contaminated spices [140].
## (s50) Occurrence and transfer of OTA into ruminant milk
Number of References: 8

(p50.0) In general, carry-over of OTA into ruminant milk is considered to be of little significance [6,25], especially if compared with monogastric species or other mycotoxins like aflatoxin. However, some studies found a transfer of OTA into ruminant milk, too. OTα was found in the milk of cows when being fed an OTA contaminated diet (in a single dose of 13.3 mg/kg and daily doses of 1.66, 0.75 and 0.25 mg/kg; one cow per treatment) [126]. For the cow with the very high single dose, OTA was found in milk in high amounts one day after the treatment. Traces of OTA were found on days 3, 4 and 5 after the start for the cow on the 1.66 mg/kg dose of OTA, and no OTA was found at daily doses <1.66 mg/kg. In goats given a single dose of 0.5 mg OTA/kg, recovery of OTA and OTA metabolites in milk was about 6% of the total excretion (faeces: ~54%; urine 38%; 2.3% in serum) [103]. Of this 6%, about 14% were in the form of OTA, and the rest in the form of 3 other metabolites not further characterised.
