# Curr Trends Biomedical Eng & Biosci White Tea a Day Keeps Disease Away: A Review Harshal A Pawar* Current Trends in Biomedical Engineering & Biosciences

CorpusID: 86738519 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/129b786d58bf4ea90844437af5d1176080f5629a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/129b786d58bf4ea90844437af5d1176080f5629a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s1) Process of Preparation of White Tea
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) White tea is made from the buds of the tea plant. Unlike black or green tea, white tea is not rolled, and only slightly oxidized, making it the least processed tea. White tea belongs to the group of tea that does not require panning, rolling or shaking. Plucking of young tea leaves with much fine hair can produce good-quality white tea. The leaves and buds are allowed to wither in natural sunlight before they are lightly processed to prevent oxidation or further tea processing. It is steam dried quickly after the leaves are picked-there is no oxidation at all. Because there is no oxidation, it contains the most anti-oxidants and catechins, the least caffeine, and has a pale colour with a delicate, sweet taste. This tea is pale yellow or green in color [7,8]. The simplified steps of processing of white tea are summarised in Figure 1.
## (s6) 3.
Number of References: 4

(p6.0) Cancer is generally considered as uncontrolled cell division that results in the aggregation of cells to form tumours. It is one of the major causes of death in the modern world and has shown to be a largely preventable disease, highly susceptible to modulation by dietary factor's [20]. Flavonoids, another group of antioxidants found in white tea, are known to block the formation of carcinogenic cells and as such it prevents the cancerous growth in prostate, colon, intestine and stomach. Polyphenols present in tea may play an important role in prevention of cancer by decreasing DNA damage in the cell and reducing the activation of cancer that leads to malignancy [21]. Catechins also protect cell membranes against oxidation, keep RONS in confined zones and probably block cell membrane receptors required for cancer cell growth. The initiation of carcinogenesis can be overcome by the repression of some catalytic activities and of other specific enzymes involved in cancer initiation [22,23].
## (s7) 4.
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Diabetes mellitus (DM) is an increasingly common, potentially devastating, expensive, treatable but incurable lifelong disease. White tea is more likely to lower stress and glucose levels in the blood and helpful for increasing metabolism. Published reports show that numerous extracts obtained from plants are effective in reducing glycemia, causing fewer side effects and with lower cost than the usual antidiabetic agents. Recently, White tea was reported to have strong lipolytic and antiadipogenic activity in vitro. Hence, white tea may demonstrate antidiabetic effect by reducing oxygen species (OS) and hyperlipidaemia followed by insulin resistance. Since diabetes mellitus is increasing worldwide as is associated with several complications, there is a large interest in finding an effective therapy and white tea seems to be a good alternative. Furthermore, in-depth investigation is needed to fully understand the mechanisms of action of white tea against this disease [24,25].
