# A Survey on Multicarrier Communications: Prototype Filters, Lattice Structures, and Implementation Aspects

CorpusID: 875676 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b4d5db99097b71feac6051abdac863f8559b3787](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b4d5db99097b71feac6051abdac863f8559b3787)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science, Engineering

## (s2) A. Fundamentals
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) In the classical paper by C. Shannon [29], a geometrical representation of communication systems is presented. According to this representation, messages and corresponding signals are points in two function spaces: message space and signal space. While a transmitter maps every point in the message space into the signal space, a receiver does the reverse operation. As long as the mapping is one-to-one from the message space to the signal space, a message is always recoverable at the receiver. Based on this framework, a waveform corresponds to a specific structure in the signal space and identifies the formation of the signals. Throughout this survey, the signal space is considered as a time-frequency plane where time and frequency constitute its coordinates, which is a wellknown notation for representing one dimensional signals in two dimensions [11], [12]. When the structure in signal space relies on multiple simultaneously-transmitted subcarriers, it corresponds to a multicarrier scheme. It is represented by
## (s3) B. Symbols
Number of References: 5

(p3.0) Without loss of generality, the transmitted symbols are denoted by X mk ∈ C, where C is the set of all complex numbers. As a special case, it is possible to limit the set of X mk to real numbers, i.e. X mk ∈ R, where R is the set of all real numbers. One may choose X mk as a modulation symbol or a part of the modulation symbol, e.g. its real or imaginary part or a partition after a spreading operation. In addition, it is reasonable to consider finite number of elements in the set, based on the limited number of modulation symbols in digital communications. Note that the set of the symbols may be important for the perfect reconstruction of the symbols since its properties may lead one-to-one mapping from message space to the signal space [29], as in signaling over Weyl-Heisenberg frames, faster-than-Nyquist signaling, or partialresponse signaling [23], [24], [30], [31].
## (s12) D. Multicarrier Schemes with Spreading Approaches
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) Spreading operation is commonly used to reduce the peakto-average-power ratio (PAPR) in multicarrier schemes, in which modulation symbols are mapped to the multiple points in the lattice. One way to interpret and generalize the spreading operation in multicarrier systems (e.g., as in SC-FDMA [52] and filter-bank-spread-filter-bank multicarrier (FB-S-FBMC) [53]) is to consider another Gabor system that spreads the energy of the modulation symbols into multiple subcarriers. In other words, as opposed to using single Gabor system at the transmitter and receiver, two Gabor systems combined with serial-to-parallel conversions are employed at the transmitter and the receiver. For example, it can be said that SC-FDMA, which allows better PAPR characteristics and frequency domain equalization (FDE) along with CP utilization [54]- [57], employs an extra Gabor system equipped with a rectangular filter and δ(Λ) = 1 to spread the modulation symbols at the transmitter (i.e., discrete Fourier transformation (DFT)) and de-spread them at the receiver (i.e., inverse DFT). On the contrary, in OFDM, since there is no spreading of the modulation symbols in frequency domain, employed prototype filter for spreading is a Dirac function.
## (s13) E. Milestones for Orthogonal Schemes
Number of References: 15

(p13.0) Having discussed the different variations of multicarrier systems in the earlier subsections, this subsection provides a brief history on the development of aforementioned multicarrier systems. Earlier works related to orthogonal multicarrier schemes actually date back to 1960s [58], [59], which utilize a bank of filters for parallel data transmission. In [58], Chang presented the orthogonality condition for the multicarrier scheme schemes considering band-limited filters. This condition basically indicates that the subcarriers can be spaced half of the symbol rate apart without any interference. This scheme has then been re-visited by Saltzberg in 1967 [59] by showing the fact that Chang's condition is also true when the time and frequency axes are interchanged, based on OQAM. Indeed, Chang and Saltzberg exploits the lattice staggering for their multicarrier schemes which includes the basics of CMT and SMT. However, the idea of parallel transmission suggested in [58] and [59] were unreasonably expensive and complex for large number of data channels at that time. In [60], through the use of DFTs, Weinstein and Ebert eliminated the banks of subcarrier oscillators to allow simpler implementation of the multicarrier schemes. This approach has been later named as OFDM, and it has become more and more popular after 1980s due to its efficient implementation through fast Fourier transformation (FFT) techniques and FDE along with CP utilization [61] compared to other multicarrier schemes. On the other hand, Weinstein's DFT method in [60] limits the flexibility on different baseband filter utilization while modulating or demodulating the subcarriers, but instead used a time windowing technique to cope with the spectral leakage. In [62], by extending Weinstein's method, Hirosaki showed that different baseband filters may also be digitally implemented through DFT processing by using a polyphase network (PPN) [63], [64]. Several other developments over the last two decades have demonstrated low complexity and efficient implementations of lattice staggering, paving the way for its consideration in the next generation wireless standards (see e.g., [2], [15], [65], and the references listed therein).
## (s19) 3) Optimal Finite Duration Pulses:
Number of References: 4

(p19.0) Although prolate window is an optimally-concentrated filter in terms of minimum sidelobe energy for a given filter length and bandwidth, it does not satisfy the Nyquist criterion that ensures zero-interference between the points in the lattice. Considering this fact, Vahlin exploits PSWFs to realize a new family which is referred as optimal finite duration pulse (OFDP) [74] by generalizing the optimization procedure given for single carrier, presented in [73]. The aim is to achieve a Nyquist filter in both time and frequency with the maximum energy in the main lobe for a given bandwidth and filter length. In order to develop these pulses, as summarized in TABLE I, Vahlin chooses the signal representation of OFDPs as the linear combinations of the PSWFs and formulates the constraints as an optimization problem to find the weights a l for lth PSWF for a given interval, using Lagrange multipliers and calculus of variations. Since only the even-indexed prolate functions are even-symmetrical, only a 2l are considered through the optimization procedure. By applying similar optimization procedure, OFDP has been utilized in [65]. Also, another optimization procedure which is based on deriving the composite matched filtering response of OFDP filter instead OFDP itself is suggested in [83] to reduce the optimization complexity.
## (s21) B. Design Criterion: Rapid-Decay
Number of References: 3

(p21.0) Even though PSWFs provide the optimum solution for the energy concentration problem, they do not address the rapiddecaying of the sidelobes, as can be seen in Fig. 5. Decaying of the sidelobes is related with the smoothness of a filter. It is known that smoothness is measured by the number of continuous derivatives. If the mth derivative of a function is impulsive, the sidelobes of the function in frequency falls at |ω| −m or 6m dB/octave, where ω is the angular frequency [79], [81], [87].
