# Food Reviews International Post-harvest technologies applied to edible flowers: A review

CorpusID: 90752406 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1146997f620b596e15b85b6d9a4dfe2778ba14b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1146997f620b596e15b85b6d9a4dfe2778ba14b)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Business

## (s5) Edible films and coatings
Number of References: 13

(p5.0) Edible films and coatings are distinct methods used by the food industry. A film can be defined as a thin skin formed and then applied to the product (e.g., through casing with a biopolymer solution prepared separately from the food that is later applied to), while coating is a suspension or an emulsion applied directly on the surface of the food, leading to the subsequent formation of a coating. [30] However, both are generally based on biological materials, such as proteins, lipids, and polysaccharides. Presently, both methods are already used in fruits and vegetables, acting mainly as a barrier against gas transport and microorganism growth. [31] Regarding edible coatings, no studies have been done on edible flowers and a few works have been published on artichoke and brassicas ( Table 2). Some polysaccharides have been included in edible coating formulations like alginate [32] , chitosan, [33,34] and carboxymethyl-cellulose. [31] Concerning alginate coating, its application on artichoke showed the best results in terms of shelf life (increased microbial stability) in comparison with dipping in citric acid/calcium chloride solution. [32] Furthermore, these authors also stated the importance of choosing a correct packaging material, with better results (higher microbial stability and increased shelf life) obtained with the biodegradable monolayer film (NVT2) than multilayer-film (All-PE) and oriented polypropylene film (OPP). The effectiveness of chitosan to improve the microbiological and sensory quality of fresh cut broccoli was evaluated by Moreira et al. [33] , regarded as a viable alternative to control the microbiota present in minimally processed broccoli because the growth of total coliforms, psychrotrophic, and mesophilic aerobes was substantially inhibited during the whole storage period tested. Furthermore, coated broccoli samples had acceptable scores in all sensory parameters examined until the end of storage, without appearance of undesirable odors and with higher quality levels than control samples. A similar study [34] also showed that chitosan coating enriched with essential oils (tea tree, rosemary, clove, lemon, oreganum, calendula, and aloe vera) and bioactive compounds (bee pollen, ethanolic extract of propolis, pomegranate dried extract, and resveratrol) had significant antibacterial properties. Again, the application of chitosan coatings alone or enriched did not introduce negative effects on the sensory attributes of minimally processed broccoli. [34] Ansorena et al. [31] also studied the effect of chitosan and carboxymethyl-cellulose coatings on several quality parameters (weight loss, texture, color, microbial load, ascorbic acid, total chlorophyll, browning potential, and sensory quality) of fresh-cut broccoli during refrigerated storage, and explored if there was any additional benefit in a combined treatment of mild heat shock followed by edible coating. They concluded that chitosan coating effectively maintained quality attributes and extended shelf life of minimally processed broccoli, but chitosan coating after a mild heat shock showed the best performance for long-term refrigerated storage of minimally processed broccoli. Thus, chitosan and alginate coatings, alone or enriched with biopreservatives or combined with other technologies can be a good post-harvest technology to increase the shelf life and improve the quality of edible flowers. However, in the future more studies must be done on edible coatings to better understand the effect of other materials and to evaluate their role on other edible flowers species.

(p5.1) Concerning edible films, only a study in cauliflower has been published, with the aim to evaluate the effects of methyl cellulose-based edible films with variable amounts of stearic, ascorbic, and citric acids, on oxygen (O 2 ) permeability. [35] The authors observed that films containing ascorbic acid or citric acid applied to cauliflower slowed down browning reactions, as well as the polyphenoloxidase activity and vitamin C losses when compared to uncoated ones and with films without antioxidants. [35] Also here, studies involving other types of edible flowers are required.
