# Is back pain during childhood or adolescence associated with muscle strength, muscle endurance or aerobic capacity: three systematic literature reviews with one meta-analysis

CorpusID: 9478023 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc418718495cfd9f1b0e2d7c2f6b1b2c950c4175](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc418718495cfd9f1b0e2d7c2f6b1b2c950c4175)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Background
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) Pain is relatively common in childhood and adolescence [1]. For example, in a population of circa 3000 adolescents, 61 % reported musculoskeletal pain at least in one area [2]. Back pain (BP) was noted to be the second most common type with 25 % reporting daily complaints [2]. BP is common during childhood and has been shown to be a predictor of low back pain (LBP) in adulthood [3]. Therefore, more knowledge is needed about BP in the early years, as attention needs to be focused on this period of life.
## (s14) Results for research question 2
Number of References: 4

(p14.0) In all four articles, an association was found between BME and BP. In three of these [28][29][30], it was reported that those with BP had a weaker BME compared to those without BP (Table 5). In the fourth study [30], many associations were tested. In this study, only one (diagnosed BP) of four outcome variables (BP ever, one month prevalence, chronic back pain (CBP), diagnosed BP) was statistically significant for girls and not for boys. In the text, multivariate analysis is reported to have resulted in an increased likelihood of diagnosed BP in those with reduced BME as compared to the middle group. On the other hand, those with the greater BME, when compared to the middle group, were also found to be more likely to report diagnosed BP, i.e. indicating a U-curve for diagnosed BP. On this topic, in all articles, the data allowed us to perform a meta-analysis (Fig. 2). A negative association was found between the BME and BP (OR = 0.75, 95 % CI 0.58-0.98). The I 2 was 66.1 % indicating a high heterogeneity between the studies. This can be explained by the fact that some articles divided their sample according the sex of the participant and by the differences in the definition of back pain.
## (s18) Results for research question 3
Number of References: 5

(p18.0) In all three articles, at least one association was reported between AC and BP. In two of the studies, results were reported separately for girls and boys with positive findings only for the boys [30,32]. However, these two studies reported conflicting results as one study found a positive association [30] whilst the association was negative in the other [32]. In the third study [28], the association between AC and BP disappeared after adjustment for BME. Hence, the AC and BP may well be associated but it is unclear how, with the possibility that AC is but a proxy for BME. Meta-analysis was not performed for this research question because it was not possible to obtain the confidence intervals of all the odds ratios in the included articles.
