# Auditory distance perception in humans: a review of cues, development, neuronal bases, and effects of sensory loss

CorpusID: 9689033 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ea3bfb3fe32da086674990e70b1853077c279cf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ea3bfb3fe32da086674990e70b1853077c279cf)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s2) Development of auditory distance processing
Number of References: 14

(p2.0) Infants' perception of auditory distance has generally been assessed by measuring how their actions match spatial information conveyed by proximal sensory stimulation, such as reaching to grasp sound-producing objects (Ashmead, Clifton, & Perris, 1987;Clifton, Perris, & Bullinger, 1991;Litovsky & Clifton, 1992) or moving to avoid approaching objects (Freiberg, Tually, & Crassini, 2001). Such actions suggest that the sound-producing object is perceived in spatial terms relative to the location of the infant (van der Meer, Ramstad, & Van der Weel, 2008). The literature on developmental aspects of auditory distance perception has not been reviewed previously and is discussed in this section. Clifton et al. (1991) showed that infants were able to distinguish between objects in near and far space on the basis of sound by 6 months of age. Sounds were presented in the dark either within reach at 15 cm, or out of reach at 60 cm. Infants reached more frequently towards the location of the sound when positioned within reach than when out of reach. This was replicated in a follow-up study by Litovsky and Clifton (1992), who further demonstrated that infants correctly discriminated between near and far sounds regardless of whether or not sound level was roved to prevent it from providing a useful cue. This suggests that infants use other cues than sound level when judging distance, in contrast to adults tested in the same study, who relied primarily on level cues and whose performance worsened when level was roved.

(p2.1) Using a conditioned head turn technique, Morrongiello, Hewitt, and Gotowiec (1991) showed that by 6 months of age infants were better at discriminating approaching than receding stimuli. They also demonstrated that responses on trials where changes in distance occurred were greater than responses on trials using non-moving sounds that increased or decreased in sound level, suggesting that distance cues other than changes in level were utilized. Freiberg et al.
## (s4) Effects of hearing loss and hearing aid processing on auditory distance perception
Number of References: 18

(p4.0) In contrast to investigations of the effects of hearing loss on localization in azimuth (see Keating & King, 2013 for a review), there are relatively few psychophysical studies and no neuronal studies of how auditory distance perception is affected by hearing loss. Effects of hearing aid processing, which potentially may distort available auditory distance cues, also have received relatively little attention. Adverse effects of hearing impairment or hearing-aid processing on auditory distance perception may be compensated to some extent by visual depth information for normally sighted listeners. However, considerable difficulties may occur in situations where vision is degraded, and although hearing loss is an important consideration for blind listeners, this area of enquiry is currently under-researched. The effect of sensory loss and hearing aid processing on auditory distance perception is especially important for older people, because visual and auditory losses are more prevalent in this group. Akeroyd et al. (2007) compared the effectiveness of level and DRR distance cues combined with DRR alone for normal-hearing and hearing-impaired participants. They measured distance discrimination for sentence pairs at virtual distances between 1 and 8 m. Hearing-impaired participants generally performed as well as normally hearing participants when both cues were available, although hearing-impaired participants performed more poorly for simulated distances greater than 5 m. Hearing-impaired participants performed more poorly when the level cue was made unavailable by fixing the overall level of the sounds, suggesting deficits in the ability to discriminate distance using DRR. The scores obtained with DRR cues alone were correlated with selfreported auditory distance perception abilities.

(p4.1) Most modern hearing aids include amplitude compression that applies high gain for low-level sounds and low gain for high-level sounds. This increases the audibility of low-level sounds without making intense sounds uncomfortably loud (Moore, 2008). However, alterations to sound level due to hearing aid processing may alter the cues utilized to perceive distance accurately (Simon & Levitt, 2007). Amplitude compression alters level cues and can affect DRR cues by reducing gain for high-level direct sound while providing high gain for low-level reverberant sound. However, for continuous speech, the reverberant tail only occurs in isolation, during pauses in speech. Thus, adverse effects of hearing aid processing might be expected to be small or negligible. This was found in a study by Akeroyd (2010), who investigated distance discrimination for continuous speech using the design of Akeroyd et al. (2007) described above, with level and DRR cues both available. Akeroyd (2010) did not find any adverse effects of hearing-aid compression produced by the participants' own hearing aids. As the participants were experienced hearing aid users, it is possible that they acclimatized to the effects of their own hearing aids on sound level. It also is possible that no adverse effects were found, because the amount of amplitude compression was small or because the gain changed too slowly to affect the DRR. Effects of hearing-aid compression might be observed for absolute distance judgments rather than the relative distance task utilized in the study (Akeroyd, 2010).

(p4.2) Hearing aid compression may affect the use of ILD distance cues (Simon & Levitt, 2007) even for continuous speech, and although this has not yet been directly assessed, there is evidence that compression distorts ILD cues for localization in azimuth. Musa-Shufani et al. (2006) tested normally hearing and hearing-impaired participants with narrow-band one-third octave wide noise signals centered at 500 and 4000 Hz in a localization task. Hearing aids were simulated with linear processing or fixed amounts of fast or slow compression. Fast compression was found to increase JNDs in ILD compared with linear processing.
## (s9) Development of auditory distance processing
Number of References: 14

(p9.0) Infants' perception of auditory distance has generally been assessed by measuring how their actions match spatial information conveyed by proximal sensory stimulation, such as reaching to grasp sound-producing objects (Ashmead, Clifton, & Perris, 1987;Clifton, Perris, & Bullinger, 1991;Litovsky & Clifton, 1992) or moving to avoid approaching objects (Freiberg, Tually, & Crassini, 2001). Such actions suggest that the sound-producing object is perceived in spatial terms relative to the location of the infant (van der Meer, Ramstad, & Van der Weel, 2008). The literature on developmental aspects of auditory distance perception has not been reviewed previously and is discussed in this section. Clifton et al. (1991) showed that infants were able to distinguish between objects in near and far space on the basis of sound by 6 months of age. Sounds were presented in the dark either within reach at 15 cm, or out of reach at 60 cm. Infants reached more frequently towards the location of the sound when positioned within reach than when out of reach. This was replicated in a follow-up study by Litovsky and Clifton (1992), who further demonstrated that infants correctly discriminated between near and far sounds regardless of whether or not sound level was roved to prevent it from providing a useful cue. This suggests that infants use other cues than sound level when judging distance, in contrast to adults tested in the same study, who relied primarily on level cues and whose performance worsened when level was roved.

(p9.1) Using a conditioned head turn technique, Morrongiello, Hewitt, and Gotowiec (1991) showed that by 6 months of age infants were better at discriminating approaching than receding stimuli. They also demonstrated that responses on trials where changes in distance occurred were greater than responses on trials using non-moving sounds that increased or decreased in sound level, suggesting that distance cues other than changes in level were utilized. Freiberg et al.
## (s11) Effects of hearing loss and hearing aid processing on auditory distance perception
Number of References: 18

(p11.0) In contrast to investigations of the effects of hearing loss on localization in azimuth (see Keating & King, 2013 for a review), there are relatively few psychophysical studies and no neuronal studies of how auditory distance perception is affected by hearing loss. Effects of hearing aid processing, which potentially may distort available auditory distance cues, also have received relatively little attention. Adverse effects of hearing impairment or hearing-aid processing on auditory distance perception may be compensated to some extent by visual depth information for normally sighted listeners. However, considerable difficulties may occur in situations where vision is degraded, and although hearing loss is an important consideration for blind listeners, this area of enquiry is currently under-researched. The effect of sensory loss and hearing aid processing on auditory distance perception is especially important for older people, because visual and auditory losses are more prevalent in this group. Akeroyd et al. (2007) compared the effectiveness of level and DRR distance cues combined with DRR alone for normal-hearing and hearing-impaired participants. They measured distance discrimination for sentence pairs at virtual distances between 1 and 8 m. Hearing-impaired participants generally performed as well as normally hearing participants when both cues were available, although hearing-impaired participants performed more poorly for simulated distances greater than 5 m. Hearing-impaired participants performed more poorly when the level cue was made unavailable by fixing the overall level of the sounds, suggesting deficits in the ability to discriminate distance using DRR. The scores obtained with DRR cues alone were correlated with selfreported auditory distance perception abilities.

(p11.1) Most modern hearing aids include amplitude compression that applies high gain for low-level sounds and low gain for high-level sounds. This increases the audibility of low-level sounds without making intense sounds uncomfortably loud (Moore, 2008). However, alterations to sound level due to hearing aid processing may alter the cues utilized to perceive distance accurately (Simon & Levitt, 2007). Amplitude compression alters level cues and can affect DRR cues by reducing gain for high-level direct sound while providing high gain for low-level reverberant sound. However, for continuous speech, the reverberant tail only occurs in isolation, during pauses in speech. Thus, adverse effects of hearing aid processing might be expected to be small or negligible. This was found in a study by Akeroyd (2010), who investigated distance discrimination for continuous speech using the design of Akeroyd et al. (2007) described above, with level and DRR cues both available. Akeroyd (2010) did not find any adverse effects of hearing-aid compression produced by the participants' own hearing aids. As the participants were experienced hearing aid users, it is possible that they acclimatized to the effects of their own hearing aids on sound level. It also is possible that no adverse effects were found, because the amount of amplitude compression was small or because the gain changed too slowly to affect the DRR. Effects of hearing-aid compression might be observed for absolute distance judgments rather than the relative distance task utilized in the study (Akeroyd, 2010).

(p11.2) Hearing aid compression may affect the use of ILD distance cues (Simon & Levitt, 2007) even for continuous speech, and although this has not yet been directly assessed, there is evidence that compression distorts ILD cues for localization in azimuth. Musa-Shufani et al. (2006) tested normally hearing and hearing-impaired participants with narrow-band one-third octave wide noise signals centered at 500 and 4000 Hz in a localization task. Hearing aids were simulated with linear processing or fixed amounts of fast or slow compression. Fast compression was found to increase JNDs in ILD compared with linear processing.
