# The foraging behaviour of honey bees, Apis mellifera: a review

CorpusID: 9969906 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a52ec22762a9eed0d3e03ac26d8f22a3a621068b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a52ec22762a9eed0d3e03ac26d8f22a3a621068b)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 9

(p0.0) Under normal colony conditions, the forager bees are workers with an age of over 21 days, at which time they shift to perform Out-colony tasks including water, nectar, pollen or resin collection.The division of labour and the change of the nurse bees to perform foraging tasks were suggested to be impacted by colony factors (Huang and Robinson 1996), elevated levels of the foraging gene (Amfor) (Ben-Shahar et al. 2003) and/or the variations in the abundance of mRNA (Whitfield et al. 2003) in the worker's brain.Also, many other factors were suggested to have a key role in the shifting of worker bees from In-colony tasks to Out-colony tasks.The anticipation of the commencement of foraging is associated with an increased titre of juvenile hormone (JH) in foragers which is not affected by foraging experience but by diurnal variations (Elekonich et al. 2001).Further, Schulz et al. (2002) found higher octopamine concentrations in the antennal lobes of the bee brain in foragers compared to nurses regardless of the age.They also found that changes in octopamine are modulated by juvenile hormone.The earlier age of foraging activity commencement (shifting to Out-colony tasks) was found to be affected by bovine insulin treatments (Mott and Breed 2012).In another study, and under reduced brood rearing activity a delay in foraging commencement and death was found to be associated with increased vitellogenin levels (Amdam et al. 2009).Generally, the foraging skills and the number of forager workers are increased with age (Dukas and Visscher 1994).Additionally, the forager bees have different n-alkane profiles than the nurse bees with a higher quantity of n-alkane which may help the forager bees to tolerate the ambient conditions (Kather et al. 2011).Still more studies are required to elucidate the mechanisms influencing the shifting of the nurse bees to forager bees.After the change to foraging, a worker begins a new part of her life outside the colony in combination with different foraging tasks and interactions with the environment as explained in the next paragraphs.
## (s6) Factors impacting foraging activity
Number of References: 10

(p6.0) There are many factors that can impact foraging activity.These factors can be divided into two major groups: in-colony factors and out-colony factors.The first group (in-colony factors) include: queen presence and case (virgin or mated).Higher foraging activity with less pollen collection was found in colonies headed by virgin queens than colonies headed by mated queens while lower foraging activity and pollen collection were found in queenless colonies than in colonies with a mated or virgin queen (Free et al. 1985b).Also, foraging activity is impacted by colony strength and brood rearing activity (Amdam et al. 2009;Abou-Shaara et al. 2013), and the degree of pollen need (Weidenmuller and Tautz 2002).Beehive type also has an impact on the foraging activity of honey bees (Abou-Shaara et al. 2013).The infection of honey bee foragers with diseases and parasites such as Nosema sp. or Varrao destructor may result in the inability of foragers to return to their colonies or increased time to return (Kralj and Fuchs 2006;Kralj and Fuchs 2010).The genotype of honey bee strains (e.g.high and low pollen-hoarding bees) strongly affected foraging behaviour for nectar or for pollen (Pankiw et al. 2002).The inheritance of high pollen-hoarding behaviour is a recessive trait unlike honey storing behaviour, which shows a more dominant pattern (Page et al. 1995).Beside these factors, ovariole number can influence nectar collection by honey bee workers (Siegel et al. 2012).
